JOHN L.
MacARTHUR, PAUL C.
MARTH, JR., and JOSEPH G.
WALL  THE GEOSAT RADAR ALTIMETER  The GEOSA T radar altimeter is an improved version of the one flown on Seasat.
The characteristics  of the return signal from the ocean surface are discussed as a basis for understanding the altimetry  process.
The primary measurements provided by the altimeter are listed along with a description of  altimeter hardware implementation.
The processing and corrections to the raw measurements to yield  the end-user data products are presented, followed by a summary of the altimeter's in-orbit performance.
 INTRODUCTION  The GEOSA T radar altimeter is similar to the Seas at  altimeter in its mechanical, thermal, and electrical in­ terfaces.
Changes include the use of a 20-watt long-life  traveling wave tube amplifier, an 8085 microprocessor  for improved radiation tolerance, a digitally synthesized  transmit waveform generator (i.e., a linear FM or  "chirp" pulse), and a gallium arsenide field-effect­ transistor preamplifier for the receiver front end.
 RETURN SIGNAL CHARACTERISTICS  The characteristics of a signal reflected from the ocean  surface strongly influence an altimeter's design and im­ pose limits on the precision attainable, even for a per­ fect instrument.
A pulse-limited mode of operation is  used in which the intersection of a spherical shell (rep­ resenting the locus of points equidistant from the radar)  with the ocean's surface defines regions where the later­ al extent is small compared to that defined by the an­ tenna beamwidth; i.e., the surface area corresponding  to the range resolution of the altimeter is much smaller  than that encompassed by the antenna beam (Fig.
1).
 The earliest signal returns come from wave crests.
 Reflecting facets deeper in the waves then gradually con­ tribute, accompanied by an increase in the illuminated  area within a range resolution cell, until a point is  reached where the surface of constant range reaches the  wave troughs.
Beyond that point, the illuminated area  within a range resolution cell remains essentially con­ stant.
The signal amplitude would also remain constant,  except for the antenna pattern attenuation that imparts  an exponential decay in amplitude.
The result is a wave­ form whose average shape is given by the double con­ volution of the system's point target response, the  ocean-surface height distribution, and the two-way an­ tenna pattern.
The angles involved are much steeper than  Fig.
1 suggests (less than 1 degree); thus, the effects of  earth curvature and changing geometry have been  ignored.
 The sharply rising leading edge of the waveform is  the basis for the precise height estimation.
The half- The authors are members of the Space Department , The Johns Hop­ kins University Applied Physics Laborator y, Laurel, MD 20707.
 176 Antenna  pattern  decay  -27 -7 0 7 27 37 47  t =7} Time  27 Illuminated area at 37  47  Figure 1-Pulse-limited geometry (SWH is the significant wave  height).
 power point conforms closely to mean sea level.
The in­ strument tracks the location of that point with respect  to the transmitted pulse, and the height measurement  is telemetered to the ground.
The slope of the leading  edge directly affects the measurement precision and de­ grades performance with increasing wave height.
This  is counteracted in part by adaptively increasing the width  of the tracking gate that senses the location of the lead­ ing edge.
The addition of adjacent high-resolution sam­ ples to form a wider gate leads to a reduction in noise.
 As part of the overall height and wave-height estima­ tion process, the amplitude of the ocean-return signal  is normalized via an automatic gain control loop.
Prop­ erly calibrated, the automatic gain control setting is a  measure of the backscatter coefficient at the surface that,  in turn, is dependent on wind speed.
 In summary, the altimeter provides three basic mea­ surements with precisions specified as  1.
Height: 3.5 centimeters for 2 meters significant  wave height (SWH),  Johns Hopkins APL Technical Digest, Volume 8, Number 2 (1987)  2.
SWH: 10 percent of the SWH or 0.5 meter (which­ ever is greater),  3.
Wind speed: 1.8 meters per second over the range  1 to 18 meters per second.
 ALTIMETER IMPLEMENTATIONl  The altimeter functions as a 13.5-gigahertz nadir­ looking pulse compression radar; major characteristics  are listed in Table 1.
The altimeter's two major sub­ systems are an RF section and a signal processor (Fig.
 2).
The RF section consists of a 2-inch-thick honeycomb  panel with the various subsystems attached to one sur-face and a parabolic dish antenna attached to the op­ posite surface (Fig.
3).
 Figure 4 is a simplified block diagram of the altimeter.
 The system generates a linear FM (chirp) pulse waveform  for transmission by a traveling wave tube amplifier.
The  2-kilowatt amplifier used on Seasat and GEOS-3 gave  evidence of not being able to support more than a few  thousand hours of operation.
Therefore, an existing  20-watt amplifier, space qualified and in production for  the Landsat program, was selected for GEOSAT.
Two  design changes were made to compensate for the reduc­ tion in transmit power from 2 kilowatts to 20 watts: (a)  the uncompressed pulse width was increased from 3.2  Table 1-Characteristics of the G EO SAT radar altimeter.
 Waveform:  Type  Center frequency  Pulse width  Bandwidth  Interpulse period  Generation  Transmitter:  Type  Peak power (RF)  Power consumption  (28 volts DC bus)  Signal processor:  AID converters (2)  Digital filters  (range gates)  Height least significant bit  Adaptive tracker  Telemetry outputs:  Digital (serial)  Frame size  Frame rate  Contents (words)  Analog Linear FM pulse  13.5 gigahertz  102.4 microseconds  320 megahertz  980 microseconds  Digital synthesis  Traveling wave tube  20 watts (minimum)  70 watts  4 bits + sign  63  0.7325 centimeter  8085 processor  850 bits  (85, lO-bit words)  10 per second  16 science  63 waveform samples  (range gates)  4 modelstatus  1 engineering channel ID  1 engineering data  (50 channel subcom.)  12 channels (conditioned by altimeter)  10 channels (temps) (conditioned by spacecraft)  Operation modes:  Standby I and II  Track (4 modes)  Calibrate  Test (7 modes)  Johns Hopkins APL Technical Digest, Volume 8, Number 2 (1987) Antenna:  Type  Gain  Beamwidth  Receiver:  Type I-meter parabolic  > 37.6 decibels  2.0 degrees  Dual conversion  500 megahertz (lst IF),  o hertz (2nd IF)  Automatic gain control o to 63 decibels  (l-deci bel steps)  Inputs:  Bus 24 to 33 volts DC  Frequency reference  Commands 5 megahertz  8-pulse digital data  Weight:  Signal processor  RF section  Power requirements:  Standby (lO-bit parallel)  47 pounds  144 pounds  103 watts  Track 146 watts  Envelope (inches):  RF section 41.25 dia.
x 11.5 high = 15,369  Antenna cubic inches (less antenna)  41.25 dia.
x 19.125 high = 25,559  cubic inches (including feed)  Signal processor 20 long x 13.5 wide x 10 high = 2700  cubic inches  177  MacArthur, Marth, Wall -The GEOSA T Radar AlliJlleler  Figure 2-The GEOSAT RF deck/signal processor .
 Figure 3-The GEOSAT radar altimeter antenna.
 to 102.4 microseconds and (b) a gallium arsenide field­ effect-transistor preamplifier was added to improve the  noise figure from 9 to 5 decibels.
 In the Seasat altimeter, the basic linear FM waveform  was generated in a surface acoustic wave filter.
The  transmitted waveform had a time-bandwidth product of  1024 (3.2 microseconds x 320 megahertz), including an  up-converter frequency mUltiplier of 4.
To accommo­ date an increase in pulse width to 102.4 microseconds  with unchanged signal bandwidth (time-bandwidth prod­ uct of 32,768), a digital chirp generator developed previ­ ously with NASA support was incorporated (Fig.
5).
A  linear ramp is accumulated to provide a number repre­ sentative of the signal phase that varies parabolically with  time.
The sine and cosine of the number are extracted  from the contents of a read-only memory and convert­ ed to a pair of analog signals that are then applied to  a single sideband modulator to impart a parabolic phase  (linear frequency) modulation on a carrier signal.
A sub- 178 Dual  AID  converters  Waveform  samples Transmitter  (TWTA)  AGe  Transmit  trigger  Major characteristics :  Antenna bandwidth: 2 deg  Frequency : 13.5 GHz  Peak transmit power: 20 W  Average transmit power: 2 W Digital  chirp  generator  Receive  trigger  Pulse width (uncompressed): 102.4 J.l.S  Pulse width (compressed): 3.125 ns  Pulse repetition rate: 1020 Hz  Figure 4-Block diagram of the GEOSAT radar.
 sequent multiplication by 8 then results in the desired  320-megahertz bandwidth pulse.
 The receiver uses dual conversion, with the final con­ version to base band for digital processing.
Dual analog­ to-digital converters digitize in-phase and quadrature  bipolar video outputs from the second mixer.
 As a result of using a linear FM signal for the local  oscillator at the first mixer, range sampling is trans­ formed into frequency filtering.
The range gate system  consists of digital filters implemented in the time domain  using a discrete Fourier transform process.
The power  spectrum outputs of 60 contiguous filters (waveform  samples) are applied to the adaptive tracker, which uses  an 8085 microprocessor.
The adaptive tracker controls  the altimeter through the various calibrate, track, stand­ by, and test modes in response to commands received  via the spacecraft command link.
It formats the height,  automatic gain control, wave height, status, and en­ gineering data for output to the spacecraf t telemetry  system.
 An increase in antenna beamwidth from 1.6 to 2.0  degrees was needed to accommodate the larger (I-degree)  off-nadir attitude excursions characteristic of the GEO­ SAT gravity gradient attitude-stabilization system.
The  Johns Hopkins APL Technical Digesi, Volume 8, Number 2 (1987)  Parabolic  phase  counter  accumulator Sine read-only  memory  Cosine  read-only  memory Filter  change was implemented by increasing the dimensions  of the antenna feed, causing a corresponding increase  in the amplitude taper across the I-meter dish.
The re­ sult is an increase in beamwidth and a decrease in the  antenna gain from 40 to 37.6 decibels that reduces the  system margin but has no effect on the measurement  precision.
 DATA PROCESSING AND CORRECTIONS  The generation of two data products, a Sensor Data  Record and a Waveform Data Record, is described else­ where in this issue and in complete detail in Ref.
2.
In  addition to data quality checks, engineering unit con­ versions, and editing for gaps, overlaps, and out-of­ sequence data, the main thrust of the processing is the  generation of height, height-rate, attitude, sea-state, and  temperature corrections.
Also, initial bias offsets, derived  from preflight testing, that are expected to change slowly,  if at all, are included in the header of each tape.
The  altimeter contains an on-board calibrate mode, currently  invoked twice a day, that is designed to track long-term  drifts.
In the discussion that follows, only the essential  aspects of the processing steps have been included for  clarity.
 Waveform Sample Gain Correction  The altimeter on-board tracker operates on a set of  60 waveform samples that are the power spectrum out­ puts of a digital filter bank, as discussed previously.
They  represent contiguous time (or range) samples with  3.
125-nanosecond (47-centimeter) resolution.
A typical  ocean-return shape for a 2-meter wave height is shown  in Fig.
6.
The slope of the leading edge varies with wave  height, and the half-power point corresponds to mean  sea level.
The tracker operates to center the fast-rising  leading edge of the ocean return within the 60 samples.
 The gentle decay in the plateau region of the waveform  results from antenna pattern attenuation and ideally  should be exponential.
Deviations from the ideal result  from waveform sample gain variations that, in turn, re­ flect in-band ripple and band-edge rolloff of anti-aliasing  low-pass filters in the altimeter receiver.
These effects  JOhIlS Hopkins APL Technical Digesr.
\'olume 8.
Number 2 (1987) MacArthur, Marth, Wall -The GEOSA TRadal' A/fill/efer  Figure 5-Block diagram of the  digital chirp generator.
 200~--~--~--~----r---~--~---'----'  (J)  ~ 150  ~  Q)  ~ 100  0.
 Q)  >  .~ 50  Q) a:  O~~~~ ~~~~ __ ~~ __ ~ __ ~  -32 -16 0 16 32  Waveform sample index  Figure 6-A typical ocean-return shape for a 2-meter wave  height.
 are removed by individual waveform sample gain cor­ rection factors, derived from ground test data and re­ fined during the initial in-orbit evaluation phase.
 Attitude Determination and Related Corrections  Spacecraft off-nadir attitude excursions cause the slope  in the plateau region of the ocean return to decrease.
 It becomes nearly horizontal when the off-nadir point­ ing angle equals the antenna one-way 3-decibel beam­ width (Fig.
6).
Because the tracker bases the half-power  point on the average signal in the plateau region, cor­ rected for antenna pattern decay, the result is a shift in  the null point of the closed-loop height tracker.
The mag­ nitude of the resulting height error is also dependent on  wave height, which, in turn, affects the slope of the fast­ rising leading edge of the signal.
The indicated wave  height will also change slightly with attitude, and the am­ plitude of the reflected signal will decrease as the anten­ na beam departs from nadir pointing.
 The correction processes begin with the computation  of a voltage proportional to attitude (V A TT) based on  the amplitude of the last eight waveform samples.
The  correction factors may then be related to V A TT with  sufficient accuracy via a set of linear expressions using  179  MacArthur, Marth, Wall -The GEOSA T Radar Altimeter  a set of wave-height-dependent coefficients that have  been derived from waveform simulations (Fig.
7).
The  spacecraft off-nadir angle is also estimated from the  V A IT.
The measurement is only valid over the ocean  where the waveforms are well behaved and predictable.
 A distribution of altimeter-derived off-nadir pointing for  a typical day is shown in Fig.
8.
 Significant Wave Height Corrections  Adjustments to the SWH include the attitude/sea-state  correction already discussed along with a calibration cor­ rection implemented via a 256-entry look-up table.
Cur­ rently, the table contains all zero entries.
It is intended  that the results of surface truth investigations will be the  basis for new table entries.
 Automatic Gain Control Corrections  Adjustments to the automatic gain control data include  a correction for height variation that affects signal  VATT tJ.H = Co + c1 x VATTc  tJ.AGC dO + d1 x VA TTc  tJ.SWH = a1 x(VATTc -bO) ~  (off-nadir)  tJ.H  (SWH/O  tJ.AGC  (SWH /~)  tJ.SWH  (SWH /~)  AGC = automatic gain control  Figure 7-Wave-height/attitude·dependent correction factors for  the height (tJ.H), automatic gain control (tJ.AGC), and significant  wave height (tJ.SWH) are derived from a voltage proportional to  attitude (VATT), and the off·nadir pointing angle (~) is estimat·  ed.
The particular set of coefficients used will depend on the  observed wave height.
 Off-nadir angle density, day 358  16~~~~~--~~~~~~--r-~~~~  14  12  ....
10  c::  ~ 8  Q)  CL 6  4  2  O~~~~w-~~ ~~~ u-~~~~ ~~~  0.10.30.50.70 .91.1 1.3  Off-nadar angle (degrees)  Figure 8-Typical distribution of altimeter-derived off-nadir  pointing.
 180 strength, a temperature correction, the attitude/sea-state  correction, a long-term drift correction derived from on­ board calibrate mode data, and an initial offset selected  during ground test to convert gain control measurements  to aD (backscatter coefficient) from which wind speed  can be inferred.
 Of these adjustments, the most important (after the  attitude/sea-state correction) is the temperature correc­ tion.
The receiver gain varies about 4 decibels over the  nominal temperature range and measurement repeata­ bility to better than 0.2 decibel is desired.
A second-order  polynomial was derived from ground test data collected  during thermal/vacuum testing to relate gain control  changes to the observed receiver temperature.
 Derivation of wind speed from the corrected automat­ ic gain control (or from aD) is based on the work of  Brown et al.
3 and is implemented via a look-up table  having the relationship indicated in Fig.
9.
As with sea  state, reported surface truth correlations will suggest  refinements to the wind-speed process that may also be  incorporated prior to the Exact Repeat Mission.
 Height Corrections  Adjustments to the height data include a correction  for the Doppler-induced offset that is characteristic of  the linear FM waveform, a long-term-drift term deriv­ able from the on-board calibrate mode data, an initial  bias correction determined during ground test, an ad- 30r-------.--------.--------.-------~  25  =0  c::  0 20 u  Q)  (/)  a; a.
 ~  ~ 15 Q)  E  'D  Q)  Q) a.
 (/)  'D 10 c::  ~  5  O~ ______ ~ ______ ~ ________ ~ ______ ~  o 5 10 15 20  Backscatter coefficient (00, decibels)  Figure 9-The derivation of wind speed from the corrected back­ scatter coefficient.
 Johns Hopkins APL Technical Digesl, Volume 8, Number 2 (/987)  justment to reference the altimeter height measurement  to the center of gravity of the spacecraft, and the atti­ tude/sea-state correction already discussed.
The validi­ ty of these adjustments is not as readily assessable via  surface truth correlations as is that of the wave height  and gain control/wind-speed data.
The long-term drift  of the height measurement can be monitored during the  signal injection phase of the on-board calibrate mode.
 A sample of the transmitted pulse is coupled into the  receiver, processed through the system, and tracked as  a point target.
The result is shown in Fig.
10.
With the  exception of the anomalies that occur during the full sun  periods (which reflect calibrate mode artifacts), the drift  has been negligible, i.e., less than I centimeter.
A con­ version from time domain to frequency domain process­ ing at an early point in the signal flow, along with digital  frequency analysis, results in a system that is inherently  free from drift.
 The precision of the height measurement is also of  interest.
Ground test data have established that the al­ timeter noise level approaches 2 centimeter s at low wave  height for I-second averaging.
Data spans of tens of sec­ onds are required to make that measurement.
To per­ form an equivalent evaluation in orbit would involve a  data span of over 100 kilometers on the surface.
With­ in the span, small-scale geoidal or oceanographic fea­ tures and possibly atmospheric effects will typically result  in an observed height variability that prevents centimeter­ level instrument precision from being verified.
Instead,  in-orbit performance has been evaluated by computing  the standard deviation about a linear fit to IO-sample  (I-second) sets of height data, repeating this for 10 con­ secutive sets, and averaging the results.
In this case, only  the surface variability over a much shorter I-second  (7-kilometer) span will affect the measurement.
It hap­ pens that for the tracking-filter time constant used (0.25  second), the standard deviation about a fit to 10 sam­ ples is nearly the same as the standard deviation of the  average of 10 samples.
The agreement between ground  test data for I-second averages and the in-orbit data com- Johns Hopkins APL Technical Digesl, Volume 8, Number 2 (1987) MacArthur , Marth, Wall -The GEOSA T Radar Altimeter  91~----~-----.------.------,-----.
 90 E u 89  E 88 Cl  ~ 87  860 Calibrate mode step 30  100 200 500  Days from turn-on  Figure 10-Long-term height drift as monitored by an in-flight  calibration mode has been less than 1 centimeter.
The nega­ tive peaks are anomalies that occur during periods of full sun.
 puted as described is quite good and, in either case, is  close to theoretical predictions.
 GEOSA T ALTIMETER  PERFORMANCE SUMMARY  In support of the primary geodesy mission, an al­ timeter height precision of 3.5 centimeters for a 2-meter  SWH has been demonstrated during ground testing and  in-orbit operation.
 The wave height and wind speed accuracies achieved  by the altimeter are the subject of ongoing investigations  (see the article by Dobson et aI., this issue).
The avail­ able results indicate that the desired accuracies of 10 per­ cent or 0.5 meter for wave height and 1.8 meters per  second for wind speed are being realized.
 The GEOSA T altimeter continues to operate and has  exceeded the design life requirement of 18 months.
 REFERENCES  I W.
E.
Frain, S.
C.
Jones, C.
C.
Kilgus, and J.
L.
MacArthur, "The Navy  GEOSAT Mission Radar Altimeter Satellite Program , Monitoring Earth's  Ocean, Land and Atmosphere from Space-Sensor s, Systems and Applications,"  Prog.
Astronaut.
Aeronaut.
97, 440-463 (1985).
 2 GEOSAT-A Data Users/Ground System Interface Control Document (ICD) ,  JHUlAPL 7292-9510 Rev.
I (1985).
 3 G.
S.
Brown, H.
R.
Stanley, and N.
A.
Roy, "The Wind-Speed Measurement  Capability of Spaceborne Radar Altimeters ," IEEE 1.
Oceanic Eng.
OEAi, 59-63  (1982).
 181  