HARRAP’S TORCH BOOKS  GENERAL Eprror: C. 
L. BOLtz  HOW RADAR WORKS  BY  KENNETH ULLYETT  F.R.Met.S. A.M.S.E. 
 With Five Plates in Half-tone and Line  Drawings and Diagrams in the Text  GEORGE G. HARRAP & CO. LTD  LONDON SYDNEY TORONTO BOMBAY  . 
First published 1948  by Gzorce G. Harrar & Co. Lip  182 High Holborn, London, W.C.1  Copyright. 
All rights reserved  “ERIS BOOK IS PRODUCED IN  COMPLETE CONFORMITY WITH THE  AUTHORIZED ECONOMY STANDARDS  ————$—  Componed in Plantin type and printed by Western Printing Services, Lid,  . EDITOR’S FOREWORD  ARRAP’S TORCH BOOKS” ARE INTENDED TO SERVE A  wide public with accurate, up-to-date science in-  terestingly arranged and illustrated, each book written by  an author experienced in explanation and well qualified  in his subject.  Having regard for the reader’s comfort and conveni-  ence, the authors have made the treatment popular;  having an equal regard for his intelligence, they have  included the fundamentals, without which any know-  ledge of a subject is worthless. 
Every reader can be  sure that he will find in these books what is true, what  is useful, and what is provocative of thought.  “Knowledge is power,” wrote Bacon; moreover, it  is the only power that does not carry in itself the seeds  of its own corruption; thefe is no substitute.” Know-  ledge, indeed, is the only power worth pursuing in this —  modern world. And in the pursuit we shall gain under-  standing and stay humble if we remember our heritage,  the work of all those who have gone before to guide us. 
 To this end the authors of this series make use of the  historical approach.  A torch lights the way i the: dark-.and assists us  through fog; it has for centuries been a symbol of  learning; as a traffic sign it warns us that we are coming  to a school. And, just as important, a torch spreads its  light on every one within its ambit, making no distinc-  tion between rich and poor or young and old. 
 C.L.B. 1  . PREFACE  INCE THE EVOLUTION CONTROVERSY AT THE CLOSE OF  the nineteenth century the scientific method of  objective observation, experiment, and cool statistical  examination has invaded every department of know-  ledge, almost, it would seem, to the total exclusion of  genius. 
This book is, however, an introduction to a  branch of electronics (which is itself a new department  of the general subject of physics) known as radar; and  radar is a development of well-known electrical and  radio principles in a sequence of discoveries in which  the physicists involved in such development have not  been reluctant to admit the entry of genius to their work.  As one of those onlookers permitted for a number of  years to study the sequence of inspired stages of develop-  ment by Sir Robert Watson-Watt and his colleagues, I  should like this book to be a humble tribute to their  work. The reading of it demands no specialized know-  ledge of physics, but an assumption is made that the  reader knows the most elementary mathematics, and is  familiar with the functioning of conventional broadcast-  reception equipment up to the application of super-  heterodyne action. 
As an explanation of the basic prin-  ciples of popular types of radar equipment the book is  in no sense a work of reference, and for this reason  sources are not quoted at length. However, in the pre-  paration of this work I have had the most generous  co-operation from the Services and Supply Ministries  concerned with radar’s production and operational use,  and from the research laboratories of the British and  American radio and radar industries.  7  . 
&  In particular I wish to record my thanks to the former  Ministry of Aircraft Production for the loan of docu-  ments. Thanks are also due to the Admiralty Signal  Establishment, to the Air Ministry, to Sir Robert  Watson-Watt, to Dr R. A. 
Smith for notes on radar  navigation systems, to Dr L. Huxley for information on  basic radar principles, to the Publication Board of the  Radio Research Laboratory at Harvard University, and  to the directors of the research laboratories of A. C.,  Cossor, Ltd, and the General Electric Co., Ltd. 
 K. U.  . 
IT.  Hil. CONTENTS  THE DISCOVERY OF RADAR  Pulse systems—An analogy from the animal  world—Infra-red-light photographic proof of  the bat’s supersonic ‘radar’ system—How an  early patent of John Logie Baird led the way  to radar scanning—French progress in 1933—  Contribution of the U.S. 
Navy Department  —The Breit and Tuve experiment—The  Appleton experiments in 1920—~The Watson~  Watt request in 1935, and how the world’s  first radar aircraft test was made at Daventry  in February 1935.  SHORT, SHARP SHOUTS  The essence of the pulse system—Funda-  mentals of radar, and the relationship be-  tween range-finding and the speed of electro-  magnetic waves—Radio-wave speed and ob-  ject distance—How radar is used as an  electrical stop-watch—The use of a cathode-  ray-tube display as an electron timing device.  THe EcHO COMES HOME  The miracle we now take for granted—How  tiny packets of radioenergy are received Why  the radar receiver and transmitter must work  in step—Necessity for high-gain receivers to  produce a readable display—Relationship be-  tween the noise-level and the signal voltage—  The ‘Z’ factor—Wavelengths used for popy~  lar radar equipments—Function of the modu-  lator—How the pulse-recurrence frequency  is chosen—Radar aerial arrays, and why the  radiation is beamed—Common T-and-R  arrays. 
- 15  31  45  . iV. ON THE SCREEN  Function of the CRT in a radar receiver—  Physical construction of a typical radar CRT  —How the electron stream is created, beamed,  and controlled—Afterglow screens—Sensi-  tivity of electrostatic and electromagnetic  tubes—X and Y plates—A typical Type A  radar display—Showing where the target is  to be found. 
 RADAR TIME-BASES  Time-base generators as applied to radar  apparatus—Requirements of a suitable time-  base for deflection of the CRT spot—Time- -  base generators, using hard and soft valves—  type of wave-form we want to produce  —Basic principles of the production of saw-  tooth wave-~forms—Condenser charging and  discharging—-Why a pentode is used as a  charging resistance—Typical time-base cir-  cuits, using thyratrons and hard valves—An  ingenious single-valve squegging-oscillator  time-base.  ‘IMPOSSIBLE’ CIRCUITS  Differences in basic form between broadcast  technique and radar circuits—Why many  radar circuits and circuit values appear so  unconventional to the man trained in broad-  cast practice—Why we need a square pulse,  and how basic forms of pulse-shapers operate  —Common forms of pulses in radar circuits  —How the time factor of a CR circuit is  Imked to the production of a wave-form—  Using a Class C valve to obtain a squared-off  wave-form—Operation of the multi-vibrator  —The one-valve ‘flip-flop,’ or transitron—  The need for a cathode-follower, and how  this device operates—Gating’ circuits and the need for a D.C, restorer in radar CRT Circ. a?  72  82  . 
VII.  Vill.  TX. 
PICTURE ON THE TUBE  Range-amplitude display compared with the  split display—How persistence of vision  helps us to appreciate the picture on the tube  —A one-directional map given by an elemen-  tary CRT display—The graph representation  given by Type B—Type C display, giving  elevation-azimuth information—How a PPI  display is built up from radial spokes of the  rotation time-base.  CENTIMETRIC TECHNIQUE  How Watson-Watt foresaw the need for  centimetric wavelengths in radar—The men  who made the new technique possible—Revo-~  lutionary valves—How the magnetron, Kly-  stron, Sutton tube, and Heil tube work—  Spark-gap modulators—Why transit time  prevents the use of normal valves for centi-  metric radar—Superhet receiver circuits for  these extremely short wavelengths—A simple  explanation of wave-guides—The irony of a  return to crystal detectors and spark-gaps in  radar—Turning the clock back to 1914.  THe Task AHEAD  How the war-developed systems have been  harnessed for peacetime needs—Difference  between pulse and non-pulse radio navi-~  gational aids—-Gee and Console—The com-  mercial uses for H2S, Loran, and Oboe—  Description of a present-day marine radar  system—What the. 
Admiralty Signal Estab-  lishment did towards making radar suitable  for peacetime marine work—Bad-weather  flying, and what radar could do—Ancillary  tasks for radar in research, safety, and  meteorology.  THe Macic Eve  H2S, the ‘television’ system of radar—How  detail of the ground can be seen from the air IOI  II2  127  135  . AI. 
 XUY. at night Or I ClOUGQ——TluUW iseu wao uwre-  loped from early airborne radar—The har-  nessing of ground returns—The part Mr  Churchill played in H2S -development—  Description of the H2S system, its aerial  array, and method of scanning.  ELECTRONIC NAVIGATION  Gee, G-H, and Oboe—Why Gee is more  accurate than normal Df-ing by radio—How  the Gee grid is built up—Simple explanation  _ of the Gee system—How Loran was de-  veloped from Gee—How Oboe works—A  responsor system, working from ‘cat’ and  ‘mouse’ stations—The development of G-H  from Gee and Oboe—Peacetime uses of these  beacon systems. 
 TRAVEL BY BEACON  The transponder action of radar beacons—  Essentials of the Babs and SCS-51 systems  —How radar beacons have been developed  from IFF—Scope for radar beaconry—Land-  ing by a ean peal? ees beacon  system—Types 0 display given by beacons — Difference between U.S. and British beacon systems—Height-finding by radat—The AYD and AYF systems.  CONCLUSION  Radar compared with supersonic and pulsed- light techniques—A direct but not inevitable fruit of pure research—How Britain’s re- search into fundamental problems of long- distance commumication gave us the boon of tadar—The necessity for maintaining radar as a civilian function. 
.  APPENDIX  Book List  Imex 144  156 |  165  169  I7I  172  . ILLUSTRATIONS  PLATES IN HALF-TONE  PLATE  I. 
RADAR AND RADIO EQUIPMENT OF MODERN  AIRCRAFT frontispiece  II. Type A RANGE DIsPLay page Ii2  III. H2S System: RapAR SCREEN AND TRUE . 
 Map Ii3  MARINE RADAR 128  V. OPERATION OF GEE RADAR 129  ILLUSTRATIONS IN LINE  AT DAWN, FEBRUARY 25, 1935 page 23  THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN BROADCASTING AND  ~ RADAR 37  Type B DISPLAY 105  TRANSMISSION LINES 123  A Few Lines oF A GEE LATTICE 145  WHAT THE NAVIGATOR SEES IN A BABS DISPLAY  T2 158  . @  oy  I. 
THE DISCOVERY OF RADAR “ wee  T WOULD HAVE BEEN COMPARATIVELY SIMPLE, A FEW  years ago, to define radar as a means of ascertaining  location by radio echo. Indeed, the essence of Sir  Robert Watson-Watt’s discovery seemed at first to be  that radar, distinct from any other form of position-  finding, needed no co-operation on the part of the target.  A chain of coastal, and subsequently, inland warning  radar stations was erected the major purpose of which  was to detect and locate a target without the target  being made aware of the invisible radar beam tracking  it through clouds and in dark of night. 
 To-day radar is not confined to systems where the  echo from a radio pulse of energy is used. So complex  has the wide field of radar and kindred radio navigational  aids become that we must include Oboe, Gee, Rebecca-  Eureka, and other famous systems. In these it is not  merely a matter of broadcasting a pulse and detecting  the echo: some complex systems include transmitters  which are “triggered off’ by the incoming pulse, and  themselves retransmit a spurt of radio energy which a  suitably placed receiver picks up. 
Radar is used for  timing, plotting, course-checking, and, indeed, for many  major “Ravigational tasks where tlie écho ofa series of  pulses is not by any means the major feature of the  operation. There is, in fact, no greater similarity  between the early echo systems of radar (which pro-  tected the shores of the British Isles at the beginning of  the Second World War) and the latest radar navigational  was than there is between a carborundum-crystal  ears and a modern television receiver. They have | 15 ten  . 
radio communication as a common link, and that is  about all.  This invention, with its limitless applications in the  air and at sea, was born simultaneously with the accession  ‘to power of the Nazi party in Germany. Had British  scientists not been working upon this invention long  before Europe burst afresh into the flame of war it is  .very doubtful indeed whether we in these islands would  have been able to hold out in the critical times of our  lonely struggle in 1940-41. 
From those grim war years  ‘radar has risen from the obscurity of an untested  iscientific trick of unknown operational value to a peace-  time system in which radio is used in a diversity of ways  as a navigational aid.  Countless generations before the first radar system  was devised by man Nature had given us a perfect  example of a workable radar navigational aid in the  mechanism which enables bats to fly. Recent research,  in the light of our present knowledge, shows that the  bat is provided with a mechanism which is a strange  parallel of radar. 
 In the first-devised radar systems a pulse of radio  energy is transmitted at a very high frequency many  times a second; as each pulse strikes an object there is  a reflection, received during the silent period before  the next pulse is transmitted. Thus not only is an  indication given of an object capable of reflecting radio  waves, but if the time interval be recorded for the pulse  to travel from the transmitter to the object and back—  at the constant speed of light, 186,240 miles per second  ~—then the distance of that object can be known. These  pulses are transmitted at a very high frequency, so there  | is little chance of interference with other radio signals ;  ,98 more normal frequencies, and several such trans-  ‘yaaassions can be made simultancouslv. 
{  f  . Nature for July 13, 1946, gave a detailed account of  scientific research into the peculiar mechanism which  enables the bat to transmit two high-pitched supersonic  notes simultaneously. One is a note of a frequency of  ' somewhere around 7000 cycles a second. 
This is on the  upper limit of the average human ear’s detection, though  some people with auditory systems capable of appre-  ciating very high frequencies can detect the shrill, con-  tinuous sound. At the same time the bat emits another.  sound, at a much higher frequency, so high, in fact,  that to the human ear it cannot be detected as a sound. 
 To use this high frequency for its ‘radar’ the bat has a  special construction of nose, throat, and ear; careful  study of these parts of a bat show that they are thus  designed even more intricately than any human physicist  could fashion a supersonic radar apparatus.  Many existing radar devices are arranged so that the  outgoing, powerful signal does not register; only the  returning response does so. The transmitted pulse is  suppressed at the receiver. 
You might think that it  would be quite impossible for Nature to arrange a similar  device in the structure of the bat, but close examination  ‘shows us that there is a muscle in the auditory system  which appears to make the bat deaf at the minute instant  of the emission of the high-frequency note, so that it  can hear only the echo coming back from objects it  might otherwise hit in its flight. Films taken by infra-  red light at night show that the bat’s radar system 1s so  sensitive that it can detect an echo-response from a tiny  insect flying past.  So close are we to world-shattering events and dis-  coveries that it is difficult for us to know if radar was  merely a development and a logical step forward in  science, All the fighting services paid glowing tribute  to the help radar gives in war. 
Now that we face sreater  . 1s HOW RADAK WUKhKod  and more beneficial applications of radar to peacetime  needs it is somewhat invidious to attempt an investiga~  tion into the question of who invented it. No one  individual, group, or nation can rightly claim to have  invented such a complex system, any more than one  single igventor can be named for the locomotive, the  automobile engine, or the aircraft. 
It is certainly true,  however, that the bulk of all radar development has  been achieved by British scientists, and under the stern  fecessity of war Britain produced the first workable  radar system, and at all important times has kept far  ahead in research. Sir Robert Watson-Watt pioneered  and developed radar, and it is possible to draw a parallel  between his magnificent work in this branch of radar  physics and the pioneer work of the Stephensons father  and son, in the development of the locomotive‘ If the  name of Watson-Watt should rank equal with that of  Edison, Alexander Graham Bell, or of other pioneers it  is partly because radar now at this moment in the world’s  history holds a potentiality at least as great as that“facing  these earlier men of science.  Before taking up the threads of the recent story of  radar it is interesting to look back to the year 1926,  when British Patent No. 
292,285, applied for by John  Baird, described an arrangement which now bears a  striking resemblance to H2S,! which we now know to  be one of the most advanced radar techniques. In this  patent Baird stated that radio waves can be reflected  and refracted like visible light waves, and contemplated  “a method for viewing an object, consisting in projecting  1pont it electromagnetic waves of short wavelength.” In  this proposed system reflections of radio waves from an’  abject were to be passed through a ‘scanner’ to a receiver, wad the ontput of this receiver was to be used for modu-  ® See Chapter X for a detailed description.  . 
THE DISCOVERY OF RADAR 19  lating a source of visible light. This link in the chain  was, to a certain degree, wishful thinking in the year  1926, as there was then no known way of modulating  the light with the requisite degree of speed and precision.  But the patent boldly stated that a spot of light projected  from this source would “‘traverse a screen in synchron-  ism with the exploration of the object.” Although it is  very doubtful if such a system could be made to work  (the ‘scanning’ was to be done on the receiving side,  and not by the exploration of the object with the trans>  mitted radio-wave beam, as in modern H2S), this  British patent is nevertheless a step in radar develop-  ment. 
 French technicians were also early in the field of  radar,.and in 1933 were working on a system of ‘obstacle  detectors,’ using what was at that time thought to be  the fantastically short wavelength of 10 centimetres. A  bowl-shaped reflector as part of a radio obstacle detector  was fitted near the bridge of the Normandie in 1935, and  a year later a decimetre radio set was installed by the  S.F.R. at the entrance to the port of Le Havre, at Saint-~  Adresse. 
A 10-centimetre radio link was also used  across the Channel in 1934, the British organization of  Standard Telephones and Cables being concerned with  these tests, and a number of phenomena, now easily  explained in the light of our present radar knowledge,  were observed.  America too was making headway, and as early as the  autumn of 1922 Dr Hoyt Taylor and Leo C. Young  noticed a distortion, or ‘phase-shift,’ in the received  signals due to reflection from a small steamer on the  Potomac. 
To-day we should consider their results  remarkable, because the steamer had a wooden huii and  there was very little metal or conducting material im the  construction to accentuate such a phase-shift. The  . 20 HOW RADAR WORKS -  wonder is that the U.S. 
Navy Department, for whom  Taylor and Young were working then as civilian scien-  tists, did not make more immediate use of their impor-  tant discovery. It was not until the summer of 1930  that the same men, experimenting with radio direction-  finding equipment, made the second important obser-  vation that reflections of radio waves from an aircraft  could similarly be detected. The phase-shift of the radio  waves was observed, but no practical means of display  was found. 
 The principle of pulse-ranging, which characterizes  modern radar, was used first in Britain, but the earliest  public announcement was made in the United States  in 1925, when Dr Gregory Breit and Dr Merle Tuve,  of the Carnegie Institution of Washington, used a beam  of radio energy to measure the distance from the earth’s  surface to the-ionosphere, the radio-wave-reflecting layer  near the outer skin of the earth’s atmosphere. The  technique consists of sending skyward a train of very  short radio pulses, a minute fraction of a second in  length, and measuring the time taken for each reflected  pulse to return to earth.  In Britain Dr E. 
V. Appleton and the Department of  Scientific and Industrial Research had been working  along parallel lines. Appleton had trained a number of  ionosphere workers, who are now continuing and ex-  pandmg ionospheric research in many parts of the  Commonwealth and Empire. 
The Department had  gathered together and trained a team of young research-  workers, which at the Radio Research Station at Slough  and in the National Physical Laboratory at Teddington  had done work of the highest quality on other aspects  of the physics of radio communication. Appleton had  been the first to measure distance by radio waves when  | he. devised, early in the 1920's, a means of measuring  . 
THE DISCOVERY OF RADAR 21  the height of the Heaviside layer, that ionized layer of  atmosphere about sixty miles up from the earth’s sur-  face. Breit and Tuve’s method of working, discovered  soon after the Appleton ionosphere team had started,  was soon adopted as an alternative and a somewhat  more convenient means. But throughout all the Radio  Research Board work a cathode-ray tube, now a common  piece of apparatus in almost every radar set and in every  television set—but, of course, a scientific novelty in the  early 1920’s—was used to time the radio waves, and  thus to ascertain the heights of the various ionized  layers. 
 By timing the pulses of radio energy shot skyward it  was found that the ozonosphere layer of atmosphere  wraps itself around the surface of the globe at a distance  away from the surface of about fifty miles, that the  height of the Heaviside layer varies from sixty to eighty  miles, that the ionosphere proper starts about a hundred  miles up, and that the so-called ‘F,’ or Appleton, layer,  as it came to be Known after the head of the little team  of British scientists who discovered it, ranges from a  hundred and forty to some three hundred miles up.  Thus it can rightfully be claimed that Sir Edward  Appleton, then of the University of Cambridge, not  only succeeded first in proving the existence of and  measuring the heights of the various ionized layers, but  by his radar-pulse measurements incidentally made the  very first measurements ever to be taken in radio range-  finding.  Watson-Watt was by 1933 Superintendent of the  Radio Department of the National Physical Laboratory,  and he was the man with vision to realize that this radio  range-finding system had potentialities of a limitless  degree. 
It would be entirely wrong to believe that all |  the preceding work of Appleton, Hollingworth, Gebhard, ;  . 22 HOW RADAR WORKS  Tuve, and other scientists had made radar possible. No  circuit then existed of any transmitter or receiver suitable  for radar as a navigational aid; nobody could even  attempt to draw up a mathematical plan. 
The spark  that brought the world’s first radar system out of this  gloom of academic experiment was an act of high  scientific statesmanship and courageous modesty by  H. E. Wimperis, then Director of Scientific Research at  the Air Ministry. 
In the last days of 1934, pressed by  Dowding (at that time Air Member for Research and  Development of Air Council) to bring new scientific aid  to the stark problem of protecting Britain’s skies and  shores in the event of war, he admitted that the task  should not be the responsibility of any one man, but  that the finest team of experts available should be called  together. Eventually Lord Swinton, who was in 1935  Secretary of State for Air, appointed a committee con-  sisting of Mr H. T. 
(now Sir Henry) Tizard and Pro-  fessor A. V. Hill, with Professor Patrick Blackett to help  them, and with Mr A. 
P. Rowe (later to become famous  as the head of the Malvern Telecommunications  Research Establishment of M.A.P., where so much  wartime radar apparatus was devised) as Secretary. The  committee.found the problem tremendous, and turned  to outside experts with a number of long-shot sugges-  tions, even including the possibility of a death-ray!  So, in 1935, Watson-Watt was approached by a  member of the committee, and after laughing away the  suggestion of a death-ray as an aerial weapon was asked  for his views. 
While admitting that he took a poor  view of the chances of a death-ray, and that his own  memorandum The Damaging Effect of Radio Beams was  mot miended to be read as a monograph on death-rays, Watson-Watt completed his report with the optimistic  _ ‘Rete: “Meanwhile-attention is being turned to the still  . AT DAWN, FEBRUARY 25, 1935  The first field test of Watson-Watt’s forecast of echo.  ve ne drawings are merely illustrative, and are not to be considered accurate in és  . 
24 HOW RADAR WORKS  difficult but less unpromising problem of radio-detection  as opposed to radio-destruction, and the numerical con-  siderations on the method of detection by reflected  waves will be submitted.”  This, in fact, was done. The world’s first practical  radar scheme was drawn up on paper as a piece of pure  mathematics and scientific reasoning. Without even  bothering to draw a circuit diagram, Watson-Watt  showed how radar could be made to work. 
This is an  outstanding example of pure reasoning over practical  proof, but the responsible member of the Air Council  was not impressed, and said in effect, “‘ Numerical con-  siderations can be pretty much what scientists like to  make them. Let’s have a demonstration.” So out of  these discussions, which no doubt were often conducted  not without rancour and high feeling, arose the necessity  to produce the world’s first practical radar set, and thus  to show if Watson-Watt’s figures were right.  So on February 25, 1935, one junior scientific officer  of the radio department of the N.P.L., with one labora-  tory assistant who could also drive a lorry, took a special  recetver and cathode-ray tube to a site near the short-  wave station at Daventry. 
By dawn on the following  day the apparatus was working, and Mr A. F. Wilkins  was able to pick up reflections from the Daventry  station, tiny packets of radio energy being echoed back  from aircraft flying near. 
Mr A. P. Rowe, watching on  behalf of the Air Ministry, was able to report that “‘in  the circumstances the result was much beyond expecta-  tion.” What -he had actually been able to see on the  cathode-ray tube inside the lorry was the tiny ‘blip’ (a deflection of the time-base line at one point) caused __ by refiection of the Daventry signals from Heyford  _ ‘aircraft fying in a certain direction, within eight miles,  | ‘Brom thas tiny beginning grew radar. 
:  . THE DISCOVERY OF RADAR | 25  Next day the Air Ministry committee was considering  Watson-Watt’s full report, Memorandum on the Detection  and Location of Aircraft by Radio Methods. It was still  only a paper plan, but in view of controversies which  have since arisen about the credit for pioneer radar  work, it is interesting to note that this 1935 “‘ Top Secret”  report to the Air Ministry proposed direction-finding,  height-finding, ro-metre work, and the need for a radar  identification system, which became essential when  war came, and which was to become world-famous as  ‘TIFF’ (‘identification, friend or foe’). 
The 1935 report  also based future progress on pulse technique, which,  of course, did become general, and also referred to  continuous-wave and to frequency modulation as alter-  native methods. Both have since found wide new appli-  cations, the German fighting forces using frequency  modulation considerably, and more recent non-radar  navigational systems have used continuous-wave trans-  missions for range-finding.  A. 
F. Wilkins, who had featured in the Daventry  experiment, went on to develop IFF, while another  young member of the National Physical Laboratory,  E. G. 
Bowen, started pioneer work in airborne radar.  The Battle of Britain, of course, was the first big war-  time operational test given to the chain of radar stations  which had begun to function around part of the British  coast by March 1939, when the Germans marched into  Prague. With the Battle of Britain also we associate the  name of Sir Henry Tizard, who initiated the practice of  radar ‘controlled interception’ (the scheme for guiding  night fighters against the enemy by radar direction from  ground stations), and it was Sir Henry who ied the  British Mission to Washington in the crucial war year  of 1940, when Britain communicated to America the  secrets of all our work on radar, before America decided  . 
26 HOW RADAR WORKS  to enter the war. Informed witnesses of that event  affirm that America was astonished at the generosity of  the gift conveyed by Sir Henry’s mission, that she was  amazed at the progress our scientists had made in  branches of physics of which our transatlantic colleagues  had almost no knowledge, and that the nation-to-nation  gift of radar was the greatest single act of friendship  between the English-speaking peoples.  Progress in radar, even for war application, was by  no means near the end, however. 
American and British  teams worked together. Dr D. Taylor worked on a  branch of ground-control using as the radar eye the  ingenious ‘PPI’ (‘plan position indicator’) cathode-ray  tube, described later in this book. 
Radar was adapted  to searchlights, the system being largely the work of  L. H. Bedford, of the Cossor organization, Harold  Lander, and W. 
S. Eastwood. Before the War Dr W. 
S.  Butement had been working on radar to locate ships as  targets for coast-defence artillery, and had made very  great progress in systems which are now not difficult to  adapt to the needs of peacetime shipping. At the same  time Mr P. 
E. Pollard was proving that radar range-  finding was more accurate in dealing with aircraft than  were the big optical range-finders. C. 
E. Horton and  J. F. 
Coales made noteworthy contributions to radar  which eventually played an important part in radar-  directed guns which sank the Bismarck and the Scharn-  korst. E. G. 
Bowen, who had done the pioneer work on  airborne radar, and R. Hanbury-Brown were two of the  British scientists prominent in the development of air-  borne radar to locate submarines.  All this successful development is now, of course, only  war history, and is apt to be lost in the great accumula-  g Heme of recends. 
of international strife. But this is an  * Spprepeies time to reflect that what these scientists gave  . THE DISCOVERY OF RADAR 27  the world, under the stress and emotion of world war, |  was a series of discoveries each of terrifying potentialities,  and we must learn to harness them for peace. 
 But all this work of the pioneers was only a beginning.  From the early 1938 days it had been realized by  Watson-Watt and his co-workers that greater accuracy  was needed. Nothing but a narrow beam of radio  waves, instead of the ‘floodlighting’ technique, would  suffice; this meant higher power, to concentrate the  beam, greater sensitivity at the receiver, and a much  shorter wavelength. 
Early radar had been effected with  transmitters on 50 metres, then 12 metres, and subse-  quently right down to 2 metres; but this was yet not  short enough to produce a pencil-like beam, for reasons  we will consider in a later chapter. Existing apparatus  was working at about its minimum wavelength; valves  and associate apparatus could not handle higher fre-  quencies. Fortunately we were well placed as a nation  to deal with the problem, for from March 1939 ninety  of our leading physicists, men who had spent much of  their lives in the solving of abstruse problems of splitting  atoms and in electronic research, had been attached to  the chain of coastal radar stations. 
They decided that  we should probably have to employ wavelengths as short  as § or 10 centimetres, and certainly less than a foct in  length. There was then no radio valve which could  produce such high-frequency oscillations.  Professor M. 
L. Oliphant, of Birmingham University,  and Dr H. W. 
B. Skinner, of Bristol, inspired their co-  workers by their insistence upon the need for centi-  metric waves, and by their own experimental skill. A  tremendous drive followed, until in July 1940 Professor  \ J. 
T. Randall, of Birmingham, produced a magnetron,  ‘ which was the first high-power generator of centimetre-  length waves, The magnetron remains the very heart  . 28 HOW RADAR WORKS  of much modern radar transmitting equipment. 
This  new tool was eagerly seized upon by radar researchers,  the only setback (for this was during wartime) being that  caused by some operational heads of the Fighting  Services, who recognized the vital need for the mag-  netron, but refused to allow aircraft carrying the new  valve to fly over enemy territory, lest one complete  magnetron be disclosed in a crashed aircraft. A diffi-  culty was that the magnetron construction employs a  high-tensile casing, almost indestructible and certainly  not likely to be damaged by the self-destruction fuses  fitted to other radar apparatus to destroy it if it fell into  enemy hands. At last this prejudice was overcome, and  centimetre-length radar became general in the air, on  land, and at sea. 
The magnetron was supplemented by  an equally novel receiving valve evolved by Dr R. W.  Sutton. 
 ‘There are peacetime applications to many radar  devices conceived during war, notably H2S, Gee, Oboe,  and Rebecca.  HS, as we shall see later in this book, is the true  ‘television’ of radar, showing in an aircraft at night or  in fog a picture of the unseen ground over which it is flying. H2S made the ruins of Berlin and Hamburg its monuments, and now has beneficial peacetime applica-  tions in map-making of the new world. 
A. C. Lovell,  Professor P. 
I. Dee, and Dr Skinner were largely respon- sible for H2S, and Denis Robinson made his contribu-  tion to a system of H2S ‘television’ for locating ships at sea. Gee, the long-range navigational system which made mass raids possible, and which is now a most reliable system of radar navigation on civil air lines, was deve- loped by R. 
J. Dippy (who also gave his name to the Dippy oscillator, an important radar circuit), with the Seip of ©: C.E. Bellringer, Oboe, the companion long-  . 
THE DISCOVERY OF RADAR 29  range radar navigational aid, was the work of F. C.  Williams, A. 
H. Reeves, and F. E. 
Jones. Rebecca-  Eureka, out of which has come many modern naviga-  tional radar aids, was devised by F. C. 
Williams and  J. W. S. 
Pringle.  The story of how radar came to be invented must also  include the names of scientists such as Dr W. B. 
Lewis,  of Cambridge, who at the Malvern research centre con-  tributed to almost every step of radar progress, and of  J. A. Ratcliffe, of Cambridge, and Dr L. 
Huxley, of  Nottingham, who together built up Britain’s first ‘radar  university,’ wherein other scientists and workers could  learn how to work and develop radar. . There is also the  valuable technique of radar trainers and synthetic  apparatus developed by G. 
W. A. Dummer, devices  which enable pilots and radar operators to ‘fly’ thousands  of miles by radar without moving from a seat at a desk;  these trainers allow operational men and women to learn  their task through robot apparatus which simulates  travel by sea and air. 
With these radar devices for  training risk of human life is reduced, and much money  time, and fuel are saved.  It was not possible to tell this story of radar while we  were all bound by the essential needs of wartime secrecy;  credit could not be given to the men who really did the  jobs that mattered. Quite early in the post-war years  there was hasty, ill-considered, and premature publica-  tion, on both sides of the Atlantic, of much material  purporting to tell how radar works and who made this  miracle possible. 
So vast is the radar field and so great  its potentialities that it is really to be wondered that there  was not even a bigger spate of tendentious material and  consequent wrangling. No amount of familiarity with  radar can blunt your appreciation of what has been  achieved; from the small beginnings of Appleton’s  . 30 HOW RADAR WORKS  workers it has become an engineering enterprise of great  diversity and magnitude, and it is still growing. 
 Let us now step aside from this race of progress and  study the basic principles of radar itself.  . II. 
SHORT, SHARP SHOUTS  |) piaaadiea RADAR IS NOT JUST A MATTER OF SENDING  out a pulse of radio energy, picking up the echo,  and measuring the time that has elapsed, we shall find  the whole picture of radar much easier to visualize if  we look first at the pulse system, which is really only a  series of short, sharp shouts by radio.  Those short, staccato pulses are the means by which  radar can see farther than the human eye, even in the  best visibility, and are one of the reasons why radar’s  vision is unaffected by fog, night, rain, or cloud. The  one factor common to all true radar systems so far is our  knowledge of the speed of propagation of radio (electro-  magnetic) waves in space. 
Scientists and cynics take  some delight in the fact that we have discovered radar  and worked near miracles with it basically through our  knowledge that radio waves travel with a velocity of  186,240 miles a second; but we do not know anything  of the medium through which they travel (we call it  ‘ether’ for the want of a better understanding), and  there is, indeed, another school which believes that  there are no wave-like vibrations in this unknown ether,  but there is actual transmission of little packets of elec-  trical energy. Whatever it is, waves or spurts of electron  activity, something travels with a speed of 186,240 miles  a second, and for the purpose of radar measurements  that is all that we need to know. How are we going to  relate this knowledge of the speed of radio waves to our  practical problem of locating, say, an aircraft in the  night skies or a ship in fog?  ‘Radar’ is a war-born word, coming out of the British  31  . 
32 HOW RADAR WORKS  ‘radio-location,’ which not only was considered to be  insufficiently streamlined for the wonderful new tech-  nique, but was not expressive. Radar to-day is much  more than ‘location.’ So the word ‘ra-dar’ was coined  to describe ‘radio detection and ranging,’ though it  would be truly more descriptive if the phrase were  ‘radio direction-finding and ranging.’ :  Now radio waves travel at the same speed as light  waves, and, indeed, share many of the same properties.  They can be reflected and scattered; they can be split  up or combined. 
To the casual layman the ‘speed of  light’ is much the same thing as ‘instantaneous,’ but  the whole science of radar is built up on the microscopic  time intervals which elapse—intervals of so much less  than a second that we split the divisions up into ‘milli-  seconds’ (thousandths of a second) and ‘microseconds’  (millionths of a second). Just why such a fine division  is necessary you will easily see.  For 2 rough example let us say that the speed of radio  waves is 186,000 miles a second. 
One single burst of.  radio energy is transmitted, and it darts out into space  in all directions, one tiny fraction of this energy striking  the metal substance of an aircraft. The radio wave,  being similar to light (only much longer in wavelength),  is reflected in a more well-defined manner than if a  pencil of light from a searchlight were to strike the air-  craft and send a reflection back to the ground. 
 if we had some special sort of electric stop-watch, and  ‘timed the echo, we might find, for the sake of example,  that the echo came back to us, faint but accurately, in  weeth part of a second. That is the fofal time taken for  the radio wave to leave our aerial, traverse space, hit the  ainceait, and be reflected back through a receiving aerial  We-can easily see from this that the total distance out:  . SHORT, SHARP SHOUTS 33  and back must be +%3:°°° miles, which is 372 miles. 
If we  halve that for the single journey we see that the aircraft  is 186 miles away from our station. It would be very  convenient if all radar calculations were as simple as  that! We shall find, however, if we go sufficiently deep  into radar mathematics, that the figures of the subject  become extremely involved, especially where we find  ourselves on the threshold of nuclear physics. Like  astronomy, radar is a subject which can be studied  purely from the aspects of mathematics, although most  ‘of us find it more entertaining to ponder on the mech-  ~ anics of the subject than on the complex arithmetic. 
 You can work out for yourself several typical examples  of radio-wave speed and object distance. You will find,  for example, that 186 miles represents a time-interval  of 2 milliseconds, 9-3 miles an interval of 100 micro-  seconds, 1 mile 10-7 microseconds, and 7s mile 1-07  microseconds. I give these figures because for all prac-  tical purposes they cover the present range of radar,  from about a tenth of a mile up to 186 mules, by direct  ' reflection. 
There are several long-range systems, such  as Loran, where radar is effective up to many hundreds  of miles, but here the technique is somewhat different,  and as these long-range systems are described in a later  section of this book we can neglect them here in our  basic discussion of radar.  If we are to time anything by radio waves, however,  it will be obvious that we shall need some stop-watch  ‘which can deal with very minute periods of time, ranging  from about s$5 second down to about a millionth of a  - second. Not many years ago the possibility of such a  stop-watch would have been scoffed at by all serious  thinkers. 
In a period of about fifty years radio, as we  know it to-day, was developed; in various stages came  the valve, the pulse transmitter, the cathode-ray tube  CG  . 34 HOW RADAR WORKS  (which is now the basis of our electric stop-watch), and,  finally, the radar system, which would have been just a  piece of neat mathematics in Sir Robert Watson-Watt’s  notebook, quite undemonstrable because we had no  apparatus for measuring millionths of a second, but for  the fact that when we discovered the precious secret of  radar there was the electronic ‘stop-watch,’ ready for a  whole new series of discoveries.  Many people will have seen a cathode-ray tube in use  in a television set: the greyish-green glow is familiar  both in laboratory test gear and in entertainment tele-  vision. 
But in television we see, normally, the complete  picture formed on the end of the tube. We do not see  the tiny pencil of invisible electrons which leave the  cathode at the ‘small’ end of the tube and trace a pattern  on the fluorescent screen at the larger end. Just how the  tube works we shall see in a moment, in a subsequent  chapter. 
But for the present we can consider the tube  as being evacuated, leaving a nice empty space in which  there is a pencil of electrons which can be made to  sweep about over the screen end of the tube and trace  out a pattern on the fluorescent surface. The beam of  electrons can be made to sweep across or round the  screen, rather like the way in which the hands of a clock  sweep round the face. Just as the second-hand of a  clock completes the sweep of the dial in sixty seconds,  ticking its way around the chapter ring, so the pencil of  electrons in the tube can be made to trace a pattern in  any interval of time. 
We cannot swing the hands of a  clock much faster than, say, one tick every second,  becanse there is inertia, and even the most carefully  balanced clock hands have an effective mass. But there  § RO Weight in the pencil of electrons, no lag, and so  the beam can be swung backward and forward with the  ‘Speed of ight. The pencil of electrons can be focused,  . 
SHORT, SHARP SHOUTS 35  in a manner very similar physically to the focusing of  light, and can be made to produce a single fluorescent  _ spot of light at the end of the tube. If it is caused to  move backward and forward over the same path the spot  of light will travel up and down, or from side to side,  and if the beam is moved very rapidly, then the eye will  be unable to follow the single spot, and persistence of  vision will make us think that there is just a single line  of light. Indeed, for very many practical purposes in  radar, later on, we shall regard the image as one single  line of light, perhaps with various patterns emanating  from it, but we should never forget that it is not really  a line at all, but the passage of a single spot. 
 Now we can use a cathode-ray tube like this as an  electronic stop-watch, and wire it up to our transmitter  and receiver. This is just what we do in radar, and as  the cathode-ray tubes comes so frequently into our  working, let us get into the habit of naming it by its  initials, C, R, and T, as radar engineers do.  We can switch on our CRT and adjust the speed of  the electrical device which is pulling the beam back  and forth across the tube so that the beam moves across  the screen, leaving a single line of light, in s$— second. 
 This line will represent the time taken for a radio wave  to travel 186 miles out and back. So we can write  © miles on the screen at the beginning of the line and  186 miles at the end of it. We then look at the apparatus  moving the spot of light, and make sure that it is causing  it to move at an absolutely constant speed, so that the  spot does not travel faster along one part of the apparent  line than it does along another. 
Of course, we could  never do this with a mechanical lever, for it would have  inertia and would take an appreciable time to get going  at the start of the line, and would need to be slowed down  before the end. But our electron lever has no appreciable  . 36 HOW RADAR WORKS  inertia, and we can start it right at the beginning of the  line at full speed, stop it effortlessly at the end, and send  it back again at the same speed. 
If we adjust it thus, at  constant speed all along the line, we can regard it as a  true scale. We should be quite justified in marking and  subdividing the whole scale into miles, starting at o and  ending with 186.  Then we adjust our apparatus again and ‘black out?  one part of the line. 
The spot starts from the left,  travels to the right, stops, and instantaneously begins  its travel back. This is the part we suppress electrically.  Our electron beam thus traces the line, but the ‘flyback’  is blacked out for the return journey. 
Then +> second  later it starts a new journey in exactly the same place,  unless meanwhile we do anything to divert the spot into  another direction; and that is just what we do. We  put two plates, or a magnetic coil depending on the  associate apparatus, near the line of the beam, and wire  these plates or the coil to our radar transmitter and receiver. |  The transmitter is adjusted to broadcast what is  really not a continuous note, but a series of short, sharp ‘pips’ of energy. 
As each pip goes out into space a circuit linked with the CRT momentarily pulls the spot of light down out of its straight-line path; just as it is Starting on its journey. This happens many times a second, because in sending out radio waves for a radar job we must be careful to keep them in very small bursts or pulses, not lasting more than a few millionths of a: second, The reason for this is that if the pulses lasted- for a longer time they would drown the returning echo. Pause for a moment to think what you do when you Shout against a hillside and try to get an echo, If you keep. 
up 2 sustained yell you cannot hear the echo, but ‘B90 wake a series of short claps or staccato shouts t .  . Broadcasting sends continuous a Sp ay aera  ; nas a Wy  \  Lar ions = Saray si Fi “ Seas rae r A oat: Eee eRe as Ee  THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN BROADCASTING  AND RADAR  waves in all directions; radar sends short pulses of wave energy in one direction. 
 Nore. The  in detail, Picture is merely illustrative, and is not to be considered accurate  . 38 HOW RADAR WORKS  you hear each individual echo coming back, and this  applies equally to radar pulses. 
 The returning radio echo is picked up by highly  sensitive receivers and made momentarily to deflect or  dip the electron beam in our CRT, so on each occasion  the spot—many times a second—is pulled out of its  path. Persistence of vision is such that the human eye  sees the spot pulled out of its path at the beginning of  the line, causing a deep, sharp V-shaped depression, or  “blip,” or ‘break,’ and a much smaller blip some distance  along the line, marking where the received echo has  registered its homecoming, on the CRT light-line.  We have already marked off a scale of miles above the  line of light, so by reading the number of miles opposite  the echo blip we can tell instantly how far away is the  aircraft. 
Think back for a moment, and you will realize  that there are two processes going on here simultan-  eously. There are the radio pulses being shot out into space at a speed of roughly 186,000 miles a second, and if an aircraft or a ship is 186 miles away, then we shall find that the pulse goesoutand-echoes back in #4ysecond. If the object is not so far away as 186 miles, then, of course, the echo will come back more quickly, and if we could accurately measure the time we should know the distance. 
 Simultaneously we have the electron beam in the CRT being pushed over from one side of the tube to the other in sb5 second, the light-spot thus taking the same period of time for its job as does the radar pulse which causes the echo. By deflecting the light-spot as the pulse goes out, and by deflecting it again in a blip as the echo comes back, we can use the actual distance along the light-line as a measure of time, and thus of tstance between the radar station and the far object. As, this is the basic principle of many radar systems,  . 
SHORT, SHARP SHOUTS 39  and of the use of a CRT for basic radar display, you  would be well advised to read the last two pages very  carefully over again, not taking any statement for  granted, but making sure you have a thorough grasp  of how the CRT acts as our electron stop-watch.  Of course, the process is continuous. Many pulses  are being transmitted every second, with sufficient time  interval between them to allow each echo to return from  the greatest distance we have set our radar apparatus up  to measure. 
The electron beam is also sweeping up and  down the line many times a second, and is being deflected  by a constant succession of returning echoes. All this  happens far too rapidly for the eye to see anything but a  steady, glowing line of light with a couple of blips. If  the aircraft is approaching the blip will move slowly in  the direction of o miles. 
If it is going away it will move  towards 186 miles. In this way the movement of the  aircraft can be watched continuously. If we are picking  up echoes from more than one aircraft, then we shall see  a number of small echo blips along the line. 
Some may  be moving away, some home.  Although this is ‘basic’ radar, it is, indeed, just the  sort of elementary display which was possible when  Mr A. P. 
Rowe, watching on behalf of the Air Ministry,  saw radar reflections from an aircraft near Daventry in  1935. Roughly speaking, we can see how far away the  aircraft is from the transmitter, but, of course, to be of  any real use as a navigational aid radar must do far more.  We can increase our accuracy, first of all, by realizing  that the exact distance between the two blips (marking  the transmitted-pulse instant and the echo-return  instant) is the distance between the leading edges of the  two V-shaped blips. 
We must not cause confusion by  measuring between, say, one leading edge and one  lagging edge. We must take our measurements from the  . 40 HOW RADAR WORKS  leading edge in both cases, which is the precise instant _  ‘of depression of the CRT spot out of its time-base line. 
 ~ We must not be content to assume that the light-spot  is travelling at a constant speed over the line; if it  should for any reason move faster at one part than at  another it would be like using an electric ruler in which  the inches were unequally marked along the straight-  edge. To make absolutely sure that the spot sweeps at  the appropriate speed many radar receivers incorporate  a unit known as a calibrator, which is perhaps more con~ ~  yeniently and euphoniously known as a ‘Cal.’  The Cal is a number of oscillator circuits giving a series  of direct-current pulses, and we can apply these to the  plates or coils of the CRT to move the light-spot out of  its track at intervals. These blips can be separated by  any prearranged time-intervals, such as siz second,  which correspond to increments of range equal to  ro miles. 
If we set the Cal up like this and switch it on  a series of bright lines appears along our main time-base  line on the CRT, giving a sort of fence or tooth-comb  effect. We should not forget that although this tooth-  comb appears to be stationary, it is really only the  electron beam being moved out of its track several times  on each trace, at precise intervals of time. But we are  now at this point not so much concerned with time as  with distance, and if we adjust the Cal to produce a  spike of light on the time-base every ssizsecond this will  correspond to a distance of 10 miles on our electron  ‘ruler.’ So we call Cal pips thus set up our ‘1o-mile  paps,’ or, if we run the Cal circuits twice as fast, there  will be twice as many spikes of light, and they, of course,  will mark 5-mile intervals. 
On some very precise radar apparatus we even check by using 1-mile Cal pips. The  caliprater is just a check. We do not switch it on,  moematly, when the radar is operational, but test it every  . 
SHORT, SHARP SHOUTS 4I  now and then to ensure that our time-base—our apparent  line of light on the CRT—is being covered by the light-  spot at a constant speed throughout. If there were any  variation in the speed a little thought will show that the  Cal spikes of light would not be evenly spaced like the  teeth of a comb, but would be closer in groups at one  part of the line than at another. This is, in faulty  apparatus, a very common radar effect, and is cured, as  we shall see later, by adjusting the resistances, con-  densers, or other circuit values which result in the CRT  electron beam being pulled across the tube. 
When we  have the whole thing nicely set up, with Cal pips evenly  spaced, we say we are working ‘on a linear time-base,’  which simply means that if we drew a graph of time  against speed of the electron beam the result would be a  straight-line figure,  At this stage it is worth deviating for a moment to  consider some other familiar radar expressions and  tricks. The display so far described is, as we can see, 2  rather primitive one. We are faced with a great blip of  light showing where the transmitter pulse is being sent  out, and a fainter one, or several fainter blips, showing  echoes received back. 
If the transmitter pulse is very  big it will hide some of our faint, very close echoes. As  the transmitter pulse serves no real purpose here we  can dispense with it, and in many radar systems we do  commonly black-out the blip. The transmitter ‘triggers  off’ the rest of the radar equipment, and just at that  instant the light-spot in the tube is cut off. 
This results  in the beginning of the ‘trace,’ or line of light, not being  permanently cluttered up with the bright, unnecessary  blip caused by the home station, which may confuse the  accurate spotting of weak echoes near home.  We are still troubled with echoes from fixed objects  . near by. 
Fixed features of the landscape—tall buildings,  . 42 HOW RADAR WORKS  hills, headlands, and masses of trees—all give reflections  of the radio-energy pulses. Operationally they can be a  nuisance, because they tend to clutter up the line of  light at places where we might find echoes of essential  objects. 
The most that can be said for permanent  echoes—or ‘PE’s,’ as they are called—is that they do not  move along the trace (unless a building or hillside  decides to perambulate), and so can be picked out.  The real trouble caused by PE’s is that the great majority  of them are found near at home, and thus even though  we suppress the blip caused by the transmitter the first  part of the trace is not very helpful to us, because it is  confused with a mass of superimposed short-range  echoes. This group of PE’s, colloquially known as  ‘clutter,’ really determines for us the minimum range  at which we can use any one type of radar gear, because  it is quite unreliable to try to read echoes through the  mass of clutter. 
 Another familiar radar term is ‘strobe,’ a partly manu-  factured word which accurately describes a very useful  brightening device on the CRT. So far we have talked  of moving the electron beam across the tube, producing  the straight trace of light, and of deflecting it for Cal  pips and signal echoes. But, of course, we could also  arrange to increase or decrease the intensity of the beam  at any minute instant, thus brightening or dimming  the fluorescent spot. 
If we arrange one of these little  bursts of brightness to coincide with, say, the downward  deflection of the spot on one of the Cal pips, this will  happen dozens of times a second, or thousands of times  a second, or at whatever speed we have set our spot of  ight to move. And, again, that good friend of radar,  persistence of vision, will make the light at that one spot  appear brighter. Or, in radar jargon, we have ‘strobed’  the spot. 
 . SHORT, SHARP SHOUTS -43  By adjusting the values of condensers and resistances  we can arrange this strobing to take place at any position  we like along the trace; in fact, it is very useful to have  a fine variable control, so that we can slowly move the  brighter, accentuated portion along the time-base line  and leave it set at, say, an echo we wish to emphasize  above anything else. Operationally the strobe is is a very  useful control on many types of radar receiver, for by it  we can use the brightened spot as a | marker to draw, W, Say,  a colleague's ner to one particular echo of several  in a group along me-base, or it can be used as a  selector, = or Gee one echo so that the human eye  becomes more easily fixed upon it. 
 ‘Anybody who has seen a radar outfit in action will  know that what we have so far assumed—a nice clean  line of light for our time-base and neat echoes, or blips,  along it, indicating the positions of objects giving radio  reflections—is a theoretical state of perfection never  achieved. In addition to the deflections of the time-base  caused by received echoes it is obvious that, as the  electron beam of the CRT is actuated by our radar  receiver, any other sort of signal, pulse, or disturbance  in the receiver output circuit will also tend to deflect  the beam. Every listener to an ordinary broadcast  receiver knows that no matter how well designed is the  outfit there is always some appreciable background  hum from the power unit, or amplified hiss coming through  from the high-frequency side. 
Valve noise, resulting  from many combinations of mechanical and electrical  variation inside the valves, also adds to the slight back-  ground noise, but in aural reception the noise can be  filtered out, for all practical purpose, so that it does not  offend the ear. This noise presents itself on the CRT  of a radar receiver, however, and it is not so easy to trick  the eye as the ear. Where we have a display of blips  . 
44 HOW RADAR WORKS  along a straight-line time-base noise shows up as a  shimmering effect along the whole time-base, having  the appearance of a rapid series of random deflections;  in many radar systems the colour of fluorescence on the  tube-end is green, so this noise looks for all the world  like a shimmering layer of grass, and in radar colloquy.  is, in fact, known as ‘grass.’ As the gain of the receiver  is turned up the background hiss increases, and the  layer of grass along the time~base line deepens. On most  equipments, therefore, we have to choose a setting  where we get sufficiently strong echoes received back  from our distant object without the display being  cluttered up in a mass of grass. 
Unless an echo is strong enough to cause a blip on our CRT deep enough to show above the grass layer we shall miss it.  Radar transmitters, naturally, are complicated pieces of apparatus, because they must be designed to send out a pulse of tremendous energy thousands of times a ‘second, and must then cut clean off, so far as outgoing  oscillation is concerned, so that the pulse can travel out  into space and, if it hits any distant object, have ample opportunity to be cleanly reflected home again before the next pulse goes out; and this process must be con- tinued hundreds, perhaps thousands, of times a second. But we shall find the working principles of radar simpler to follow if we begin at the receiver end. 
So let us go on to see what we need in a radar receiver, and how we Shali display the results on a CRT.  . Ill. 
THE ECHO COMES HOME  OME YEARS AGO QUITE A NUMBER OF PEOPLE VISUAL-  ized that radar might be possible if only we could  devise a transmitter powerful enough to send out pulses  which could be echoed back to earth, and build a radio  set sensitive enough to receive them. To-day radar has  become so complex that we very often forget what ,  tremendous strides have been made in these two most  important directions. A number of radio sets do not  give satisfactory performance even when they are used  for reception direct from a broadcasting station; that  they should pick up reflections of such signals is still,  to many people, inconceivable. 
Yet that is just what is  happening day in, day out, with hundreds of thousands  of radar navigational and beacon stations for shipping  and for civil and military aviation, and we do take this  miracle very much for granted.  The echo comes home; but we do need a receiver  much more sensitive than the average broadcast set in  order to pick out the echo. Also, as we saw in the  preceding chapter, the mere reception of the echo by  itself is not sufficient: that would tell us there was,  indeed, a reflection from some object, but would be no  help at all towards locating its true position. 
We must,  on our CRT Echt-line, have as markers the blip of the  transmitter (or the equivalent of it, if we desire to black-  out the vis#@l display of this pulse) and the blip of the  echo, so that we may be able to see the difference in time,  and thus in miles, between them. Therefore we want  to arrange the transmitter to ‘trigger off’ the receiver at  each instant when a pulse goes out into space, and the  45  . 46 HOW RADAR WORKS  time-base line will be formed in such a time interval  that the homecoming echo can be seen. 
Then the whole  thing switches off until the next pulse goes out, perhaps  siz second later. Transmitter and receiver have thus to  work in unison, and for practical purposes it does not  matter much if we cause the transmitter to ‘trigger off’  the receiver, or if it happens the other way round.  Now so far as the receiver is concerned, we must  expect it to pull its weight in two directions. 
At the  greatest ranges over which we are likely to need radar  coverage we must expect it to show an adequate signal-  to-noise ratio on echoes from all reasonable targets.  Obviously we could design a very large set, full of  amplifier stages, the overall gain of which would be  great, but the background noise would be such that  the heavy layer of grass on the CRT would hide the echo.  Secondly, the gain of our receiver must be enough to  cause the beam of the CRT to be deflected. 
Physicists  can prove that all signals are received on all aerials; the  simple crystal set, if tuned to about two metres, might  be able to receive radar signals; but there would be no  point in that sort of reception, as the amplification would  be nil, and we should see or hear nothing.  Reverting to ‘grass’ for a moment, we are faced with  the fact that receiver noise is of multiple origin, but quite  a lot of high-frequency noise is picked up in the aerial and  the transmission system linking aerial and receiver; the  rest, such as valve noise (or electrode noise, as it is  sometimes called), crops up in the initial stages of the  receiver. Signal-to-noise ratio can be measured quite  easily on a radar set, for it can be done with an inch tape. 
 When we have switched on the set we notice that the  steady noise causes a layer of grass on the tube, and  although it will appear to be shimmering slightly, we  tah, fo within about an eighth of an inch, make a prac-  . THE ECHO COMES HOME 47  tical measurement of this with a straight-edge. Then,  when we turn the. 
aerial array towards an object giving  an echo, we shall see the spike blip of light on the CRT  standing out above the grass, and thus again we can  measure the length of this echo. The two measure-  ments can be compared as a ratio, and this ratio of signal  deflection (echo-length) to the mean noise-level is called  the S/N ratio, or the ‘Z factor.” Thus the limit of  reception on any given radar set is when the Z factor = 1,  for then the greatest echo is no longer than the average  depth of grass. Incidentally, the noise-level in a radar  receiver is proportional to the square root of the receiver’s  frequency-band width, and so circuit-designers have to  choose tuned circuits in the high-frequency stages which  have certain characteristics of band-width. 
 Now we see that a good radar receiver should have a  satisfactory Z factor, so that noise does not drown echoes,  and its output should be powerful enough to deflect the  CRT beam on the weakest echoes ever likely to need  diagnosing.  For most purposes we use a superhet, and it would  be very desirable if we could employ a receiver having  several stages of high-frequency amplification before the  mixer stage, so that we should have plenty of amplifica-  tion at signal frequency before stepping up to the inter-  mediate. It is not possible for us here to go into the  general questions of receiver design, and for the purpose  of discussing radar technique we must assume at this  stage a general knowledge of broadcast reception tech-  nique up to superhet standard. 
A superhet is essential  for most radar use, and it can be given narrow band-  width by locating band-width controls in the imter-  mediate-frequency (IF) stages. Many radar receivers  working above wavelengths of 10 centimetres have  several HF stages at signal frequency, but for radar  . 48 HOW RADAR WORKS  working below ro centimetres we have to discard these  initial amplifiers. 
Ofcourse, as we shall see in due  course, a number of tricks, strange devices, and novel  valves are used even in radar systems of the more con-  ventional wavelengths (around 2-10 metres), and the  newcomer, on making a close inspection of the whole  receiver, may be puzzled at circuit values. But on the  whole the arrangement is normal, and the layman is apt  to marvel at the comparative simplicity, or at least  conventionality, of these radar receivers. It is not until  we start to use very high frequencies, resulting in wave-  lengths of 10 centimetres and less, that the new technique  is startling to one grounded in conventional broadcast  methods. 
 For most radar outfits it is more convenient to talk  in terms of frequency than of wavelength. You will find  it easy to translate one term into another if you recall  that 14 Mcs (megacycles) represents 20 metres, 28 Mcs  ro metres, 56 Mcs 5 metres, 112 Mcs 24 metres, and  _ 224 Mcs 1} metres. Those figures will act as signposts  for other mental calculations. 
 The early chain warning system of radar stations in Britain used what radar experts now regard as ‘very long’ wavelengths, between 10 and 13 metres. The special Chain Home Low equipment for detecting low- flying aircraft worked on 200 Mcs. With radar carried in the air quite a number of different problems present themselves. 
The original airborne aircraft-interception apparatus used a diminutive form of ground radar, and - worked on about 200 Mcs, but very soon the new centi- metre technique sprang up, on the British discovery of the magnetron, and the very ingenious radar systems such as H2S came into being, using such short wave- lengths as 3 centimetres, a very far cry from the 300-metre band used by broadcasting stations.  . THE ECHO COMES HOME 4g  We have spoken of the transmitter ‘triggering off’  the receiver, and of pulses being sent out; but much  depends on the type and frequency of triggering and the  shape of the pulse. 
There is a parallel here with our  former simile of short, sharp shouts against a hillside to  produce an echo. A steady, booming sound will not  produce a sharp echo, because such a noise begins  slowly, comparatively speaking, and ends slowly. We  need a ‘sharp-edged,’ staccato sound to make the clean  echo. 
By wiring our CRT to appropriate parts of our  transmitter we can deflect the spot in exact sympathy  with the type of wave-form being produced by voltage  changes in each circuit. We can actually see the shape  of the outgoing pulse, and on most equipments it will  show up in the form of U or VY. The straighter and  more upright the sides, like the figure LI, the sharper  will be the start of the pulse and the more sudden its  cessation, and this gives us the radio version of the  staccato shout. 
This pulse can be formed by combina-  tions of radio oscillating circuits, the first of which pro-  duces a sine wave, or similar wave-form, with rounded  edges and faces; and in subsequent circuits the wave-  form is sharpened and straightened until it becomes  almost what is known as a square wave. Most of the  pulses in radar circuits are, in fact, varieties of square  waves, very different indeed from the sine-wave forms  handled by the stages of broadcast receivers. Con-  versely, a loud-speaker wired to the output of a radar  set produces a particularly obnoxious noise, the speech~  coil of the speaker vainly trying to follow the sharp  impacts and cut-offs of the square-wave pulses. 
 So now let us have a look at our complete radar chain  of apparatus. We need a modulator (‘Mod’) to produce  a nice, sharp-edged pulse. The usual Mod is an oscil-  lator and a series of distorter valves, all striving to  D  . 
50 HOW RADAR WORKS  produce a square wave out of a sine-wave oscillation. The  output of this Mod is arranged to produce a pulse of  energy of a suitable width, recurring at the desired fre-  quency. The pulse-width determines the actual length  of time which the transmitter is switched on at each pulse  —in other words, the duration of our short, sharp shout. 
 The degree of recurrence of the pulses is known as the  “pulse recurrence frequency,’ or PRF, and, of course,  it 1s really the number of shouts we give each second.  All this is controlled by Mod circuits, in which by  vatying condenser and resistance values we arrange to  produce the right shape of pulse, for the desired period  of time (pulse-width), and the necessary number of  times per second—the PRF.  The output of the Mod is fed into the transmitter. 
 As the Mod is a central source of wave-producing  circuits the same Mod is used in some radar equipments  to produce wave-forms both for transmitter and receiver.  The Mod may thus be used as a sort of electronic key to  switch on and off the transmitter, as well as controlling  fundamentals of the receiver and the movements of the  CRT light-spot Its primary job, though, is to turn on  the radio-frequency oscillator of the transmitter, making  it oscillate violently for a millionth of a second or so,  then turning it off equally sharply and keeping it in  repose until the time for the next burst. During those  minute silent intervals the energy is reflected back from the distant object, and our receiver has given one spurt  of its CRT display. 
: _ Design of the Mod and its pulse-shaper has been one of the intricate tasks of radar experts. Later on, when we look at the pulse system in more technical detail, we shall see just why it is a difficult job. But for the moment  we can regard the Mod as a series of circuits producing  &@ gigamlic square-shape wave with steep sides giving a  . 
THE ECHO COMES HOME 41  : sudden beginning and ending to the oscillations of the  transmitter.  Our radar transmitter is apt in physical dimensions  to be a surprise to the enthusiast familiar with commer-  cial and broadcast stations. Here we have stations  putting out, say, 100 kilowatts, and taking up, perhaps,  an acre of ground-space, using giant water-cooled valves  and enough machinery to fill quite a respectable public-  utility power-station. 
But in radar we use apparatus that  will almost fit into a suitcase, and yet transmit with a  power of several hundreds of kilowatts! The reason 1s  that with pulse transmission, as the name implies, we  are not transmitting continuously, but in a series of  giant pulses. The transmitter can be heavily overloaded  during the minute period of the pulse, for there then  follows a comparatively long interval of time when the  oscillator is quiescent and doing no work at all. So in  radar, as distinct from speech broadcasting (where we  usually have a continuous-wave carrier), we can use quite  small valves and very economical circuits, overloading  them tremendously for minute portions of time. 
The  longer we make our pulses—that is, the greater the  pulse-width—and the greater the PRF, the nearer we  get to a continuous-wave state of working, and so we  need bigger apparatus. In the majority of radar pulse  systems the interval of time during which the pulse is  on is infinitesimal compared with the long interval of  time between pulses. The momentary bursts of oscilla-  tion produce a power of several hundred kilowatts. 
The  peak power is thus tremendous, but the average is  usally low. Quite a large radar transmitter may run an  average power up to one kilowatt, which in radio trans-  mission is very low indeed, and for the sake of domestic  comparison, of course, is only about the power con-  sumed by one bar of a normal electric radiator or by a  . §2 HOW RADAR WORKS  toaster. 
Because of the pulse system and the momentary  overloading radar equipments run at powers thousands  of times greater than was thought possible a few years  ago. The real radar problem, as we shall see, is to design  valves, not which will handle more power, but which  will oscillate at the very high frequencies which a narrow-  beam radar system necessitates.  The next link in our chain is the aerial—the aerial at  the transmitting end and the aerial at the receiving end. 
 For an appreciation of radar technique it is necessary  to change our normal conception of the propagation of  electromagnetic waves. In a broadcast receiver we use  an aerial of an indefinite length and a ‘lead-in’ of any  reasonable proportions to link receiver to aerial, without  worrying unduly about the electrical constants of the  aerial-earth circuit. This 1s, of course, the Marconi  arrangement, where an aerial and earth (or counterpoise)  are connected in series with a tuned circuit to bring the  whole system into resonance with the desired frequency. 
 In the Hertz system we arrange that the aerial system  is self-tuned to the desired frequency, and a device  known as a feeder line (more colloquially a ‘trans-  mission’ line, when the conductor links a transmitter to  its aerial system) is used to connect the aerial array with  the first stage of the receiver or transmitter. There is  no need to elaborate on transmission-line theory in this  present volume, as it is a normal part of radio technique  and has already been adequately covered in The Amateur  Radio Handbook and in Section R of the Admiralty  Handbook of Wireless Telegraphy, to mention two out-  Standing examples.  Now it will be recalled from our knowledge of wave propagation that there is an essential difference between  _ What may be termed earth and non-earth waves; there is also attenuation of the indirect-ray component of the  . 
THE ECHO COMES HOME 53  electromagnetic wave propagation, for the earth’s atmo-  sphere is by no means a constant dielectric. Radio  ‘waves are attenuated much less in the air than in the  earth’s surface, and the upper limit is set by the density  of free electrons in the ionosphere. The combined  effect of such attenuations, and contributory causes, is  to set limits to maximum communication ranges at  various transmission frequencies. 
At the lower fre-  quency limit, for example, it has for many years been  realized that even for night transmission a frequency of  4000 kcs is the lowest which can successfully be used.  Limits at the other end of the scale have not until com-  paratively recent years been of great interest, for trans-  mission below about 5 metres was not a practical com-  mercial proposition until the last decade or so. But the  needs of radar, which compel us to use very high fre-  quencies, have caused investigation to be made into the  attenuation limits at extremely high frequencies, and  thus it is that for most radar systems we use very short  wavelengths, handled by aerial systems which at first  appear to follow optical laws more than the normal  practice of electromagnetic-wave propagation. 
 When Watson-Watt first conceived a practical radar  system the ‘floodlight’ system was devised. In this a  high-power transmitter kicked a series of pulses out into  space in every direction. If an aircraft is within range,  then an echo is bound to be picked up by the receiver,  and by the usual direction-finding system of right-angle  aerials and comparison of signal strength it was thought  not to be impossible to plot bearing. 
As can be ima-  gined, this system was simple in theory, but in practice  it presented us with a number of snags, not the least  of which was the great waste of power in floodlighting a  vast area with pulses when we could effect a great  economy if we could beam the energy and make a  . 54 HOW RADAR WORKS  ‘searchlight’ of our radar rays. This involved making  the transmitting aerial directional, and rotating it, or  swinging it over an arc wherein the distant object might  be. 
An equally directional aerial could be used to receive  the echo, and, of course, the receiving aerial could be  swung in synchronism and in line with the transmitting  aerial. The higher frequencies (thus the shorter wave-  lengths) we use the easier it is to concentrate our trans-  mitted beam with aerials and reflectors of reasonable  proportions. Indeed, when we come right down to  wavelengths only an inch or so in length we can employ  aerials and reflectors to beam the rays just as we should  beam light rays. 
There is a similarity even in appear-  ance, for the great bowl-shaped ‘dishes’ of wire-netting  and the metal parabaloids used as reflectors are like  giant searchlights. Something like the same ° optics’  apply, but, of course, we do not use radar waves as short  as light waves. The longest light waves, those of red  light, are only one-sixty-thousandth part of an inch in  length, and the shortest radar waves in commercial use  at present are half an inch. 
Nevertheless the bowl-fire  aerials of many radar beacons do behave just as a search-  light reflector would do, and we can beam our outgoing  radar rays so that we can detect with an accuracy of  about one yard for every mile distant.  Our aerials begin to become complicated; they beam  out and bring in the transmitted energy, and must be  efficient. All the generated power in the transmitter  aerials, for example, must go into the main beam, and  not into any of the side-lobes, where it not only would  be wasted, but would cause spurious reflections from  confusing directions. 
On ships and aircraft the aerials  not only have to be directional for range and height, but  often have to be stabilized to cancel out the motions of  - the ship or aircraft itself. |  . THE ECHO COMES HOME 55  On land beacons, and with navigational systems such  as Gee, the aerials can be fixed, but with certain airborne  equipment, such as H2S, the rotation of the aerial to  scan and sweep the ground below, and thus to build up  a television picture by radar reflection, forms an integral  part of the system. 
One essential of nearly every radar  aerial array, however, is that it must have highly direc-  tional properties. The main object is to concentrate the  beam into as small a space as possible; in fact, the  shorter the wavelength we employ (the higher frequen-  cies) the more we approach the state of light, ideal for  many radar purposes, where the outgoing beam is vir-  tually only a pencil, a degree or two in width. You can  thus picture the aerial system as something like the  headlamp of a car, or a highly directional searchlight,  broadcasting a pencil-like beam which scans the skies. 
 With normal frequencies there are two ways of making  an aerial directional. We can build it up on the search-  light principle, with reflectors and ‘directors,’ which  are really the electrical counterparts of the similar optical  systems. If we are using centimetric waves we can make  our reflector so small (as the aerial may be a rod only a  few inches in length) that it is a parabolic mirror focusing  the energy into a beam. 
Even longer-wave trans-  missions can be similarly beamed, using reflectors made  of wire-mesh or similar light-weight material. If itis not  practical to use such reflectors and directors we can use  a number of aerials, suitably placed and phased to con-  _centrate energy in one direction. But for the moment we  can imagine the aerial itself to be, say, a vertical rod cut  to an exact fraction of the wavelength used, and there-  fore resonating most readily at the desired frequency; a  rod equal in length to half of the wavelength is com-  monly used. 
This rod will propagate waves in all direc-  tions, but if we stand a series of somewhat similar rods  . 56 HOW RADAR WORKS  at proper intervals m one direction we shall make them  resonate too, and we shall thus get a strong transmission  in this particular direction. Equally we can stand similar  rods at distances which are chosen where they will  hinder rather than help the propagation, and this, of  course, makes the system still more directional. 
The  whole array thus takes on the appearance of a giant  tooth-comb, but the mathematics of it are unfortunately  not so obvious as its appearance.  When we have arrived at a highly directional system,  making our beam ds much like a pencil of rays as pos-  sible, we must have some method of moving the beam  to scan all space where our object may be located. We  can do this in one of three ways. 
We can move the  whole aerial and reflector. We can keep the big reflector  fixed and move the aerial itself; obviously this becomes  difficult at extreme ends of the traverse, where we shall  need to have the reflector specially shaped to produce a  constant field strength over the entire field of coverage.  Third, we can keep both aerial and reflector fixed, and  obtain the necessary beam-shift by electrical means. 
 This method is useful where one needs to scan only a  small sector, and techniques have been worked out for  electrical scanning by such methods as phase-shifting.  The alternation of effective angle of the beam is small,  but the scheme is useful where for operational reasons  we must have a very rapid rate of scan, and it would be  physically impossible to rotate or vibrate the aerial array  itself at such a speed.  The next link in our chain is the aerial feeder. 
Much  similarity will be found about aerials both at trans-  mitting and receiving ends, and, indeed, we shall dis-  cover that quite a number of radar systems use the same  aerial for transmission and reception. As the giant pulse  aS transmitted a rapid electrical switch comes into  . THE ECHO COMES HOME 57  operation and switches off the receiver, lest it be satur-  ated by the outgoing transmission. 
But, instantaneously,  the transmitter is then cut off, and for a comparatively  greater period of time the aerial is then connected to the  receiver, so that the returning echo may be picked up.  Then comes the next transmitted pulse, then a listening  period again, and so on, hundreds of times a second.  A small complication is introduced by the presence of  the aerial switch, but in high-frequency radar technique  we have found several comparatively simple ways of  effecting such a rapid switching, and there is, of course,  much saving in space and weight by using a joint aerial  for transmission and reception (or ‘common T and R,’  as the system is generally termed), as well as greater  accuracy in display, because no discrepancy can arise  such as might be the case if we had a separate aerial for  T and R and they failed to move exactly in step while  scanning the skies. 
 But, whether separate or common T and R aerial  arrays, we must link the system with the transmitter and  receiver. In ships and aircraft it is obviously very diff-  cult to have high-voltage power units, complicated  modulators, and high-frequency apparatus anywhere  near the aerial. Seaborne radar may have to be several  hundred feet away from its aerials, and the pulse system  and high frequencies used are such that a single linking-  wire, such as the ‘lead-in’ of a broadcast receiver from  its aerial, is quite impracticable. 
To carry the radio-  frequency energy from the radar transmitter to the  aerial, and the echo back from the aerial to the receiver,  we must have feeders, or transmission lines, as they are  sometimes called, carefully balanced to the circuits they  link. This system of feeders is similar in theory to the  transmission-line theory used for commercial and broad-  cast transmitters. Now that radar employs very high  . 
58 HOW RADAR WORKS  frequencies the normal transmission-line links are not  very efficient or practical, and it has been found possible  literally to ‘ pipe’ the transmitter and receiver to the aerial !  These midget wavelengths appear to travel almost without  loss through pipes or conduits of suitable shapes and  dimensions, and the conduits, which we call ‘wave-  guides,” are all part of the ordinary radar very-high-  frequency technique.  Now we come to the final link in our chain—the  magic eye with which we hope to display our received  echo, and gain operational information from its position.  On an early form of radar known as ‘Monica,’ used  during the War to warn bomber crews that enemy  fighters were approaching from behind, there was no  visual display, but the radar set on detecting fighters in  its zone caused a series of high-pitched pips to be  injected into the aerial ‘intercom’ system. 
The informa-  tion given in this way was subsequently found to be  insufficient for operational needs, and a visual display  was given on a cathode-ray tube. The system is men-  tioned here, however, as being one of the very few  instances of a radar system which did not use a CRT  for display. For the great majority of systems the CRT  is the ‘eye,’ and is the equivalent of the loud-speaker in  the normal broadcast-receiver chain. 
Whereas the loud-  speaker is called upon to handle a range of low fre-  quencies and harmonics, all between about 50 and 10,000  cycles per second, the displays on the CRT screen are  varied and complex. The CRT and its application to  radar is thus a complete story in itself.  . 
IV. ON THE SCREEN  SHALL FIND ALL MANNER OF ANACHRONISMS IN  radar, and one of the most curious certainly  applies to the CRT, which we now know stands for  cathode-ray tube. The tube was given its name in the  very early days of electron research, certainly before  radar was dreamed possible, and when all manner of  rays were being discovered and tested. 
‘X-rays,’ ‘gamma  rays, and ‘anode rays’ were the labels given to emana~  tions from various forms of tubes, and the name ‘cathode  ray’ was then appropriately given to the type of valve  in which ‘rays’ from the heated cathode were caused to  display their presence on a fluorescent screen. But  obviously what we are displaying are not ‘rays’ in the  normal sense, but fluorescence set up by electrons shot  off from a heated cathode; and therefore it is just as  correct to describe an ordinary radio valve and quite a  number of similar devices as ‘CRT.’ They are all tubes  which utilize the flow of electrons from a heated cathode.  Anyone who has seen a CRT in an oscilloscope or a  television set will be familiar with the large pear- or  bottle-shaped bulb. 
Tubes used in radar range from  about four inches in diameter to those with a tube~-  width of over a foot. Types of fluorescent screen vary  in colour, sensitivity, and other factors according to the  radar display needed, and the electrode construction of  the tubes varies according to the deflection of the electron  beam needed to produce a requisite display.  There are basically two types of CRT—the ‘soft’ or  gas-filled and the ‘hard’ or highly evacuated. 
Radar  uses the hard tube. ee  -~ 59  . 60 HOW RADAR WORKS  At the foot of the tube is the cathode or filament,  glowing and releasing electrons, negative electrical  charges, just as does the filament of a radio valve. 
These  released electrons can be attracted if a neighbouring  plate or cylinder is given a positive charge, or they can  be repelled back into the cathode if the plate is given a  stronger negative charge. Alternatively the cylinder  may be placed end-on to the cathode and given such  a strong positive potential that the electrons released  from the cathode form a beam and are attracted away  at such a high velocity that they do not stop at the  positively charged cylinder, but continue on. In a valve  it is customary to place the greatest positive potential  on the plate, or anode—say, 150 or 100 volts, compared  with only 100 or 120 on any intermediary grid—and the  anode is relatively close to the cathode, so there is a  heavier electron-flow, or, as we say, a-greater flow of  anode current. 
By this we really mean a greater flow of  electrons to the anode.  In the CRT we use a considerably greater voltage on  the electrodes corresponding to the valve anode, often  as much as 3000 volts. This anode construction is placed  relatively much farther away from the cathode, and the  effective anode current is often only a few microamperes  ({millionths of an ampere). 
But the electrons are drawn  away from the cathode so fast that they pass almost  right through the anode construction, and travel on to  the far end of the tube, hitting the screen end of the  glass at a velocity usually in the nature of 15,000 miles  a second. The anode construction, as we shall see, is so-  arranged that the electrons are drawn off the cathode  and focused into a fine pencil. So when we deflect the CRT beam to produce a radar display, what we are really doing is shifting a continuously moving stream of  electrons, which are themselves moving at a speed of  . 
ON THE SCREEN 61  15,000 miles a second. In a radar tube of the average  diameter it is not at all uncommon for the display picture  to be traced out by this curious moving finger at a writing  speed of several miles a second. We do not see the  beam, of course: what we see is the fluorescent effect  of the sharply focused electrons impinging on the  surface. 
 While we are, so to speak, at the screen end of the  tube let us just see of what it is composed. Radar  patterns are in blue, green, or similar colours; our needs  are rather different from those of television, where we  require as white a picture as possible. The colour  depends on the chemical nature of the screen, and zinc  silicate (Willemite) is a commonly used material, giving  a bright-green spot. 
The chemical fluoresces when the  electron beam touches it, and, of course, there is no  connexion between the natural colour of the powder  applied to the end of the tube and the colour it exhibits  when under fluorescence; most of the screens are  whitish in colour, viewed in natural light, but they  fluoresce only according to the chemical structure. The  electron beam ‘lights up’ the substance, and not un-~  naturally this fluorescence takes some time to die away;  there is a natural tendency for it to continue glowing  for a minute period of time after the electron pencil has  moved on. This we call the afterglow, and although it  can be a nuisance in television, it provides the answer to  many operational problems of radar. 
 Cadmium and calcium tungstate have a very short  - afterglow—in fact, the spot dies within about 7 micro-~  seconds (seven-millionths of a second) after fluorescence.  Zinc silicate has an afterglow of about 8 milliseconds  (eight-thousandths of a second); while right at the  other end of the scale is the ‘red screen,’ composed of  zinc phosphate, which gives a glow lasting for nearly  . 62 HOW RADAR WORKS  a quarter of a second. 
The degree of brilliance is impor-  tant, for with modern tubes we can focus the electron  beam right down to a small circle about 7 mm. in dia-  meter, so that there is not a very large area to cause  fluorescence on any one part of the tube.  There is no need here to go deeply into the operational  uses of afterglow, but we can easily see that a steady  radar pattern—say, one resulting from a blip of a steady  response—will paint a nice, clearly defined picture on  the tube, whereas spasmodic, sudden bursts, such as  those caused by interference or unstable, spurious  echoes, will be fainter in comparison. 
The long, steady  echo has afterglow to help it, but the sudden, short  burst does not produce the same brilliance of afterglow.  On the other hand, a long-afterglow tube would tend to  paint a heavy picture from all responses, desired and  undesired, and after a fraction of a second the whole  tube surface might be quite blurred and unreadable.  In war, where an operator has to cope with enemy  interference, it is often necessary to have tubes of blue  and green, giving short and longer afterglows respec~-  tively, each being read as required through an optical . 
 colour filter. The same technique can be employed in  peacetime navigation to cut down, optically, trouble  from receiver noise, outside spasmodic interference,  and similar snags which cannot be separated electrically.  But before we can produce our fluorescent picture  we must achieve two things: we must first focus our  electron stream into a beam; then we must find ready  means of deflecting it to make the desired picture. 
 Disposition of the electrodes in the CRT is really a  problem in electron optics, a new branch of physics  requiring a volume for adequate treatment, but it will  be appreciated that if the electron stream is being  _ “pulled away’ from the cathode through a cylinder about  . ON THE SCREEN 63  eight inches away, and charged positively at some 3000  volts, then a similar small ring or cylinder only an inch  away from the cathode, and given a small negative  charge, not only will tend to keep the stream back to  the cathode (and so retard its outward velocity), but  will also repel the stream at the point of the ring, and  so narrow the beam’s diameter. Similarly, more than  one positively charged anode may be used, so that the  electron (negatively charged) beam has to pass through  several cylinders or apertures in discs on its outward  route. 
These voltages, applied to each stage of electrode,  can be so adjusted that there is a varying electric field,  and at each point the beam can be deflected just as rays  of light would be deflected by an optical lens. The  shield near the cathode is usually known as the grid,  and because of its geometric position has the same con-  trolling effect on the electron beam as has the mesh grid  of an ordinary radio valve. In radar circuits this grid  may be a multiple electrode, or may be used for a variety  of purposes. 
For instance, we might wish to have a fine  control of voltage here, putting an instantly variable  negative charge on the grid as a ‘brightness’ control for  the tube picture. The more we make the charge nega-  tive the more the beam is repelled, and, as it were,  throttled down.  Or we could keep a steady small negative charge here  to throttle down the beam, but link the grid circuit to  the signal circuits so that a momentary voltage which is  caused to deflect the beam also, instantaneously, causes  a minute decrease of the negative grid voltage. 
The  effect of this is to make the beam stronger at the precise  instant that it is deflected. This is just what we want  for the strobe effect, which, as we saw, was the brighten-  ing of the spot at one point of the pencil travel; in most  radar circuits the strobe effect, which is puzzling for a  . 64 HOW RADAR WORKS  beginner to fathom, is, indeed, quite simply produced  just by control of grid voltage. 
 In a radio set the valve anodes are usually a hundred  or so volts positive, and this is a positive voltage above  earth, for the metal chassis of the set is negative and  usually earthed. Thus if the valve-caps are touched a  shock is experienced, because the fingers are being  placed on a point, say, 150 volts above earth. But it  would equally be possible to earth the valve anodes. 
 Then the body would experience no shock on touching  them, but all other negative parts would produce a  sensation of shock, because they would be 150 volts  “below earth,’ as we say in radar parlance. A layman  usually thinks of the risk of getting a shock off only a  ‘positive’ voltage, but, as the body is usually at earth  potential, with the feet standing on the ground, what  really matters is the voltage with respect to earth. Now  in radar the operator is looking at the end of the tube,  and if there is any danger of his touching part of the  apparatus it is the tube end. 
That, as we can see, may  quite often have a voltage of some 3000 applied to it,  enough to cause a fatal accident. In many radar out-  fits, therefore, the actual screen end of the tube is  brought to earth potential, and the high-voltage anode  in the tube is earthed. The cathode is thus 3000 volts  below earth, and the grid and inferior anodes are also  probably a thousand or more volts below earth; a shock is experienced if they are touched, but the high-voltage  anode end is safe. 
Of course, a surface charge tends to accumulate on the inside of the tube itself, owing to the electron beam impinging on the glass wall. If no means were provided for draining away this surface charge the electron beam of the CRT would continuously be ‘going  nowhere very fast,’ and a saturation charge would build up. This we prevent by making the end and walls of  . 
1 ON THE SCREEN 65  the tube slightly conducting; a thin deposit of graphite  is the usual solution to surface accumulation.  Lateral attraction or repulsion caused by voltages  applied to the tubes, slotted discs, and other electrode  shapes inside the CRT cause the beam to be speeded up,  thinned down, and generally brought as nearly as pos-  sible like a pencil, so that it may impinge on the screen  end and cause fluorescence over an area probably not  more than a + mm. square. 
Our electron pencil is ready  to write. For radar displays we must now find means of  moving it in at least two directions.  The beam is one composed of electrons, travelling at  high speed. 
They can be shifted from their path by  electrostatic or electromagnetic means. If we so shape  our focusing electrodes the shift of the beam from its  non-defliected position can be achieved without any  serious effect on the focusing. Electromagnetic deflec~  tion we secure, of course, by placing a magnetic coil or  series of coils near the tube, and usually so arranged  that the greatest concentration of the magnetic field is  at that point where the beam has passed by at least one  focusing anode. 
Electrostatic deflection we achieve by  having pairs of facing plates inside the tube (placed  usually after the final focusing electrode), the plates  having their major electric field at right angles to the  deflected beam. To avoid confusion it should be  remembered at this stage that horizontally placed plates  will deflect the beam vertically, and vertical plates will  deflect it horizontally, according to the charge on the  plates. In many radar systems we use both electrostatic  and magnetic deflection at once, and simultaneously we  control or modulate the beam by a varying voltage on the  tube grid. 
The electrons striving to go on their un-  checked path at 15,000 miles a second are thus given  quite a task! Magnetic tubes usually have a rather long  E  . 66 HOW RADAR WORKS  ‘neck’? in which all the electrodes are placed, leaving  still a circular space around which the magnetic poles  can-be placed. Electrostatic tubes usually have two  pairs of plates, the vertical pair (which, remember, pull  or push the beam along a horizontal plane) being known  as the ‘X’ plates, and the others the ‘Y’ plates. 
These  terms arise, of course, from the familiar X and Y axes  of a graph. |  In a magnetic tube the sensitivity depends almost  entirely on the physical construction of the magnets,  but in an electrostatic tube there is quite a lot we can  do, in addition to securing a maximum change. of  voltage on the plates to deflect the beam, to increase  sensitivity. 
If we can afford to limit the possible ampli-  tude—i.e., the amount by which we need to deflect the  beam to produce a reasonable radar display on the  screen—then the plates may be placed quite close  together to increase the potential gradient between  them. That they cannot be too close is obvious, for in —  an extreme case the beam would touch one edge of the  plates at maximum deflection.  We can regulate sensitivity by another means. 
The  control of anode voltage affects sensitivity—in fact,  sensitivity.and voltage on ‘the final anode are almost in  direct proportion. A rough-and-ready method of appre-  Ciating this point is to visualize that as the anode voltage  is raised the electrons are pulled ‘harder’ from the  cathode; the beam is thus more intense and more diffi-  cult to deflect from its normal path. In truth the  velocity is not so increased, but nevertheless with electro-  static deflection there is an almost linear relationship  between anode volts and tube sensitivity. 
With magnetic  tubes the sensitivity does not depend so directly Of the  pasa ee most radar tubes of normal construc- _ ate st kent tt EE ee oe  rtional tothe squ square ‘root tof the voltage. ROR A eee en emia mapA  . #  ON THE SCREEN 67  For the basic radar display we have so far considered  it will be recalled that we are faced with a time-base  display in which the spot moves horizontally—that 1s,  between the ‘X’ plates—taking a time to do so which  bears relationship to the velocity of the electromagnetic  wave-speed of 186,240 miles a second. 
Then we apply  our radar-received signal to the ‘Y’ plates, which can  produce a vertical deflection of the spot, making an echo  ‘blip’ when a signal is received, or when the transmitter  pulse goes forth. This display, known in radar spheres  as ‘Type A,’ or ‘range amplitude,’ is historically the  oldest, still much used operationally, and the easiest  to consider as our basis.  At once you will see an important difference between  the jobs the X and the Y plates are expected to do. 
The  X plates are being fed with a regularly varying voltage,  produced by a local piece of apparatus known as the  time-base, to pull the spot across the tube, to black out  its return path, and then to set it going across again in  ouey the same path. This is a ‘home-made’ voltage,  ‘and we can make it as strong as we like within reason.  _’ But across the Y plates we have to place our signal  ~ voltage, which even with most efficient radar amplifiers  _ may still be very small compared with the time-base  '- voltage on the X plates. 
Thus the sensitivity of the tube  ‘in the Y direction needs to be considerably higher than  sin the X direction. This involves important construc-  tional considerations inside the tube, and the Y plates  may be placed much closer together than the X plates.  Alternatively we can use, say, electrostatic deflection  in the Y direction, and magnetic deflection in the X  direction to produce the regular beat of the time-base  display. 
 Where we have two pairs of electrostatic plates it is  common in a badly adjusted tube to find evidence of  . 68 HOW RADAR WORKS  ‘trapezium distortion,’ a name arising from the trape-  zium-shaped figure which can, in extreme cases, result  from this distortion. The cause of the trouble is the  influence of one pair of plates on the sensitivity of the  others. 
If voltages are applied in turn to the X and Y  plates which should pull the spot over the screen area  in the form of a true square, then the effect of trapezium  distortion is to produce a trapezium-sided figure, the  difference between the long and short sides of the figure  being an indication of the variation of sensitivity in one  direction with the deflection voltage applied to the  opposite pair of plates. Asymmetrical operation without  some distortion is rather difficult to achieve, but is  almost entirely cured by correct disposition of the X  and Y plates and adjustment of voltage.  In tube displays so far we have considered only that  type wherein a coated surface is caused to fluoresce on  impact of the electron stream, and the radar operator  sees this pattern on the tube end itself. 
But we must  also note the extremely important new technique opened  by r tubes | of the Skiatron type, where the picture is not °  watched | on the tube.end, but is projected optically on to  a large screen. The fluorescent screen used on Skiatron-  type tubes does not show much apparent change to the  human eye when the electron beam traces out its pattern,  but. the- chemical structure does, in fact, change in -  opacity under the impact of the beam. 
A beam of light —  is passed through the tube end, and projected by rela-  tively simple optical means on to a ground-glass screen.  The radar display drawn out by the electron pencil is  thus enlarged up to the size of the screen. |  In practice the translucent screen can be several feet  in diameter, and the ‘picture’ is projected through a  lens-and-condenser system. 
The tube screen turns a  - darkish purple under the impact of the electron beam, ,  . ON THE SCREEN 69  and returns to its normal greyish colour when the beam  has moved on and it is subject again only to the heat of  the associated high-density light source.  We should by now be able to understand the basic  points of the range-amplitude radar display. 
We see a  faint greenish or blue line (depending on the afterglow-  factor type of tube employed), with perhaps a large blip  at one end of the line representing the transmitter pulse,  surrounded by a group of PE’s, the permanent echoes  from neighbouring objects; or the outfit may more  likely be of the type where the pulse and perhaps the  PE’s too are suppressed. As the gain control of the  radar receiver is turned up we see the thin time-base line  increase in thickness and take the appearance of a grass  carpet, as the noise background of the receiver causes  thousands of little impuises across the Y plates. Range  control is then set so that the electron beam is travelling  at a speed bearing relation to the required range of the  outfit. 
The Cal is switched on, injecting on to the Y  plates, instead of a radio signal, a locally generated series  of direct-current pulses separated by a predetermined  time interval, such as ss second, which corresponds to  increments of range equal to ten miles. These ‘ro-mile  pips’ we spread out by means of another voltage control  until the required time-base length is available. Our  electron tape-measure is now ready for action. 
Cal is  switched off, and the radar receiver instead put direct  on to the Y plates. If any ship or aircraft is within our  range, and within the direction of our aerials, we shall  see the homecoming echo displayed as a small blip, or  deflection, somewhere along the time-base line. There  may be not one but a large number of echoes. 
Some,  even remote ones, may be PE’s; some will be moving  in towards the end of the trace; others will be moving  out. If we have set the tube up accurately according to  . 70 HOW RADAR WORKS  yur Cal pips we can measure directly along the line, and  say at once that any particular echo is from a target so  nany miles, perhaps over 250 miles, away. 
 When a target in which we are especially interested  comes quite close to our station (provided the trans-  mitter and receiver are functioning well, and the target  is still being received back at good strength) we may find  it convenient to use a different time-base for more  accurate measurement. We therefore switch on a  ‘faster’ time-base, corresponding to a smaller range, but  piving us, aS it were, a more magnified picture of the  near-by echo in relation to our home station. Some  radar outfits have a choice of several time-bases, the  ‘fast’ ones giving an open and more accurate reading  for near-by echoes. 
On the other hand, the maximum  range is limited mainly by two things: first, there is the  physical limit at which the apparatus will give any  sensible reception of an echo from a very distant object;  second, there is the limiting factor set up by the spacing  between the pulses, or, as we prefer to regard it, the  PRE. If we do not allow a sufficient space of time  between pulses for an echo to be received back from the  most distant range at which the outfit will work we shall  get a false set of readings. Homecoming echoes will, in  effect, be drowned by fresh pulses going out. 
There is,  therefore, a certain relationship between PRF and  range, just as a man who wants to get a nice, loud echo  back from shouting at a mountain-side makes a clear  pause between each shout, and does not jabber while  the echo is returning. But this is a point more to be considered by radar designers than users.  A CRT is the radar eye, to the onlooker 3; but, of  course, the real ‘eye’ of radar is the aerial system. 
It is the aerial which is all the time ‘looking’ out into space and finding our echoes for us. If we make our aerial  . ON THE SCREEN at  directional, then we shall not be confused by trying to  look in all directions at once. 
But the more directional  the aerial becomes the more limited is the field over  which it can see. That field can be drawn out quite  accurately in the form of what is known as a polar  diagram; polar diagrams usually take the shape of a  number of balloon-shaped lobes, and these are really  only graphical representations of the limits of area over  which the aerial can transmit or look. Now we shall  discover when we look at some operational points of  radar that the simple range-amplitude, or Type A, dis-  play gives us some idea of where our target is, but not  how high it is. 
If we are working marine radar we do  not expect to find the Queen Mary sailing 3000 feet up,  but with radar for military or civil aviation the matter  of height-finding is very important. In fact, for some  radar uses, such as those where the magic eye of radar  brings great aircraft safely in to land in dense ground  fog, accurate height-finding is the only thing that  matters. The pilot can tell by quite a number of other  means where he is over the airfield; all he needs to know  for a safe landing is how high he is at any moment. 
 Height and the more ready appreciation of a number  of other operational points compel us to use in practice  more complex radar tube pictures than the simple  Type A, but if we have grasped the idea well so far we  need not hesitate to consider some of.the more advanced  displays.  . V. 
RADAR TIME-BASES  VERY RADAR DEVICE WHICH DEPENDS ON TIME  ee ee must have a means of pulling the  CRT spot along a display path at a certain speed, so that  deflection from this path resulting from received signals  or other pulses can be read with relation to some fixed  standard.  The apparatus which moves the spot in this way is  known as the time-base, or more accurately as a time-  base generator. It is really only an electronic method  of measuring time, and is a series of circuits that  produce a potential which varies at a known (and usually  constant and linear) rate with respect to time. 
Time-  base generators are to-day an elementary part of elec-  tronics, and in this chapter we need only describe the  general types and see how they can be applied to radar  uses. -Many time-base generators which are valuable in  general industrial and laboratory work are useless for  radar. Although time-base generators for television sets  are relatively complicated—and, indeed, two time-bases  are needed, as the tube is scanned horizontally 405 times  while traversing the tube screen twice in a vertical  direction—they are not suitable for the majority of radar  systems, as the degree of linearity may not be sufficient. 
 Tt will readily be seen that if we do need a radar display  where our electronic clock demands a linear time-base,  then there must not be the slightest variation in the  potential’s straight-line characteristic, or we shall have the same trouble in getting correct timing (and therefore  correct reading of distance) from our radar clock as we should from an ordinary clock the hands of which did  . ?  RADAR TIME-~BASES 73  not maintain an exactly constant speed in travelling  from midnight to midday.  There are two basic forms of time-base generator,  those using hard (highly evacuated) valves, and those in  which the potential changes result from a discharge  taking place through a gas-filled (soft) low-resistance  valve. 
For most radar time-bases it is generally desir-  able to obtain what is called a linear saw-tooth voltage  wave-form—that is, a voltage which increases uniformly  with time for a certain period, and is then restored to its  Starting value in a very much shorter period, and can  graphically be shown by a figure such as “\_ , so that,  of course, the perfect form would be shaped thus:  Ji: With many radar time-base circuits we do, in  fact, get such a close approximation to an instant fly-  back that the graphical representation is, indeed, v:  close to this latter figure. :  This saw-tooth voltage is applied to the CRT in such  a way that the spot is swept across at a known speed  from left to right (usually) in a Type A display, or from  the centre of the tube to the outer diameter in the case  of a rotating PPI display. And at each end of such a  journey the spot is sent very rapidly back to its starting-  point, the flyback usually taking only a negligible interval  of time, so that the path is only faintly visible on the  screen, or, indeed, may not be seen at all by the human  eye. 
 The basic principle of many radar time-bases is the  charging of a condenser at a uniform rate, and then its  discharge at the appropriate instant through a low-  resistance path.  A condenser connected to a fixed-voltage supply  charges at first with a rush, the rate tailing off as the  . 74 HOW RADAR WORKS  condenser voltage begins to approach the supply  voltage. 
Theoretically, of course, the condenser never  does attain the full voltage of the supply, but, apart  from this hairsplitting point, the essential is that the  current drops to zero at full charge, so that the graph  of voltage against time is of the form yo. , and the  graph of current against time is the converse,  We could attempt to straighten up the voltage-time  curve if, instead of linking the condenser to a constant-  voltage source, we made arrangements to maintain a  constant rate of flow of current into the condenser. For  this purpose you must imagine a variable resistance in  series with the condenser. 
We are measuring the voltage  across the condenser only, of course, and not across the  resistance. At the moment that the condenser is first  connected we turn the resistance up to maximum,  decreasing it as the condenser becomes gradually  charged. We should, if such a feat were humanly pos-  sible with components of normal radar values, then get -  a fairly straight-line graph of voltage against current. 
 It would, in fact, be a > and not ee ;  Naturally no human co-ordination of hand and eye could achieve such a result of controlling the series resistance to limit the voltage in this way, but we can get an approximation of the plan by charging the con-~ lenser through the effective anode resistance of a pen-  tode, or through a saturated diode. | _ Except at very low values, the anode current of a pentode is almost independent of its anode voltage—a characteristic of such valves brought about largely by the mechanical construction and geometric placing of _ the electrodes,.and one which is most useful for radar.  . 
RADAR TIME-BASES 75  In some time-base circuits we can put the condenser to  be charged in series with an ordinary rectifying diode,  and we get almost the same effect because there is a  limited electron cathode emission, and after a small  initial anode-current rise it cannot grow again even  though the voltage is increased.  Thus we have solved the first essential of our time-  base, to get a straight-line charging rate, which means,  of course, a straight-line graph for the CRT figure. If  we do not mind using a very high charging voltage, then,  of course, we need not be unduly troubled by the curved  nature of the first voltage-time curve we have examined. 
 Although its overall shape is thus e » we can produce  such a curve by a relatively high voltage, and then for  our time-base portion work on only a very small part of  this exponential characteristic, and the smaller the part  from which we work the nearer will be its approximation  to linearity. There are several time-bases which do, in  fact, have their condensers charged direct through a  resistance, but the high voltage is an obvious disadvan-  tage. Moreover, even on a very small part of this curve  we do not get so near to linearity as we do with the flat  part of the anode-voltage and anode-current characteristic  of a screened pentode. 
 For the discharge we may arrange that the condenser  value of voltage is suddenly reduced by automatic dis~.  charge through a gas-filled triode such as a thyratron,  and we can set the circuit values so that the condenser  will continuously be charged and discharged, producing  a succession of saw-tooth wave-forms. Or we can arrange  the circuit values so that after initial charge the con-  denser does not become discharged until another small  voltage change takes place, and this voltage change can  come from another circuit, so that the time~base display  . 
76 HOW RADAR WORKS  on the CRT depends each time on this additional  _ triggering circuit.  For lower frequencies the discharge through a thyra-  tron is satisfactory. These valves are similar in electrode  construction to a hard triode, but they contain a minute  quantity of some inert gas. 
Immediately this gas ionizes  the anode current rises to an extremely high value.  There are small gas-filled thyratrons which have a  cathode rating of only 5 watts, yet on ionization they are  capable of passing I ampere of anode current. The point  at which ionization occurs is determined, not unnatur-  " ally, by combination of grid bias and anode voltage. 
 The initial anode current is very small usually, but  immediately the grid bias is reduced beyond a pre-  determined point, or the anode current is sufficiently  increased, ionization occurs and the anode-current curve  rises sharply.  In the normal thyratron-type time-base generally the  grid bias remains fixed, and the anode voltage is con-  trolled by the voltage across the condenser. Immedi-  ately this reaches a predetermined value ionization  occurs, the thyratron ‘strikes,’ and the condenser dis-  charges almost instantly through this low-resistance  path. 
It is worth noting that in most circuits the con-  denser does not discharge to zero volts, but to about 20 volts, which is a value so low compared with the “striking” voltage of the thyratron that the circuit does  give a true saw-tooth effect. During the following  charging period of the condenser the thyratron is vir-  tually a non-conducting path, and does not affect the linear charging curve we have striven to obtain. Of course, it will at once be seen that we can set the thyra~  tron’s working anode voltage and normal grid bias at such values that the thyratron will not ‘strike’ unaided  even at the point of maximum condenser voltage. 
But a  . RADAR TIME-BASES 77  slight alteration of grid bias, such as can be given from  the associated trigger circuit, will permit the ionization,  and then the condenser rushes to discharge. If in that  interval the trigger voltage is withdrawn from the grid  the circuit remains quiescent again until, the condenser  having charged once again, the discharged is ‘pipped  off.’  The difference graphically is that with continuous  working we obtain a succession of saw-tooth forms,  such as ~~ \ ~\_~ \_-~ \ .. 
The vertical por-  tion x is dependent on the discharging characteristics of  the thyratron. The sloping portion depends for its  slope and degree of linearity on the condenser and  voltage values, and, of course, on the anode voltage and  anode current characteristic of the screened pentode  used as a charging resistance. But with the trigger in  operation the saw-tooth form we obtain is shown thus  ye | /| / | > or, in other words, a series of  /| spaced by a time interval of L__J , which latter  is controlled by the trigger circuit. 
 The thyratron type of circuit is normally not suitable  for very high frequencies, and then we have to use time-  base crrcuits employing hard valves all through. There  are many such, and the radar enthusiast who wants to  probe the construction of such circuits is recommended  to O. S. 
Puckle’s Time Bases or Sir Robert Watson-  Watt’s Applications of the Cathode Ray Oseillograph in  Radio Research.  Typical of the hard-valve time-base generators is that  used in the Cossor Model 339 double-beam oscillograph,  and a detailed description will be given of this, as it is  quite simple to follow and shows how the standard hard-  . 78 HOW RADAR WORKS  valve radar time-base circuit works. 
It uses three high-  vacuum valves, and is stable over the wide frequency  range of 5 to 250,000 cycles per second. This upper  limit of frequency sweep is determined and limited, of  course, by circuit capacities and the voltage sweep  required, and not by any such irregular and unstable  factors as the deionization-time of a gas in a thyratron.  Erratic behaviour of thyratron-type circuits is to be  expected above 15,000 cycles per second. 
©  O HT. Fe  = OSynch.  a Sz  VS  Cc) C 4  D HT. 
 FIG. I. A TYPICAL THREE-VALVE TIME~BASE  GENERATING CIRCUIT  ‘Hard’ (highly evacuated) valves are used throughout. 
 The circuit of the hard-valve time-base is shown in  Fig. 1. The master-condenser is C in the anode circuit  of valve Va. 
This condenser will, as we have seen,  charge in linear fashion through the pentode, thus  carrying the cathode of valve V6 more and more negative  with respect to its anode. The control grid of this valve  is, however, appreciably negative relative to the anode  due to the voltage drop in Re by the anode current of Vc.  As soon as the cathode of Vb has travelled sufficiently  negative to approach the potential present on the control  grid of this valve, then V will start to pass current, and  . 
RADAR TIME-BASES 79  at once a voltage drop will be present across Rb. This  swings the suppressor grid of Ve negative, causing the  anode of Vc (and therefore the control grid of valve V6)  to go positive.  This action is cumulative, and the master-condenser  C therefore discharges rapidly through Vé until, when it  becomes discharged, no further current flows through  Rb. 
Then the cycle repeats. The value of Rb affects  the amplitude of the triggering pulse present in the grid  circuit of Vc, and also modifies the flyback period due to  its presence in the discharging path, and this, of course,  provides us with a trigger control. The voltage de-  veloped across condenser C before each successive dis-  charge through Vb is dependent upon the extent by  which the grid of Vb is maintained negative relative to  the anode by the voltage drop across Re. 
Adjustment  of the magnitude of this latter resistance therefore gives  us control of amplitude. Synchronization of the time-  base with outside circuits is effected by injecting a  fraction of the working voltage into one of the grids of  Vc. The rate of charge of condenser C depends upon  the capacity of this component and the current flowing  through Va. 
In the Cossor oscillograph time-base  advantage is taken of both these factors, rough control  being effected by the selection of a number of fixed  condensers on a rotary switch, while a progressive  adjustment is provided in the form of a ‘velocity’ con-  trol varying the screen volts on the pentode charging  valve.  This three-valve time-base circuit is typical of many  used in radar practice, but there is one simple circuit  giving a useful saw-tooth wave-form and employing  only one valve. The circuit is shown in Fig. 
2. This  circuit is given, as it is typical of those in which the  saw-tooth is produced from a rapid charge and a slow  . 80 HOW RADAR WORKS  discharge, or, graphically, [\/\_; and not | /|, as in  the previous circuits described. 
This circuit acts on the  principle of the ‘squegging’ oscillator, but it is important  to note that the sweep frequency is not directly related  to the frequency of the oscillations set up in the circuit,  e  HLT. ate  R  Swe  Volt ace  Synch.  C  HT. 
 @ > 2  FIG. 2. A SINGLE-VALVE TIME-BASE GENERATOR,  FUNCTIONING AS A SQUEGGING OSCILLATOR  which, of course, are principally controlled by the values  of L and C. 
This latter oscillatory frequency must be  higher than the sweep frequency to avoid interference.  The circuit oscillates, and the grid of the valve rapidly  becomes negative until oscillation is checked. The grid  condenser then discharges through the leak R until the  valve’s grid voltage is once more sufficiently in the  positive trend to allow oscillation to commence again. 
 At once the grid voltage builds up negative, the grid  condenser again discharges through the leak, and so the -  cycle continues.  _ Flyback suppression is sometimes added to a radar  . RADAR TIME-BASES Sr  time-base circuit to ensure that the trace is completely  eliminated during flyback. 
This is generally achieved  by applying back to the shield of one of the time-base  valves a voltage of suitable phase taken from the sweep  output part of the circuit. This voltage is generally  applied through a diode rectifier, and, of course, the  effect (if the voltage is in phase) is to ‘wipe out’ the spot  during flyback. . 
 . VI. ‘IMPOSSIBLE’ CIRCUITS  MAN WHO HAD SPENT SOME FIFTEEN YEARS IN THE  construction and servicing of radio receivers was  shown the circuit diagram of a 10-centimetre radar  receiver used in a fairly popular civil-aviation beacon  system. 
He studied the blueprint for some five minutes,  and his quizzical expression clearly showed that he was  on the defensive, thinking, no doubt, that he was being  made the subject of a practical joke.  At length he said, ‘‘I don’t know what it is meant to  be. It couldn’t work, of course. 
The circuit is quite  impossible.” On being told that no sport with his feel-  ings was intended, and that the circuit was, in fact, an  accurate delineation of a piece of commercial radar  equipment, he remained puzzled and suspicious, and  kept repeating, ‘‘But it couldn’t work. The circuit is  impossible.”  Perhaps this is an extreme case, but nevertheless it is  borne out by instructors who have to prepare radar  mechanics and service engineers to handle civil and  military radar. These instructors find that newcomers  to the techniques of radio are prepared to take the ad-  mittedly strange radar circuits at their face-value, and  will reason out for themselves the manner of the circuit’s  functioning. 
But the man who has become conservative,  and who has hidebound ideas of radio theory, remains so  puzzled by the comparative novelty of radar technique  that he is at a great disadvantage. To him all valve  cathodes are earthed. All grids stay at some negative  potential, all anodes usually end up at ‘high-tension  positive, and the whole purpose of the circuits in which  82  . 
‘IMPOSSIBLE’ CIRCUITS 83  he has been trained is to handle ‘nicely rounded’ sine  waves at the grid end and to deliver equally sine-looking  waves, perhaps amplified or inverted, but nevertheless  sine waves. The notion that a circuit should pass a  square wave is revolutionary. That a string of some  seven or eight valves may be needed to produce some  peculiar little pulse (which the novice might imagine  would be produced only too readily by a single stage of  distorting LF amplification) is an annoying lack of  apparent economy on the part of radar technique. 
But  there it is; many of the circuits do appear revolutionary,  impracticable, and to the conventional radio man  ‘impossible.’  In the scope of this book it is obviously not possible  to deal with all radar circuits and manners of producing  square waves, pulses, and bursts of energy in various  time-forms. But if the reader has studied some reliable  work, such as C. L. 
Boltz’s Basic Radio or the Radio  Society of Great Britain’s Amateur Radio Handbook and  its supplement, and is familiar with normal circuit theory  and the use of the valve as a Class A, B, and C amplifier,  then some of the most important radar circuits will not  have a crossword-puzzle complexity.  The very names of typical radar circuits are often as  intriguing as the operation: we have already met such  strange additions to the English language as the ‘strobe’  and the ‘Cal.’ Now let us meet the ‘cathode follower,’  the ‘D.C. restorer,’ the ‘flip-flop,’ and the ‘multi-vib.’  We shall meet the ‘transitron fitp-flop’ and several other  circuits imported from American radar laboratories, but  first we must be introduced to the two firm friends which  run through all basic forms of radar pulse-shapers—the  differentiator and the integrator. 
 We have seen enough of radar systems to realize that  a ‘short, sharp shout’ is the fundamental of all transmis-  . +  ae 84 HOW RADAR WORKS  sion in this way, and therefore the major task of all  modulator circuits at the transmitting end must be to  create not a gentle sine wave to modulate the C.W., but  as ‘vertical’ a square wave as possible to cause a nearly  instantaneous burst of energy, and then a cut-off again  as nearly instantaneously as possible. We need many  Circuits in the transmitter modulator, first to form a  square pulse with a wave-form having a leading edge as  nearly vertical as possible to produce a sudden burst of  energy. 
 The nature of the circuit may also demand that the  lagging edge be vertical, to produce an imstantaneous  cut-off. Such a wave-form is produced in the transmitter  modulator, the pulse of energy is broadcast, and a signal  received by the radar receiver. Now there is one impor-  tant difference between a radar and a broadcast radio  receiver. 
The latter continues to function all the time  it is switched on, and, apart from the distortion intro-  duced by ‘detection,’ the job of the receiver amplifier  stages is to handle the sine-wave form and deliver at the  loud-speaker a continuous output which should be as  nearly as possible a mirror image of the microphone  _ Voltage wave-form at the transmitter. The process is  ‘continuous. Not so in the radar receiver. 
 Use of a common aerial for reception and transmission  (a standard technique now in centimetric radar systems)  involves some form of switch to insulate the receiver  from the great surge of energy when the transmitter  ‘fires,’ and to connect the receiver to the aerial in good  time (although it may be only.a minute fraction of time, -  perhaps a millionth of a second) for reception of the  echo. The pulse is received, then amplified at radio  frequency, probably by a superheterodyne arrangement  which obeys conventionality in principle, even though  the circuit and component values may be unorthodox  . ‘IMPOSSIBLE’ CIRCUITS 85  compared with broadcast practice. 
But for effective dis-  play on the CRT the pulse may not be ‘square’ enough.  To produce a good vertical leading or lagging edge to the  pulse, for accurate CRT reading, we may need to distort  the received signal, to ‘square it up,’ and for this purpose  we may put the signal through a ‘pulse-shaper.” But an  essential part of the receiver is not involved in the con-  tinuous chain of reception. We gain nothing by receiving  the pulse and displaying it on a CRT unless we can  relate the pulse in time to the time of the transmitted  energy. 
In many forms of radar the tme relationship  between the transmitted burst and the received packet  of energy, and the accurate measurement of this time  relationship, is as important as the reception of the echo.  Thus the time-base of the CRT is so arranged that the  echo is presented not, as it were, on one continuous  beam of fluorescence, but with each echo on a separate  trace. The whole thing takes place dozens or hundreds  or even thousands of times every second, so to the  human eye it appears as a continuous process. 
But in  the receiver itself the process is not continuous. In many  of the circuits we must arrange not for steady voltage  changes, such as those of speech frequency in a radio  low-frequency amplifier, but for spasmodic, sudden,  staccato changes. We need such bursts of energy, for  instance, in saw-tooth form to provide the common  form of linear time-base in basic radar equipment. 
 AVAVAVAVAVAVA FIG, 3  To summarize, therefore, the average radio circuit is  handling wave~forms which can roughly be represented  as in Fig. 3. The radar receiver and transmitter, how-  ever, will be handling a square wave, such as is shawn  . 
86 HOW RADAR WORKS  in Fig. 4, or one of its several variations, such as in  Fig. §. 
 FIG. 4  FIG. 5  How can such curious wave-forms be produced? The  orthodox radio man will say at once, “‘Oh, these are  merely distortions of a true wave-form. 
I am not  familiar with a rectangular or ‘square’ wave, but obvi-  ously these pulses and blips are a distorted form of some  truly geometric wave-form which has been applied to  a distorter.”” That is true, but what is the cause of the  meticulously arranged distortion? It is not, obviously,  the result of circuit fault, nor an uncontrollable effect.  We shall, in fact, discover on analysing many a radar  pulse-shaping circuit that no matter how many valves  are used the essential of the circuit is often the ‘inte-  grator’ or the ‘differentiator.’  FIG. 6  First consider a simple circuit diagram (Fig. 
6), con-  _ Sisting of a condenser C and a resistance R. This looks  . ‘IMPOSSIBLE’ CIRCUITS 87  simple enough, even to the hidebound radio man, but  in radar this is a ‘differentiating’ circuit if the values are  correctly chosen; so let us see what happens. 
If a  sudden voltage is applied to point A point B will follow  at once and rise by the same amount. If now the voltage  at A is maintained steadily B’s voltage will drop owing  to the leak-back through R. Even a slow discharge will  have an effect on the voltage at B, and we can, of course,  control the rate of discharge by varying the values of the  condenser and resistance. 
There is a fairly simple piece  of arithmetic which can tell us the ‘time factor’ of such  a Circuit, for it can be shown that about two-thirds of the  charge will leak away in a time equal to C multiplied  by R, in seconds. If C is measured in microfarads and  R in megohms, then the result CR gives us the time  constant of the circuit in seconds or fractions of a  second. We can make this time constant fit our radar  needs. 
 FIG. 7  FIG. 8  Now look at the ‘long’ pulse (Fig. 
7)—-a sudden  increase in voltage, maintained at a steady higher value  for a certain time, then dropped almost instantaneously  to zero. Let us say that the time interval is 50 micro-  seconds, and that such a series of pulses be applied across  the differentiating circuit just examined. The sudden  . 
$8 HOW RADAR WORKS  increase of voltage at A will last for 50 microseconds. If  we arrange condenser C to be of 5 micro-microfarads  and R x megohm the time factor is § microseconds. This  means that by the time 5 microseconds have passed the  voltage at B will have tailed off in a differential curve,  so that at B, instead of the original square pulse, we get  a series of pulses, as in Fig. 
8. That is the result of  putting a square wave-form through a differentiating  circuit. Now a rather different effect is obtained if the  circuit is arranged as in Fig. 
9, the ‘integrating’ circuit.  The time constant can be worked out as before, but it is  obvious that if the square pulse be applied to point 4  the resulting wave~form at B will not be a series of  rectangular pulses, but rather as in Fig. 10. 
This is the  characteristic wave-form of the ‘integrated’ pulse.  FIG. I0  How do we obtain our square wave in the first place?  There are several methods, but one basic system is  interesting because it takes a sine wave and turns it into  . 
‘IMPOSSIBLE’ CIRCUITS 89  a square wave. If we consider an ordinary Class A valve  amplifier, with a sine wave applied to its correctly biased  grid, and the whole thing working on the straight part  of the characteristic, then an amplified sine wave is pro-  duced in the anode circuit, a mirror of the grid input.  . 
go HUW Ravan Wveanno  Fig. 11 shows the type of operating conditions for  Class A. But what happens if we shift the operating  conditions to Class C, using the entire characteristic,  biasing the grid to about twice cut-off? As the grid is  driven positive, grid current flows, the anode current  drops at the peak of the cycle, causing the top of the peak  to be, not /\ , as with Class A, or sometimes even  Class B, but a . 
What we get from such a circuit,  if a large sine wave is applied to the grid, is a series of  pulses suchas ( \ ( \ ( ) ( }- Obviously this is the  first step towards a truly rectangular wave-form, and  by applying such a series of pulses to a differentiating  Circuit we can get a series of saw-tooths, or ‘pips.’ A  fascinating series of forms can be obtained, and I advise  interested radar enthusiasts to read N. Marchand’s  ‘¢ The Response of Electrical Networks of Non-sinusoidal .  Periodic Waves,” in the IL.R.E. 
Proceedings for 1941.  This method of creating pulses is used in many radar  systems, but an even more popular circuit is that of the  ‘multi-vib,’ or multi-vibrator, to give its full ttle, an  honour seldom, I may say, accorded it by radar mech-  anics. The multi-vib is much older than radar. 
In fact,  it was 4 invention of H’ Abraham and E. Bloch at the  end of the First World War, and in view of the secrecy  which came to surround all producers of square waves  (most especially the multi-vib) during World War No. 2,  it is amusing to reflect that the enemy could have read  it all for himself in Abraham and Bloch’s Notice sur les  lampes-valves a 3-electrodes et leur applications (Publi-  cation No. 
27 of the French War Ministry in April 1918).  This particular ingenious application of the ‘lampes-  valves’ makes use of two resistance-coupled valves, back  . ‘IMPOSSIBLE’ CIRCUITS OI  to back. 
A typical circuit is shown in Fig. 12. It will  be seen that the anode of each valve is coupled to the  grid of the other, of course through the usual grid con-  denser, with grid-leak to earth. 
To see how the multi-  vib operates we must first ‘catch’ it at a quiescent state.  FIG. I2  At any such instant picture the anode current in one  valve increasing. 
A negative voltage is thus applied to  the grid of the next valve (because of the greater volts-  drop across the anode resistance), and the effect of this  negative grid voltage is to drive the steady anode current  of the second valve down. This tends to make the grid  of the first valve more positive, and still further increases  the anode current of that valve. The effect is cumulative,  and after a predetermined time the cumulative effect  causes the anode current of one valve to reach maximum,  while that of the other valve is cut off or reduced. 
 Immediately the grid condenser’s charge has leaked  away through the resistance (here comes that old friend  . 92 HOW RADAR WORKS  the ‘time constant’ of an RC circuit again) anode current  flows normally again in the second valve, and the  cumulative effect starts building up again, of course, this  time in the opposite direction. There is no necessity for  the time constants of the two circuits to be matched,  In many radar multi-vibs the two RC time constants  are arranged to be different, or the valves are otherwise  ‘mis-matched’ by the application of a small negative  bias to one stage. 
 The multi-vib, you see, is really a resistance-capacity-  coupled amplifier in which the output of the second  valve goes back into the first. If you prefer a mathe-  matical explanation, then I would quote the Admiralty  Signal Establishment’s stock ‘arithmetical’ explanation  of the multi-vib, which incidentally applies equally well  to the ‘flip-flop’ and ‘transitron,’ which we will con-  sider next.  A positive voltage (say, 1 volt) is applied to A’s grid. 
 It produces a negative voltage at A’s anode, which is fed  to B’s grid and produces a positive voltage at B’s anode,  which adds itself to the original r-volt change. There  will be two very different results, depending on whether  the application of 1 volt positive will make B’s anode  go more or less than 1 volt positive.  Suppose that the effect of 1 volt positive is that A’s  anode goes 4 volt negative, making B’s grid, of course,  also go 4 volt negative. 
This will make B’s anode go  4X4 (.e., 4) volt positive. This extra } volt at B’s  anode will cause a further change of } x} (Z.e., vg) volt  at A’s grid, and so on. Mathematical proof exists that  the resulting change can never exceed 13 volts, for this  total is made up by continued addition of 1-+3-+75, and  so on, each term being one-quarter of the preceding  one. 
Now what happens if the effect of 1 volt positive  on A’s grid is to produce an extra 7% volt positive at  . ‘IMPOSSIBLE’ CIRCUITS 93  B’s grid? The resulting change will be 1-+345-+-384, and  So on, making a total which can never be in excess of 10.  In these two cases, therefore, the effect of back-coupling  is to increase the gain of A either by 13 times, or by  ro times. 
If the voltage on A’s grid is removed the  whole circuit goes back to its original state, and the  circuit acts as a stable amplifier.  ’ Now suppose that the effect of 1 volt positive on A’s  grid is that the extra voltage is 1-1 volts positive—i.e.,  more than one. The preceding reasoning shows that  A’s grid will change in voltage by 1+1-1-+1-21, and so on, getting larger and larger until a limit is set only by  considerations of H.T. 
voltage and valve characteristics.  The circuit is unstable. The ‘effect’ is out of all pro-  portion to the ‘cause,’ and, indeed, remains when the  ‘cause’ is removed. 
This state of things occurs in all  circuits of the ‘flip-flop,’ multi-vib, and Kipp-relay  types. Nearly all circuits of this type begin (at some  infinitesimal instant of time when the outfit is first  Switched on) as a stable arrangement. A minute voltage  change, which rapidly builds up, puts them into an  unstable condition. 
They ‘flip’ over into a stable con-  dition, and remain in this state until (usually due to the  charge or discharge of a grid condenser) they again  became unstable and ‘flop’ back to the original stable  condition. Sometimes the internal changes taking place  after the ‘flop’ send them automatically—+.e., with no  external cause—into an unstable state again, and they  continue ‘flip-flopping’ of their own accord. Such a  circuit is the true multi-vibrator. 
 A similar explanation is given by the Admiralty Signal  Establishment for that ingenious circuit the one-valve  “flip-flop,” called in America the transitron. It consists  of a pentode with its suppressor and screen grid linked  by a condenser. By suitable choice of component values  . 
94 HOW RADAR WORKS  it can produce oscillation (when it is more usually known  as a ‘Numans oscillator’), and with different values it  can be made to have a stable and an unstable state, the  change from the stable to the unstable being produced  by a positive-going pulse.  G3 =  Input G2 [777 ee paceman Gi = = oe oF  FIG. 13  In this circuit (Fig. 
13) the connexions differ from the  usual pentode arrangement in two respects. First, the  suppressor grid G3 is connected to cathode (earth)  through a resistance R2, instead of the usual direct con-  nexion to cathode. The insertion of this resistance  allows G3 to take up varying potentials depending on the  other circuit conditions. 
The variation of the potential  of G3 will in turn change the distribution of currents  between the electrodes (particularly G2 and the anode).  In general it will be found that if G3 is made a little  negative the anode current will be reduced. If less  current flows to the anode there will be more current  available for G2. 
So more current flows to G2, which  consequently becomes less positive, because of the  increased voltage drop across Rr. The second difference  from the usual pentode arrangement is that.a condenser  . ‘IMPOSSIBLE’ CIRCUITS 95  is connected between G2 and G3. 
This compels G3  to follow G2 in potential change as regards instantaneous  potential changes.  Two separate cases are met with:  (a) If the drop in the potential in G2 which would be  caused (in the absence of C) by the drop in the potential  of G3 is less than the drop in potential of G3, the circuit  will return to its original condition when the original  ‘cause’ is removed. This is the stable state. 
 (5) If the drop in the voltage of G2 which would be  caused by the drop in the potential of G3 is greater than  the drop of potential of G3, the circuit will change  violently to a completely different condition. This is  the unstable state, which is used in the ‘flip-flop.’  Case (a) corresponds to the condition of the multi-  vib, in which, as we have seen, the extra voltage change  on A’s grid is Jess than the original voltage change  causing it. Case (é) corresponds to that in which the  extra voltage change on A’s grid is greater than the  original voltage change causing it. 
 Suppose that case (6) holds, and that a positive-going  pulse is applied to the control grid G1, the potentials  of the electrodes change and reach the following con-  ditions of stability. G3 and G2 drop equally in voltage,  G3 becoming very negative. The anode current is  nearly cut off. 
The voltage difference between L and Mf  (the condenser terminals) is the same as at the start.  This state marks the occurrence of the ‘flip’ action.  The valve would remain in this new stable state if C  had no tendency to discharge. 
In fact, C now starts  discharging through R2 and the point M, and therefore  the potentials of G2 and G3 will change slowly untla .  state similar to (6) is reached. At this instant the slow  change in G3 and G2 voltages acts as a disturbance, and  another violent change (the ‘flop’) takes place in the  . 
96 HOW RADAR WORKS  opposite direction until the original stable state is  reached.  Quite a number of radar circuits are coupled through  . a device known as a ‘cathode-  follower.’- To see why this is  necessary consider Fig. 
14. This  is the normal method of con-  necting a valve amplifier. The  signal is applied to the grid, and  a resistance (or inductive) load is  = in the anode circuit, so the ouptut  is taken direct from the anode. 
The  riG. 14 cathode follower (Fig. 15) has one  important difference. 
The load is inserted in the  cathode lead, and the output is taken from across this  resistance. The gain is low, and the arrangement has  little merit as an amplifier, but the output circuit can  be made to have a low impedance, and is therefore  suitable for connecting to a transmission line. It acts,  in fact, as a transformer, with none of the difficulties  attending the use of transformers  for ‘pulses,’ such as the effects of |  internal capacity and resonances. 
 This arrangement is known sae an  as a cathode-follower because the  cathode follows the grid-voltage  changes. If the resistor is made  sufficiently large the cathode =  voltage will rise very nearly as. FIG. 
15  much as the grid voltage. The  normal cathode-follower has no resistance load in  the anode circuit, but, of course, such an arrangement  could be used, as in Fig. 16. 
The same current flows  through both resistances. When a positive signal is  applied to the grid the cathode rises in voltage; mean- R  Output  Signal  Output  . “IMPOSSIBLE” CIRCUITS 97  while the anode goes negative—i.e., the anode output is  negative—and thus from the one cathode-follower it is  possible to get a positive and a negative output simul-  taneously. 
This is often useful  in coupling the last stage of a  radar circuit to a CRT.  ‘Gating’ circuits are com-  monly used in radar equip-  ment, and a typical circuit is  shown in Fig. 17. 
The pur-  pose of the ‘gate’ is to accept  two sorts of pulses simultane-  ously, and to sort them out as  required. For instance, the  valve in Fig. 17 could have such a potential applied  to the suppressor that the anode current would be  entirely cut off. 
If we picture a string of pulses, (- a ~~} Output  Gating  puises  il  FIG. 17  such as in Fig. 18, applied to the control grid they will  have no effect at the anode of the valve, for there is no  anode current flow. 
But if the second set of pulses  (Fig. 19), usually Known as the ‘gating’ pulses, are  G  . 98 HOW RADAR WORKS  applied to the suppressor they may be arranged to be of  sufficient potential at peak to permit an anode current  flow for the duration of each gating pulse. 
Thus if the  gating pulse coincides with the pulses on the control  grid there is change in anode voltage, and the resulting  output form is controlled at those instants only by both  FIG. 18  FIG. 19  FIG. 
20  sets of pulses. The final output may be of the form  shown in Fig. 20, but, of course, there are many varieties  of the ‘gating’ device. 
Such a circuit is used for the  strobe. Signal pulses are applied to the control grid,  and strobe pulses to the suppressor. The only output at  the anode, if the valve is correctly biased, is that which  coincides with the strobing. 
 There is no necessity here to describe the action of  - the D.C. restorer, for although this circuit is commonly  used with radar CRT’s, the D.C. restoration principle  is well known in connexion with television and cathode-  ray oscilloscope practice. 
The use of the diode for D.C.  restoration is described in the Amateur Radio Handbook,  in the section on television technique. But in concluding  this brief survey of some unusual radar circuits which  . 
‘IMPOSSIBLE’ CIRCUITS 99  the orthodox radio enthusiast would have found puzzling  in view of their divergence from sine-wave practice,  reference must be made to one very elegant way of  producing square waves, by means of a delay line. A  typical circuit is shown in Fig. 21. 
 FIG. 21  The arrangement is fully described in O. S. 
Puckle’s  Time Bases, and the delay-line system is used when it  is required to produce a series of pulses spaced by  definite intervals. In the delay line the number of  sections is arranged to be equal to 1-28 times the total  delay required, divided by the time of rise of the pulse  wave-front. The time required for the burst of energy  to return to the input end of the line is dependent upon  the electrical length of the line. 
When the pulse is  reflected it is simultaneously reversed in polarity, so the  resultant wave-form at the input end consists of a  number of square waves, each of a duration twice the  . 500 HOW RADAR WORKS  time taken for the pulse of energy to travel from the  input end of the line to the short-circuited end. Another  delay line may be used to provide a second series of  square pulses, at time intervals delayed with respect to  the first. 
|  Quite a number of these important radar circuits were  devised for other purposes long before radar came into  being, and prior to 1930 they were only of academic  interest. Now they have a direct practical application,  despite the fact that the conventional radio man classifies  them as ‘impossible.’  . VII, PICTURE ON THE TUBE  ANGE-AMPLITUDE, OR TYPE A, DISPLAY ON THE  CRT of a radar receiver would be of very little use  with many modern systems, as the information it gives  is not sufficiently accurate, nor can it be deciphered  sufficiently speedily. 
We have seen that the distance  along the time-base where the echo blip displays itself  is a true indication of distance of the target from the  pulse transmitter. Thus we can read the range, but  without some other means we do not know direction;  also, if our target is an aircraft, we cannot read its  height from the simple Type A display. Moreover, the  range of the echoing object must be read with some  degree of accuracy by taking a measurement on the  trace from the leading edge of the transmitter pulse to  the leading edge of the echo blip. 
If we had to read this  distance in inches, centimetres, or any other fraction of  a standard measure we should need some way of trans-  lating this distance into true range.  In one type of coast-watching radar we do not bother  to estimate the physical distance between the blips  shown on the tube, but we move a control which shifts  a definite strobe spot along the trace until the spot  coincides with the echo blip on which we are taking a  reading. As this control is moved to regulate the posi-  tion of the strobe another circuit is simultaneously put  out of balance, and thus, entirely independently, can  give us a reading. 
Devices of this kind are numerous,  and are generally known as ‘electrical range-markers.’  The next most common variation of the straight  Type A display is the Split. This came into use during  IOI  . 102 HOW RADAR WORKS  the War, when coast-watching radar equipments were  being developed to give warning of approaching enemy  aircraft. 
An indication of height was obtained by  measuring automatically the angle of the line of maxi-  mum. reception of the echo. If we could measure this  angle and ascertain the range we could, by fairly simple  trigonometry, find the unknown quantity, the height. 
 To ascertain the angle of elevation with simple ground  equipment which is not highly directional we use two  aerial systems with different polar diagrams, or perhaps  with the same aerial shooting in two different direc-  tions. Thus we can get two rather different conditions  of reception, and by means of a switching motor or some  similar device synchronized with the PRF we can check  these two different conditions alternatively. To get a  quick visual check we arrange that one echo is displayed  along a trace similar to that described for the standard  Type A, and then for the second set of conditions a  different trace is switched on, usually displaced by  having one trace start its travel a little nearer the edge  of the tube than the other. 
 Persistence of vision will thus give the effect of two  echo blips side by side, one of which will usually be  greater than the other. If we know our aerial polar  diagrams comparison of the respective heights will show  us in what area is the effective ‘line of shoot.’ Thus we  can ascertain the angle of elevation with respect to  ground-level, and so know the height of our aircraft.  Although a Split display gives the effect of two echoes  side by side {or in some systems one echo reversed, so  that it hangs beneath), we should never forget that it is  only persistence of vision which makes this picture on  the tube. 
What is actually happening is that at one  instant a pulse is transmitted and an echo received back,  and this sequence is displayed on a trace; then, the next  . PICTURE ON THE TUBE 163  instant, another pulse is transmitted through a different  aerial (or through the same aerial in a different position),  and the display of the resulting echo along this different  line of shoot is given by a trace and blip display on the  CRT a little distance away from the first display. As  these two displays are being made alternately, probably  more than a hundred times a second, the effect is to show  two echoes simultaneously. 
 A full explanation of the Split system and of its  operational use in conjunction with known polar dia-  grams of aerials is necessarily wordy and complex. But  if we are content to take the polar diagrams themselves  as really a rather rough sketch of the area covered by the  lines of shoot of the aerial the operational aspect is not  too difficult; and the Split display on the CRT is, of  course, quite simply achieved by arranging that one trace  is produced with a slightly different value of voltage on  the X plates, to shift the alternate display slightly to  one side.  You can regard the Type A display as a very elemen-  tary, one-directional map of what is happening. 
On one  side you have some indication of the transmitter pulse;  then, a distance along the trace, you have the blip indi-  cating reception of an echo. The distance between these  two objects on the tube is proportional to the actual dis-  tance in space between them; but as a map it is too  elementary to be of any other use than in indicating  range, for we cannot tell which direction is being taken  by the object giving a reflection. Of course, we could  fit either our transmitter or our receiver with a direc-  tional aerial, and by rotation we should be able to get  some idea of azimuth, just as one does in ordinary radio  DF-ing. 
This system was, in fact, used in early coast-  watching radar equipments. A type of directional aerial  feeding into a goniometer was used to supply the  . 104 HOW RADAR WORKS  receiver. 
The gonio control was turned until maximum  reception of the echo was achieved (readily shown by  the period when the depth of the received blip was at its  greatest), when, if the gonio control were suitably en-  graved in degrees corresponding to aerial-array positions  in space, the true line of shoot could be determined. In  many such systems the gonio was elementary, consisting  of aerial arrays at right angles feeding into coils similarly  placed in the gonio. The first stage of the radar receiver  was fed from a pick-up coil which could be rotated by  the gonio knob over the facing aerial coils. 
Accurate  calibration of the gonio scale was arranged to coincide  with actual aerial array position, but, of course, it will  be seen that such an arrangement is equivalent only to  the normal elementary ‘frame aerial? DF, and gives  indication of line of shoot only, without showing if it  is to the back or front. This was not at first a disadvan-  tage, for radar was visualized only as a warning system  for detecting aircraft approaching from over the coast.  But when radar became miniaturized, and centimetric  equipment was fitted to aircraft, some more easily  decipherable map was essential than that given. 
by the  Type A. So the Type B, or range-azimuth, display was  conceived. This gives a sort of distorted map of the  area in front of the aircraft scanned by the radar aerial,  and it is worth considering the system here, for it forms *  the basis of quite a number of aircraft radar systems. 
 The picture on the tube with Type B is, first, of a  square of faint light. Somewhere in this square you may  detect one or two brighter spots of light, indicating  echoes received from aircraft ahead. This square is thus  a graph, or a distorted map. 
The co-ordinates of the  map are easy to appreciate. Horizontally is azimuth—  say, 90 degrees either way of the central point. Vertically  the radar ‘graph’ shows range up to, say, 25 miles. 
The  . 0 7  PICTURE ON THE TUBE “ros  one essential difference between CRT’s used in Types A  and B is that B tubes use intensity modulation. In‘ ™  Type A the echo blip is ‘pulled’ up or down out of its  horizontal trace by voltages applied to the Y plates. 
 In Type B what we see is not a V-shaped blip, but a  spot of light which is brighter than the lines drawn out  for the rest of the trace, and this brightness is achieved  by applying the signal not to X or Y plates, but, usually,  cd dieathe  \ tis  wlll  diatutbatiaes,  —  TYPE B DISPLAY  The spot moves upward from x toy, retraces and starts upward at z again, and so on. This is suggested in black lines in (a). (6) and (c) are specimen plots, the first showing a target 45° to the left of the line ahead and 124 miles away, the second showing a target 30° to the right of the line ahead and 40 miles away. 
heen a Pictures are merely illustrative, and are not to be considered accurate m ae  to the grid of the CRT, so that the spot strobes itself and grows momentarily brighter as a signal is received. The Type B square is drawn out by the trace in the following manner, which is rather interesting to follow. The tracing-spot starts its journey at the bottom left corner of the CRT, and is moved up to the top left _ corner, Covering a distance equal to the maximum range of the radar equipment. 
It is then suppressed, travels  . r06 HOW RADAR WORKS  back to the bottom line, and starts a fresh painting of ar  upward line simultaneously with the next outgoing  transmitted pulse. This line is not over the preceding  one, but is displaced slightly to the right; indeed, the  successive sweeps are spaced out over the square to  correspond with the azimuthal direction in which the  aerial is sweeping. 
If the aerial were checked in its  mechanical sweep and set pointing straight ahead, then  all we should see on the screen would be a single line  formed by the spot moving up and down at the centre  of the rectangle. This is in the o-degrees azimuth  position. Maximum displacement to left or right is  (usually) 90 degrees, and if it were not for the slowness  of human vision we should see the spot tracing out a  faint pattern like the teeth of a comb, with the teeth at  the left numbering from go degrees down to zero at the  centre, then to 90 degrees starboard. 
 With this display we do not see the comb pattern  clearly, because a screen is chosen which has a fairly  considerable afterglow, leaving a greenish-grey (or blue-  grey) faint square of light. On this background sudden  spots of light appear as the tracing-spot at that very  instant is strobed, indicating an echo. This display does  not show height, of course, but if you regard the picture  on the tube as a distorted sort of map of what is seen  ahead of the aircraft you will realize that at once, without  any mathematical interpretation, the pilot can see the  azimuth of his object, and its approximate range. 
A fine  graticule can be placed over the end of the CRT screen  so that these essential figures can be read at once.  A kindred display is the Type C, where again the  aerial is rocked mechanically, and the spot moved in step,  so that a rough map is drawn. This time it is an eleva-  tion-azimuth display, and the form is what is known as  helical scanning. 
It may not be vitally necessary for a  . PICTURE ON THE TUBE 107  pilot to know the exact range of his target, and, in fact,  he may have a separate display on another CRT which  can show range on a simple Type A display; but in war  it is commonly necessary for a pilot to get instant indi-  cation of the elevation and azimuth of the target, without  waiting for range. A disadvantage of such systems is  that for a period between transmitted pulses the tracing-  spot is stationary, and this light-spot represents, in  intensity, ali that is received and put on the CRT by the  radar receiver. 
Thus all extraneous signals, including  noise, are accumulated together in the spot, and the  contrast between noise and echo may be poor. One way  of overcoming this trouble is to have at the side of the  Type C, say, a Type A display showing range. The  operator can then ‘strobe out’ the desired echo on the  range display, moving the strobe control as previously  described, and then displaying the selected echo alone  on the Type C screen. 
In some systems such strobing  can be done automatically.  So far we have considered some displays which can be  used by seaborne, airborne, or ground radar to show  such factors as latitude, longitude, and height above  ground. But already we have gained a hint of the way  in which, if we rock or swing the aerial array, and keep  it highly directional, we can arrange our CRT display  to be in sympathy, and thus we can attempt to draw a  map on the CRT screen. 
At quite an early stage in the  development of radar it was appreciated that it would  be a boon if the CRT could really draw a complete map,  or if the trace and aerial could be so kept in step that  echoes would show up zn therr true position on a map of  the area covered, and not merely between some arbi-  trarily chosen co-ordinates.  Even the layman can read position immediately from  the CRT which really does draw a map, the ‘plan  . 108 HOW RAVDAK WUKKDS  position indicator,’ or PPI. 
Theoretically this is one of  those fascinating ideas which appear so simple that it  should surely have been immediately obvious to ‘them’  when ‘they’ were inventing radar! Yet the PPI repre-  sents the results of some years of work in radar and in  CRT development; and though it is now not difficult  theoretically, it nevertheless presented many tricky pro-  blems for the manufacturers of tubes for the system, and  it is still not easy to ensure that tubes stay accurate over  long operational periods.  When we look at a typical ground-radar station using  a PPI display we see a fascinating picture at the tube  end. We see, first, a translucent screen, squared off  probably in graticule fashion, and the centre of this is  not only placed over the centre of the CRT screen, but  represents geographically the position of our station. 
On  this graticule will be drawn, in black line, an outline  map of the whole area, to north, south, east, and west  of our station, and we must imagine that our radar trans-  mitting and receiving aerials (if, indeed, a common-TR  array is not used) are about to be swung, say, in clock-  wise fashion, looking out along a narrow beam, and with  this beam being swung round in a full circle of 360  degrees.  On our CRT the trace is arranged to run from the  centre of the tube to the outer edge, and, of course, this  trace represents the maximum range of the equipment,  just as in Type A. The tube is intensity-modulated, so  that if an echo is received back along this particular line  of shoot it will appear on the tube as a bright spot. 
We  now set our aerial beam pointing, say, due north, and  adjust our CRT so that the trace is also running from  the centre of the tube to a position off the tube in the  “12 o’clock,’ or north, position. If any aircraft is flying  along that line we shall be able to see its exact position  . PICTURE ON THE TUBE IO9  on the translucent map. 
As the light from the spot is  not sufficient to illuminate the map itself subdued amber  lighting may be arranged through the glass walls of the  CRT, so that the map area is bathed in soft reddish  light, and the tracer-spot shines brightly in green if there  is an echo.  Reception along only one line would be of little use;  but if we arrange to swing our aerial slowly throughout  the entire 360 degrees, and move the trace clockwise  round the tube end in step with the aerial, then any  echo over the whole area will show up on the tube in  approximately its relative position with respect to the  centre, which, of course, is the position of the radar  station. As the aerial sweeps the circle the trace is  arranged to sweep the tube end in sympathy with it, and  thus the faint line of light of the trace represents the  aerial T and R beams. 
Intensity modulation causes the  trace to brighten at a position relative to the actual  distance of the object from the transmitter.  If the eye were not confused by persistence of vision,  and if a longish-afterglow tube were not used in order  to build up a coherent picture, then it would be possible  to see the tube covered by a series of radial spokes, each  spoke representing one single trace. The angle between  the spokes is obviously directly related to the PRF, as  the traces are not superimposed, but spread out accord-  ing to the number of pulses per second. 
In practice the  aerial may rotate a dozen times a minute, or as fast as  §00 times a minute, and the trace is pulled round in step  at the same speed. Afterglow and persistence of vision  make it difficult for the eye to follow the movement of  the light-line of the trace itself, and the echoes show up  as bright spots or smudges. As the trace is ‘moving’  there is an optical tendency for these spots to appear not  as circular pin-points, but as sausage-shaped blobs of  . 
IIo HOW RADAR WORKS  light, being, in fact, two or three echo spots on two or  three traces in succession. As the transparent map is  superimposed over the tube end these spots give a ready  indication.  Obviously the construction of a CRT for PPI display  must be different from that for Type A, for example. 
No  longer do we have a stationary trace, with an echo  deflected. The usual arrangement is for intensity modu-  lation to be applied by varying signal voltages on the  grid of the CRT. That produces for us our brighter  spot on the reception of a signal. 
The time-base trace  is arranged, by construction of the electrodes, to run  from the exact geometric centre of the tube to the outer  edge, and magnetic coils outside the tube itself (usually  placed quite close to a long neck) ‘pull’ the trace round  through the 360 degrees.  The coils produce magnetic deflection of the spot to  form the time-base trace, and if they are mounted on a  ring concentric with the axis of the tube, and are swung  round, then the light-line of the time-base will be drawn  round too. The coils in their mounting can be linked  directly, mechanically, with the rotating part of the  aerial system, but backlash may be experienced if the  distance between aerial and PPI tube is considerable. 
 In many systems the aerial and PPI coils are linked  electrically, and an accurate follower-motor drives the  coils in step with the aerial beam. In small radar outfits,  if the PPI is not more than a few yards from the aerial,  a flex drive is satisfactory. Rotation can, of course, be  in clockwise or counter direction, and some systems have  a reverse switch, so that either direction can be used at  the whim of the operator. 
Continuous rotation is  general, but with some search systems, where a full  360-degree cover is not essential, the aerial and the PPI  coils may be swung over a small arc.  . PICTURE ON THE TUBE II  Many PPI tubes are for direct reading on the tube end,  but the Skiatron-type projection can be used to display  the map picture on a large screen. 
 From the manufacturer’s viewpoint the PPI presents  problems of alignment and so forth which can fairly  easily be corrected in a Type A display, but which may  cause errors in operation as the time-base itself is being  swung round the clock. Manufacturing problems, how-  ever, are not so serious that they detract in any way from  the amazing ingenuity and usefulness of PPI display,  which in itself was the first full attempt to make radar  ‘draw its own map,’ second by second.  . 
VIII. CENTIMETRIC TECHNIQUE  ROM THE EARLIEST DAYS OF RADAR SIR ROBERT  F watson. Watt had realized that greater accuracy,  and in particular the capacity to discriminate between  natural echoes and those from the target, was required. 
 Nothing but a narrow beam instead of the former ‘flood-  lighting’ could give the desired results, and this meant  much higher power on much shorter wavelengths, with  much higher sensitivity of reception. Fortunately Britain  was well placed to deal with this problem, and from  March 1939 some ninety of our leading physicists and  men who had spent many years in the abstruse problems  of splitting atoms and ‘spinning’ electrons were attached  to the coastal radar stations set up to guard Britain  against invasion. Their past experience had made them  aware of the need for centimetric radar. 
 It is well worth while considering the history of this  development, for it is to the exclusive credit of Britain,  and is a development parallel with that of the harnessing  of atomic power. Professor M. L. 
Oliphant, of Birming-  ham University, and Dr H. W. B. 
Skinner, of Bristol,  ‘inspired their co-workers by their insistence upon the  urgent need for centimetric wavelengths, and by their  own experimental skill. A tremendous drive followed,  until in July 1940 Professor J. T. 
Randall, of Birming-  ham, produced the first workable directly excited cavity  magnetron, the new and revolutionary type of valve for  generating these extremely high frequencies. Randall’s  “cavity magnetron was the first high-power generator of  centimetric waves in the world, and the magnetron is  likely for many years to remain the heart of every  modern radar equipment.  II2  . 
Poor  cd  ‘xqpuaddy  say; Pda  WIUATO)  wow  y  APPS  fo  Aaparzy  ayy  fo  Asapanos  Aq AVIASICE  AONVY  Vo  AMAR  SI  SLLW  Id  . ETI  FroZr  ty  ‘xipteddy  vag] PIUISIA  JYdlatfod  unody  “Aajsinipy  aly  ayy  fo  dsajanoa  Ay dVW  FOUL  GNV  NAMWOS  UVAVA  :WALSAS  SGH  ‘IT  ALVId ef aonn0siy  apers  dey  Qu ok  os  Bo  peony  &  . CENTIMETRIC TECHNIQUE It3  The magnetron was a spur to other physicists and  technicians, and it was supplemented by an equally  novel receiving valve evolved by Dr R. 
W. Sutton, and  very soon remarkable radar circuits were developed to  enable these new creators and receptors of ultra~high  frequencies to be used to best advantage.  For a detailed study of the progress in development  of these valves and other generators of very high fre-  quencies I recommend reference to the Institute of  Electrical Engineers Radar Convention papers, especially  Work on the Cavity Magnetron, by J. 
T. Randall and  H. A. 
H. Boot, and The High-power Pulsed Magnetron,  by W. B. 
Willshaw and L. Rushforth.  ‘Centimetric,’ where radar wavelengths are concerned,  means a range of usually 3 to 10 centimetres, although  systems using even shorter wavelengths are now in use,  and the trend is towards higher frequencies still. 
The  practical limits of standard centimetric equipment, how-  ever, remain 10 centimetres (frequency 3000 megacycles)  and 3 centimetres (frequency 10,000 megacycles). Use  of these shorter wavelengths allows the production of a  very narrow beam without the use of very cumbersome  and complicated aerials and reflectors. There is, per-  haps, an apt parallel in sound and light. 
Wavelengths  of sound, in the medium of air, are extremely long com-  pared with the wavelengths of light in the ‘medium’  (if any) of ether. It is possible partially to direct sound  by means of reflectors, but in no easy way can a very  narrow pencil of sound waves be produced as can a ray  of light.  That revolutionary new circuits must be employed in  centimetric radar is obvious. 
A medium-wave broad-  cast receiver has tuning coils of normal dimensions,  with probably a hundred turns of wire on a former an  inch or so in diameter. In a short-wave set the tuning  H  . 114 HOW RADAR WORKS  coils may have only a dozen turns of wire. 
In a tele-  vision receiver for use on about 7 metres we are reduced  to only a minute tuning ‘coil,’ and for still shorter wave-  lengths we arrive at one turn or less of wire. In centi-  metric radar it is obvious that the shortest connexion  between components must be longer, electrically speak-  ing, than the wavelength ‘carried.’ If we cannot have  a coil less than about a quarter of a turn, then we must  find some other means of inductive coupling, and of  generating oscillations. As we shall see, in place of a  coil we employ a hollow space for the generation of  oscillations!  In radar apparatus using such high frequencies the  physical dimensions of the circuits are inevitably of the  same order as the wavelengths, for it is difficult to  visualize a circuit in which components are linked  together by wires less than one centimetre in length. 
 Thus every piece of the connecting wire will act like a  portion of a transmitting line, and may radiate, with  consequent loss of energy. Normal transmission lines  between aerial and transmitter or receiver (as referred  to in Chapter III) cannot easily be used, so we employ  a long, hollow tube of metal as a conduit down which  the electromagnetic energy flows as in a pipe—or, rather,  one would like to t#ink as in a pipe: the actual direction  of flow of the energy in such a conduit is extremely  complicated, and is the object of much difference of  opinion among radar technicians. Conduits of this  nature are known as wave-guides, and their cross-  sectional dimensions are of the order of half a wave-  length, for mathematical reasons we need not explore  here. 
Thus centimetric radar sets working up to I0  centimetres can have wave-guides which are, in fact, not  much bigger than household drain-pipes, and the energy  is literally ‘piped’ from T to aerial and from aerial to R. °  . CENTIMETRIC TECHNIQUE Irs  Electrical losses in these wave~guides are very small, and  their efficiency at such high frequencies is much better  than could be achieved with normal aerial transmission  lines. 
 Radio enthusiasts are all too familiar with the diffi-  culties of using normal valves at very high frequencies.  A grid may be spaced about § inch away from an anode  in a broadcast valve, and the physical dimensions of the  electrodes are such that we do not need to worry about  them in the circuit constants, nor do we need to take  any special care about the inter-electrode capacity set up  through the electrode spacing. But when we want to  use such valves for the generation or reception of very  high frequencies we find that the capacity inside the  valve itself may have an appreciable relation to the  external capacities in the circuit itself, and unless we can  reduce or neutralize them we shall find that the valve  capacity stops the oscillation. 
While some ‘normal’  valves will work up to about 50 megacycles, it has usually  been necessary to use special ultra~high-frequency valves  even for the frequencies such as §6 megacycles, which in  pre-1939 days were considered high. For reception the  midget ‘acorn’ valves were developed, both as triodes  and as pentodes. These were physically very small, and  while they had closely spaced electrodes the area was  small, so that the total internal capacity was low. 
Also  these valves had no base, the connexions being brought  out to short wire pins arranged in a glass ring about the  centre of the valve. All this helped to cut down internal  capacity, and, in fact, the first radar receivers built in  1939 used these acorn valves in some stages.  For centimetric radar even the most efficient ultra-  high-frequency valve of normal construction is useless,  because an entirely new factor is involyed—the trouble-  ‘ some factor of ‘transit time.’ With centimetric waves  . 
116 HOW RADAR WORKS  the frequencies of operation are so high that they bear  some relation to the speed of the electrons travelling  from cathode to anode of the valves. In a normal valve  on normal wavelengths the familiar theory of operation  takes for granted the fact that the electrons emitted by  the cathode, controlled by the grid, and attracted to the  anode will have time to make the journey and do their  job. Indeed, in normal working the electrons travel  with the speed of light, approximately, and one does not  have to consider, say, placing the anode very close to the  filament to ensure that the electrons will have time to  make the journey before the next half-cycle of oscillation!  But in centimetric radar that is precisely our problem. 
 We can control the electron speed, within limits, by the  applied voltages, and it will be realized that if we control  the electrons to travel with the speed of light, then the  distance travelled in one time period would be equal to  the wavelength of the applied oscillation. If the wave-  length is only 3 centimetres, then obviously this bears  relation to the physical dimensions of the valve itself.  We can, in fact, work out the distance travelled by  electrons when sped on by a variety of voltages, and we  find that at a wavelength of Io centimetres the distance  travelled in one time period is 2 millimetres for an elec-  tron urged on by 100 volts. 
If we put the voltage up to  10 kilovolts, then the speed is so increased that the  distance travelled in that same time is 2 centimetres.  In only a tenth of this distance the phase of the applied  voltage will have shifted by 36 degrees. In an ordinary  valve this means that an appreciable part of the oscilla-  tory cycle occurs while the electron is crossing from  cathode to anode, and so the ordinary type of valve with  wide spaces between electrodes is useless for centimetric  work. 
It is necessary for us to use an entirely new type  of valve for oscillations at 3009 megacycles a second, and  . CENTIMETRIC TECHNIQUE 1i7  in these valves the electron stream is caused to excite the  oscillatory circuit by a mechanism which, indeed, makes  use of the finite times of travel of the electrons.  The general name of these generators is ‘hollow-space  oscillators,’ and in this class come the magnetrons, the  klystrons, Heil tubes, and other devices, detailed descrip-  tion of which is in many cases impossible, for, like the  precise details of the harnessing of atomic power, they  are still a part of secret State information. 
 But just as high-frequency electromagnetic energy  can travel through the ‘pipeline’ of a wave-guide, so  oscillations can be created in a hollow space. If you  picture a chunk carved out of a block of metal, forming  a spherical space with only a very small opening, then  you can imagine inside this cavity currents circulating  on the inside of the opening, and associated electric and  magnetic fields inside the cavity.  This is a startling conception to the man accustomed  to the normal theory of oscillatory circuits with induc-  tances and capacities, but in centimetric radar we have  started along a new avenue of radio physics. 
In a radio  valve we heat a cathode, emit electrons from it, apply a  voltage to the anode, and the electrons complete their  journey. But what would happen if by some means such :  as applying a strong magnet to the outside of the valve  we prevented the electrons from completing their jour-  ney? We might thus visualize setting them whirling  round in a circle, and in the magnetron that is exactly  what we do.  On first switching on an anode voltage is applied, and  the hot filament emits electrons, which do not, however,  succeed in completing their journey to the anode. 
This  anode we arrange as a large metal ring around the  cathode, and we surround the whole with a powerful  magnet, and whirl the electrons out of their course.  . 118 HOW RADAR WORKS  So fierce is this whirlpool of electrons that we can switch  off the filament almost immediately, and, provided the  magnetic field is maintained, we have a stream of  electrons continuously whirling around inside the metal  anode ring. 
 On the inside of this ring we cut a number of cavities,  and the electrons pulled out of their course by the mag-  netic field parallel to the axis of the tube commence  travelling across the openings of these cavities in a series  of curved orbits. In this way appropriate charges are  produced on the anode segments, giving rise to sustained  high-frequency oscillations inside the cavities themselves,  To link each cavity with the next the magnetron is  ‘strapped’ with short stubs of wire carefully arranged so  that the potentials from cavity to cavity are in the correct  order. Small holes are bored in the otherwise solid  block of the magnetron’s main construction, and short _  lengths of No. 
22 gauge copper wire are used as straps.  In manufacture these straps are used for pre-tuning, for  obviously the magnetron is otherwise limited by its solid  construction, and no great variation of frequency is  possible. Continuous-wave energy from another source  (usually from a Klystron) is injected into the magnetron  through the coupling loop, and the coupling straps are  then bent up, down, or sideways until the whole is  resonating at the desired frequency. 
Tuning is not  otherwise usually attempted in magnetrons, although in  one type of equipment there is a tunable magnetron  giving a possible variation of about 75 megacycles either  way (at some 3000 megacycles), and this tuning is  achieved by making the lid of the magnetron itself of  thin metal, so that the centre can be depressed on a  screw-thread and the internal capacity of the segments  varied by a small amount. Experiments have also been  carried out with tunable magnetrons having metal rods  . CENTIMETRIC TECHNIQUE Iit9  capable of being moved in and out of the main anode  block. 
 The klystron is another variety of ‘hollow-space  oscillator.’ Picture a CRT in which a beam of electrons  is drawn from the cathode to the positive anode. On  their way the electrons pass the lips of two rhumbatrons  —ring-like cavities connected together by concentric  pipes. The first cavity is known as the ‘buncher,’ as the  physical dimensions are arranged so that the electrons  do, in fact, cross the opening of the cavity in bunches,  in alternate ‘parcels’ of large and small electron density. 
 Then follows a ‘drift space’ before the electrons cross  the opening of the second rhumbatron cavity, known as  the ‘catcher.’ The bursts of electrons passing between the  two cavities set up oscillations within. If you picture  the whistle set up by blowing across the lip of holes in a  penny whistle you will appreciate to some extent how  the klystron oscillates. The blast of air corresponds to  the stream of electrons, the holes in the whistle are the  lips of the rhumbatron cavities, and the resulting sound  is the oscillation in the tube. 
But in the klystron the  holes are at right angles to the main electron beam, and  the oscillations do not take place near the beam, but  inside the rhumbatron rings.  There is a second type of klystron known as the  reflector, in which there is only one rhumbatron cavity,  which acts both as buncher and catcher for the same  electron beam. On their first traverse past the lips of  the cavity they are velocity-modulated; they are then  reflected back, and on passing the cavity a second time  are density-modulated. 
The effect, of course, is pre-  cisely the same, the electron gun setting up oscillations  within the rhumbatron cavity. There are several modi-  fications of the reflecting klystron. In one form the  reflecting electrode is negative, and repels the electrodes  . 
120 HOW RADAR WORKS  shot at it by the ‘gun.’ In another type the reflector is  strongly positive, and by secondary emission produces  a counter-stream of electrons. Such Klystrons are quite  small, and often have a standard valve base to which is  attached the electron gun. The rhumbatron cavities  are formed by copper rings or discs, and to some extent  the device is tunable by a screw-plunger regulating the  capacity of the rhumbatron, affecting its volume or shape. 
 Klystrons are producers of lower-power oscillations at  very high frequency. Their efficiency cannot very well  be high, for it is physically impossible to ensure that all  the electrons pass through the rhumbatron in both  directions. With the first types of Klystron developed a  radio-frequency output of not more than a tenth of a watt  is obtained from 10 watts input. 
 The Heil tube is another form of velocity-modulated  radio-frequency oscillator. Electrons are emitted from a  cathode and pass through a grid on their way to the col-  lector, this grid playing no part in the creation of ultra-  high-frequency ocsillations, but controlling the total  current. The beam of electrons passes through two slots  in two concentric tubes placed at right angles to the  flow. 
These tubes are really the two parts of a concentric  transmission line, and the radio-frequency oscillations  are set up at the slits through which the electron beam 1s  directed. The concentric tubes are connected to the  output circuits by a concentric feeder-line, but there is  an alternative form of Heil-tube construction in which  one part of the concentric feeder projects through the  glass tube, and it can be tuned within narrow limits by  an external extension. Theory of the Heil tube is some-  what complicated, but is a parallel with that of the  klystron and Sutton tubes: it has been said that the gap  between the outer tube and the inner is in effect the  ‘yelocity-modulating’ space, the space inside the inner  . 
CENTIMETRIC TECHNIQUE i21  tube is the ‘drift’ space, and the second passage of the  electron stream through from inner to outer concentric  feeder is through the catcher space. Heil tubes can be  used to give an output of some 4 watt, but again the  efficiency is very low, usually not more than 5 per cent.  Although tubes of the klystron type handle such low  power that they cannot be used as oscillators for micro-  wave radar transmitters, they can be used for the equally  important purpose of acting as local oscillators in the  receiving end of the chain. 
 On these very tiny wavelengths no signal-frequency  amplification is possible, so the first stage of almost any  radar receiver working on less than 10 centimetres con-  sists of the mixer, into which (as in normal broadcast  practice) the signal voltage and the voltage from a local  oscillator are fed. In centimetric equipment the local  oscillator is usually a klystron, and the mixer used is  either a simple diode or a crystal capsule. It is some-  what ironic to return to the crystal detector in this  advanced phase of radio technique, but although the  research organizations of the G.E.C. 
and Mazda have  produced very efficient microwave diodes as mixers,  much radar equipment at present in use has a crystal-  mixer capsule; and the mixer, whether it be crystal or  diode, is inserted usually in the concentric transmission  line itself.  The capsule is mounted in a high-impedance section  of the transmitter line, and into the same compartment  are fed the ‘pipes’ bringing in the e.m.f. from the  klystron local oscillator, and also those leading to the  first IF stage of the centimetric superhet. 
A silicon  crystal and a tungsten wire are used as the rectifying  contacts, and with correct adjustment this gives a ‘back-  to-front’ ratio of about seven. The crystal and contact  wire are mounted up in the capsule, which forms an  . [22 HOW RADAR WORKS  integral part of the transmission line, and when the  contact is satisfactory the whole capsule is filled with  molten wax to stabilize the crystal against vibration. 
 These crystal mixers are very efficient, but are apt to  burn out easily and lose sensitivity if excessive voltage  is applied to them. For this reason special precautions  must be taken with centimetric radar when using a  common aerial for transmission and reception to ensure  that none of the transmitted signal energy is accidentally  passed to the receiver feeders. Diode mixers can with-  stand a greater overloading, and do not need to be so  elaborately protected against the transmitter signal  voltage. 
 Energy is piped to the aerial array from the trans-  mitter, and back to the receiver, by means of wave-  guides. Until about 1936 the only means for linking  radio equipment to the aerial was by means of a pair  of conductors. We had parallel pairs of transmission  lines, twisted wires, and then ‘coaxial’ feeders consisting  of a wire or tube inside another tube. 
The operation of  all these circuit means of transmitting radio-frequency  energy. by wire can be studied by amateurs in such works  as The Amateur Radio Handbook. The very latest  centimetric radar equipment has rendered such circuit  methods of connexion out of date, and all ‘circuit’  theories have had to be discarded in favour of the idea  of wires guiding waves of energy in the required direc-  tion, rather than acting as parts of circuits linked to the  ‘lumped?’ circuits of the apparatus itself. 
 So just about ten years ago radio experimenters were  attracted to the possibility of using metal tubes filled  with some insulating dielectric as ‘guides’ for electro-  magnetic waves. Almost at once it was realized that a  ‘hollow’ tube—<.g., filled with air only—was satisfactory  for the purpose, and that waves could in reality be  . Outer inner conductor conductor  &  luli ill  TRANSMISSION LINES  For wavelengths above about 50 metres the length and nature of the line connecting the transmitter or receiver to the aerial is of little relative importance. 
Below 50 metres the aerial and line must be shorter, but are still not a cause of serious loss until we reach about iO metres. (See (a).) For wavelengths from about § metre to, say, IO metres the transmission line (6) must be suitably chosen. transmission lines are made of concentric cable as suggested in (ce), in order to cut down attenuation losses. 
For centimetre waves concentric cable causes too much less even on short lengths, and the connexion between transmitter and ‘aerial’ is a wave-grade of rectangular section made of copper sheet (d). It can be bent, and it can be flared into a horn to project the waves against a metal reflector.  plete 2ee drawings are merely illustrative, and are not to be considered accurate in ‘. 
 . 124 HOW RADAR WORKS  guided along such conducting tubes with negligible loss.  The energy does, of course, continue to travel along the  ‘pipeline’ of the guide in wave-form, just as it would,  according to one school of thought, travel in free space  by radiation. 
The important difference—and, indeed,  the factor which makes the wave-guide a workable pro-  position for radar—is that the strength of the waves in  free space falls off as the reciprocal of the distance,  while, in a tube made of a perfect conductor, there would  be no reduction in strength as the wave-form travels  along the tube. In practice, using copper tubes as wave-  guides, the attenuation is about 20 per cent. for 50 yards  of the guide. 
As few guides are more than a few yards  long, this loss is unimportant.  By careful design it is possible to introduce even sud-  den bends into the guide, and when it is required to  radiate the microwave energy into space the wave-guide  itself is simply opened out into a ‘flare,’ or horn. This  horn opening may face a reflector, of course, to direct  the energy and thus to beam the transmission. 
If the  guide is not used to terminate in a radiator, then energy  is fed in by a small aerial stub at the start of the tube,  and taken from the far end of the tube by a similar stub.  The majority of guides used in radar equipment are of  rectangular cross-section, to ensure greatest accuracy in  design, and also, so the cynics would say, to simplify  the mathematics! The ‘arithmetic’ of this form of link  does, in fact, become quite complicated, because mathe-  matical analysis shows that only certain types of wave-  forms can be propagated along metallic wave-guides,  and each of these wave-types, moreover, is characterized  by a certain distribution of electromagnetic field over  the cross-section. The velocity of the waves is different  from that in free space, so the wavelength in the tube is  somewhat different from the length in space, and this  . 
CENTIMETRIC TECHNIQUE I25§  velocity change depends not only on the frequency of  the transmission, but on the cross-sectional dimensions.  It is unfortunate that at this stage in the world’s his-  tory only an approximate picture can be given of centi-  metric equipment, for each nation has its radar develop-  ments, and all progress is largely State-sponsored or  State~controlled either for supremacy in civil or military  aviation or the guidance of projectiles.  But it is fitting to conclude this brief survey of centi-  metric devices with a final irony. 
We have seen how  scientists have had to revert to the use of the crystal  detector as a mixer in centimetre superhets. And the  early pioneers of radio, who remember Marconi’s ‘S’  spark signals from Cornwall to Newfoundland which  made history in radio communication, will smile on  investigating the spark-gap modulators used in many  microwave radar transmitters.  We have seen that radio-frequency oscillations can be  produced by a device such as the magnetron, but these  oscillations are of sine-wave form and must be modu-  lated by square-topped pulses of e.m.f. 
at high power to  produce radar pulses in free space. These square-  topped e.m.f.’s are commonly produced by suitable  arrangement of a transmission line into which energy is  fed, and the wave-form is distorted to produce a square  top. But we need a switch to throw this special section  of the transmission line in series with the load, to modu-  late our centimetric oscillations; and the two common  types of switch are the thyratron (with certain modi-  fications such as the trigatron) and the ordinary spark  p!  Both such devices depend, of course, on the fact that  an electric discharge in a gas provides a conducting path. 
 The operation of the thyratron we have investigated;  the trigatron uses a gas filling of argon and oxygen. But  . 126 HOW RADAR WORKS  the spark-gap modulator bears striking resemblance to the  spark-gap Hertz transmitters of pre-1914 days. 
It is not  suitable without modification for airborne radar because  of the effect of atmospheric-pressure changes on the gap.  There is a rather more elegant version known as the  triggered gap, in which the discharge takes place between  a metal cathode and a hollow tubular anode, usually of  molybdenum. The gap is set up so that normally it  will just not ‘strike’ until a trigger electrode (usually a  rod in the centre of the hollow anode) is connected, thus  closing the switch. 
This centre electrode is connected  to an additional valve circuit providing low-power pulses  to close the circuit at predetermined intervals to provide  the PRF.  . IX. 
THE TASK AHEAD  I: THE PRECEDING CHAPTERS WE HAVE WATCHED THE  fundamental points of radar, and have seen how the  basic systems work. Now we can study in more detail  the systems developed since the War, and look ahead to  the new tasks facing radar. It must be remembered,  however, that the picture is rapidly changing. 
New  applications are being found for radar, new systems are  being pioneered, and with almost equal suddenness  political changes take place which make some systems  of more importance than others. In radar, which spans  the globe, there can be no frontiers, and politics naturally  enter into the good-neighbour applications of radar  systems intended for international aviation and marine  transport.  During the war years we heard much of H2S, Gee,  Oboe, Babs, Eureka, Loran, and other systems. 
In sub-  sequent chapters we shall investigate these systems and  see how they work and what they provide both for  military and peacetime needs, but this is an appropriate  moment to put some of these systems in their proper  perspective. Obviously the technical ingenuity of radar  will be productive of systems to aid safer, swifter trans-  port. But pulse-system radar is not the only technique  which can be so applied, and there is a considerable  future for systems such as the QM (Decca) and the  Console, which are ‘radar’ methods in the generic sense,  but which are not pulse methods; their background is  the normal continuous-wave transmission. 
In many  navigational problems they provide a much simpler  solution than pulse radar, but some believe that in their  127  . 128 HOW RADAR WORKS  present state of development continuous-wave methods  have certain disadvantages where long ranges have to be  measured accurately. ‘‘It is possible, for instance,” as  a writer in Nature points out,  for continuous-wave systems to be confused by spurious  readings caused by near-by objects, and these local obstacles  tend to reduce the usefulness of continuous-wave systems,  despite their great accuracy. 
With pulse radar we can  choose suitable transmitting frequencies and introduce  other methods, so that scatter from the ionosphere and  reflections from near-by objects can be ignored.  It is possible to suppress PE’s to a certain extent on  the pulse system, so for some navigational purposes  ranging and direction-finding by pulse radar are to be  preferred.  In summing up the relative advantages of radar  systems a Ministry of Aircraft Production Telecom-  munications official has pointed out:  We have to remember that there are essential differences  between war and peace transport needs. 
In the air, for  instance, civil aviation is very largely concerned with the  problem of economic pay-loads, which are not factors of  great importance in war. In hostilities there is almost no  ceiling to the maximum cost of delivering a bomb-load to  an enemy objective. In war, moreover, it may be expedient  to sacrifice bomb-loads in order that more adequate radar  apparatus can be carried. 
In civil air transport passenger-  and freight-carrying become uneconomic if undue space  has to be given to radar apparatus, or if its weight is excessive  compared with other navigational equipment.  Technical needs are very different, moreover: in war  aircraft fly very largely over hostile enemy territory,  where it is difficult for navigational aid to be given from  the ground, and where even recognition of ground  targets by systems such as H2S may be confused by radar  . yer  holy  tf  ‘stpttoddiy  ay reresreepititdes  trey  sQeepp  ap  fo  Msopaios  Age . 
AVUAVIE  GINEIVIN,  CAL  CLLV'  Id  . Orr  frog1  *  ‘xipuaddy  97g] PILIISIA  JYdIALGor  wnoséy  dpddus  fo  Kaysiurpy  ayy  fo  Asaanoa  gq Uvava  axO  HO  NOILVUAdO  :A  ALV  Id  , Dee ste ine at ae.  . 
THE TASK AHEAD I29  camouflage. The enemy does not post convenient radar  beacons all along the route, but, of course, in civil  aviation the ustmost co-operation can be expected from  ground aids, and there is an entirely different prospect  for aids such as radar beacons.  Wartime necessity for the radar navigation of British  and Allied bombers at night over Germany brought  about the Gee system, perhaps in its day the most  extensively used of all radar non-echo navigational  systems. 
As we shall see, Gee has a maximum range of  about 400 miles. It set a completely new standard of  accuracy in radio navigation when it was first introduced  by the Malvern experts for Bomber Command, and  heavy raids at night over Europe would not have been  possible if we could not have covered Europe with the  invisible but very tangible Gee lattices. Loran, the  American long-range modification of Gee, working by  reflection from the ionosphere, became very useful over  longer distances of even up to 1000 miles, although it  was conceded that over shorter ranges Gee was more  accurate, and that Loran should, for all normal pur-  poses, take up where Gee left off. 
With suitable inter-  national agreement both systems could be used with  advantage, but, of course, in civil aviation we have no  need to rely on the Gee or Loran lattices if the ground  below can be adequately covered with radar or other  beacons. The need for the lattice system is greater in  war, except over large tracts of ocean where beacons  cannot be installed except on bouys. It is too early yet  in the history of radar development to tell if a sufficient  number of radar beacons can be placed over the earth’s  surface to make other long-range navigational systems  obsolescent under civilian conditions of air travel. 
For  maritime use the position is different, as a radio officer  would experience confusion from a large number of  I  . 130 HOW RADAR WORKS  beacons all at sea-level. This is not a difficulty which  faces an air navigator, who may be able to gain useful  guidance from ground beacons perhaps more than 200  miles ahead. 
 The Royal Navy developed several radar systems  which now make a considerable step forward in marine  navigation; and several types of semi-automatic radar ~  gear are now produced for merchant-ships. A typical  installation is that made for the whaling~-factory ship  Southern Venturer. This radar equipment was a naval  warning set designed and manufactured in Canada. 
It  gives a display on three PPI tubes, and, although  originally designed to give warning of enemy ships, has  now been harnessed to give warnings of icebergs and of  other craft approaching at night or in bad weather.  One weakness in early systems was a difficulty of  distinguishing between ships and buoys, but experts of  the Admiralty Signal Establishment carried out tests on  board H.M.S. Pollux in the Thames Estuary, using  buoys provided with radar corner reflectors. 
Such  buoys are now often laid in geometric patterns, and the  extra response given back by the corner reflectors  enables them to shine up brightly on the PPI screens,  and in this way they are easily distinguishable from the  pin-points of light which represent ordinary buoys and  moving ships. In a restricted sea area of an approach to  a large port the benefit derived from radar when used in  conjunction with corner-reflector buoys can clearly be  seen, especially in low visibility. Attached to some of  the latest marine apparatus is a chart comparison unit. 
.  When a navigator has got his ‘fix’ by radar he must ~  refer to his chart to get a sounding. In the comparison  unit the image of the charts is thrown on the screen, and  the navigator can at once compare his position and the  sounding on the chart. 
In initial trials in the few years  . THE TASK AHEAD 131  immediately following the War there were differences  between British and American marine methods, but the  authorities in this country have worked hard to develop  simple navigational ideas which have been given to all  seagoing nations, and which may become international  marine standards. This would be no more than poetic  justice, for radar was so pre-eminently a British develop-  ment, and we gave our allies in war the full use of our  scientific research. 
 It is appropriate to mention that maritime navigation  can hardly fail to benefit from Admiralty centimetric  research during the war years: the greatest triumph of  our surface gunnery was in the famous wartime Scharn-  horst action, the first major naval engagement carried  out entirely by radar. The combatants never sighted  each other visually from start to finish, and the aid given  by spotting aircraft was held over, as radar aid was  sufficient for the action. It is to be anticipated that  continuous-wave systems rather than radar will be of  use in bringing vessels safely to harbour, and that non-  pulse systems, as well as radar with corner-reflecting  buoys, will guide ships safely along sea-lanes. 
It is  interesting to reflect that the Decca system of con-  tinuous-wave navigation was used to bring small vessels  into French harbours during the War, with an accuracy  of yards.  Although airborne centimetric radar has great possi-  bilities in peacetime civil aviation, it must be remem-  bered that H2S, ASV, and other systems, which were  among the most spectacular developments of war, are  limited for civilian use. Military-type H2S 1s too com-  plex, too heavy, and too costly for civilian use. 
At first  sight it appears to offer the ideal radio aid te navigation,  for it is a continuously running ‘television’ map of the  ground, being a direct replacement for contact flying.  . 132 HOW RADAR WORKS  But many civil air experts believe that it is unnecessary  to go to such lengths to produce a self-contained navi-  gational aid which demands no co-operation from the  ground. 
Absence of ground organization is essential in  war, but in peace air lines travel over well-known routes,  and can obtain all ground assistance. There is an obvious  future, however, for miniaturized systems of the H2S  type for exploration and for use over new routes.  “Obviously airborne centimetric radar is an aid to  collision-warning,” states a research expert of the Tele~  communications Research Establishment, ‘‘ but  it does not at present appear possible to use radar as a  collision-warning system for rail or road transport, as the  necessary aerial arrays are too large and complex. 
There  is, perhaps, a greater future here for supersonic methods  than for pulse radar.  Bad-weather flying involves risk of collision with other  aircraft, with high ground, or with dangerous clouds.  When direct control by radar of all aircraft within the  vicinity of a busy airport can be effected all three collision  dangers will be reduced, but until then there is much to be  said for the safety given by microwave warning equipment  in the aircraft. 
‘Mountain Goat,’ a popular beacon warning  system used during the war years for giving pilots radio-  audible warning of dangerous high ground, can be extended  to register on all civilian air radar. A difficulty with many  existing radar systems is that they are really too effective for  collision-warning, and give more information than the pilot  needs. Any device which continually gives warning of any-  thing but potentially dangerous aircraft would be a dis-  traction, and therefore a menace, to a civil pilot. 
 We can easily see that among the tasks ahead for radar  are many ancillary jobs, some of which we can regard  only as curiosities. Canadian radar experts have done  much useful work with a modification of ASV designed  to locate shoals of fish swimming near the surface of  . THE TASK AHEAD 133  great Canadian lakes. 
It would be premature to antici-  pate too much success for underwater investigation by  radar, and when the main job is locating submerged  objects, then there may be a greater future for super-  sonic rather than electronic aids.  The Royal Society has amassed a considerable amount  of data on the migration of birds, and now that we have  discovered that large flocks of birds give a quite reason-  able reading on the average radar equipment we could  use radar technique to plot the course of migratory  flocks, and thus discover much that organizations of  bird-watchers might never know, when flocks cross large  tracts of ocean. Ornithological research in the future  can hardly be dissociated from radar, any more than can  weather-forecasting. 
 Radar meteorology, however, must be along two lines  of development. In the tropics we have found that  sudden changes in air-pressures, in humidity, and in  other meteorological conditions produce widely differing  results on radar apparatus. We therefore have to use  expert forecasts to know what effect the weather will  have on radar itself, and in turn we can use radar to find  out what sort of weather is to be expected in the immedi-  ate future! :  The radio-sonde (radio-transmitting weather balloon)  now has a useful colleague in the weather balloon fitted  with simple radar reflectors, the course and height of  which can be spotted in a few minutes by relatively  simpie ground radar apparatus. 
Rain-clouds can also  be plotted on some centimetric radar equipment, and,  indeed, greater accuracy of weather forecasting may  become one of radar’s valuable contributions to navi-  gation, a contribution as great as that given by radar in  more direct aids to marine and air transport.  Now that we have studied the basic principles of radar  . 134. 
HOW RADAR WORKS  equipment we can progress to a more detailed investiga-  tion of practical systems. We can see how the leading  marine radar systems have developed from basic equip-  ment. In airborne centimetric systems we can investi-  gate such devices as H2S. 
In navigational systems we can  investigate Gee, Oboe, G-H, and Loran, and a wide  range of beacon-direction, blind-landing, and height-  indicating equipments. All these things have one thing  in common: they depend on pulse transmission, though  not in every case on echo reception.  . 
X. THE MAGIC EYE  F ALL RADAR SYSTEMS PERHAPS THE MOST COLOURFUL  in its practical application is that branch of airborne  centimetric radar known by the generic code-name  handed down from the war years, H2S.  This is the ‘television’ airborne radar system which  on a PPI tube gives a very reasonable map of the ground  over which the aircraft is flying. 
Variations of the system  were used during the war years for ASV search, as the  system which can ‘draw’ a map of the ground can equally  show up vessels on the ocean surface below. With early  H2S technique the map was little more than a skeleton,  showing the main features, towns, rivers, and coastlines  standing out clearly. With later systems it has been  possible to ‘draw’ the map with a narrower beam of  radiation, and thus to give more detail in the picture. 
 It is not unreasonable to suppose that development along  these lines could produce an H2S-type equipment cap-  able of showing almost as much detail on the ground,  from a height of, say, 2000 feet, as does a television pic-  ture on the 405-line system. This would appear to be  the ideal navigation system, needing no co-operation  from the ground, and being controlled entirely by the  pilot.or navigator, so necessitating no interpretation of  instructions. It seems unlikely at present that H2S-  type systems will offer great scope for civil aviation,  owing to cost and weight of equipment, but for special  tasks H2S may be the only solution. 
For radar carto-  graphy, for instance, H2S is an accurate check. Direc-  tions given to radar aerial-survey units from Oboe and  Gee stations can be checked on the spot by H2S, and for  135  . 136 HOW RADAR WORKS  scientific work of this nature the weight and cost of thi  equipment are not a serious disadvantage. 
 H2S could not be conceived until it was possible t  transmit radar pulses on wavelengths of a few centi.  metres, instead of about 14 metres. Radar systems mus:  obviously work to fine limits if any attempt is to be made  to draw a map of the terrain below by means of a con. 
 centrated beam of energy. It was known by Sir Rober  Watson-Watt’s workers as early as 1935 that suct  reflections from the ground could be displayed, perhap:  even in map form, but the lack of a high-definition trans.  mitting system prevented anything being done whicl  would at that time have been of operational value. 
Bu  immediately centimetric radar could be airborne ;  great future opened up for systems such as H2S, becauss  the requisite narrower beams and sharper pulses coulc  be produced on the centimetre wavelengths.  Hi28S and all the systems such as ASV, which give ir  the aircraft cockpit a television-like picture of the terrair  below, took their rise in the fateful autumn of 1941. Ths  comparative failure of our bombing effort over Germany  at that time was very much in the minds not only of th  operational Service heads, but of the technicians respon. 
 sible for the radar devices then in use. A different typs  of blind-bombing device was needed, which would bs  relatively immune from enemy jamming and whict  would be self-contained in the aircraft, demanding n  co-operation from ground stations. The success of air:  borne radar in fighters over home territory in wardin;  off the threatened attacks of enemy bombers and nigh  fighters led T.R.E. 
technicians to explore other possi  bilities of such airborne radar.  They soon appreciated that the new airborne systen  with very little modification might be used to detect no  air targets, but ground targets. ‘Ground returns,’ th  . 
THE MAGIC EYE 137  wasteful, troublesome echo returns from the ground,  inseparable from early types of airborne fighter equip-  ment, where part of the radiation reaches the horizon  and the ground, and so clutters up part of the display  by unwanted ‘earthy’ echoes, might at last be harnessed  to use.  The beam of radiation which had in the past been  used to search the sky for hostile aircraft could now be  made to search the ground for towns, factories, and other  solid objects which it was soon discovered gave a rather  different sort of echo back from that of the flat surround-  ing earth or sea. These built-up areas might thus be  displayed on the CRT as ‘targets’ against the weaker  response from the open country. 
That such a method  of detecting towns was possible had been demonstrated  previously, using a system on 14 metres, as described in  the first chapter of this book. But on this occasion only  very isolated towns could be picked up and located,  owing to the overlapping of the responses from hills and  woods included in the ‘illumination’ of the ground by  the relatively broad transmitted beam. Even at that  early date British scientists could see that, given a  higher-frequency transmitting system to produce almost  a pencil of radiation, more detailed illumination of the  ground could be achieved, and then a cockpit ‘television’  picture system might be devised to show a useful map  of the ground. 
 But the autumn of 1941 demanded immediate opera-  tional results, so an aircraft was adapted for ‘downward-  looking,’ with a bowl-shaped reflector pointing towards  the ground; this showed immediate promise on its first  test flight from Christchurch to Wolverhampton, in that  a series of ‘target’ towns and other objects were seen  on the radar display, and after the flight 1t was found  possible to correlate these with specific objects on the  . 138 HOW RADAR WORKS  known route. This one test was enough to convince the  scientists that it would be worth while building a  specially designed radar transmitter and receiver for  ground search. 
 Very soon it became obvious that this system could be  used to build up for the navigator on his radar screen a  map of the terrain, for there were sharp differences in  the responses from flat country and built-up towns, and  again between land and sea. On the radar screen man-  made objects, such as factories, show up very strongly,  the radar echoes back from these objects (with their very  numerous walls and reflecting surfaces) being powerful,  Reflections from land are much weaker, being slightly  diffused, whereas the flat surface of water gives almost  no reflection at all back in the direction of the aircraft.  The decision to install this new aid soon followed;  production on a superlative scale of speed and priority,  under the personal urge of Winston Churchill, was the  greatest of all ‘crash’ programmes of radar production,  but it was vital to keep the enemy in the dark about the  purpose of this novel device, even when he had some  evidence that new fittings were appearing in our aircraft. 
 So it was to be Known as a ‘homing device.’ The initials  BN, for ‘blind navigation,’ by which it had been known,  were thought too suggestive, and as a name which would  give nothing away, H2S was suggested; and H2S has  thus come to be the general title for all such equipments.  There is an amusing story told that on first being given  an aircraft with experimental H2S a navigator returned,  _and, asked for his opinion on the new device, cautiously  and conservatively preferred his former means of navi-  gation, and compared the new one to the H2S (hydrogen  disulphide) of our schoolboy ‘chem’-lab days, saying  _ bluntly, “It stinks!’ But in point of fact H2S was one  of the very few radar devices which were reasonably  . THE MAGIC EYE 139  successful from their inception, and navigators did,  indeed, welcome this new aid with enthusiasm and with  complete lack of odious, odorous comparison. 
 In H2S the aerial system is placed inside a turret or  streamlined Perspex ‘blister’ under the belly, and  pointing in a directional sense towards the ground. The  aerial and reflector are placed so that they can rotate  about a central vertical axis.  A cut-down parabaloid shape is achieved by skilful  metal-beating, and the dish-shaped aerial system results  in a beam narrow in azimuth, where the reflector has its  full dimensions. 
In elevation the beam is spread out in  such a way that, although most of the energy is sent out  at a few degrees below the horizontal, the lobe is  deformed at greater angles from the horizontal. It is  therefore not quite correct, in practical forms of H2S,  to think of the radiated energy as being strictly a ‘pencil’  of rays illuminating the ground. But sharp beaming in  this complicated pattern is necessary to ensure a de-  formed lobe of correct proportions, so that an aircraft  receives echoes back of approximately equal eaenees  from all targets within range. 
 This beam is rotated by the physical movement of the  scanner, with reflector and director, and in the earliest  systems the aerial itself is of the half-wave type, at the  focus of the scanner, and it illuminates a strip of the  ground at any one time, in the shape of a sector of a  circle not much more than 5 degrees wide. The most  remote point of illumination is controlled, so that the  H2S can scan over, say, ranges of 50 miles, 20 miles,  and 5 miles, and at each setting a full-diameter circle ts  displayed on the CRT. Obviously a PRF of over 500  must be used for such equipments, and the scanner is  rotated at a speed seldom in excess of 1} revolutions 2  second. 
The effective angle of inclination of the scanner  . 140 HOW RADAR WORKS  is varied, of course, to produce illumination at different  ranges.  With basic types of H2S there is a common T and R  aerial system, the magnetron and Sutton-tube local  oscillator are used, and a ‘gas-gap’ switch to connect  alternately the high-power transmitter and then the  sensitive receiver and crystal mixer to the array. 
The  gas gap consists of two electrodes in a soft valve. During  the interval when the transmitter is not giving a pulse  (or, as we say, when it is ‘on space’) the coupling loop  of the system acts as a short-circuit, and the proportions  of the rest of the feeder are arranged to be a quarter-  wave line giving infinite impedance. In this condition  only the receiver is electrically connected to the array. 
 Immediately the transmitter pulses (‘marks’) the ionized  gas in the gas-gap switch breaks down, providing an  effective short-circuit. The gas gap is placed in the  feeder system at such a point that the short-circuit of  the gap transforms the receiver side of the feeder into a  quarter-wave line, so this time the passage to the  receiver is blocked by conditions of infinite impedance,  and all the energy passes from the transmitter to the  aerial. This switch-over takes place over 500 times a  second, and if the gas gap of H2S were to break down or  fail to work on any one pulse the receiver would be —  burned out. 
Precautions are taken, therefore, as in all  similar centimetric aerial T-R switching devices, by  inserting impedance transformations to give additional  protection. Ofall the practical modifications perhaps the  easiest to follow is the application of a biasing voltage  to the gas-filled tube. These small voltages are applied  to encourage the gas gap to ionize as soon as the trans-  mitter ‘mark’ begins, and ensure that the receiver side  of the feeder is safely switched off. 
 The gas gap, therefore, enables pulses of energy to be  . THE MAGIC EYE I4t  sent to, and echoes received from, the rotating H2S  scanner. A rheostat control regulates the speed of  rotation, as the wedge-shaped slice of illumination covers  the terrain, and the trace line, as in all normal PPI  techniques, rotates in step at the same speed. 
By dis-  playing echo returns the H2S tube trace paints and con-  tinually repaints a map on the tube end. In this map the  objects which send especially strong echoes back to the  set, such as towns where there are many vertical walls  and buildings, appear as bright spots. Water areas  appear black, for they do not reflect any appreciable  radio energy back to the sender, but reflect it away. 
In  early H2S systems the picture was very liable to show  underexposed areas or gaps. Contrast between town  and country was not very great, and the picture obtained  was what a photographer would regard as underexposed.  Hours of patient experimenting in the air and on the  ground have been necessary to get the correct grading of  radiation at all angles from the scanner. 
The develop-  ment of H2S has not been without loss of life. The first  heavy bomber installed with H2S crashed on an experi-  mental flight, and all the crew and five of the pioneer  experimenters were killed.  What the H2S picture may show is not the scene  immediately below the aircraft, but at some slant range  ahead. 
Thus if the slant is known the height of the  aircraft itself can be calculated, which is an additional  navigational aid. But an electronic difficulty is en-  countered, for what we are chiefly aiming to show on the  H2S tube is a true map-like picture of the scene beneath,  and we must counter the distortion introduced by the  differences in ranges, for a slant-range map introduces  inaccuracies akin to perspective distortion. If we can  calculate this distortion we can arrange to speed up or  slow down the time-base itself at precisely corresponding  . 
142 HOW RADAR WORKS  ranges. Thus, putting this solution to the problem very  briefly, we can distort the start of the time-base to  correct for the slant-range distortion introduced by the  purely optical scanning differences in range. The result  is a non-distorted map which does bear close relation to  the geographic map. 
There are other visual distortions,  of course, for the precise shape which a rectangular  block of buildings takes on the PPI tube depends on  certain factors, one of which is the range. Unless cor-  rection is made a rectangular target seen at a consider-  able distance on H2S equipment appears, not square,  but ‘thin.? As the run-up to the town is made it fattens  up to its true proportions. This is because at long range  the incident waves fall on distant objects from a direction  nearly parallel with the earth’s surface. 
Only the front,  facing walls of buildings thus give any return to the  radar receiver, and the rear walls are hidden from the  beam. As the run-up is made the angle of elevation  increases, and more walis and buildings come into the  ‘sunshine,’ as it were, of the H2S pulses, and so can give  an appreciable returned echo. Here, again, correction  can be made electrically if necessary. 
 Obviously there is relation between the direction in  which the scanner is ‘looking’ and the direction of the  aircraft’s travel, and here we have a choice of displays.  Either we can arrange the H2S displayed map to be  always with its top (on the tube) representing the  direction of flight, or we might link the H2S display with  the gyro-compass of the aircraft, so that the map is  _always pointed to true north. For civil aviation over  considerable areas of land the latter system is to be  preferred if it is possible. 
Over land H2S-type sys-  tems show up towns, large buildings, and prominent  - coastline formations. Over sea the kindred ASV en-  ables the operator to see, as though plotted on a  . THE MAGIC EYE 143  chart, the positions of all ships and coastlines within  range. 
 It gives us, at best, the sort of chart referred to in  The Hunting of the Snark, the chart  ... representing the sea  Without the least vestige of land;  And the crew were much pleased when they found it to be  A map they could all understand!  . XI. 
ELECTRONIC NAVIGATION  E HAVE NOWADAYS A RESPECTABLE CHOICE OF TRUE  W radar navigational aids, apart from those such as  the QM and Console, which are not within the strict  scope of pulse-radar navigation.  There is H2S in its many forms, Gee, G-H, Oboe,  Babs, and Rebecca, and even that does not cover the  entire field. H2S-type systems, as previously described,  do not demand any co-operation from the ground, and  are virtually ‘television’ devices. 
Babs and kindred  systems take their name from the initials of “beam  approach beacon systems’ of aircraft guidance while  landing, and Rebecca systems again represent radar  beacons which do not transmit continuously, but  respond only to code inquiry.  The biggest field for the present of the true electronic  navigational aids is held by Gee, G-H, and Oboe, and  they all had their beginnings in the years when long-  range radar navigational aids were vitally necessary to  ‘guide bombers over enemy targets, and to bring them  safely back.  On the face of things Gee appears so similar to non-  pulse methods that it merits a close inspection to avoid  this confusion. 
Ever since radio direction-finding  became practicable it has been used to provide ships  and aircraft with a knowledge of their position relative  to fixed points. By taking DF cross-bearings of at least  two stations an intersection of lines can be used to fix  position, just as if visual cross-plotting methods were  used. DF-ing by radio (using the frame-aerial direc-  tional properties, or the Bellini-Tosi crossed loop) thus . 
144  . \¥ AWN a : og  MMO Qa nw!  SEE 2 AWN WWW  eS  \\ \ ~  AES A FEW LINES OF A GEE LATTICE  A is the master, B and C are the slaves. The base-line is 100 miles,  and the time-delay in microseconds is shown in each isochrone. 
By  taking a fix on each base and plotting, the navigator can pin-point his  position.  K  . supplanted solar and stellar observations because of its  convenience, but not because of its greater accuracy. 
 By astronomical methods a really good observer can  determine the position of a ship to within a mile or two,  and of an aircraft to within eight miles, if circumstances  are favourable. Errors in Bellini-Tosi or Adcock radio  DF-ing are just as great, but do not depend, of course,  on climatic conditions or visibility to the same extent as  do astronomical methods. But until the newer techniques  of radio DF-ing came into being radar or electronic  navigational aids brought an entirely new standard of  accuracy. 
With one radar system accuracy to within a  few yards can be given, and it has, for instance, been  possible to bomb a small group of private houses used  as a Gestapo HQ from radar beacons about a hundred  miles away. This new degree of accuracy is such that  the geodetic surveys of the past cannot provide maps of:  sufficient reliability, and for the first time in history  our navigational methods are really ahead of our existing  maps.  The essence of the new methods is this: if two radar  transmitters send out truly synchronized pulses—that is  to say, the pulses of energy leave the aerials at the same  instant of time—then a receiver situated anywhere on  the perpendicular bisector of the straight line joming  the two transmitters will receive the two pulses simul-  ‘taneously, because any point in this bisector is equi-  distant from both transmitters. 
 At any other point there will be a time difference in  the receipt of the pulses, because the receiver will then  be nearer one transmitter than the other, so, of course,  ‘the pulses from one transmitter will reach there earlier,  by a very minute fraction of time. The fact that it zs  minute need not worry a radar receiver, for, as we have  seen in the introductory chapters of this book, the CRT  . ELECTRONIC NAVIGATION 147 -  and its associated circuits provide a very useful electronic  stop-watch, capable of indicating millionths of a second. 
 Now with our two radar transmitters we could plot a  very large number of positions where there are time  differences, and sets of lines could be drawn, fotning all  the points having the same time differences, with respect  to these two transmitters. Such networks of curved lines  we call a grid, but it is worth noting that internationally  we have agreed to call the lines themselves ‘isochrones,’  just as the lines joining all points on a weather map  having the same barometric readings are called ‘isobars.’  Generally these isochrone lines are hyperbole, not  straight, but curving outward on either side of the zero  isochrone, and bunching close together, but never  crossing, as they pass between the transmitter stations.  Time differences are displayed on a CRT linked to a  receiver on the ship or in the aircraft; and if the observer  notes, for example, that the pulses arrive from stations  A and B 20-millionths of a second apart he would know  that he must be situated somewhere on one of a pair of  conjugate hyperbole, of which A and B are the foci. 
 There is, in navigational practice, no need for him to  make such a mathematical note. If he regards stations  A and B, synchronized, as ‘blue’ stations, he merely  looks at his Gee chart of curves and notes that he is  somewhere on ‘blue 20.”  Now he turns to another pair of stations—although  let us note here for convenience that one may be simul-  taneously the second station of the first pair—é.e.,  station B—and takes a reading from this second, or  ‘red,’ group of stations. His map or Gee grid chart  will have ruled on it intersecting ‘families’ of confocal  curves, coloured blue and red respectively, and numbered  at intervals just like the contour curves or isobars of a  weather map. 
 . 148 HOW RADAR WORKS  A radar navigator working on Gee reception has thus  to follow ‘blue 20’ curve with his pencil until he meets  ‘red 16,’ when he can fix with great precision the position  of his receiver at the intersection of the two isochrone  curves, on both of which he 1s at that moment situated.  In practice he takes his reading, notes the exact time on  his stop-watch, and then does the ‘final fiddling’ after-  wards, logging the exact time of the reading. 
 There is no co-operation, you will see, between the  Gee network of transmitters and the receiver. Any  number of receivers may work off the Gee station with-  out fear of overloading. For civil aviation Gee offers a  very practical advantage in that we know it works  because it has been set up on a considerable scale all  over Europe. 
You will find most Gee transmitters  working on frequencies around 60 Mcs, but the possible  Gee range is from 20 to 85 Mcs. At 15,000 feet a range  of some 400 miles is quite usual with Gee equipment,  and, of course, there can be no point in using wave-  lengths far removed from the customary 6 metres; there  can be no overloading, any more than there is limit to  the number of broadcast sets which can be tuned at any  one time to a B.B.C. transmitter. 
The standard fre-  quencies are sufficiently high to be immune from much  static and similar interference, and Gee can be used in  mountainous country with ease and accuracy. An impor-  tant point is that the system is international and intro-  duces no language difficulty. Limitation of range is a  disadvantage, and the error at 300 miles is plus or minus  + per cent., and so the system cannot be used for blind  approach. 
The standard equipment weighs about  7a pounds, which is not considerable.  This is the basic method of navigation which in its  British form is known as Gee—a code word which  seems destined to live; using longer wavelengths, the  . SBLEWUARUNIC NAVAIUVALLILUN i4gy  system has been developed by American scientists, and  is there known as Loran, an abbreviation of ‘long-range  navigation.” The Loran system has the advantage over  Gee in that its pulses, on longer wavelengths, are propa-  gated over wide stretches of the earth’s surface by  multiple reflection from the ionosphere, but it suffers  from the disadvantage of all other reflected propagations  in that path-lengths are not precisely determinate, and  the errors of position-finding are in consequence usually  somewhat greater. 
Loran enthusiasts claim that although  its daytime ground waves cover about 500 to 700 miles,  which is not much more than with Gee, the night-time  sky waves extend coverage up to some 1400 miles.  There is a difference in the time taken to get a fix on  these systems. In Gee pulses from both pairs of stations  appear on the CRT at the same time, and readings are  taken simultaneously. 
In Loran only one set of readings  can be taken at a time. The difference is about two  minutes, as an expert Loran operator can seldom get a  full fix in under three minutes, compared with the sixty  seconds or less for Gee.  Within a year after the War American radar experts  had seen much success in the installation of a Loran  chain. 
Loran coverage stretches west across the Atlantic,  North America, and the broad reaches of the Pacific.  Loran transmitters have been installed in the Himalayas  to guide traffic across the Hump. There is, of course,  close co-operation between the pioneers of the two  systems, and even during the war years as many as 800  aircraft of Bomber Command were fitted with dual sets  which could handle both systems. 
Loran’s chief feature,  as its name implies, is that it is a long-range system, and  with only four times as many transmitters as Gee its  coverage is twenty times as great. It already covers more  than a quarter of the earth’s surface, and physicists who  . 150 HOW RADAR WORKS  are working to extend its range like to joke about the  time when with a transmitter at each pole and four  around the equator Loran will cover the world. 
 A reason for the great secrecy about Gee and similar  systems during the War was the obvious fear that if  the beacon transmitters were jammed by enemy signals  the navigational aid might become useless. Of course, the  enemy did attempt to jam, and arising from our counter-  measures is some information which may later be of great  use in civil aviation over territory where atmospherics  and local bad reception conditions make Gee working  difficult. |  One of the most successful anti-jamming devices was  the XF. 
Under this stratagem a new transmission on a  frequency different from that being used comes up  suddenly, synchronized with the preceding transmission.  In wartime conditions this new frequency, known as the  XF frequency, was usually switched on suddenly just  before the first bombers were about to reach their  target. While the enemy listening stations were dis-  covering the XF and the jammers scrambling around to  retune their transmitters to jam this new channel Allied  navigators could get their fix, and so find their last  short stage to the target. 
 Oboe, like Gee, is virtually a radar beacon. It does  not ‘see’ things, nor depend on radar echoes, but the.  important difference between Gee and Oboe is this:  with Gee there are slave and master beacon stations  transmitting continuously, and all the adjustment, calcu-  lation, and work of obtaining a fix is done by the navi-  - gator. 
In Oboe all the control of the operation is done  from the ground, and the installation in the aircraft is as  simple as possible. The accuracy of Oboe too is of a  higher order.  With Gee it is possible for a navigator to tell his pilot  . 
ELECTRONIC NAVIGATION I§I  how to get across some 300-400 miles of unknown  country and find a large town, without any guidance  other than the Gee master and slave transmisssion. With  Oboe it is possible for the same journey to be made over  entirely unknown country, and for the arrival spot to  be pin-pointed with an accuracy of yards. The original  plan was to develop Oboe with apparatus in the aircraft  or ship as simple as possible, and at a later stage of  development it was hoped that it might, in fact, be pos-  sible to dispatch the aircraft with no crew at all, the  Oboe being automatic. 
 Oboe is a responsor system, like so many radar  beacons; it does not depend on an echo from a distant  aircraft, but pulse transmissions from the ground sta-  tions, on arrival at a distant outfit, trigger it off and  cause a second pulse to be transmitted.  Oboe, which was born in Britain in 1941, consists  basically of two ground radar stations, A and B, which  both obtain responding pulses from the Oboe-controlled  aircraft. A small transmitter in the aircraft is pipped-off  on receipt of the ground pulses, many times a second. 
 Ground station A, known as the ‘cat’ or tracking  station, defines a marrow track at constant range from  the transmitter by sending out signals in dot-and-dash  form to the pilot. In early forms of Oboe the amplitude  of these dots and dashes, which can be injected into an  aircraft intercom system, tells the pilot how far he ts  from the correct track. In later versions rate-aiding  principles have been applied, and the amplitude of the  dots and dashes thus tells the pilot, not when he is on  the track, but when his heading is correct—that is, when  he is making accurately towards the desired target or  airfield. 
 Ground station B, known as the ‘releasing’ (from the * *  days when Oboe was devised as a wartime bomb-aiming  . 152 HOW RADAR WORKS  device) or ‘mouse’ transmitter, measures the ground  speed of the aircraft as it approaches its home run along  the track, and sends a signal to the navigator when he is  immediately over it, if the need is to drop bombs, or  when he is suitably approaching for a landing. On some  wartime aircraft it was arranged that this Station B  ‘mouse’ signal itself released the bombs, and, of course,  there are several obvious peacetime applications of such  a radar-controlled relay. 
To try the system as quickly as  possible during the war years Oboe Mark I was pro-  duced using carrier frequencies in the 14-metre band.  It was planned that if this apparatus were successful  centimetric Oboe could be used. First trials were made  over the Bristol Channel on 14 metres, and were very  successful. 
Development of Oboe has been a joint  American-British venture, for during the War a scheme  was drawn up whereby all the Oboe receivers both for  R.A.F. Bomber Command and U.S. [Xth Air Force  were made in Britain, and all the miniature centimetric  transmitters and the special Oboe transmitting valves  needed by the British and American forces were made  in-the United States. 
With this sort of apparatus jam-  ming is very difficult, and it appears from numerous tests  that the accuracy of the range measurement is of the  order of yards, and is substantially independent of range.  As with Gee, the Oboe navigational systems are more  accurate than the maps available for them. In present  times, of course, this is not a serious problem, for the  cartographers can set no frontier limits to their work in  the international good. 
But in war it is a serious diffi-  culty, for there is little point in building up a radar  system which is very accurate, but rendered useless  because the enemy maps available do not represent the  necessary degree of accuracy!  A case in point arose in December 1942, when the  . ELECTRONIC NAVIGATION 153  first trial bombing raid was made on the Ruhr by  Mosquitoes flying at 28,000 feet on a wild winter's  night. The aircraft were navigated to some point on the  circular track about 50 miles from the target by Gee. 
 Oboe control then took over, and the pilot was given  signals to guide him along the curved track. Signals  were given from the ‘mouse’ station to tell the bomb-  aimer when he was approaching the target, and finally a  signal was sent which accurately defined the release-  point. So successful did the results seem that it was  decided to hold calibration tests to ensure that the  German air-maps available to us were accurate enough  for Oboe calculations. 
In the first calibration raid on a  small German-held aircraft centre in Belgium one bomb  hit the building and another fell at the entrance, killing  the sentry. Thus it was proved that the system was  extremely accurate, and that the tying-up of the German  and British maps had been done successfully. When you  realize that the bombing in this case, as with all similar  Oboe ventures, was done really by the ground operator,  some hundreds of miles away from the target, or from  the operator dropping the bombs, the system appears all  the more remarkable. 
 How do the ‘cat’ and ‘mouse’ stations get their ranges  by radar? Remember that the aircraft carries only a  mobile transmitter-receiver, and no measuring device.  The ground stations send out their pulses, these trigger  off the airborne set, and new pulses come back home to  the ‘cat’ and ‘mouse’ receivers. The total time for each  of these transmissions is made up of a number of com-  plicated parts—for instance, there is the time of outward  travel, time delay in triggering off the mobile equipment,  and time of the return to the ground station. 
The time  of the second journey must be known accurately, for this  gives the range of the aircraft from the fixed station.  . 154 HOW RADAR WORKS  Each ground station has the information that the aircraft  is at a known distance away, so the position lines are  circles with the ground stations at their centres. 
By  comparing notes the fixed stations can determine the  position of the aircraft, and can then send the ‘mouse’  signal to the navigator, pilot, or bomb-aimer. Of  course, the whole system could be reversed. The mobile  station could initiate pulses and measure the time of the  ‘interrogated’ pulses from fixed ground responder  stations. 
Whichever way round the system is worked,  a transmitter has to be carried by the mobile station.  One operational advantage of Oboe in normal circum-  stances is that the task of getting an accurate fix is done  in the relative calm of the ground stations, and the calcu-  lation does not have to be carried out at the airborne or  ship-borne end.  Gee cannot be overloaded by a large number of  receivers being tuned at the same time to the ground  stations. 
Oboe, however, is directed to one group of  mobile transmitter-receivers. A third system may be  needed to give very precise marking of small targets, or  so that a number of tactical targets can be covered  simultaneously by a considerable number of aircraft.  The G-H system offers possibilities, and it is derived  from the Gee system. 
The ‘H’ principle consists of  measuring with great precision the range of an aircraft  or ship from two fixed beacons. In contrast with Oboe,  where ranges are measured on the ground, in G-H they  are measured at the mobile end. The number of aircraft  which can use the system is limited only by the power-  _ handling capacity of the beacons. 
A transmitter at the  mobile end sends out a pulse, and this is received by  each of the ground beacons and returned to the aircraft  on a different frequency. The time taken for this process  gives a-precise measurement of the two ranges, the  . 1ON Res. 
T  ps ee 0  delays in the beacons having bet previ  ascertained. , ae range of the aircraft fom o ie bere  been d ined the en ground beacons has eterminet Ton, 1onerm  obtained. In addition to knowing its p% a er,  an aircraft requires to know its ems . 
a  ‘nitude and direction, before b0 ee  ae blindly that they will hit the _ Sir Ri lar  information is equally necessary for #* 4. MBs.  Direction of flight is obtained through the alt ae “Eng  along that: circle of constant range fom 0 ding Tthe  beacons which passes through the target lan — ad. 
 Ground speed is determined by measutilg : syste of  change from the other beacon, Accuracy oft ‘tho “no  depends on one curious factor, as a little cartfll MOUS Roth  will show: it depends on the position of tht ae or  landing-field relative to the two beacon station. Riis  accuracy decreases as the angle of intersect OF fo hhe  two constant-range circles through the target COCTCOESS mac |  The combination of Gee and H in G-Hisa lappy & try...  for in many operational circumstances Gee cin be US eg  for the general navigation, and then the sjil¢™ €—2eaq,  switch over so that the H{ part can be wed forthe & aromaqy  run-in. 
 Depending, as these systems do, on tht prec# me  measurement of the time differences in the arival aoe  pulses, either direct or triggered, Gee and the kindras «cq  systems have set a new standard of accusty in rad wo  navigation, but there are practical difficilis in usiraague  these systems for civil flying. Military sitmft carry sex, navigator who can take Gee readings and sure fixes  Civil aircraft always carry as small a crew i possible my  for obvious reasons, and the desire has been strongly expressed that all navigational aid should be preseratedil direct to the pilot,  . XII. 
TRAVEL BY BEACON  HERE ARE RIVAL SCHOOLS OF THOUGHT IN RADAR,  Some people like to see things; others are content  to let things guzde them by beacons and other impersonal  _aids. It is certainly more fascinating, from the layman’s  point of view, to ‘see’ the ground by H2S than it is to  visualize an aircraft guided by the more complex beacon  systems, with their jumble of unmusical pulses; but then  the layman does not have to fly aircraft, or (directly,  at least) pay for the equipment used.  Although beacons do not show the pictorial results of,  say, H2S, they are an important part of radar because  of their simplicity. 
Oboe and Gee, as we have seen, are  really beacon systems of a sort, but here we are going  to examine other radar beacons and navigational aids,  notably Babs, SCS-51, an American-designed beam-  ‘approach system now produced in Britain, and Rebecca.  One of the fundamental principles of many radar  beacons is that of the ‘transponder.’ Once it was estab-  lished that pulses from a radar transmitter could be  received and used to trigger automatically another pulse  transmitter with uniformly negligible time delay (not  necessarily repeating the original pulse form, nor re-  transmitting on the same frequency) it became clear  that such a ‘transponder’ could be set up at any con-  venient place and would act as a radar beacon. An  operational advantage of such a beacon is that it main-  tains ‘wireless silence’—in effect, speaking only when  being spoken to. 
Moreover, it is capable of being made  to respond only to certain coded sequences of pulses on  a given frequency, and to give accurate information of  | 156  . TRAVEL BY BEACON £57  the distance between the beacon and the interrogator.  Such an estimate of distance is obtained, usually, in the  well-Known Type A display manner, with the beacon  and interrogator pulses showing along a straight-line  trace, the time interval between them being easily inter-  preted into distance. 
 Much of this beacon development arose out of IFF.  Ships and other vehicles of war carried small trans-  mitter-receivers which, on being triggered off by detect-  ing ground stations, could automatically emit coded  pulses. These pulses show up at the ground station,  usually in addition to the echo received back; if the  coding is correct, then obvious indication is given that  the mobile outfit is carried by a ‘friendly.’  The network of beacons which came to be relied upon  in war may become an important adjunct to navigation  to-day, at sea and in the air. 
Earliest beacon signals  were presented to the navigator of the questioning craft  as fluctuating blips on his Type-A-displayed range-  scale, together with whatever indication of azimuth  (bearing) the apparatus might be capable of displaying.  But with the introduction of PPI technique the beacons  show up as ‘winking’ spots or arcs of light in their  positions relative to the interrogator, on the scale of the  map-like PPI picture.  Comparison can be made between these transponder  beacons, which blip only when blipped at, and the  reflecting signs on our main roads, which glisten and  warn motorists only when the car headlamps illuminate  their midget reflectors. 
 Beaconry in radar offers a wide scope, for we can have  fixed marker beacons or we can arrange to drop beacons  on parachute harness or fit them to buoys at sea. Safety  aids use radar beacons extensively, and a wartime air-  sea-rescue system which has now grown up to peace-  . 158 HOW RADAR WORKS  time proportions uses a rather ingenious radar beacon. 
 This incorporates a squegging oscillator which can be  coded in dot-and-dash form, to act as a beacon to  ifn i  (6) Runway on left or aircraft too much to starboard.  (c) Runway on right or aircraft too much to port.  Note. 
The drawing is merely illustrative, and is not to be considered accurate in de The blip in the centre picture would in practice be thicker than the  t. one on the  intermittent pulsed signal which will show like a beacon  on the radar display of searching craft.  Among the numerous track guides and instrument —  approach systems predominant is Babs, the beam- -  approach beacon system. 
It enables aircraft to be  brought to the boundary of an airfield with precision,  - and with most types comes into operation first when the  navigator is about 20 miles away from the field. The  Babs equipment on the aerodrome consists of a small -  transponder (transmitter and receiver), situated at the ©  . TRAVEL BY BEACON 159  end of the runway, and accurately aligned so that the  major beam of transmission is correct for landing con- ditions. 
The fixed installation is erected for the main runway, and the other runways are usually served by mobile equipment.  The airborne part of the Babs equipment, the interro- gator, sends out signals which are received by the trans- ponder at the end of the runway and retransmitted in a very sharply defined beam, the central axis of which  is switched rapidly first slightly to the left for a short interval, then slightly to the right for a longer  . tLoterval. 
 When the homecoming aircraft is ‘in’ the beam—that  is, exactly in line with the runway—signals from the  Babs beacon will appear level on the CRT screen, and if  pips are being injected into the intercom, then a con-  tinuous, steady howl will be heard.  if the pilot is approaching too far to the right of the  runway a series of dashes will be heard in the intercom,  and broad echoes will show up on the CRT.  As he changes course to the left the broad echoes  become shorter, and small, narrow responses or ‘dot’  signals will appear. 
Any deviation to one side or the  other immediately produces corresponding changes in  the echo blips. The position of the blips on the CRT is  a continuous indication of the distance of the aircraft  from the end of the runway, and thus the navigator or  observer with Babs is able to pass to the pilot a steady  flow of information which should bring the aircraft over  the edge of the airfield, at a comfortable height and  heading straight for the runway—and the pilot knows  that he can rely on it. The half-degree-wide beam of  Babs should bring the aircraft in not more than twenty  yards either side of the centre line of the approach end  of a runway 2000 yards long. 
Lights will then enable  . 160 HOW RADAR WORKS  the pilot to complete his landing visually in all but the  worst weather conditions.  Babs has the advantage that it was used throughout  the War with confidence, and many other branches of  beaconry have developed from Babs technique; it is  therefore a well-tried radar equipment and popular  with crews who have been taught the drill on this type  of radar aid. 
It also has the advantage that it is inter-  national, presents no language difficulties, and is reliable  owing to its simplicity. Operational disadvantages put  forward by some navigators are that the CRT is rather  bulky if the range is to be effective, and the presentation  is not so ‘pictorial’ as that given by, say, a PPI display.  British and American scientists have made valuable  contributions to the technique and practice of beaconry,  and an interesting American development is the blind-  approach system known as SCS-51, which a usually  around 100 Mcs. 
 In most commercial forms of this equsinent there is  a ‘localizer,’ a ‘glide-path,’ and three marker beacons.  Each of these beacons transmits on a different frequency |  (or, in a certain variation of the system, on the same  frequency, but with different PRF’s), and each is given  a different CRT display in the cockpit. In certain  equipment where there is no CRT display miliammeter  needles show what is happening. 
With milliammeter  display the instruments used are of the. centre-zero  type, and are placed in a balancing network so that all  the pilot has to do is set a course on which the milliam-  meter needle shows a centre reading. Deviation from  the true course—that is, head-on to the appropriate  radar beacon—will be shown by corresponding milliam-  meter needle swing. 
Each. beacon is sharply beamed by  directional aerial arrays.  Of the various ground beaceass in SCS-51 the ‘local-  . 
TRAVEL BY BEACON 161  izer’ assists the aircraft to get in line with the runway,  from a distant point, and guides it in to the centre of  the runway. There is no continuous range indication,  but the three marker beacons are placed to indicate the  start of the descent, the approach end of usable runway  —and one also acts as a central checking-point. With the  glide-path ground transmitter and associated equipment  this is a comparatively costly outfit to work, but in  practice the aircraft can be localized to within 0-75°,  and the glide-path checked to within 0-3° above or  below. 
There are no language difficulties with SCS-51,  for the pilot has to get no instructions from the ground.  A beacon system which has many characteristics  similar to Babs is Rebecca, with its variant, Rebecca-  Eureka. Whereas Babs is a generic term covering a  number of radar systems of beam approach on airfields,  beacons of the Rebecca type respond only to coded  interrogation. 
In the Rebecca-Eureka system small  beacon transmitters (the ‘Eureka’ part of the equipment)  can be dropped by parachute: they remain quiescent  until an aircraft carrying the Rebecca interrogator  approaches fo within, say, 20 miles. Then the Eureka  beacon begins transmitting pulses which show up on  the CRT carried in the navigator’s cockpit. Under war  conditions beacons which respond only to certain codes,  or to certain types of interrogator, have their obvious  uses, as security is improved. 
Such a radar system does  not broadcast continuously, but is interested only m  some minute fractions of time—for instance, 1§ mucro-  seconds within each three-millisecond period of time.  But when the air is crowded with civilian traffic the same  difficulties may be experienced, and the advantage of  coded beacons is obvious.  Beacons can provide an indication of bearing with a  remarkable accuracy, but for air-travel we must know  ;  . 
162 HOW RADAR WORKS  more than bearing; we must have some radar device to  indicate height.  The altimeter is an essential flying instrument, and for  many years the only indication of height was the reading  of an aneroid barometer which had been set before  take-off to the height above sea-level of the airfield from  which the flight started. Even if the weather conditions  did not change during the flight the best that could be  expected was that while over water or land at sea-level  the aneroid would register ‘true clearance.’ The same  reading would be obtained in level flight if} a few  minutes later, the aircraft flew over mountain-peaks  10,000 feet high, with disastrous results if the flight  altitude were only 9000 feet. 
This is not a fanciful  possibility, for only too often have aircraft flown into  mountain-sides in weather so ‘thick’ that disaster was  upon them before the air-crew could take evasive action.  What was needed, clearly, was an instrument to show  ‘terrain clearance,’ which is the true distance from the  aircraft to the nearest part of the earth’s surface, with  some sort of warning indicator, so that if this aircraft-  to-earth clearance became dangerously small the pilot  could gain height and avoid danger. This the aneroid-  type altitude indicators could never do, for weather and  various barometric changes might result in a long-  distance aircraft returning to base with its altimeter  in error by several hundreds of feet. 
 Normal pulse-and-echo radar systems have a disad~  vantage in that at very close distances from the ground  _ the time interval between pulse and its echo becomes  extremely small, so there is a minimum height at which  such equipment can be used. Early radio altimeters  were, in effect, a normal pulse-sender and echo-detector,  and measured heights with a considerable degree of  accuracy. But they fell into disuse because at any  . 
TRAVEL BY BEACON 163  distance from the ground less than about 400 feet they  proved unreliable. CRT display is also apt to become  a nuisance for altimeter work. The picture on the CRT  is helpful to the navigator for range and bearing, for  PPI pictures, and for many other purposes. 
But in the  field of altimeters all he wants to know is, “‘ What is the  altitude?” ‘The answer is perhaps best shown on an  instrument dial rather than with the electric pencil-point  of the CRT. Moreover, the associate apparatus neces~  sary for CRT display takes up space in the cockpit.  In present popular electrical altimeter systems the  transmission is not of pulses, but of continuous waves. 
 They are emitted with rhythmic variations in frequency  from the underside of the aircraft. The reflected wave  from the earth’s surface is received back and ‘com-  pared’ electrically with the waves then being sent out.  The longer the time interval between the emission of  the original wave and its reflection back to the aircraft  —that is, the higher the aircraft is flying—the more will  its frequency differ from that of the wave being emitted  at the instant it is echoed back. 
Thus the altimeter  receiver is simultaneously fed with two streams of waves,  one from the transmitter and one reflected back from  the ground. These differ by an amount proportional t  the altitude of the aircraft. The receiver measures this  frequency difference and shows the result on a dial as  terrain clearance. 
Terrain clearance may also involve  the measurement of clearance obliquely ahead, as in the  approach to or flying through steeply mountainous  country.  For simplicity radio altimeters of this type do not  show minute changes in altitude, but record only in steps  of six feet (on the o—400 feet scale) or 60 feet (on the  400-4000 feet scale). Apparatus of this type has a  reasonable error. 
In the 50-400 feet sector, for instance,  . 164. HOW RADAR WORKS  there is a plus-or-minus error of 6 per cent. 
With some  types of altimeter there is a limit indicator to relieve the  pilot of the necessity for watching the altitude scale al]  the time. It consists of a small panel on which are  mounted three coloured bulbs, green, amber, and red.  These come into circuit as the altitude of the aircraft  varies in relation to that indicated by the position of the  limit switch, which, of course, can be controlled at the  pilot or navigator’s wish according to the type of terrain  over which he is flying. 
In the British arrangement the  green signal lamp indicates that the aircraft is flying at  approximately the pre-set altitude. The red bulb in-  dicates flight below and amber above that altitude.  American practice reverses the green and amber. 
It is  obviously not impossible to link such a device with an  automatic pilot, enabling the aircraft to be flown hands-  off at a predetermined height within the range limit of  the altimeter.  It should be appreciated, therefore, that radio alti-  meters of this type do not depend on pulse and echo, but  on frequency difference. A continuous-wave signal is  continuously, rhythmically changed slightly in fre-  quency, and this is fed into a receiver as well as into the  frequency-modulation side of the transmitter. 
The echo  is received back from the ground, and its frequency  difference is measured from that of the signal which is  at that same instant being transmitted. It is this fre-  quency difference which is proportional to height above  ground.  . 
XII. CONCLUSION  . YVHAT THE STORY OF HOW RADAR WORKS CAN BE TOLD  Tan a book published in the English language is in  itself a tribute to radar’s operational success in war. 
In  a world of international emotion and political misuse of  power it is impossible to separate radar progress from  its war potentiality, and although the applications of  radar and similar electronic navigational aids and other  devices for the uses of peace are now boundless, it can  never be forgotten that radar did indeed protect these  islands from enemy invasion.  Although pulsed light and the new techniques of  supersonics may be used in wars yet to come to guide  projectiles of attack, radar remains the first and still the  most important system of direction-finding, of navi-  gational aid, and of direction of aircraft, ships, vehicles.  The story which I have attempted to tell in this  present book must be hampered by the nearness of the  recounting to the momentous historical events of the  present time, so that all nations are fearful of disclosing  their radar discoveries. 
But it must be put on record  in this concluding note that these radar devices which  have transformed every major aspect of war were born  in Britain of a timely combination of scientific imagma~  tion, technical resource, operational appreciation, and  organizing genius. The scientific imagination was exer-  cised in taking the step from old knowledge, available  to every one, of many isolated facts and methods m  radio research, to a coherent new system fitted to military  needs and capable of use by military personnel. The old  knowledge—much of it very old—was international i  165  . 
166 HOW RADAR WORKS  its origin, much of it British, some of it American, the  crucial part of it a British experimental method.  The technical resource was exercised in producing,  under severe difficulties imposed by the wartime need  for stringent secrecy, pulse transmitters of unpre-  cedented power, receivers of unparalleled sensitivity,  aerials of unique design, ancillary equipment of novel  character, all doing somewhat better than before some-  thing previously done after a fashion, some doing things  never done before.  Radar was a direct but not an inevitable fruit of pure  research. 
On probably no other subject can we say  with so much truth, ‘‘Ifit had not been for the War... .”  Britain had for many years been a prominent leader in  pure research on the travel of radio waves, on the things  which make long-distance radio communication pos-  sible, and on the things which still cause it to be imper-  fect. The Department of Scientific and Industrial  Research had followed the very enlightened policy of  accepting the advice of its Radio Research Board that the  best contribution which it could make to better radio  communication was the long-term and fundamental  investigation of the basic processes, rather than the  short-term search for individual remedies to individual  problems. 
Whether this pure research should be  fostered and supported by industry, by scientists them-  selves, or by the State has now become not only a political  but an international matter.  In radar there can be no boundaries, and in the long  run, as with the harnessing of atomic power, no secrets.  From the pioneering days of Appleton and Watson-Watt  with experiments in the ionosphere and in pure research  on the reflections of radio waves from solid bodies we  have progressed to a multitude of navigational and  directional radar devices. 
This multitude Combis to  . CONCLUSION 167  make a weapon too great for any one man or any one  nation to hold. Although the people and even the  scientists are reluctant to realize what has happened,  the baby of radar, born in the nineteen-thirties in Slough,  has risen from that despond to become a giant. 
In his  youth he saw valiant war service. It is now desperately  essential that he remains a peaceful civilian.  . 
APPENDIX  NOTES ON THE PLATES  Plate I (frontispiece). The modern aircraft carries a wealth  of radio and radar equipment. This composite picture shows  sixteen major electronic devices to aid pilot and navigator. 
 (1) H2S, with an impression of a typical radar ground map as  seen on the screen. (2) Wireless telegraphy link. (3) Radar  Gee system of long-range navigation. 
(4) Radio track guides,  using Standard Beam Approach to guide aircraft to known  airports. (5) Medium-frequency beacons, for use with a loop  aerial inside the aircraft. (6) Main beam-approach system,  injecting dots or dashes into the intercommunication system  to inform a pilot when he is to port or starboard of correct  course. 
(7), (8), and (12) High-frequency direction-finding aerials and very-high-frequency transmitter for use by Flymg  Control and for airfield signals. (9) and (10) Inner and outer  marker radio beacons. (12) Very-high-frequency communt-  cation with other aircraft. 
(13) Medium~-frequency direction-  finding stations. (14) Identification of Friend or Foe radar  system used in military aircraft. (15) Attack-warning radar  system used in military aircraft to give warning of aerial  attack. 
(16) ‘Mountain Goat’ radio beacon to warn navi-  gators of high ground, cliffs, and mountam-peaks.  Plate II (p. 112). 
Type A Range Display. The horizontal  bright line, known as the ‘trace,’ is constant. The vertical  deflections, showing as spikes of light, indicate radar refiec-  tions from various objects. 
The rule above the trace 1s  graduated in miles. The ‘echoes’ seen from the base (0) up to  20 miles are from fixed near-by objects such as hills, masts,  and towers. They are permanent echoes, known as PE’s. 
 A live response from an aircraft some 52 miles away can  clearly be seen.  169  . 170 HOW RADAR WORKS  Plate Hl (p. 
113). The H2S system paints on the radar screen  a rough map of the ground beneath an aircraft. The actual  photograph (left) of a radar screen shows how the picture  appears to be traced out. 
Coast and sea areas are clearly  marked. The true map is shown on the right, and comparison  can thus be made between this and the radar image of the  characteristic English coastline of the Wash.  Plate IV Op. 
128). Marine radar can be used for locating  coastlines, buoys, other ships, and even aircraft. The bright  lobe above this ship represents the radar rotating beam. 
The  small circle (inset) indicates approximately what is seen on the  ship’s radar screen. The big ‘blip’ represents the pulse caused  by the ship’s radar transmission signals. The small echo A is  the response from aircraft A, which is not fully in the beam. 
 Aircraft B is right in the beam, and causes the deeper ‘blip.’  The ship’s beam can similarly be swung or rotated to scan  the coastline.  Plate V (p. 129). 
The Operation of Gee Radar. (Left to  right, above.) Two Gee transmitters are equivalent to two  stones dropped simultaneously into water. The white line  illustrates ripples at a point equidistant from the centres of  splashes. 
At points mot equidistant from two wave sources the  difference in arrival-time of waves or ‘ripples’ indicates the  position on a series of hyperbolic lines. In practice Gee can  use three transmitters, A being related both to B and C.  On the Gee tube in the aircraft transmissions from these three  stations are seen as spikes of light on the trace. 
 (Left to right, below.) The Gee receiver time-base is adjusted  to align the ‘blips’ in relation to the strobe. These readings  are then translated into figures by switching on the timing  “Cal’ (calibrator) pips, which the navigator can match with the  received signals. These figures relate not to mileage or bear-  ings direct, but to numbered lines on the Gee charts. 
In the  fmal picture this position is seen being ascertained and marked  with an X.  . BOOK LIST  APPLETON, E. 
V., and BurmLper, G.: “ Wireless Echoes of  Short Delay,” in Proceedings of the Physical Soctety,  1932.  BoLtz, C. L.: Wireless (Gifford, 1940). 
 HOLLINGWORTH, J.:“* Some Characteristics of Short-wave  Propagation,” in Journal of the Institution of Elec-  trical Engineers, 1933.  INSTITUTION OF ELECTRICAL ENGINEERS: Proceedings at  the Radiolocation Convention (1946).  MacGrecor-Mornris, J. 
T., and Mies, R.: “‘ Measure-  ments in Electrical Engineering by Means of  Cathode Rays,” in Fournal of the Institution of Elec-  trical Engineers, 1925.  PuckLe, O. S.: Time Bases and Time Base Generators  (Chapman and Hall, 1946). 
 REYNER, J. H.: Modern Radio Communication (Pitman,  1932).  SMITH-ROSE, R. 
L.: A Study of Radio Direction-finding  (Radio Research Special Report, No. 5) (H.M.  Stationery Office, 1927). 
 WATSON-WaATT, SiR ROBERT, Herp, J. F., and BAmN-  BRIDGE-BELL, L. H.: Applications of the Cathode  Ray Oscillograph in Radio Research (H.M. 
Stationery  Office, 1933).  171  . INDEX  AERIALS, Hertz, 525 Marconi,  52; rotating, $5  Afterglow, 61  Altimeters, 162 et seq. 
 Appleton, Sir E. V., 20, 21  ASV, 136  BABS, 158 et seq.  Baird, J. 
L., his British patent,  8 I  Bat, radar system of, 17  Bedford, L. H., 26  Beliringer, C. C. 
E., 28  Boot, H. A. H., 113  Bowen, E. 
G., 25, 26  Breit, Dr Gregory, 20  Butement, Dr W. S., 26  CADMIUM SCREENS, 61  Calcium tungstate, afterglow  of, 61  Calibrator (Cal), 40 et seq.  ‘Cat? station, 151  Cathode-follower, 96  Cathode-ray tube (CRT), 59-  71; ‘hard,’ 593 ‘soft,’ 595 electrodes, 60; screens,  60  Centimetric radar, 112 et seq. 
 Chain Home Low (CHL)  equipment, 48  urchill, Right Hon.  Winston S., 138  Console, 127  Cossor oscillograph, 77-78  Crystal capsule, 121  D.C. RESTORER, 98  Decca (QM), 127  Dee, Professor P. 
I., 28 Deflection, electromagnetic,  65-66; electrostatic, 65-  66  Dippy, R. J., 28  Distortion, trapezium, 68  Dowding, Air Chief Marshal  first Baron, 22  Dummer, G. W. 
A., 29  Ecuo, speed of, 33  FEEDERS, 56 ef seq.  ‘Flip-flop,’ 93 ef seq.  Flyback suppression, 80-81  France, pioneer radar in, 19  Frequencies, common radar,  48  Frequency difference systems,  164  ‘GATING’ CIRCUITS, 97  Gee, 144 et seg., 170  G-H, 154  ‘Grass,’ 46  H2S, 135 et seg.) 170  Hanbury-Brown, R., 26  Heil tubes, 117, 120 et seq. 
 Huxley, Dr L., 29  IFF, 25, 157  Jones, F. E., 29  KIPP RELAY, 93  Kiystron, I17, E19 ef seg.  LAGGING EDGE, 39  Lander, Harold, 26  Leading edge, 39  r'73  . 
174 Lewis, Dr W. B., 29  Loran, 129, 149-150  Lovell, A. C., 28  MAGNETRON, 27, 117 et seg. 
 Modulator (Mod), 49 et seg.  Monica, 58  ‘Mountain Goat,’ 132  ‘Mouse’ station, 152  Multi-vibrator, 90 et seg.  Nature, 17, 128  Normandie, the, short-wave  experiments in, I9  Numans oscillator, 94  OBOE, 150 et seq. 
 Oliphant, Professor M. L., 27,  II2  Oscillator; Numans, 94  Oscillograph, Cossor, 77-78 a _*  PEAK POWER, 51  Permanent echoes (PE’s), 42  Plan position indicator (PPI),  26, IO7—108 |  Polfard, P. E., 26  Pollux, H.M.S., tests in, 130  Puckle, O. 
S., 77, 99  Pulse recurrence frequency  es (PRE), 50 Pulse-shaper, 85  QM (DEcCA), 127  ‘RADAR,’ meaning of the word,  32  Radio waves, speed of, 3  Randall, Professor J. T., 27,  112, II3  Range-markers, electrical, IOI  Ratcliffe, J. A., 29  » Reeves, A. 
H., 29 (gerry  3 a,  af. : rf oe  &  we  " aon *  »'  Py  se HOW RADAR WORKS  Rowe, A. P., 22, 24, 39  Rushforth, L., Ir3  SCIENTIFIC AND INDUSTRIAL  aaa DEPARTMENT OF,  I  SCS-51, 160  Skiatron, 68, III  Skinner, Dr i. 
W. B., 27, 112  Southern Venturer, the, radar  system in, 130  Spark-gap switch, 125  Split display, 102-103  Square-wave producers, 89  Strobe, 42  Sutton, Dr R. W., 28, 113  TAYLOR, Dr D., 26  Taylor, Dr Hoyt, 19  Thyratron, 75, 76  Time-bases, 72 et seq. 
 Tizard, Sir Henry, 22, 25  Transit time, 115 ~  Transitron, 93  “Triggering,” 45 Tuve, Dr Merle, 20  U.S. NAvy, pioneer radar in,  19-20  WATSON-WATT, SIR ROBERT,  21, 22-25; 53  Wave-guide, 114, 122  Wilkins, A. F., 24, 25  Willemite, 61  Williams, F. 
C., 29  Willshaw, W. B., 113  Wimperis, H. E., 22  *X? PLATES, 67  YounG, Leo C., 19  ‘Y° plates, 67  a FACTORS, 47  -  . 
. 