1CHAPTER 1 — BASIC RADAR PRINCIPLES AND GENERAL CHARACTERISTICS INTRODUCTION The word radar is an acronym derived from the phrase RAdioDetection AndRangingandappliestoelectronicequipmentdesignedfordetectingand tracking objects (targets) at considerable distances.
The basic principlebehind radar is simple - extremely short bursts of radio energy (traveling atthe speed of light) are transmitted, reﬂected off a target and then returned asan echo.
Radar makes use of a phenomenon we have all observed, that of the ECHO PRINCIPLE.
To illustrate this principle, if a ship’s whistle weresounded in the middle of the ocean, the sound waves would dissipate theirenergy as they traveled outward and at some point would disappear entirely.If, however the whistle sounded near an object such as a cliff some of theradiated sound waves would be reﬂected back to the ship as an echo.
The form of electromagnetic signal radiated by the radar depends upon the type of information needed about the target.
Radar, as designed formarine navigation applications, is pulse modulated.
Pulse-modulated radarcan determine the distance to a target by measuring the time required for anextremely short burst of radio-frequency (r-f) energy to travel to the targetand return to its source as a reﬂected echo.
Directional antennas are used fortransmitting the pulse and receiving the reﬂected echo, thereby allowingdetermination of the direction or bearing of the target echo.
Once time and bearing are measured, these targets or echoes are calculated and displayed on the radar display.
The radar display provides theoperator a birds eye view of where other targets are relative to own ship.
Radar is an active device.
It utilizes its own radio energy to detect and track the target.
It does not depend on energy radiated by the target itself.The ability to detect a target at great distances and to locate its position withhigh accuracy are two of the chief attributes of radar.There are two groups of radio frequencies allocated by international standardsforusebycivilmarineradarsystems.TheﬁrstgroupliesintheX-band which corresponds to a wavelength of 3 cm.
and has a frequency rangebetween 9300 and 9500 MHz.
The second group lies in the S-band with awavelength of 10 cm.
and has a frequency range of 2900 to 3100 MHz.
It issometimes more convenient to speak in terms of wavelength rather thanfrequency because of the high values associated with the latter.
A fundamental requirement of marine radar is that of directional transmission and reception, which is achieved by producing a narrowhorizontal beam.
In order to focus the radio energy into a narrow beam thelaws of physics prevail and the wavelength must be within the fewcentimeters range.
The radio-frequency energy transmitted by pulse-modulated radars consists of a series of equally spaced pulses, frequently having durations ofabout 1 microsecond or less, separated by very short but relatively longperiods during which no energy is transmitted.
The terms PULSE-MODULATED RADAR and PULSE MODULATION are derived from thismethod of transmission of radio-frequency energy.
If the distance to a target is to be determined by measuring the time required for one pulse to travel to the target and return as a reﬂected echo, itis necessary that this cycle be completed before the pulse immediatelyfollowing is transmitted.
This is the reason why the transmitted pulses mustbe separated by relatively long nontransmitting time periods.
Otherwise,transmission would occur during reception of the reﬂected echo of theprecedingpulse.Usingthesameantennaforbothtransmittingandreceiving,the relatively weak reﬂected echo would be blocked by the relatively strongtransmitted pulse. 2A BRIEF HISTORY Radar, the device which is used for detection and ranging of contacts, independent of time and weather conditions, was one of the most importantscientiﬁc discoveries and technological developments that emerged fromWWII.
It’s development, like that of most great inventions was mothered bynecessity.
Behind the development of radar lay more than a century of radiodevelopment.
The basic idea of radar can be traced back to the classical experiments on electromagnetic radiation conducted by the scientiﬁc community in the 19thcentury.
In the early 1800s, an English physicist, Michael Faraday,demonstrated that electric current produces a magnetic ﬁeld and that theenergyinthisﬁeldreturnstothecircuitwhenthecurrentisstopped.In1864the Scottish physicist, James Maxwell, had formulated the general equationsof the electromagnetic ﬁeld, determining that both light and radio waves areactually electromagnetic waves governed by the same fundamental laws buthaving different frequencies.
He proved mathematically that any electricaldisturbancecouldproduceaneffectataconsiderabledistancefromthepointof origin and that this electromagnetic energy travels outward from thesource in the form of waves moving at the speed of light.
At the time of Maxwell’s conclusions there was no available means to propagate or detect electromagnetic waves.
It was not until 1886 thatMaxwell’s theories were tested.
The German physicist, Heinrich Hertz, setout to validate Maxwell’s general equations.
Hertz was able to show thatelectromagnetic waves travelled in straight lines and that they can bereﬂected from a metal object just as light waves are reﬂected by a mirror.
In1904theGermanengineer,ChristianHulsmeyerobtainedapatentfora device capable of detecting ships.
This device was demonstrated to theGerman navy, but failed to arouse interest probably due in part to its verylimited range.
In 1922, Guglielmo Marconi drew attention to the work ofHertzandrepeatedHertz’sexperimentsandeventuallyproposedinprinciplewhat we know now as marine radar.
The ﬁrst observation of the radar effect was made in 1922 by Dr.
Albert Taylor of the Naval Research Laboratory (NRL) in Washington, D.C.
Dr.Taylor observed that a ship passing between a radio transmitter and receiverreﬂected some of the waves back to the transmitter.
In 1930 further tests atthe NRL observed that a plane ﬂying through a beam from a transmittingantenna caused a ﬂuctuation in the signal.
The importance of radar for thepurposes of tracking aircraft and ships ﬁnally became recognized when scientists and engineers learned how to use a single antenna for transmittingand receiving.
Due to the prevailing political and military conditions at the time, the UnitedStates,GreatBritain,SovietUnion,France,Italy,GermanyandJapanall began experimenting with radar, with varying degrees of success.
Duringthe 1930s, efforts were made by several countries to use radio echo foraircraft detection.
Most of these countries were able to produce some formof operational radar equipment for use by the military at the start of the warin 1939.
At the beginning of WWII, Germany had progressed further in radar development and employed radar units on the ground and in the air fordefense against allied aircraft.
The ability of radar to serve as an earlywarning device proved valuable as a defensive tool for the British and theGermans.
Although radar was employed at the start of the war as a defensive weapon,asthewarprogressed,itcametobeusedforoffensivepurposestoo.By the middle of 1941 radar had been employed to track aircraftautomatically in azimuth and elevation and later to track targetsautomatically in range.
All of the proven radar systems developed prior to the war were in the VHF band.
These low frequency radar signals are subject to severallimitations, but despite the drawbacks, VHF represented the frontier of radartechnology.
Late in 1939, British physicists created the cavity magnetronoscillator which operated at higher frequencies.
It was the magnetron thatmademicrowaveradarareality.Itwasthistechnologicaladvancethatmarksthe beginning of modern radar.
Following the war, progress in radar technology slowed as post war prioritiesweredirectedelsewhere.Inthe1950snewandbetterradarsystemsbegan to emerge and the beneﬁts to the civil mariner became moreimportant.
Although radar technology has been advanced primarily by themilitary, the beneﬁts have spilled over into many important civilianapplications,ofwhichaprincipalexampleisthesafetyofmarinenavigation.The same fundamental principles discovered nearly a century ago and thebasic data they provide, namely target range and bearing, still apply totoday’s modern marine radar units. 3RADAR PROPAGATION CHARACTERISTICS THE RADIO WAVE To appreciate the capabilities and limitations of a marine radar and to be able to use it to full advantage, it is necessary to comprehend thecharacteristics and behavior of radio waves and to grasp the principles oftheir generation and reception, including the echo display as seen by theobserver.
Understanding the theory behind the target presentation on theradar scope will provide the radar observer a better understanding of the artand science of radar interpretation.
Radar (radio) waves, emitted in pulses of electromagnetic energy in the radio-frequency band 3,000 to 10,000 MHz used for shipborne navigationalradar, have many characteristics similar to those of other waves.
Like lightwaves of much higher frequency, radar waves tend to travel in straight linesor rays at speeds approximating that of light.
Also, like light waves, radarwaves are subject to refraction or bending in the atmosphere.
Radio-frequency energy travels at the speed of light, approximately 162,000 nauticalmiles persecond; therefore,the time requiredfor apulse totravel to the target and return to its source is a measure of the distance to thetarget.
Since the radio-frequency energy makes a round trip, only half thetime of travel determines the distance to the target.
The round trip time isaccounted for in the calibration of the radar.
The speed of a pulse of radio-frequency energy is so fast that the pulse can circumnavigate the earth at the equator more than 7 times in 1 second.
It shouldbe obvious that in measuring the time of travel of a radar pulse or signal fromone ship to a target ship, the measurement must be an extremely short timeinterval.
For this reason, the MICROSECOND ( µsec) is used as a measure of time for radar applications.
The microsecond is one-millionth part of 1 second,i.e., there are 1,000,000 microseconds in 1 second of time.
Radio waves have characteristics common to other forms of wave motion such as ocean waves.
Wave motion consists of a succession of crests andtroughs which follow one another at equal intervals and move along at aconstant speed.
Like waves in the sea, radar waves have energy, frequency,amplitude, wavelength, and rate of travel.
Whereas waves in the sea havemechanical energy, radar waves have electromagnetic energy, usuallyexpressed in watt units of power.
An important characteristic of radio wavesin connection with radar is polarization.
This electromagnetic energy hasassociated electric and magnetic ﬁelds, the directions of which are at rightangles to each other.
The orientation of the ELECTRIC AXIS in spaceestablishes what is known as the POLARIZATION of the wave.
Horizontalpolarization is normally used with navigational radars, i.e., the direction ofthe electric axis is horizontal in space.
Horizontal polarization has been found to be the most satisfactory type of polarization for navigational radarsin that stronger echoes are received from the targets normally used withthese radars when the electric axis is horizontal.
Each pulse of energy transmitted during a few tenths of a microsecond or a few microseconds contains hundreds of complete oscillations.
A CYCLEis one complete oscillation or one complete wave, i.e., that part of the wavemotion passing zero in one direction until it next passes zero in the samedirection (see ﬁgure 1.1).
The FREQUENCY is the number of cyclescompleted per second.
The unit now being used for frequency in cycles persecondistheHERTZ.Onehertzisonecyclepersecond;onekilohertz(kHz)is one thousand cycles per second; one megahertz (MHz) is one millioncycles per second.
WAVELENGTH is the distance along the direction of propagation between successive crests or troughs.
When one cycle has been completed,the wave has traveled one wavelength.
The AMPLITUDE is the maximum displacement of the wave from its mean or zero value.
Since the speed of radar waves is constant at 300,000 kilometers per second, there is a deﬁnite relationship between frequency and wavelength.
Figure 1.1 - Wave.
 4The CYCLE is a complete alternation or oscillation from one crest through a trough to the next crest.
When the wavelength is 3.2 centimeters (0.000032 km), THE RADAR BEAM The pulses of r-f energy emitted from the feedhorn at the focal point of a reﬂector or emitted and radiated directly from the slots of a slottedwaveguide antenna would, for the most part, form a single lobe-shapedpattern of radiation if emitted in free space.
Figure 1.2 illustrates this freespace radiation pattern, including the undesirable minor lobes or SIDELOBES associated with practical antenna design.
Because of the largedifferences in the various dimensions of the radiation pattern, ﬁgure 1.2 isnecessarily distorted.Although the radiated energy is concentrated or focused into a relatively narrow main beam by the antenna, similar to a beam of light from a flashlight,there is no clearly defined envelope of the energy radiated.
While the energy isconcentrated along the axis of the beam, its strength decreases with distancealong the axis.
The strength of the energy decreases rapidly in directions awayfrom the beam axis.
The power in watts at points in the beam is inverselyproportionaltothesquareofthedistance.Therefore,thepowerat3milesisonly1/9th of the power at 1 mile in a given direction.
The field intensity in volts atpoints in the beam is inversely proportional to the distance.
Therefore, thevoltageat2milesisonlyone-halfthevoltageat1mileinagivendirection.Withthe rapid decrease in the amount of radiated energy in directions away from theaxis and in conjunction with the rapid decreases of this energy with distance, itfollows that practical limits of power or voltage may be used to define thedimensions of the radar beam or to establish its envelope of useful energy.
Beam Width The three-dimensional radar beam is normally deﬁned by its horizontal and vertical beam widths.
Beam width is the angular width of a radar beambetween points within which the ﬁeld strength or power is greater thanarbitrarily selected lower limits of ﬁeld strength or power.
There are two limiting values, expressed either in terms of ﬁeld intensity or power ratios, used conventionally to deﬁne beam width.
One conventiondeﬁnes beam width as the angular width between points at which the ﬁeldstrength is 71 percent of its maximum value.
Expressed in terms of powerratio, this convention deﬁnes beam width as the angular width betweenHALF-POWER POINTS.
The other convention deﬁnes beam width as theangular width between points at which the ﬁeld strength is 50 percent of itsmaximum value.
Expressed in terms of power ratio, the latter conventiondeﬁnes beam width as the angular width between QUARTER-POWERPOINTS.
The half-power ratio is the most frequently used convention.
Which convention has been used in stating the beam width may be identiﬁed fromthe decibel (dB) ﬁgure normally included with the speciﬁcations of a radarset.
Half power and 71 percent ﬁeld strength correspond to -3 dB; quarterpower and 50 percent ﬁeld strength correspond to -6 dB.
Figure 1.2 - Free space radiation pattern.frequencyspeed of radar waves wavelength--------------------------------------------------= frequency300 000 km, ondsec---------------------------------0.000032 km cycle---------------------------------- - ÷ frequency 9375megahertz= =  5The radiation diagram illustrated in ﬁgure 1.3 depicts relative values of power in the same plane existing at the same distances from the antenna orthe origin of the radar beam.
Maximum power is in the direction of the axisofthebeam.Powervaluesdiminishrapidlyindirectionsawayfromtheaxis.The beam width in this case is taken as the angle between the half-powerpoints.
For a given amount of transmitted power, the main lobe of the radar beam extends to a greater distance at a given power level with greaterconcentration of power in narrower beam widths.
To increase maximumdetection range capabilities, the energy is concentrated into as narrow abeam as is feasible.
Because of practical considerations related to targetdetectionanddiscrimination,onlythehorizontalbeamwidthisquitenarrow,typical values being between about 0.65˚ to 2.0˚.
The vertical beam width isrelatively broad, typical values being between about 15˚ to 30˚.
The beam width is dependent upon the frequency or wavelength of the transmitted energy, antenna design, and the dimensions of the antenna.
For a given antenna size (antenna aperture), narrower beam widths are obtained when using shorter wavelengths.
For a given wavelength, narrowerbeam widths are obtained when using larger antennas.
The slotted waveguide antenna has largely eliminated the side-lobe problem.
EFFECT OF SEA SURFACE ON RADAR BEAM With radar waves being propagated in the vicinity of the surface of the sea,themainlobeoftheradarbeam,asawhole,iscomposedofanumberofseparate lobes as opposed to the single lobe-shaped pattern of radiation asemitted in free space.
This phenomenon is the result of interference betweenradar waves directly transmitted and those waves which are reﬂected from the surface of the sea.
The vertical beam widths of navigational radars aresuch that during normal transmission, radar waves will strike the surface ofthe sea at points from near the antenna (depending upon antenna height andverticalbeamwidth)totheradarhorizon.Theindirectwaves(seeﬁgure1.4)reﬂected from the surface of the sea may, on rejoining the direct waves,either reinforce or cancel the direct waves depending upon whether they areinphaseoroutofphasewiththedirectwaves,respectively.Wherethedirectand indirect waves are exactly in phase, i.e., the crests and troughs of thewavescoincide,hyperboliclinesofmaximumradiationknownasLINESOFMAXIMA are produced.
Where the direct and indirect waves are exactly ofopposite phase, i.e., the trough of one wave coincides with the crest of theother wave, hyperbolic lines of minimum radiation known as LINES OFMINIMA are produced.
Along directions away from the antenna, the directandindirectwaveswillgraduallycomeintoandpassoutofphase,producinglobes of useful radiation separated by regions within which, for practicalpurposes, there is no useful radiation.
Figure 1.5 illustrates the lower region of the INTERFERENCE PATTERN of a representative navigational radar.
Since the ﬁrst line ofminima is at the surface of the sea, the ﬁrst region of minimum radiation orenergy is adjacent to the sea’s surface.
From ﬁgure 1.5 it should be obvious that if r-f energy is to be reﬂected from a target, the target must extend somewhat above the radar horizon, theamount of extension being dependent upon the reﬂecting properties of thetarget.
A VERTICAL-PLANE COVERAGE DIAGRAM as illustrated in ﬁgure 1.5isusedbyradardesignersandanalyststopredictregionsinwhichtargetswill and will not be detected.
Ofcourse,onthesmallpageofabookitwouldbeimpossibletoillustrate the coverage of a radar beam to scale with antenna height being in feet andthe lengths of the various lobes of the interference pattern being in miles.
Inproviding greater clarity of the presentation of the lobes, non-lineargraduations of the arc of the vertical beam width are used.
Figure 1.3 - Radiation diagram.
Figure 1.4 - Direct and indirect waves.
 6Figure 1.5 - Vertical-plane coverage diagram (3050 MHz, antenna height 125 feet, wave height 4 feet).
 7Figure 1.6 - Vertical-plane coverage diagram (1000 MHz, vertical beam width 10˚, antenna height 80 feet, wave height 0 feet).
 8Thelengthsofthevariouslobesillustratedinﬁgures1.5and1.6shouldbe given no special signiﬁcance with respect to the range capabilities of aparticular radar set.
As with other coverage diagrams, the lobes are drawn toconnect points of equal ﬁeld intensities.
Longer and broader lobes may bedrawn connecting points of equal, but lesser, ﬁeld intensities.
The vertical-plane coverage diagram as illustrated in ﬁgure 1.6, while not representative of navigational radars, does indicate that at the lowerfrequencies the interference pattern is more coarse than the patterns forhigher frequencies.
This particular diagram was constructed with theassumption that the free space useful range of the radar beam was 50nauticalmiles.Fromthisdiagramitisseenthattherangesoftheusefullobesare extended to considerably greater distances because of the reinforcementof the direct radar waves by the indirect waves.
Also, the elevation of thelowest lobe is higher than it would be for a higher frequency.
Figure 1.6 also illustrates the vertical view of the undesirable side lobes associated withpractical antenna design.
In examining these radiation coverage diagrams,the reader should keep in mind that the radiation pattern is three-dimensional.
Antennaheightaswellasfrequencyorwavelengthgovernsthenumberof lobesintheinterferencepattern.Thenumberofthelobesandtheﬁnenessofthe interference pattern increase with antenna height.
Increased antennaheight as well as increases in frequency tends to lower the lobes of theinterference pattern.
The pitch and roll of the ship radiating does not affect the structure of the interference pattern. 9ATMOSPHERIC FACTORS AFFECTING THE RADAR HORIZON THE RADAR HORIZON The affect of the atmosphere on the horizon is a further factor which should be taken into account when assessing the likelihood of detecting aparticular target and especially where the coastline is expected.
Generally, radar waves are restricted in the recording of the range of low- lying objects by the radar horizon.
The range of the radar horizon dependsontheheightoftheantennaandontheamountofbendingoftheradarwave.Thebendingiscaused bydiffractionandrefraction.Diffraction isapropertyof the electromagnetic wave itself.
Refraction is due to the prevailingatmospheric conditions.
There is, therefore, a deﬁnite radar horizon.
DIFFRACTION Diffraction is the bending of a wave as it passes an obstruction.
Because of diffraction there is some illumination of the region behind an obstructionor target by the radar beam.
Diffraction effects are greater at the lowerfrequencies.
Thus, the radar beam of a lower frequency radar tends toilluminatemoreoftheshadowregionbehindanobstructionthanthebeamofradar of higher frequency or shorter wavelength.
REFRACTION Refraction affects the range at which objects are detected.
The phenomenon of refraction should be well-known to every navigation ofﬁcer.Refraction takes place when the velocity of the wave is changed.
This canhappen when the wave front passes the boundary of two substances ofdifferingdensities.Onesubstanceoffersmoreresistancetothewavethantheother and therefore the velocity of the wave will change.
Like light rays,radar rays are subject to bending or refraction in the atmosphere resultingfrom travel through regions of different density.
However, radar rays arerefractedslightlymorethanlightraysbecauseofthefrequenciesused.Iftheradar waves actually traveled in straight lines or rays, the distance to thehorizon grazed by these rays would be dependent only on the height of theantenna, assuming adequate power for the rays to reach this horizon.Without the effects of refraction, the distance to the RADAR HORIZONwould be the same as that of the geometrical horizon for the antenna height.Standard Atmospheric Conditions The distance to the radar horizon, ignoring refraction can be expressed in the following formula.
Where h is the height of the antenna in feet, thedistance, d, to the radar horizon in nautical miles, assuming standardatmospheric conditions, may be found as follows: With the distances to the geometrical or ordinary horizon being 1.06 and the distance to the visible or optical horizon being 1.15 .
We see thatthe range of the radar horizon is greater than that of the optical horizon,which again is greater than that of the geometrical horizon.
Thus, like lightrays in the standard atmosphere, radar rays are bent or refracted slightlydownwards approximating the curvature of the earth (see ﬁgure 1.7).
The distance to the radar horizon does not in itself limit the distance from which echoes may be received from targets.
Assuming that adequate poweristransmitted,echoesmaybereceivedfromtargetsbeyondtheradarhorizonif their reﬂecting surfaces extend above it.
Note that the distance to the radarhorizon is the distance at which the radar rays graze the surface of the earth.
In the preceding discussion standard atmospheric conditions were assumed.
The standard atmosphere is a hypothetical vertical distribution ofatmospheric temperature, pressure, and density which is taken to berepresentative of the atmosphere for various purposes.
Standard conditions are precisely deﬁned as follows: Figure 1.7 - Refraction.d 1.22 h= hh  10Pressure = 1013 mb decreasing at 36 mb/1000 ft of height Temperature = 15˚C decreasing at 2˚C/1000 ft of heightRelative Humidity = 60% and constant with height.
These conditions give a refractive index of 1.00325 which decreases at 0.00013 units/1000 ft of height.
The deﬁnition of “standard” conditionsrelates to the vertical composition of the atmosphere.
Mariners may not beabletoobtainapreciseknowledgeofthisandsomustrelyonamoregeneralappreciationoftheweatherconditions,theareaoftheworld,andofthetimeof the year.
While the atmospheric conditions at any one locality during a given season may differ considerably from standard atmospheric conditions, theslightly downward bending of the light and radar rays may be described asthe typical case.
While the formula for the distance to the radar horizon is based upon a wavelength of 3cm, this formula may be used in the computation of the distance to the radar horizon for otherwavelengths used with navigational radar.
The value so determined shouldbe considered only as an approximate value because the mariner generallyhas no means of knowing what actual refraction conditions exist.
Sub-refraction The distance to the radar horizon is reduced.
This condition is not as commonassuper-refraction.Sub-refractioncanoccurinpolarregionswhereArcticwindsblowoverwaterwhereawarmcurrentisprevalent.Ifalayerofcold, moist air overrides a shallow layer of warm, dry air, a condition knownas SUB-REFRACTION may occur (see ﬁgure 1.8).
The effect of sub-refraction is to bend the radar rays upward and thus decrease the maximumranges at which targets may be detected.
Sub-refraction also affects minimum ranges and may result in failure to detect low lying targets at short range.
It is important to note that sub-refraction may involve an element of danger to shipping where small vesselsand ice may go undetected.
The ofﬁcer in charge of the watch should beespecially mindful of this condition and extra precautions be administeredsuch as a reduction in speed and the posting of extra lookouts.Super-refraction The distance to the radar horizon is extended.
In calm weather with no turbulence when there is an upper layer of warm, dry air over a surface layerof cold, moist air, a condition known as SUPER-REFRACTION may occur(see ﬁgure 1.9).
For this condition to exist, the weather must be calm withlittle or no turbulence, otherwise the layers of different densities will mixand the boundary conditions disappear.
The effect of super-refraction willincreasethedownwardbendingoftheradarraysandthusincreasetherangesat which targets may be detected.
Super-refraction frequently occurs in thetropics when a warm land breeze blows over cooler ocean currents.
It isespecially noticeable on the longer range scales.d(1.22 h) = Figure 1.8 - Sub-refraction.
Figure 1.9 - Super-refraction.
 11Extra Super-refraction or Ducting Mostradaroperatorsareawarethatatcertaintimestheyareabletodetect targets atextremelylong ranges, but atother times theycannot detect targetswithin visual ranges, even though their radars may be in top operatingcondition in both instances.
These phenomena occur during extreme cases of super-refraction.
Energy radiated at angles of 1˚ or less may be trapped in a layer of the atmospherecalled a SURFACE RADIO DUCT.
In the surface radio duct illustrated inﬁgure 1.10, the radar rays are refracted downward to the surface of the sea,reﬂected upward, refracted downward again within the duct, and so oncontinuously.
The energy trapped by the duct suffers little loss; thus, targets may be detected at exceptionally long ranges.
Surface targets have been detected atranges in excess of 1,400 miles with relatively low-powered equipment.There is a great loss in the energy of the rays escaping the duct, thusreducing the chances for detection of targets above the duct.
Ducting sometimes reduces the effective radar range.
If the antenna is below a duct, it is improbable that targets above the duct will be detected.
Ininstances of extremely low-level ducts when the antenna is above the duct,surface targets lying below the duct may not be detected.
The latter situationdoes not occur very often.
Ducting Areas Although ducting conditions can happen any place in the world, the climate and weather in some areas make their occurrence more likely.
Insome parts of the world, particularly those having a monsoonal climate,variationinthedegreeofductingismainlyseasonal,andgreatchangesfrom daytodaymaynottakeplace.Inotherpartsoftheworld,especiallythoseinwhich low barometric pressure areas recur often, the extent of nonstandardpropagation conditions varies considerably from day to day.
Figure 1.11 illustrates the different places in the world where known ductingoccursfrequently.Refertothemaptoseetheirlocationinrelationtothe climate that exists in each area during different seasons of the year.
Atlantic Coast of the United States (Area 1).
Ducting is common in summer along the northern part of the coast, but in the Florida region theseasonal trend is the reverse, with a maximum in the winter season.
Western Europe (Area 2).
A pronounced maximum of ducting conditions exists in the summer months on the eastern side of the Atlantic around theBritish Isles and in the North Sea.
Mediterranean Region (Area 3).
Available reports indicate that the seasonal variation in the Mediterranean region is very marked, with ductingmore or less the rule in summer.
Conditions are approximately standard inwinter.
Ducting in the central Mediterranean area is caused by the ﬂow ofwarm, dry air from the south, which moves across the sea and thus providesan excellent opportunity for the formation of ducts.
In winter, however, theclimate in the central Mediterranean is more or less the same as Atlanticconditions, therefore not favorable for duct formation.
Arabian Sea (Area 4).
The dominating meteorological factor in the Arabian Sea region is the southwest monsoon, which blows from early June to mid-September and covers the whole Arabian Sea with moist-equatorial air up toconsiderable heights.
When this meteorological situation is developed fully, nooccurrence of ducting is to be expected.
During the dry season, on the otherhand,conditionsaredifferent.Ductingthenistherule,nottheexception,andonsome occasions extremely long ranges (up to 1,500 miles) have been observedon fixed targets.
When the southwest monsoon begins early in June, ducting disappears on the Indian side of the Arabian Sea.
Along the western coasts, however,conditions favoring ducting may still linger.
The Strait of Hormuz (PersianGulf)isparticularlyinterestingasthemonsoontherehastocontendwiththeshamal(anorthwesterlywind)overIraqandthePersianGulffromthenorth.Thestraititselfliesattheboundarybetweenthetwowindsystems;afrontisformed with the warm, dry shamal on top and the colder, humid monsoonunderneath.
Consequently, conditions are favorable for the formation of anextensive duct, which is of great importance to radar operation in the Straitof Hormuz.
Bay of Bengal (Area 5).
The seasonal trend of ducting conditions in the Bay of Bengal is the same as in the Arabian Sea, with standard conditionsduring the summer southwest monsoon.
Ducting is found during the dryseason.
Figure 1.10 - Ducting.
 12Figure 1.11 - Ducting areas.
 13Paciﬁc Ocean (Area 6).
Frequent occurrences of ducting around Guadalcanal, the east coast of Australia, and around New Guinea and Koreahave been experienced.
Observations along the Paciﬁc coast of the UnitedStates indicate frequent ducting, but no clear indication of its seasonal trendis available.
Meteorological conditions in the Yellow Sea and Sea of Japan,including the island of Honshu, are approximately like those of thenortheastern coast of the United States.
Therefore, ducting in this areashould be common in the summer.
Conditions in the South China Sea approximatethoseoffthesoutheasterncoastoftheUnitedStatesonlyduringthe winter months, when ducting can be expected.
During the rest of theyear, the Asiatic monsoon modiﬁes the climate in this area, but noinformation is available on the prevalence of ducting during this time.
Tradewinds in the Paciﬁc quite generally lead to the formation of rather low ductsover the open ocean.
WEATHER FACTORS AFFECTING THE RADAR HORIZON The usual effects of weather are to reduce the ranges at which targets can be detected and to produce unwanted echoes on the radarscope which mayobscure the returns from important targets or from targets which may bedangerous to one’s ship.
The reduction of intensity of the wave experiencedalong its path is known as attenuation.
Attenuation is caused by the absorption and scattering of energy by the various forms of precipitation.
The amount of attenuation caused by each ofthe various factors depends to a substantial degree on the radar wavelength.It causes a decrease in echo strength.
Attenuation is greater at the higherfrequencies or shorter wavelengths.
Attenuation by rain, fog, clouds, hail, snow, and dust The amount of attenuation caused by these weather factors is dependent upon the amount of water, liquid or frozen, present in a unit volume of airand upon the temperature.
Therefore, as one would expect, the affects candiffer widely.
The further the radar wave and returning echo must travelthrough this medium then the greater will be the attenuation and subsequentdecrease in detection range.
This is the case whether the target is in oroutside the precipitation.
A certain amount of attenuation takes place evenwhen radar waves travel through a clear atmosphere.
The affect will not benoticeable to the radar observer.
The effect of precipitation starts to becomeof practical signiﬁcance at wavelengths shorter than 10cm.
In any given setof precipitation conditions, the (S-band) or 10cm will suffer less attenuationthan the (X-band) or 3cm.Rain In the case of rain the particles which affect the scattering and attenuation take the form of water droplets.
It is possible to relate the amount ofattenuation to the rate of precipitation.
If the size of the droplet is anappreciable proportion of the 3cm wavelength, strong clutter echoes will beproduced and there will be serious loss of energy due to scattering andattenuation.
If the target is within the area of rainfall, any echoes fromraindrops will further decrease its detection range.
Weaker target responses,as from small vessels and buoys, will be undetectable if their echoes are notstronger than that of the rain.
A very heavy rainstorm, like those sometimesencountered in the tropics, can obliterate most of the (X-band) radar picture.
Continuous rainfall over a large area will make the center part of the screen brighter than the rest and the rain clutter, moving along with the ship,looks similar to sea clutter.
It can be clearly seen on long range scales.
Thisisduetoagradualdecreaseinreturningpowerasthepulsepenetratesfurtherinto the rain area.
Fog In most cases fog does not actually produce echoes on the radar display, but a very dense fogbank which arises in polar regions may produce asigniﬁcant reduction in detection range.
A vessel encountering areas known for industrial pollution in the form of smog may ﬁnd a somewhat higher degree of attenuation than sea fog. 14Clouds The water droplets which form clouds are too small to produce a detectable response at the 3cm wavelength.
If there is precipitation in thecloud then the operator can expect a detectable echo.
Hail With respect to water, hail which is essentially frozen rain reﬂects radar energy less effectively than water.
Therefore, in general the clutter andattenuation from hail are likely to prove less detectable than that from rain.
Snow Similar to the effects of hail, the overall effect of clutter on the picture is less than that due to rain.
Falling snow will only be observed on the displaysof3cmexceptduringheavysnowfallwhereattenuationcanbeobservedona10cm set.
The strength of echoes from snow depends upon the size of the snowﬂake and the rate of precipitation.
For practical purposes, however, the signiﬁcantfactor is the rate of precipitation, because the water content of the heaviest snowfall will very rarely equal that of even moderate rain.
It is important to keep in mind that in areas receiving and collecting snowfall and where the snow is collecting on possible danger targets it mayrender them less detectable.
Accumulation of snow produces a limitedabsorption characteristic and reduces the detection range of an otherwisestrong target.
Dust There is a general reduction in radar detection in the presence of dust and sandstorms.
On the basis of particle size, detectable responses are extremelyunlikely and the operator can expect a low level of attenuation.
Unusual Propagation Conditions Similar to light waves, radar waves going through the earth’s atmosphere are subject to refraction and normally bend slightly with the curvature of theearth.
Certain atmospheric conditions will produce a modiﬁcation of thisnormal refraction. 15A BASIC RADAR SYSTEM RADAR SYSTEM CONSTANTS Beforedescribingthefunctionsofthecomponentsofamarineradar,thereare certain constants associated with any radar system that will be discussed.
Theseare carrier frequency, pulse repetition frequency, pulse length, and powerrelation.
The choice of these constants for a particular system is determined byits operational use, the accuracy required, the range to be covered, the practicalphysical size, and the problems of generating and receiving the signals.
Carrier Frequency The carrier frequency is the frequency at which the radio-frequency energy is generated.
The principal factors inﬂuencing the selection of thecarrier frequency are the desired directivity and the generation and receptionof the necessary microwave radio-frequency energy.
For the determination of direction and for the concentration of the transmittedenergysothatagreaterportionofitisuseful,theantennashouldbe highly directive.
The higher the carrier frequency, the shorter thewavelength and hence the smaller is the antenna required for a givensharpness of the pattern of radiated energy.
The problem of generating and amplifying reasonable amounts of radio- frequency energy at extremely high frequencies is complicated by thephysical construction of the tubes to be used.
The common tube becomesimpractical for certain functions and must be replaced by tubes of specialdesign.
Among these are the klystron andmagnetron.
Since it is very difﬁcult to amplify the radio-frequency echoes of the carrier wave, radio-frequency ampliﬁers are not used.
Instead, the frequencyof the incoming signals (echoes) is mixed (heterodyned) with that of a localoscillator in a crystal mixer to produce a difference frequency called the intermediate frequency.
This intermediate frequency is low enough to be ampliﬁed in suitable intermediate frequency  ampliﬁer stages in the receiver.
Pulse Repetition Frequency The Pulse Repetition Frequency (PRF), sometimes referred to as Pulse RepetitionRate(PRR)isthenumberofpulsestransmittedpersecond.Somecharacteristic values may be 600, 1000, 1500, 2200 and 3000 pulses persecond.
The majority of modern marine radars operate within a range of 400to 4000 pulses per second.
If the distance to a target is to be determined by measuring the time required for one pulse to travel to the target and return as a reﬂected echo, itis necessary that this cycle be completed before the pulse immediatelyfollowing is transmitted.
This is the reason why the transmitted pulses mustbe separated by relatively long nontransmitting time periods.
Otherwise,transmission would occur during reception of the reﬂected echo of theprecedingpulse.Usingthesameantennaforbothtransmittingandreceiving,the relatively weak reﬂected echo would be blocked by the relatively strongtransmitted pulse.
Sufﬁcient time must be allowed between each transmitted pulse for an echo to return from any target located within the maximum workable rangeof the system.
Otherwise, the reception of the echoes from the more distanttargets would be blocked by succeeding transmitted pulses.
The maximummeasurable range of a radar set depends upon the peak power in relation tothe pulse repetition rate.
Assuming sufﬁcient power is radiated, themaximum range at which echoes can be received may be increased throughlowering the pulse repetition rate to provide more time between transmittedpulses.
The PRR must be high enough so that sufﬁcient pulses hit the targetand enough are returned to detect the target.
The maximum measurablerange, assuming that the echoes are strong enough for detection, can bedeterminedbydividing80,915(radarnauticalmilespersecond)bythePRR.
With the antenna being rotated, the beam of energy strikes a target for a relatively short time.
During this time, a sufﬁcient number of pulses must betransmitted in order to receive sufﬁcient echoes to produce the necessaryindication on the radarscope.
With the antenna rotating at 15 revolutions perminute, a radar set having a PRR of 800 pulses per second will produceapproximately 9 pulses for each degree of antenna rotation.
ThePERSISTENCE of the radarscope, i.e., a measure of the time it retainsimages of echoes, and the rotational speed of the antenna, therefore,determine the lowest PRR that can be used.
Pulse Length Pulselengthisdeﬁnedasthedurationofthetransmittedradarpulseandis usually measured in microseconds.
The minimum range at which a target can be detected is determined largely by the pulse length.
If a target is so close to the transmitter that theecho is returned to the receiver before the transmission stops, the reception 16of the echo, obviously, will be masked by the transmitted pulse.
For example, a radar set having a pulse length of 1 microsecond will have aminimumrangeof164yards.Thismeansthattheechoofatargetwithinthisrange will not be seen on the radarscope because of being masked by thetransmitted pulse.
Since the radio-frequency energy travels at a speed of 161,829 nautical miles per second or 161,829 nautical miles in one million microseconds, thedistance the energy travels in 1 microsecond is approximately 0.162 nauticalmile or 328 yards.
Because the energy must make a round trip, the targetcannot be closer than 164 yards if its echo is to be seen on the radarscopewhile using a pulse length of 1 microsecond.
Consequently, relatively shortpulse lengths, about 0.1 microsecond, must be used for close-in ranging.
Many radar sets are designed for operation with both short and long pulse lengths.
Many of these radar sets are shifted automatically to the shorterpulselengthonselectingtheshorterrangescales.Ontheotherradarsets,theoperator must select the radar pulse length in accordance with the operatingconditions.
Radar sets have greater range capabilities while functioning withthe longer pulse length because a greater amount of energy is transmitted ineach pulse.
While maximum detection range capability is sacriﬁced when using the shorterpulselength,betterrangeaccuracyandrangeresolutionareobtained.With the shorter pulse, better deﬁnition of the target on the radar-scope isobtained; therefore, range accuracy is better.
RANGE RESOLUTION is ameasure of the capability of a radar set to detect the separation betweenthose targets on the same bearing but having small differences in range.
Ifthe leading edge of a pulse strikes a target at a slightly greater range whilethe trailing part of the pulse is still striking a closer target, it is obvious thatthe reﬂected echoes of the two targets will appear as a single elongatedimage on the radarscope.
Power Relation Theusefulpowerofthetransmitteristhatcontainedintheradiatedpulses and is called the PEAK POWER of the system.
Power is normally measuredas an average value over a relatively long period of time.
Because the radartransmitter is resting for a time that is long with respect to the operatingtime, the average power delivered during one cycle of operation is relativelylow compared with the peak power available during the pulse time.
A deﬁnite relationship exists between the average power dissipated over an extended period of time and the peak power developed during the pulsetime.
The PULSE REPETITION TIME, or the overall time of one cycle of operation, is the reciprocal of the pulse repetition rate (PRR).
Other factorsremaining constant, the longer the pulse length, the higher will be the average power; the longer the pulse repetition time, the lower will be theaverage power.
These general relationships are shown in ﬁgure 1.12.
The operating cycle of the radar transmitter can be described in terms of the fraction of the total time that radio-frequency energy is radiated.
Thistime relationship is called the DUTY CYCLE and may be represented asfollows: Foraradarhavingapulselengthof2microsecondsandapulserepetition rate of 500 cycles per second (pulse repetition time = 2,000 microseconds),the Figure 1.12 - Relationship of peak and average power.average power peak power-----------------------------------------pulse length pulse repetition time------------------------------------------------------------ - = duty cyclepulse length pulse repetition time------------------------------------------------------------ - = duty cycle2µsec 2000µsec,-------------------------- 0.001== 17Likewise, the ratio between the average power and peak power may be expressed in terms of the duty cycle.
In the foregoing example assume that the peak power is 200 kilowatts.
Therefore, for a period of 2 microseconds a peak power of 200 kilowatts issupplied to the antenna, while for the remaining 1998 microseconds thetransmitter output is zero.
Because average power is equal to peak power timesthe duty cycle, High peak power is desirable in order to produce a strong echo over the maximum range of the equipment.
Low average power enables thetransmitter tubes and circuit components to be made smaller and morecompact.
Thus, it is advantageous to have a low duty cycle.
The peak powerthat can be developed is dependent upon the interrelation between peak andaverage power, pulse length, and pulse repetition time, or duty cycle.
COMPONENTS AND SUMMARY OF FUNCTIONS Whilepulse-modulated radarsystemsvary greatlyindetail, theprinciples of operation are essentially the same for all systems.
Thus, a single basicradar system can be visualized in which the functional requirements areessentially the same as for all speciﬁc equipments.
The functional breakdown of a basic pulse-modulated radar system usually includes six major components, as shown in the block diagram,ﬁgure 1.13.
The functions of the components may be summarized asfollows: Thepower supply furnishes all AC and DC voltages necessary for the operation of the system components.
Themodulator produces the synchronizing signals that trigger the transmitter the required number of times per second.
It also triggers theindicator sweep and coordinates the other associated circuits.
Thetransmitter generates the radio-frequency energy in the form of short powerful pulses.
Theantennasystem takestheradio-frequencyenergyfromthetransmitter, radiates it in a highly directional beam, receives any returning echoes, andpasses these echoes to the receiver.
Thereceiverampliﬁes the weak radio-frequency pulses (echoes) returned by a target and reproduces them as video pulses passed to the indicator.
Theindicator produces a visual indication of the echo pulses in a manner that furnishes the desired information.duty cycleaverage power peak power-----------------------------------------= average power 200 kw x 0.001 0.2 kilowatt == Figure 1.13 - Block diagram of a basic pulse-modulated radar system  18FUNCTIONS OF COMPONENTS Power Supply In ﬁgure 1.13 the power supply is represented as a single block.
Functionally,thisblockisrepresentative.However,itisunlikelythatanyonesupply source could meet all the power requirements of a radar set.
Thedistribution of the physical components of a system may be such as to makeit impractical to group the power-supply circuits into a single physical unit.Different supplies are needed to meet the varying requirements of a systemand must be designed accordingly.
The power supply function is performedbyvarioustypesofpowersuppliesdistributedamongthecircuitcomponentsof a radar set.
In ﬁgure 1.14 the modulator, transmitter, and receiver are contained in the same chassis.
In this arrangement, the group of components is called aTRANSCEIVER.
(The term transceiver is an acronym composed from thewords TRANSmitter and reCEIVER.) Modulator The function of the modulator is to insure that all circuits connected with the radar system operate in a definite time relationship with each other and that thetime interval between pulses is of the proper length.
The modulatorsimultaneously sends a synchronizing signal to trigger the transmitter and theindicatorsweep.Thisestablishesacontrolforthepulserepetitionrate(PRR)andprovidesareferenceforthetimingofthetravelofatransmittedpulsetoatargetand its return as an echo.
Transmitter The transmitter is basically an oscillator which generates radio-frequency (r-f) energy in the form of short powerful pulses as a result of being turnedon and off by the triggering signals from the modulator.
Because of thefrequenciesandpoweroutputsrequired,thetransmitteroscillatorisaspecialtype known as a MAGNETRON.Transmitting and Receiving Antenna System The function of the antenna system is to take the r-f energy from the transmitter, radiate this energy in a highly directional beam, receive anyechoes or reﬂections of transmitted pulses from targets, and pass theseechoes to the receiver.
In carrying out this function the r-f pulses generated in the transmitter are conductedtoaFEEDHORNatthefocalpointofadirectionalreﬂector,fromwhich the energy is radiated in a highly directional pattern.
The transmittedand reﬂected energy (returned by the same dual purpose reﬂector) areconducted by a common path.
This common path is an electrical conductor known as a WAVEGUIDE.
A waveguide is hollow copper tubing, usually rectangular in cross section,having dimensions according to the wavelength or the carrier frequency, i.e.,the frequency of the oscillations within the transmitted pulse or echo.
Because of this use of a common waveguide, an electronic switch, a TRANSMIT-RECEIVE (TR) TUBE capable of rapidly switching fromtransmit to receive functions, and vice versa, must be utilized to protect thereceiver from damage by thepotent energy generated by the transmitter.
TheTR tube, as shown in ﬁgure 1.14 blocks the transmitter pulses from thereceiver.
During the relatively long periods when the transmitter is inactive,the TR tube permits the returning echoes to pass to the receiver.
To preventanyoftheveryweakechoesfrombeingabsorbedbythetransmitter,anotherdevice known as an ANTI-TR (A-TR) TUBE is used to block the passage ofthese echoes to the transmitter. 19Figure 1.14 - A basic radar system.
 20The feedhorn at the upper extremity of the waveguide directs the transmitted energy towards the reﬂector, which focuses this energy into anarrowbeam.Anyreturningechoesarefocusedbythereﬂectoranddirectedtoward the feedhorn.
The echoes pass through both the feedhorn andwaveguide enroute to the receiver.
The principles of a parabolic reﬂector areillustrated in ﬁgure 1.15.
Since the r-f energy is transmitted in a narrow beam, particularly narrow in its horizontal dimension, provision must be made for directing this beamtowards a target so that its range and bearing may be measured.
Normally,this is accomplished through continuous rotation of the radar beam at a rateof about 10 to 20 revolutions per minute so that it will impinge upon anytargets which might be in its path.
Therefore, in this basic radar system theupper portion of the waveguide, including the feedhorn, and the reﬂector areconstructed so that they can be rotated in the horizontal plane by a drivemotor.
This rotatable antenna and reﬂector assembly is called theSCANNER.
Figure1.16illustratesaSLOTTEDWAVEGUIDEANTENNAandnotice that there is no reﬂector or feedhorn.
The last few feet of the waveguide isconstructed so that it can be rotated in the horizontal plane.
The forward andnarrower face of the rotatable waveguide section contains a series of slotsfromwhichther-fenergyisemittedtoformanarrowradarbeam.Returningechoes also pass through these slots and then pass through the waveguide tothe receiver.Receiver The function of the receiver is to amplify or increase the strength of the veryweakr-fechoesandreproducethemasvideosignalstobepassedtotheindicator.
The receiver contains a crystal mixer and intermediate frequencyampliﬁcation stages required for producing video signals used by theindicator.
Figure 1.15 - Principles of a parabolic reﬂector.
Figure 1.16 - Slotted waveguide antenna.
 21Indicator The primary function of the indicator is to provide a visual display of the ranges and bearings of radar targets from which echoes are received.
In thisbasic radar system, the type of display used is the PLAN POSITIONINDICATOR (PPI), which is essentially a polar diagram, with thetransmitting ship’s position at the center.
Images of target echoes arereceived and displayed at either their relative or true bearings, and at theirdistancesfromthePPIcenter.Withacontinuousdisplayoftheimagesofthetargets,themotionofthetargetrelativetothemotionofthetransmittingshipis also displayed.
The secondary function of the indicator is to provide the means for operating various controls of the radar system.
The CATHODE-RAY TUBE (CRT), illustrated in ﬁgure 1.17, is the heart of the indicator.
The CRT face or screen, which is coated with a ﬁlm ofphosphorescent material, is the PPI.
The ELECTRON GUN at the oppositeend of the tube (see ﬁgure 1.18) emits a very narrow beam of electronswhich impinges upon the center of the PPI unless deﬂected by electrostaticor electromagnetic means.
Since the inside face of the PPI is coated withphosphorescent material, a small bright spot is formed at the center of thePPI.If the electron beam is rapidly and repeatedly deﬂected radially from the center,abrightlinecalledaTRACEisformedonthePPI.Shouldtheﬂowofelectrons be stopped, this trace will continue to glow for a short periodfollowing the stoppage of the electron beam because of the phosphorescentcoating.
The slow decay of the brightness is known as PERSISTENCE; theslower the decay the higher the persistence.
At the instant the modulator triggers the transmitter, it sends a TIMING TRIGGER signal to the indicator.
The latter signal acts to deﬂect theelectron beam radially from the center of the CRT screen (PPI) to form atrace of the radial movement of the electron beam.
This radial movement ofthe electron beam is called the SWEEP or TIME BASE.
While the termstrace and sweep are frequently used interchangeably, the term trace isdescriptive only of the visible evidence of the sweep movement.
Since the electron beam is deﬂected from the center of the CRT screen with each pulse of the transmitter, the sweep must be repeated very rapidlyeven when the lower pulse repetition rates are used.
With a pulse repetitionrate of 750 pulses per second, the sweep must be repeated 750 times persecond.
Thus, it should be quite obvious why the sweep appears as a solidluminous line on the PPI.
The speed of movement of the point ofimpingement of the electron beam is far in excess of the capability ofdetection by the human eye.
While the sweep must be repeated in accordance with the PRR, the actual rate of radial movement of the electron beam is governed by the size of theCRT screen and the distance represented by the radius of this screenaccording to the range scale being used.
If the 20-mile range scale isselected, the electron beam must be deﬂected radially from the center of theCRT screen having a particular radius at a rate corresponding to the timerequired for radio-frequency energy to travel twice the distance of the rangescale or 40 nautical miles.
When using the 20-mile range scale, the electronbeam must move radially from the center of the CRT screen to its peripheryin 247 microseconds.
Speed of radio frequency - frequency energy = 0.161829 nm per microsecond Distance = Speed X Time 40 nm÷ 0.161829 nm per microsecond = 247 microseconds The objective of regulating the rate of travel of the electron beam in this manner is to establish a time base on the PPI which may be used for directmeasurements of distances to targets without further need to take into Figure 1.17 - Electromagnetic cathode-ray tube.
 22account the fact that the transmitted pulse and its reﬂected echo make a round trip to and from the target.
With the periphery of the PPI representinga distance of 20 miles from the center of the PPI at the 20-mile range scalesetting, the time required for the electron beam to move radially from thecenter to the periphery is the same as the time required for the transmitted pulse to travel to a target at 20 miles and return to the antenna as a reﬂectedecho or the time to travel 40 miles in this case.
It follows that a point on thesweep or time base halfway between the center of the PPI and its peripheryFigure 1.18 - The sweep on the plan position indicator.
 23represents a distance of 10 miles from the center of the PPI.
The foregoing assumes that the rate of travel of the electron beam is constant, which is theusual case in the design of indicators for navigational radar.
If the antenna is trained on a target at 10 miles while using the 20-mile range scale, the time for the 20-mile round trip of the transmitted pulse andthe returning echo is 123.5 microseconds.
At 123.5 microseconds, followingthe instant of triggering the transmitter and sending the timing trigger pulseto the indicator to deﬂect the electron beam radially, the electron beam willhave moved a distance of 10 miles in its sweep or on the time base.
Onreceiving the echo at 123.5 microseconds after the instant of the pulse, thereceiver sends a video signal to the indicator which in turn acts to intensifyor brighten the electron beam at the point in its sweep at 123.5microseconds,i.e.,at10milesonthetimebase.Thisbrighteningofthetraceproduced by the sweep at the point corresponding to the distance to thetargetinconjunctionwiththepersistenceofthePPIproducesavisibleimageof the target.
Because of the pulse repetition rate, this painting of an imageon the PPI is repeated many times in a short period, resulting in a steadyglow of the target image if the target is a reasonably good reﬂector.
In navigational and collision avoidance applications of radar, the antenna and the beam of r-f energy radiated from it are rotated at a constant rate,usually about 10 to 20 revolutions per minute in order to detect targets allaroundtheobserver’sship.Intheprecedingdiscussionofhowatargetimageis painted on the PPI, reference is made only to radial deﬂection of theelectron beam to produce the sweep or time base.
If target images are to bepainted at their relative bearings as well as distances from the center of thePPI, the sweep must be rotated in synchronization with the rotation of the antenna.
Just as the electron beam may be deﬂected radially by electrostaticorelectromagneticmeans,thesweepmayberotatedbythesamemeans.Thesweep is usually rotated electromagnetically in modern radars.
As the antenna is rotated past the ship’s heading, the sweep, in synchronization with the antenna, is rotated past the 0˚ graduation on therelative bearing dial of the PPI.
The image of any target detected ahead ispainted on the PPI at its relative bearing and distance from the center ofthe PPI.
As targets are detected in other directions, their images arepainted on the PPI at their relative bearings and distances from the centerof the PPI.
Up to this point the discussion of how target information is displayed on the PPI has been limited to how the target images are painted, virtuallyinstantaneously, at their distances and relative bearings from the referenceship at the center of the PPI.
It follows that through continuous display(continuous because of the persistence of the CRT screen and the pulserepetitionrate)ofthepositionsoftargetsonthePPI,theirmotionsrelativetothe motion of the reference ship are also displayed.
In summary, the indicator of this basic radar system provides the means for measuring and displaying, in a useful form, the relative bearings anddistances to targets from which reﬂected echoes may be received.
Indisplaying the positions of the targets relative to the reference shipcontinuously, the motions of the targets relative to the motion of thereference ship are evident. 24FACTORS AFFECTING DETECTION, DISPLAY, AND MEASUREMENT OF RADAR TARGETS FACTORS AFFECTING MAXIMUM RANGE Frequency The higher the frequency of a radar (radio) wave, the greater is the attenuation (loss in power), regardless of weather.
Lower radar frequencies(longer wavelengths) have, therefore, been generally superior for longerdetection ranges.
Peak Power The peak power of a radar is its useful power.
Range capabilities of the radar increase with peak power.
Doubling the peak power increases therange capabilities by about 25 percent.
Pulse Length The longer the pulse length, the greater is the range capability of the radar because of the greater amount of energy transmitted.
Pulse Repetition Rate The pulse repetition rate (PRR) determines the maximum measurable range of the radar.
Ample time must be allowed between pulses for an echoto return from any target located within the maximum workable range of thesystem.
Otherwise, echoes returning from the more distant targets areblocked by succeeding transmitted pulses.
This necessary time intervaldetermines the highest PRR that can be used.
The PRR must be high enough, however, that sufﬁcient pulses hit the target and enough echoes are returned to the radar.
The maximummeasurable range can be determined approximately by dividing 81,000 bythe PRR.
Beam Width The more concentrated the beam, the greater is the detection range of the radar.Target Characteristics Targets that are large can be seen on the scope at greater ranges, provided line-of-sight exists between the radar antenna and the target.
Conductingmaterials (a ship’s steel hull, for example) return relatively strong echoeswhile nonconducting materials (a wood hull of a ﬁshing boat, for example)return much weaker echoes.
Receiver Sensitivity Themoresensitivereceiversprovidegreaterdetectionrangesbutaremore subject to jamming.
Antenna Rotation Rate The more slowly the antenna rotates, the greater is the detection range of the radar.
For a radar set having a PRR of 1,000 pulses per second, a horizontal beam width of 2.0˚, and an antenna rotation rate of 6 RPM (1 revolution in10 seconds or 36 scanning degrees per second), there is 1 pulse transmittedeach 0.036˚ of rotation.
There are 56 pulses transmitted during the timerequired for the antenna to rotate through its beam width.
With an antenna rotation rate of 15 RPM (1 revolution in 4 seconds or 90 scanning degrees per second), there is only 1 pulse transmitted each 0.090˚ofrotation.Thereareonly22pulsestransmittedduringthetimerequiredforthe antenna to rotate through its beam width.
From the foregoing it is apparent that at the higher antenna rotation rates, the maximum ranges at which targets, particularly small targets, may bedetected are reduced.Beam Width Degrees per Pulse-----------------------------------------------------2.0° 0.036°---------------- 56 pulses== Beam Width Degrees per Pulse-----------------------------------------------------2.0° 0.090°----------------2 2= = pulses 25FACTORS AFFECTING MINIMUM RANGE Pulse Length The minimum range capability of a radar is determined primarily by the pulse length.
It is equal to half the pulse length of the radar (164 yards permicrosecondofpulselength).Electronicconsiderationssuchastherecoverytime of the receiver and the duplexer (TR and anti-TR tubes assembly)extend the minimum range at which a target can be detected beyond therange determined by the pulse length.
Sea Return Sea return or echoes received from waves may clutter the indicator within andbeyondtheminimumrangeestablishedbythepulselengthandrecoverytime.
Side-Lobe Echoes Targets detected by the side-lobes of the antenna beam pattern are called side-lobeechoes.Whenoperatingnearlandorlargetargets,side-lobeechoesmay clutter the indicator and prevent detection of close targets, withoutregard to the direction in which the antenna is trained.
Vertical Beam Width Small surface targets may escape the lower edge of the vertical beam when close.
FACTORS AFFECTING RANGE ACCURACY The range accuracy of radar depends upon the exactness with which the time interval between the instants of transmitting a pulse and receiving theecho can be measured.
Fixed Error A fixed range error is caused by the starting of the sweep on the indicator before the r-f energy leaves the antenna.
The zero reference for all rangemeasurementsmustbetheleadingedgeofthetransmittedpulseasitappearsonthe indicator.
Inasmuch as part of the transmitted pulse leaks directly into thereceiverwithoutgoingtotheantenna,afixederrorresultsfromthetimerequiredforr-fenergytogouptotheantennaandreturntothereceiver.Thiserrorcauses the indicated ranges to be greater than their true values.
A device called a trigger delay circuit is used to eliminate the ﬁxed error.
By this means the trigger pulse to the indicator can be delayed a smallamount.
Such a delay results in the sweep starting at the instant an echowould return to the indicator from a ﬂat plate right at the antenna not at theinstant that the pulse is generated in the transmitter.
Line Voltage Accuracy of range measurement depends on the constancy of the line voltage supplied to the radar equipment.
If supply voltage varies from itsnominal value, ranges indicated on the radar may be unreliable.
Thisﬂuctuation usually happens only momentarily, however, and after a shortwait ranges normally are accurate.
Frequency Drift Errors in ranging also can be caused by slight variations in the frequency of the oscillator used to divide the sweep (time base) into equal rangeintervals.
If such a frequency error exists, the ranges read from the radargenerally are in error by some small percentage of the range.
To reduce range errors caused by frequency drift, precision oscillators in radars usually are placed in a constant temperature oven.
The oven is alwaysheated, so there is no drift of range accuracy while the rest of the set iswarming up.
Calibration The range to a target can be measured most accurately on the PPI when the leading edge of its pip just touches a ﬁxed range ring.
The accuracy ofthis measurement is dependent upon the maximum range of the scale in use.Representative maximum error in the calibration of the ﬁxed range rings is75 yards or 1 1/2percent of the maximum range of the range scale in use, whichever is greater.
With the indicator set on the 6-mile range scale, theerror in the range of a pip just touching a range ring may be about 180 yardsor about 0.1 nautical mile because of calibration error alone when the rangecalibration is within acceptable limits.
On some PPI’s, range can only be estimated by reference to the ﬁxed range rings.
When the pip lies between the range rings, the estimate isusually in error by 2 to 3 percent of the maximum range of the range scalesetting plus any error in the calibration of the range rings.
Radar indicators usually have a variable range marker (VRM) or 26adjustable range ring which is the normal means for range measurements.
With the VRM calibrated with respect to the ﬁxed range rings within atolerance of 1 percent of the maximum range of the scale in use, ranges asmeasured by the VRM may be in error by as much as 2 1/2percent of the maximum range of the scale in use.
With the indicator set on the 8-milerangescale,theerrorinarangeasmeasuredbytheVRMmaybeinerrorbyas much as 0.2 nautical mile.
Pip and VRM Alignment The accuracy of measuring ranges with the VRM is dependent upon the abilityoftheradarobservertoaligntheVRMwiththeleadingedgeofthepiponthePPI.OnthelongerrangescalesitismoredifficulttoaligntheVRMwiththepipbecausesmallchangesinthereadingoftheVRMrangecounterdonotresultin appreciable changes in the position of the VRM on the PPI.
Range Scale The higher range scale settings result in reduced accuracy of ﬁxed range ring and VRM measurements because of greater calibration errors and thegreater difﬁculty of pip and VRM alignment associated with the highersettings.
PPI Curvature BecauseofthecurvatureofthePPI,particularlyintheareanearitsperiphery, range measurements of pips near the edge are of lesser accuracy than themeasurements nearer the center of the PPI.
Radarscope Interpretation Relatively large range errors can result from incorrect interpretation of a landmass image on the PPI.
The difﬁculty of radarscope interpretation canbe reduced through more extensive use of height contours on charts.
For reliable interpretation it is essential that the radar operating controls be adjusted properly.
If the receiver gain is too low, features at or near theshoreline, which would reﬂect echoes at a higher gain setting, will notappear as part of the landmass image.
If the receiver gain is too high, thelandmass image on the PPI will “bloom”.
With blooming the shoreline willappear closer than it actually is.
A ﬁne focus adjustment is necessary to obtain a sharp landmass image on the PPI.
Because of the various factors introducing errors in radar rangemeasurements, one should not expect the accuracy of navigational radar to be better than + or - 50 yards under the best conditions.
FACTORS AFFECTING RANGE RESOLUTION Range resolution is a measure of the capability of a radar to display as separate pips the echoes received from two targets which are on the samebearing and are close together.
The principal factors that affect the range resolution of a radar are the length of the transmitted pulse, receiver gain, CRT spot size, and the rangescale.
A high degree of range resolution requires a short pulse, low receivergain, and a short range scale.
Pulse Length Two targets on the same bearing, close together, cannot be seen as two distinct pips on the PPI unless they are separated by a distance greater thanone-half the pulse length (164 yards per microsecond of pulse length).
If aradarhasapulselengthof1-microsecondduration,thetargetswouldhavetobe separated by more than 164 yards before they would appear as two pipson the PPI.
Radio-frequencyenergytravelsthroughspaceattherateofapproximately 328yardspermicrosecond.Thus,theendofa1-microsecondpulsetravelingthrough the air is 328 yards behind the leading edge, or start, of the pulse.
Ifa 1-microsecond pulse is sent toward two objects on the same bearing,separated by 164 yards, the leading edge of the echo from the distant targetcoincides in space with the trailing edge of the echo from the near target.
Asa result the echoes from the two objects blend into a single pip, and rangecan be measured only to the nearest object.
The reason for this blending isillustrated in ﬁgure 1.19.
In part A of ﬁgure 1.19, the transmitted pulse is just striking the near target.
Part B shows energy being reﬂected from the near target, while theleading edge of the transmitted pulse continues toward the far target.
In partC, 1/2microsecond later, the transmitted pulse is just striking the far target; theechofromtheneartargethastraveled164yardsbacktowardtheantenna.The reﬂection process at the near target is only half completed.
In part Dechoes are traveling back toward the antenna from both targets.
In part Ereﬂectioniscompletedattheneartarget.Atthistimetheleadingedgeoftheecho from the far target coincides with the trailing edge of the ﬁrst echo.When the echoes reach the antenna, energy is delivered to the set during aperiod of 2 microseconds so that a single pip appears on the PPI. 27Figure 1.19 - Pulse length and range resolution.
 28The data below indicates the minimum separation in range for two targets to appear as separate echoes on the PPI for various pulse lengths.
Receiver Gain Range resolution can be improved by proper adjustment of the receiver gain control.
As illustrated in ﬁgure 1.20, the echoes from two targets on thesame bearing may appear as a single pip on the PPI if the receiver gainsetting is too high.
With reduction in the receiver gain setting, the echoesmay appear as separate pips on the PPI.CRT Spot Size The range separation required for resolution is increased because the spot formed by the electron beam on the screen of the CRT cannot be focusedintoapointoflight.Theincreaseinechoimage(pip)lengthandwidthvarieswith the size of the CRT and the range scale in use.
On the longer range scales, the increase in echo size because of spot size is appreciable.
Range Scale The pips of two targets separated by a few hundred yards may merge on the PPI when one of the longer range scales is used.
The use of the shortest rangescale possible and proper adjustment of the receiver gain may enable theirdetection as separate targets.
If the display can be off-centered, this may permitdisplay of the targets on a shorter range scale than would be possible otherwise.Pulse Length (microseconds)Range Resolution (yards) 0.05 8 0.10 160.20 330.25 410.5 821.2 197 Figure 1.20 - Receiver gain and range resolution.
CRT Diameter (Inches)Range Scale (nautical mi.)Spot Length or Width (yards) Nominal Effective 9 7.5 0.5 5 24 220 12 10.5 0.5 4 24 185 16 14.4 0.5 3 24 134 29FACTORS AFFECTING BEARING ACCURACY Horizontal Beam Width Bearing measurements can be made more accurately with the narrower horizontal beam widths.
The narrower beam widths afford better deﬁnitionofthetargetand,thus,moreaccurateidentiﬁcationofthecenterofthetarget.Several targets close together may return echoes which produce pips on thePPI which merge, thus preventing accurate determination of the bearing of asingle target within the group.
The effective beam width can be reduced through lowering the receiver gain setting.
In reducing the sensitivity of the receiver, the maximumdetection range is reduced, but the narrower effective beam width providesbetter bearing accuracy.
Target Size For a speciﬁc beam width, bearing measurements of small targets are more accurate than large targets because the centers of the smaller pips ofthe small targets can be identiﬁed more accurately.
Target Rate of Movement The bearings of stationary or slowly moving targets can be measured more accurately than the bearings of faster moving targets.
Stabilization of Display Stabilized PPI displays provide higher bearing accuracies than unstabilized displays because they are not affected by yawing of the ship.
Sweep Centering Error If the origin of the sweep is not accurately centered on the PPI, bearing measurements will be in error.
Greater bearing errors are incurred when thepipisnearthecenterofthePPIthanwhenthepipisneartheedgeofthePPI.Since there is normally some centering error, more accurate bearing measurements can be made by changing the range scale to shift the pipposition away from the center of the PPI.
Parallax Error Improper use of the mechanical bearing cursor will introduce bearing errors.
On setting the cursor to bisect the pip, the cursor should be viewedfrom a position directly in front of it.
Electronic bearing cursors used withsome stabilized displays provide more accurate bearing measurements thanmechanical bearing cursors because measurements made with the electroniccursor are not affected by parallax or centering errors.
Heading Flash Alignment For accurate bearing measurements, the alignment of the heading ﬂash with the PPI display must be such that radar bearings are in close agreementwith relatively accurate visual bearings observed from near the radarantenna.
FACTORS AFFECTING BEARING RESOLUTION Bearing resolution is a measure of the capability of a radar to display as separate pips the echoes received from two targets which are at the samerange and are close together.
The principal factors that affect the bearing resolution of a radar are horizontal beam width, the range to the targets, and CRT spot size.
Horizontal Beam Width As the radar beam is rotated, the painting of a pip on the PPI begins as soon as the leading edge of the radar beam strikes the target.
The painting ofthe pip is continued until the trailing edge of the beam is rotated beyond thetarget.
Therefore, the pip is distorted angularly by an amount equal to theeffective horizontal beam width. 30As illustrated in ﬁgure 1.21, in which a horizontal beam width of 10˚ is used for graphical clarity only, the actual bearing of a small target havinggood reﬂecting properties is 090˚, but the pip as painted on the PPI extendsfrom 095˚ to 085˚.
The left 5˚ and the right 5˚ are painted while the antennais not pointed directly towards the target.
The bearing must be read at thecenter of the pip.
Figure 1.21 - Angular distortion.
 31Range of Targets Assuming a more representative horizontal beam width of 2˚, the pip of a ship 400 feet long observed beam on at a distance of 10 nautical miles on abearing of 090˚ would be painted on the PPI between 091.2˚ and 088.8˚, theactual angular width of the target being 0.4˚.
The pip of a ship 900 feet longobserved beam on at the same distance and bearing would be painted on thePPI between 091.4˚ and 088.6˚, the angular width of the target being 0.8˚.Since the angular widths of the pips painted for the 400 and 900-foot targetsare 1.4˚ and 1.8˚, respectively, any attempt to estimate target size by theangular width of the pip is not practical, generally.
Since the pip of a single target as painted on the PPI is elongated angularlyanamountequaltobeamwidth,twotargetsatthesamerangemustbe separated by more than one beam width to appear as separate pips.
Therequired distance separation depends upon range.
Assuming a 2˚ beamwidth, targets at 10 miles must be separated by over 0.35 nautical miles or700 yards to appear as separate pips on the PPI.
At 5 miles the targets mustbe separated by over 350 yards to appear as separate pips if the beam widthis 2˚.
Figure1.22illustratesacaseinwhichechoesarebeingreceivedfromfour targets, but only three pips are painted on the PPI.
Targets A and B arepaintedasasinglepipbecausetheyarenotseparatedbymorethanonebeamwidth; targets C and D are painted as separate pips because they areseparated by more than one beam width.
In as much as bearing resolution is determined primarily by horizontal beam width, a radar with a narrow horizontal beam width provides betterbearing resolution than one with a wide beam.CRT Spot Size The bearing separation required for resolution is increased because the spot formed by the electron beam on the screen of the CRT cannot befocused into a point of light.
The increase in the pip width because of CRTspot size varies with the size of the CRT and the range scale in use.
WAVELENGTH Generally, radars transmitting at the shorter wavelengths are more subject to the effects of weather than radars transmitting at the longer wavelengths.
Figure 1.23 illustrates the PPI displays of two radars of different wavelengths aboard a ship steaming in a rain squall and a choppy sea.Without use of anti-rain and anti-sea clutter controls, the clutter is moremassive on the PPI of the radar having the shorter wavelength.
Also, threetargets, which can be detected on the PPI of the radar having the longerwavelength, cannot be detected on the PPI of the radar having the shorterwavelength.
Following use of the anti-rain and anti-sea clutter controls, thethree targets still cannot be detected on the PPI of the radar having theshorter wavelength because too much of the energy has been absorbed orattenuated by the rain.
Similarly, ﬁgure 1.24 illustrates detection of close targets by a radar having a relatively long wavelength and no detection of these targets by aradar having a relatively short wavelength.
Figure 1.22 - Bearing resolution. 32Two identical 8 mile range PPI pictures taken on Raytheon 3 cm.
and 10 cm.
radars in a rain squall and with a choppy sea.
Three ships bearing 225˚, 294˚ and 330˚ shown on the 10 cm.
radar right are not shown on the 3 cm.
radar left.
Onbothradarstheanti-rainandanti-seaclutterdevicesareswitchedin.Thethreeshipsareclearlyvisibleonthe10cm.radarright.Thereareno targets visible on the 3 cm.
radar left as the echo power has been absorbed by rain.
Reproduced by Courtesy of the Raytheon Company.
Figure 1.23- Effects of rain and sea on PPI displays of radars having different wavelengths.
 33Two identical 20 mile range PPI pictures taken on Raytheon 3 cm.
and 10 cm.
radars showing the effects of sea clutter.
On the 10 cm.
radar right targets inside the 5 mile range marker are clearly visible.
On the 3 cm.
radar left the close range targets are missing.
On both radars the anti-sea clutter control has been carefully adjusted to remove sea clutter.
The close range targets are clearly visible on the 10 cm.
right, whereas they are missing on the 3 cm.
radar left.
Reproduced by Courtesy of the Raytheon Company.
Figure 1.24 - Effects of sea on PPI displays of radars having different wavelengths.
 34TARGET CHARACTERISTICS There are several target characteristics which will enable one target to be detected at a greater range than another, or for one target to produce astronger echo than another target of similar size.
Height Since radar wave propagation is almost line of sight, the height of the target is of prime importance.
If the target does not rise above the radarhorizon, the radar beam cannot be reﬂected from the target.
Because of theinterference pattern, the target must rise somewhat above the radar horizon.
Size Up to certain limits, targets having larger reﬂecting areas will return stronger echoes than targets having smaller reﬂecting areas.
Should a targetbe wider than the horizontal beam width, the strength of the echoes will notbe increased on account of the greater width of the target because the areanot exposed to the radar beam at any instant cannot, of course, reﬂect anecho.Sincetheverticaldimensionsofmosttargetsaresmallcomparedtotheverticalbeamwidthofmarinenavigationalradars,thebeamwidthlimitationis not normally applicable to the vertical dimensions.
However, there is avertical dimension limitation in the case of sloping surfaces or steppedsurfaces.
In this case, only the projected vertical area lying within thedistance equivalent of the pulse length can return echoes at any instant.
Aspect The aspect of a target is its orientation to the axis of the radar beam.
With change in aspect, the effective reﬂecting area may change, depending uponthe shape of the target.
The nearer the angle between the reﬂecting area andthe beam axis is to 90˚, the greater is the strength of the echo returned to theantenna.Shape Targetsofidenticalshapemaygiveechoesofvaryingstrength,depending on aspect.
Thus a ﬂat surface at right angles to the radar beam, such as theside of a steel ship or a steep cliff along the shore, will reﬂect very strongechoes.
As the aspect changes, this ﬂat surface will tend to reﬂect more ofthe energy of the beam away from the antenna, and may give rather weakechoes.
A concave surface will tend to focus the radar beam back to theantenna while a convex surface will tend to scatter the energy.
A smoothconical surface will not reﬂect energy back to the antenna.
However, echoesmay be reﬂected to the antenna if the conical surface is rough.
Texture The texture of the target may modify the effects of shape and aspect.
A smoothtexturetendstoincreasethereﬂectionqualities,andwillincreasethestrength of the reﬂection, but unless the aspect and shape of the target aresuch that the reﬂection is focused directly back to the antenna, the smoothsurface will give a poor radar echo because most of the energy is reﬂected inanother direction.
On the other hand, a rough surface will tend to break upthe reﬂection, and will improve the strength of echoes returned from thosetargets whose shape and aspect normally give weak echoes.
Composition The ability of various substances to reﬂect radar pulses depends on the intrinsic electrical properties of those substances.
Thus metal and water aregood reﬂectors.
Ice is a fair reﬂector, depending on aspect.
Land areas varyin their reﬂection qualities depending on the amount and type of vegetationand the rock and mineral content.
Wood and ﬁber glass boats are poorreﬂectors.
It must be remembered that all of the characteristics interact witheach other to determine the strength of the radar echo, and no factor can besingled out without considering the effects of the others. 