 INTRODUCTION TO  RADAR SYSTEMS  Second Edition  Merrill I.
Skolnik  McGRAW-HILL BOOK COMPANY  Auckland Bogota Guatemala Hamburg Lisbon  London Madrid Mexico New Delhi Panama Paris  San Juan Sao Paulo Singapore Sydney Tokyo  INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  International Edition 1981  Exclusive _rights by McGraw-Hill Book Co.--Singapore for  manufacture and export.
This book cannot be re-exported  from the counti:y to which it is consigned by McGraw-Hill.
 Copyright © 1980, 1962 by McGraw-Hill, Inc.
 All rights reserved.
Except as permitted under the United States Copyright  Act of 1976, no part of this publication may be reproduced or distributed in  any form or by any means, or stored in a data base or retrieval system,  without the prior written permission of the publisher.
 l 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 2 0 BJE 9 8 7 6 5 4  This book was set in Times Roman.
 The editor was Frankl.
Cerra.
 The production supervisor was Gayle Angelson.
 Library of Congress Cataloging In Publlcatlon Data  Skolnik, Merrill Ivan, date  Introduction to radar systems.
 Includes bibliographical references and index.
 1.
Radar.
I.
Title.
II.
Series.
 TK6575.S477 1980 621.3848 79-15354  ISBN 0-07-057909-1  When ordering this title use ISBN 0-07-066572 ..
9  Printed in Singapore  CONTENTS  Preface ix  I The Nature of Radar  l.
I Introduction 1  t.2 The Simple Form of the Radar Equation J  t.J Radar Block Diagram and Operation 5  1.4 Radar Frequencies 7  1.5 Radar Development Prior to World War II 8  1.6 Applications of Radar 12  Rercrences 14  2 The Radar Equation 15  2.1 Prediction of Range Performance 15  2.2 Minimum Detectable Signal 16  2.3 Receiver Noise 18  2.4 Probability-density Functions 20  2.5 Signal-to-noise Ratio 23  2.6 Integration of Radar Pulses 29  2.7 Radar Cross Section of Targets 33  2.8 Cross-section Fluctuations 46  2.9 Transmitter Power 52  2.10 Pulse Repetition Frequency and Range Ambiguities 53  2.11 Antenna Parameters 54  2.12 System Losses 56  2.1 J Propagation Effects 62  2.14 Other Considerations 62  References 65  3 CW and Frequency-Modulated Radar 68  .ll The Doppler Effect 68  3.2 CW Radar 70  JJ Frequency-modulated CW Radar 81  vi CONTENTS  3.4 Airborne Ooppkr Navigation l) ::>  3.5 Multiple-Frequency CW Radar 95  Rderenccs l)K  4 MTI and Pulse Doppler Radar 101  4.1 I nl rod uction IOI  4.2 Delay-Line Cancelers 106  4.3 Multiple, or Staggered, Pulse Repetition Frequencies 114  4.4 Range-Gated Doppler Filters 117  4.5 Digital Signal Processing 119  4.6 Other MTI Delay Lines 126  4.7 Example of an MTI Radar Processor l'  4.8 Limitations to MTI Performance I ::> l)  4.9 Noncoherent MTI 138  4.10 Pulse Doppler Radar 130  4.11 MTI rrom a Moving Platform 140  4.12 Other Types of MTI 1-17  References 148  5 Tracking Radar I ,  5.1 Tracking with Radar 152  5.2 Sequential Lobing 153  5.3 Conical Scan 155  5.4 Monopulse Tracking Radar 160  5.5 Target-Reflection Characteristics and Angular Accuracy 167  5.6 Tracking in Range 176  5.7 Acquisition 177  5.8 Other Topics 178  5.9 Comparison of Trackers 18'..:  5.10 Tracking with Surveillance Radar 183  References 186  6 Radar Transmitters 190  6.1 Introduction 190  6.2 The Magnetron Oscillator 192  6.3 Klystron Amplifier 200  6.4 Traveling-Wave-Tube Amplifier 206  6.5 Hybrid Linear-Beam Amplifier 208  6.6 Crossed-Field Amplifiers 208  6.7 Grid-Controlled Tubes 211  6.8 Modulators 2 I •l  6.9 Solid-State Transmitters 21 l>  References 220  7 Radar Antennas 22.1  7.
I Antenna Parameters 221  7.2 Antenna Radiation Pattern and Aperture Distribution 228  7.3 Parabolic-Reflector Antennas 235  7.4 Scanning-Feed Reflector Antennas 244  7.5 Lens Antennas 248  7.6 Pallcrn Synthesis  7.7 Cosecant-Squared Antenna Pattern  7.8 FfTccl of Frrors on Radiation PaHcrns  7.9 Radomcs  7.10 Stahilization of Antennas  References  8 The ElectronicalJy Steered Phased  Array Antenna in Radar  X.
I Introduction  8.2 Basic l 'onccp!s  8 .
.1 Phase Shifters  8.4 I· rcq ucncy-Sca n Arrays  8.5 A rrny Elements  8.6 Feeds for Arrays  8.7 Simultaneous Multiple Beams from Array Antennas  8.8 R...indom Errors in Arrays  8.9 Computer Control of Phased-Array Radar  8.10 Other Array Topics  8.11 Applications of the Array in Radar  8.12 Advantages and Limitations  References  9 Receivers, Displays, and Duplexers  9.1 The Radar Receiver  9.2 Noise Figure  ~.3 Mixers  9.4 Low-Noise Front-Ends  9.5 Displays  9.6 Duplexers and Receiver Protectors  References  10 Detection or Radar Signals in Noise  10.
l Introduction  I0.2 Matched-Filler Receiver  10.3 Correlation Detection  10.4 Detection Criteria  10.5 Detector Characteristics  10.6 Performance of the Radar Operator  10.7 Automatic Detection  I0.8 Constant-False-Alarm-Rate (CFAR) Receiver  References  11 Extraction of Information and Waveform  Design  I I.I Introduction  J 1.2 Information Available from a Radar  J J .3 Theoretical Accuracy of Radar Measurements  11.4 Ambiguity Diagram CONTENTS vii  254  258  262  264  270  273  278  278  279  286  298  305  306  310  318  322  328  334  335  337  343  343  344  347  351  353  359  366  369  369  369  375  376  382  386  388  392  395  399  399  399  400  411  viii CONTENTS  11.5 Pulse Compression 420  11.6 Classification of Targets with Radar 434  References 438  12 Propagation of Radar Waves 441  12.1 Introduction 441  12.2 Propagation over a Plane Earth 442  12.3 The Round Earth 446  12.4 Refraction 447  12.5 Anomalous Propagation 450  12.6 Diffraction 456  12.7 Attenuation by Atmospheric Gases 459  12.8 Environmental Noise 461  12.9 Microwave-Radiation Hazards 465  References 466  13 Radar Clutter ; 470 ····'"'  13.l Introduction to Radar Clutter 470  13.2 Surface-.Clutter Radar Equations 471  13.3 Sea Clutter 474  13.4 Detection of Targets in Sea Clutter 482  13.5 Land Clutter 489  13.6 Detection of Targets in Land Clutter 497  13.7 Effects of Weather on Radar 498  13.8 Detection of Targets in Precipitation 504  13.9 Angel Echoes 508  References.
512  14 Other Radar Topics 517  14.1 Synthetic Aperture Radar 517  14.2 HF Over-the-Horizon Radar 529  14.3 Air-Surveillance Radar S36  14.4 Height-Finder and 30 Radars 541  14.5 Electronic Counter-Countermeasures 547  14.6 Bistatic Radar 553  14.7 Millimeter Waves and Beyond 560  References 566  Index 571  .,.,;, PREFACE  Although the fundamentals of radar have changed little since the publication of the first  edition.
there has been continual development of new radar capabilities and continual im­ provements to the technology and practice of radar.
This growth has necessitated extensive  revisions and the introduction or topics not found in the original.
 One of the major changes is in the treatment of MTI (moving target indication) radar  (Chap.
4 ).
Most of the basic MTI concepts that have been added were known at the time of the  first edition, but they had not appeared in the open literature nor were they widely used in  practice.
Inclusion in the first edition would have.been largely academic since the analog  delay-line technology available at that time did not make it practical to build the sophisticated  signal processors that were theoretically possible.
However, subsequent advances in digital  technology, originally developed ror applications other than radar, have allowed the practical  implementation of the multiple delay-line cancelers and multiple pulse-repetition-frequency  MTI radars indicated by the basic MTI theory.
 Automatic detection and tracking, or ADT (Secs.
5)0 and 10.7), is another important  development whose basic theory was known for some time, but whose practical realization  ,iad to await advances in digital technology.
The principle of ADT was demonstrated in the  early 1950s, using vacuum-tube technology, as part ·of the United States Air Force's SAGE  air-defense system developed by MIT Lincoln Laporatory.
In this form ADT was physically  large, expensive, and difficult to maintain.
The commercial availability in the late 1960s of the  solid-state minicomputer, however, permitted ADT to be relatively inexpensive, reliable, and  of small size so that it can be used with almost any surveillance radar that requires it.
 Another radar area that has seen much development is that of the electronically steered  phased-array antenna.
In the first edition, the radar antenna was the subject or a single  chapter.
In this edition, one chapter covers the conventional radar antenna (Chap.
7) and a  separate chapter covers the phased-array antenna (Chap.
8).
Devoting a single chapter to the  array antenna is more a rellection of interest rather than recognition of extensive application.
 The chapter on radar clutter (Chap.
13) has been reorganized to include methods for the  detection of targets in the presence of clutter.
Generally, the design techniques necessary for  the detection of targets in a clutter· background are considerably different from.those necessary  for detection in a noise background.
Other subjects that are new or which have seen significant  changes in the current edition include low-angle tracking," on-axis" tracking, solid-state RF  sources, the mirror-scan antenna, antenna stabilization, computer control of phased arrays,  ,olid-state duplexers, CF AR, pulse compression, target classification, synthetic-aperture radar,  over-the-horizon radar, air-surveillance radar, height-finder and 30 radar, and ECCM.
The  bistatic radar and millimeter-wave radar are also included even though their applications have  X PREFACE  been limited.
Omitted from this second edition is the chapter on Radar Astronomy since  interest in this subject has decreased with the availability of space probes that can explore the  planets at close range.
The basic material of the first edition that covers the radar equation,  the detection of signals in noise, the extraction or information, and the propagation of radar  waves has not changed significantly.
The reader, however, will find only a few pages of  the original edition that have not been modified in some manner.
 One of the features of the first edition which has been continued is the inclusion of  extensive references at the end of each chapter.
These are provided to acknowledge the sources  or material used in the preparation of the book, as well as to permit the interested reader to  learn more about some particular subject.
Some references that appeared in the first edition  have been omitted since they have been replaced by more current references or appear in  publications that are increasingly difficult to find.
The references included in the first edition  represented a large fraction of those available at the time.
It would have heen difficult to add to  them extensively or to include many additional topics.
This is not so with the second edition.
 The current literature is quite large; and, because of the limitations of -space, only a much  smaller proportion of what is available could be cited.
 In addition to changes in radar technology, there have been changes also in style and  nomenclature.
For example, db has been changed to dB, and Mc is replaced by M HL.
Also.
the  letter-band nomenclature widely employed by the radar engineer for designating the common  radar frequency bands (such as L, S, and X} has been officially adopted as a standard by the  IEEE.
 The material in this book has been used as the basis for a graduate course in radar taught  by the author at the Johns Hopkins ·University Evening College and, before that, at several  other institutions.
This course is different from those usually found in most graduate electrical  engineering programs.
Typical EE courses cover topics related to circuits, components, de­ vices, and techniques that might make up an electrical or electronic system; hut seldom is the  student exposed to the system itself.
It is the system application (whether radar, communica­ tions, navigation, control, information processing, or energy) that is the raison d'etre for the  electrical engineer.
The course on which this book is based is a proven method for introducing  the student to the subject of electronic systems.
It integrates and applies the hasic concepts  found in the student's other courses and permits the inclusion of material important to  the practice of electrical engineering not usually found in the traditional curriculum.
 Instructors of engineering courses like to use texts th~t contain a variety or problems that  can be assigned to students.
Problems are not included in this book.
Although the author  assigns problems when using this book as a text, they are not considered a major learning  technique.
Instead, the comprehensive term paper, usually involving a radar design problem or  a study in depth of some particular radar technology, has been found to be a better means for  having the student reinforce what is covered in class and in the text.
Even more important, it  allows the student to research the literature and to be a bit more creative than is possible by  simply solving standard problems.
 A book of this type which cover~ a wide variety of topics cannot be written in isolation.
It  would not have been possible.withoutthe many contributions on radar that have appeared in  the open literature and which have been used here as the basic source· material.
A large  measure of gratitude must be expressed to those radar engineers who have taken the time and  energy to ensure that the results ,of their work were made available hy publication in  recognizecj journals.
.
.
 On a more personal note, neither edition of this book could have been written without the  complete support and patience of my wife Judith and my entire family who allowed me the  time necessary to undertake this work.
 Merrill I.
Skolnik  CHAPTER  ONE  THE NATURE OF RADAR  I.I INTRODUCTION  Radar is an electromagnetic system for the detection and location of objects.
It operates by  transmitting a particular type of waveform, a pulse-modulated sine wave for example, and  detects the nature of the echo signal.
Radar is used to extend the capability of one's senses for  observing the environment, especially the sense of vision.
The value of radar lies not in being a  substitute for the eye, but in doing what the eye cannot do ...
Radar cannot resolve detail as well  as the eye, nor is it capable of recognizing the" color" of objects to the degree of sophistication  of which the eye is capable.
However, radar can be designed to see through those conditions  impervious to normal human vision, such as darkness, haze, fog, rairi, and snow.
In addition,  radar has the advantage of being able to measure the distance or range to the object.
This is  probably its most important attribute.
 An elementary form of radar consists of a transmitting antenna emitting electromagnetic  radiation generated by an oscillator of some sort, a receiving antenna, ~nd an energy-detecting  device, or receiver.
A portion of the transmitted signal is intercepted by a reflecting object  (target) and is reradiated in all directions.
I.t is the energy reradiated in the back direction that  is of prime interest to the radar.
The receiving antenna collects the returned energy and  delivers it to a receiver, where it is processed to detect the presence of the target and to extract  its location and relative velocity.
The distance to the target is determined by measuring the  time taken for the radar signal to travel to the target and back.
The direction, or angular  position, of the target may be determined from the direction of arrival of the reflected wave­ front.
The usual method of measuring the direction of arrival is with narrow antenna beams.
If  relative motion exists between target and radar, the shirt in the carrier frequency of the  reflected wave (doppler elTect) is a measure of the target's relative (radial) velocity and may be  used to distinguish moving targets from stationary objects.
In radars which continuously track  the movement of a target, a continuous indication of the rate of change of target position is  also available.
 2 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  The name radar reflects the emphasis placed by the early experimenters on a device to  detect the presence of a target and measure its range.
Radar is a contraction of the words radio  detection and ranging.
It was first developed as a detection device to warn of the approach of  hostile aircraft and for directing antiaircraft weapons.
Although a well-designed modern radar  can usually extract more information from the target signal than merely range, the measure­ ment of range is still one of radar's most important functions.
There seem to be no other  competitive techniques which can measure range as well or as rapidly as can a radar.
 The most common radar waveform is a train of narrow, rectangular-shape pulses modu­ lating a sinewave carrier.
The distance, or range, to the target is determined by measuring the  time TR taken by the pulse to travel to the target and return.
Since electromagnetic energy  propagates at the speed of light c = 3 x 108 m/s, the range R is  R = cTR  2 ( 1.1)  The factor 2 appears in the denominator because of the two-way propagation or radar.
With  the range in kilometers or nautical miles, and TR in microseconds, Eq.
(J.1) becomes  R(km) = 0.15TR.(µs) or R(nmi) = 0.081 TR.(J,s)  Each microsecond of round-trip travel time corresponds to a distance or 0.081 nautical mile,  0.093 statute mile, 150 meters, 164 yards, or 492· feet.
 Once the transmitted pulse is emitted by the radar, a sufficient length of time must elapse  to allow any echo signals to return and be detected before the next pulse may be transmitted.
 Therefore the rate at which the pulses may be transmitted is determined by the longest range at  which targets are expected.
If the pulse repetition frequency is too high, echo signals from some  targets might arrive after the transmission of the next pulse, and ambiguities in measuring  !.
 "' .!! ·e  0 u 1,000 :;;  ::J  0  C:  .,;  °' C:  0 ...
 "' ::J  0  ::J  °' 100 'ii  E  0  c::  =>  lOL-~1.-..1-1-L..J....l..L..\..1..~-J..........1.-1--1-1...1..1.JU--~....__..._........_....._........,  10 100 1,000 10,000  Pulse repetition· frequency, Hz  Figure 1.1 Plot of maximum unambiguous range as a function of the pulse repetition frequency.
 THE NATURE OF RADAR 3  range might result.
Echoes that arrive after the transmission of the next pulse are called  second-time-around (or multiple-time-around) echoes.
Such an echo would appear to be at a  much shorter range than the actual and could be misleading if it were not known to be a  second-time-around echo.
The range beyond which targets appear as second-time-around  echoes is called the 111axi111111n 1111ambiguous range and is  C  Runamb = lfp (1.2)  where fr = pulse repetition frequency, in Hz.
A plot of the maximum unambiguous range as a  function of pulse repetition frequency is shown in Fig.
l.l.
 Although the typical radar transmits a simple pulse-modulated waveform, there are a  number of other suitable modulations that might be used.
The pulse carrier might be  frequency- or phase-modulated to permit the echo signals to be compressed in time after  reception.
This achieves the benefits of high range-resolution without the need to resort to a  short pulse.
The technique of using a long, modulated pulse to obtain the resolution of a short  pulse, but with the energy of a long pulse, is known as pulse compression.
Continuous  waveforms (CW) also can be used by taking advantage of the doppler frequency shift to  separate the received echo from the transmitted signal and the echoes from stationary clutter.
 Unmodulated CW waveforms do not measure range, but a range measurement can be made  by applying either frequency- or phase-modulation.
 1.2 THE SIMPLE FORM OF THE RADAR EQUATION  The radar equation relates the range of a radar to the characteristics of the transmitter,  receiver, antenna, target, and environment.
It is useful not just as a means for determining the  maximum distance from the radar to the target, but it can serve both as a tool for under­ standing radar operation and as a basis for radar design.
In this section, the simple form of  the radar equation is derived.
 If the power of the radar transmitter is denoted by P,, and if an isotropic antenna  is used (one which radiates uniformly in all directions), the power density (watts per unit area)  at a distance R from the radar is equal to the transmitter power divided by the surface area  4n:R 2 of an imaginary sphere of radius R, or  I  Power density from isotropic antenna = 4 P, 2 nR (1.3)  Radars employ directive antennas to channel, or direct, the radiated power P, into some  particular direction.
The gain G of an antenna is a measure of the increased power radiated in  the direction of the target as compared with the power that would have been radiated from an  isotropic antenna.
It may be defin.ed as the ratio of the maximum radiation intensity from the  subject antenna to the radiation intensity from a lossless, isotropic antenna with the same  power input.
(The radiation intensity is the power radiated per unit solid angle in a given  direction.) The power density at the target from an antenna with a transmitting gain G is  Power density from directive antenna = :;;~2 (1.4)  The target intercepts a portion of the incident power and reradiates it in v~rious directions.
 4 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  The measure of the amount of incident power intercepted by the target and reradiated back in  the direction of the radar is denoted as the radar cross section a, and is defined by the relation  Power density of echo signal at radar = P, G2 ~ 4rrR 4n:R ( 1.5)  The radar cross section a has units of area.
It is a characteristic of the particular target and is a  measure of its size as seen by the radar.
The radar antenna captures a portion of the echo  power.
If the effective area of the receiving antenna is denoted A.,, the power P, received by the  radar is  ( 1.6)  The maximum radar range Rmax is the distance beyond which the target cannot be detected.
It  occurs when the received echo signal power P,just equals the minimum detectable signal Smin.
 Therefore  ( 1.
7)  This is the fundamental form of the radar equation.
Note that the important antenna par­ ameters are the transmitting gain and the receiving effective area.
 Antenna theory gives the relationship between the transmitting gain and the receiving  effective area of an antenna as  ( 1.8)  Since radars generally use the same antenna for both transmission and reception, Eq.
( l .8) can  be substituted into Eq.
(1.7), · first for Ae then for G, to give two other forms of the radar  equation  ( l.9)  ( l.10)  These three forms (Eqs.· 1.1, 1.9, and 1.10) illustrate the need to be careful in the inter­ pretation of the radar equation.
For example, from Eq.
(1.9) it might be thought that the range  of a radar varies as l 112, but Eq.
( 1.10} indicates a l -112 relationship, and Eq.
( 1.
7) shows the  range to be independent of ,t The correct relationship depends on whether it is assumed the  gain is constant or the effective area is constant with wavelength.
Furthermore, the introduc­ tion of other constraints, such as the requirement to scan a specified volume in a given time,  can yield a different wavelength dependence.
 These simplified versions of the ·radar equation do not adequately describe the perfor­ mance of practical radar.
Many important factors that affect range are not explicitly included.
 In practice, the observed maximum radar ranges are usually much smaller than what would be  predicted by the above equations, sometimes by as much as a factor of two.
There are many  reasons for the· failure of the simple radar equation to correlate with actual performance, as  discussed in Chap.
2.
· · · · ..
· · ' ·  THE NATURE OF RADAR S  1.3 RADAR BLOCK DIAGRAM ANO OPERATION  The operation or a typical pulse radar may be described with the aid of the block diagram  shown in Fig.
1.2.
The transmitter may be an oscillator, such as a magnetron, that is" pulsed"  (turned on and off) by the modulator to generate a repetitive train of pulses.
The magnetron  has prohahly heen the most widely used of the various microwave generators for radar.
A  typical radar for the detection of aircrart at ranges of 100 or 200 nmi might employ a peak  power or the order or a megawatt, an average power of several kilowatts, a pulse width of  several microseconds.
and a pulse repetition frequency of several hundred pulses per second.
 The waveform generated by the transmitter travels via a transmission line to the antenna,  where it is radiated into space.
A single antenna is generally used for both transmitting and  receiving.
The receiver must be pro~ected from damage caused by the high power of the  transmitter.
This is the function of the duplexer.
The duplexer also serves to channel the  returned echo signals to the receiver and not to the transmitter.
The duplexer might consist of  two gas-discharge devices, one known as a TR (transmit-receive) and the other an ATR  (anti-transmit-receive).
The TR protects the receiver during transmission and the ATR directs  the echo signal to the receiver during reception.
Solid-state ferrite circulators and receiver  protectors with gas-plasma TR devices and/or diode limiters are also employed as duplexers.
 The receiver is usually of the superheterodyne type.
The first stage might be a low-noise  RF amplifier, such as a parametric amplifier or a low-noise transistor.
However, it is not  always desirable to employ a low-noise first stage in radar.
The receiver input can simply be  the mixer stage, especially in military radars that must operate in a noisy environment.
 Although a receiver with a low-noise front-end will be more sensitive, the mixer input can  have greater dynamic range, less susceptibility to overload, and less vulnerability to electronic  interference.
 The mixer and local oscillator (LO) convert the RF signal to an intermediate frequency  (IF).
I\ "typical" IF amplifier for an air-surveillance radar might have a center frequency of 30  or 60 MHz and a bandwidth of the order of one megahertz.
The IF amplifier should be  designed as a matclted filter; i.e., its frequency-response function H(f) should maximize the  peak-signal-to-mean-noise-power ratio at the output.
This occurs when the magnitude of the  frequency-response function [ H(f) I is equal to the magnitude of the echo signal spectrum  I S(l) [.
and the phase spectrum of the matched filter is the negative of the phase spectrum of  the echo signal (Sec.
10.2).
In a radar whose signal waveform approximates a rectangular  pulse, the conventional IF filter bandpass characteristic approximates a matched filter when  the product of the IF bandwidth Band the pulse width r is of the order of unity, that is, Br ~ 1.
 After maximizing the signal-to-noise ratio in the IF amplifier, the pulse modulation is  extracted by the second detector and amplified by the video amplifier to a level where it can be  Antenna Transmitter  Low-noise  RF  amplifier Pulse  modulator  IF amplifier  (matched filter)  Figure 1.2 Block diagram of a pulse radar.
2d  detector Video  amplifier Display  6 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  ,  -~  (al (I.)  -0  -~ a.
 E  <l'.
 Range  (bl  Figure 1.3 (a) PPI presentation displaying range vs.
angle (intensity modulation); (b) A-scope presenta­ tion displaying amplitude vs.
range (deflection modulation).
 properly displayed, usually on a cathode-ray tube (CRT).
Timing signals are also supplied to  the indicator to provide the range zero.
Angle information is obtained from the pointing  direction of the antenna.
The most common form of cathode-ray tube display is the plan  position indicator, or PPI (Fig.
1.3a), which maps in polar coordinates the location of the  target in azimuth and range.
This is an intensity-modulated display in which the amplitude of  the receiver output modulates the electron-beam intensity (z axis) as the electron beam is made  to sweep outward from the center of the tube.
The beam rotates in angle in response to the  antenna position.
A B-scope display is similar to the PPI except that it utilizes rectangular,  rather than polar, coordinates to display range vs.
angle.
Both the B-scope and the PPI, being  intensity modulated, have limited dynamic range.
Another form of display is the A-scope,  shown in Fig.
1.3b, which plots target amplitude (y axis) vs.
range (x axis), for some fixed  direction.
This is a deflection.:inodulated display.
It is more suited for tracking-radar applica­ tion than for surveillance radar.
 The block diagram of Fig.
1.2 is a simplified version that omits many details.
It does not  include several devices often found in radar, such as means for automatically compensating the  receiver for changes in frequency (AFC) or gain (AGC), receiver circuits for reducing interfer­ ence from other radars and from unwanted signals, rotary joints in the transmission lines to  allow movement of the antenna, circuitry for discriminating between moving targets and  unwanted stationary objects (MTn and pulse compression for achieving the resolution benefits  of a short pulse but with the energy of a long pulse.
If the radar is used for tracking, some  means are necessary for sensing the angular location of a moving target and allowing the  antenna automatically to lock-on and to track the target.
Monitoring devices are usually  included to ensure that the transmitter is delivering the proper shape pulse at the proper  power level and that the receiver sensitivity has not degraded.
Provisions may also be in­ corporated in the radar for locating equipment failures so that faulty circuits can be easily  found and replaced.
 Instead of displaying the" raw-video" output of a surveillance radar directly on the CRT,  it might first be processed by an automatic1detection and tracking (ADT) device that quantizes  the radar coverage into range-azimuth resolution cells, adds (or integrates) all the echo pulses  received within each cell, establishes a threshold (on the basis of these integrated pulses) that  permits only the stroug outputs due to target echoes to pass while rejecting noise, establishes  and maintains the tracks (trajectories) of each target, and displays the processed information  THE NATURE OF RADAR 7  to the operator.
These operations of an ADT are usually implemented with digital computer  technology.
 A common form of radar antenna is a reflector with a parabolic shape, fed (illuminated)  from a point source at its focus.
The parabolic reflector focuses the energy into a narrow beam,  just as does a searchlight or an automobile headlamp.
The beam may be scanned in space by  mechanical pointing of the antenna.
Phased-array antennas have also been used for radar.
In a  phased array, the beam is scanned by electronically varying the phase of the currents across  the aperture.
 1.4 RADAR FREQUENCIES  Conventional radars generally have been operated at frequencies extending from about  220 MHz to 35 GHz, a spread of more than seven octaves.
These are not necessarily the Jimits,  since radars can be, and have been, operated at frequencies outside either end of this range.
 Skywave HF over-the-horizon (0TH) radar might be at frequencies as low as 4 or 5 MHz, and  groundwave HF radars as low as 2 MHz.
At the other end of the spectrum, millimeter radars  have operated at 94 GHz.
Laser radars operate at even higher frequencies.
 The place of radar frequencies in the electromagnetic spectrum is shown in Fig.
1.4.
Some  or the nomenclature employed to designate the various frequency regions is also shown.
 Early in the development of radar.
a letter code such as S, X, L, etc., was employed to  designate radar frequency bands.
Although its original purpose was to guard military secrecy,  the designations were maintained, probably out of habit as well as the need for some conven­ ient short nomenclature.
This usage has continued and is now an accepted practice of radar  engineers.
Table 1.1 lists the radar-frequency Jetter-band nomenclature adopted by the  IEEE.1 s These are related to the specific bands assigned by the International Telecommunica­ tions Union for radar.
For example, although the nominal frequency range for L band is 1000  to 2000 MHz, an L-band radar is thought of as being confined within the region from 1215 to  1400 MHz since that is the extent of the assigned band.
Letter-band nomenclature is not a  Wavelength  10km l km 100 m 10m 1m 10cm fem 1mm O.lr.im  +--VLF LF MF HF VHF UHF SHF EHF  Very low Low Medium High VeryhiQh  frequency frequency frequency frequency frequency  I Ultrohigh Super Extremely  frequency high high  frequency frequency  Mydometric Kilometric Heclometric Decometric Metric Decimetric Centi metric Mi!limetric Decimilli- waves woves waves waves waves waves waves waves metric waves  Bond 4 Band 5 Bond 6 Bond 7 Band 8 Bond 9 Bond IO Bond 11 Bond I 2  ___ Au_d_lo_fr_eq_u_,n_d_es ...
-----,...
 Video frequencies  30Hz 300Hz 3kH1 roodcost 1-----1  bond 0TH  rodor I  Letter designotions L S C X Ku Ka  ~ I M;,,,.; ....
;., I Submillimeter  For  infrored -- 30kHz 300kHz 3MHz 30MHz 300MHz 3GHz 30GHz 300GHz 3,000 GHz  Frequency  Figure 1.4 Radar frequencies and the electromagnetic spectrum.
 8 INTRODUCTlON TO RADAR SYSTEMS  Table 1.1 Standard radar-frequency letter-band nomenclature  Band  designation  HF  VHF  UHF  L s  K  K ..
 mm Nominal  frequency range  3-30 MHz  30-300 MHz  300-1000 MHz  1000-2000 MHz  2000-4000 MHz  4000-8000 MHz  8000-12,000 MHz  12.0-18 GHz  18-27 GHz  27-40 GHz  40-300 GHz Specific radiolocation  (radar) bands based on  ITU assignments for region 2  138-144 MHz  216-225  420-450 MHz  890-942  1215-1400 MHz  2300-2500 MHz  2700-3700  5250-5925 MHz  8500-10,680 MHz  13.4-14.0 GHz  15.7-17.7  24.05-24.25 GHz  33.4-36.0 GHz  substitute for the actual numerical frequency limits of radars.
The specific numerical frequency  limits should be used whenever appropriate, but the letter designations of Table 1.1 may be  used whenever a short notation is desired.
 1.5 RADAR DEVELOPMENT PRIOR TO WORLD WAR II  Although the development of radar as a full-fledged technology did not occur until World War  II, the basic principle of radar detection is almost as old as the subject of electromagnetism  itse1f.
Heinrich Hertz, in 1886, experimentally tested the theories of Maxwell and demonstrated  the similarity between radio and light waves.
Hertz showed that radio waves could be reflected  by metallic and dielectric bodies.
It is interesting to note that although Hertz's experiments  were perrormed with relatively short wavelength radiation (66 cm), later work in radio engin­ eering was almost entirely at longer wavelengths.
The shorter wavelengths were not actively  used to any great extent until the late thirties.
 In 1903 a German engineer by the name of Hlilsmeyer experimented with the detection of  radio waves reflected from ships.
He obtained a patent in 1904 in several countries for an  obstacle detector and ship navigational device.2 His methods were demonstrated before the  German Navy, but generated little interest.
The state of technology at that time was not  sufficiently adequate to obtain ranges of more than about a mile, and his detection technique  was dismissed on the grounds that it was little better than a visual observer.
 Marconi recognized the potentialities of short waves for radio detection and strongly  urged their use in 1922 for this application.
In a speech delivered before the Institute of Radio  Engineers, he said :3  As was first shown by Hertz, electric waves can be completely reflected by conducting bodies.
In  some of iny tests J have noticed the effects of reflection and detection or these waves by metallic  objects miles away.
 It ~eems to me that it should be possible to design apparatus by means of which a ship could  THE NATURE OF RADAR 9  radiate or project a divergent beam of these rays in any desired direction, which rays, if coming  across a metallic object, such as another steamer or ship, would be reflected back to a receiver screened  from the local transmitter on the sending ship, and thereby, immediately reveal the presence and  bearing of the other ship in fog or thick weather.
 Although Marconi predicted and successfully demonstrated radio communication be­ tween continents, he was apparently not successful in gaining support for some or his other  ideas involving very short waves.
One was the radar detection mentioned above; the other was  the suggestion that very short waves are capable of propagation well beyond the optical line of  sight-a phenomenon now known as tropospheric scatter.
He also suggested that radio waves  be used for the transfer of power rrom one point to the other without the use of wire or other  transmission lines.
 In the autumn of 1922 A.
H.
Taylor and L.
C.
Young of the Naval Research Laboratory  detected a wooden ship using a CW wave-interference radar with separated receiver and  transmitter.
The wavelength was 5 m.
A proposal was submitted for further work but was not  accepted.
 The first application or the pulse technique to the measurement of distance was in the  basic scientific investigation by Breit and Tuve in 1925 for measuring the height of the  ionosphere.4• 16 However, more than a decade was to elapse before the detection of aircraft by  pulse radar was demonstrated.
 The first experimental radar systems operated with CW and depended for detection upon  the interference produced between the direct signal received from the transmitter and the  doppler-rrequency-shifted signal reflected by a moving target.
This effect is the same as the  rhythmic flickering, or flutter, observed in an ordinary television receiver, especially on weak  stations, when an aircraft passes overhead.
This type of radar originally was called CW  wave-interference radar.
Today, such a radar is called a bistatic CW radar.
The first experimen­ tal detections of aircraft used this radar principle rather than a monostatic (single~site) pulse  radar because CW equipment was readily available.
Successful pulse radar had to await the  development of suitable components, especially high-peak-power tubes, and a better under­ standing of pulse receivers.
 The first detection of aircraft using the wave-interference effect was made in June, 1930, by  L.
A.
Hyland of the Naval Research Laboratory.1 It was made accidentally while he was  working with a direction-finding apparatus located in an aircraft on the ground.
The transmit­ ter at a frequency of 33 MHz was located 2 miles away, and the beam crossed an air Jane from  a nearby airfield.
When aircraft passed through the beam, Hyland noted an increase in the  received signal.
This stimulated a more deliberate investigation by the NRL personnel, but the  work continued at a slow pace, lacking official encouragement and funds from the govern­ ment.
although it was fully supported by the NRL administration.
By 1932 the equipment was  demonstrated to detect aircraft at distances as great as 50 miles from the transmitter.
The NRL  work on aircraft detection with CW wave interference was kept classified until 1933, when  several Bell Telephone Laboratories engineers reported the detection of aircraft during the  course of other experiments.5 The NRL work was disclosed in a patent filed and granted to  Taylor, Young, and Hyland6 on a•• System for Detecting Objects by Radio." The type of radar  described in this patent was a CW wave-interference radar.
Early in 1934, a 60-MHz CW  wave-interference radar was demonstrated by NRL.
 The early CW wave-interference radars were useful only for detecting the presence of the  target.
The problem of extracting target-position information from such radars was a difficult  one and could not be readily solved with the techniques existing at that time.
A proposal was  made by NRL in 1933 to employ a chain of transmitting and receiving stations along a line to  he guarded, for the purpose of obtaining some knowledge of distance and velocity.
This was  10 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  never carried out, however.
The limited ability of CW wave-interference radar to be anything  more than a trip wire undoubtedly tempered what little official enthusiasm existed for radar.
 It was recognized that the limitations to obtaining adequate position information could  be overcome with pulse transmission: Strange as it may now seem, in the early days pulse  radar encountered much skepticism.
Nevertheless, an effort was started at NRL in the spring  of 1934 to develop a pulse radar.
The work received low priority and was carried out prin­ cipally by R.
M.
Page, but he was not allowed to devote his full time to the effort.
 The first attempt with pulse radar at NRL was at a frequency of 60 MHz.
According to  Guerlac! the first tests of the 60-MHz pulse radar were carried out in late December, 1934,  and early January, 1935.
These tests were" hopelessly unsuccessful and a grievous disappoint­ ment." No pulse echoes were observed on the cathode-ray tube.
The chief reason for this  failure was attributed to the receiver's being designed for CW communications rather than for  pulse reception.
The shortcomings were corrected, and the first radar echoes obtained al  NRL using pulses occurred on April 28, 1936, with a radar operating at a frequency of  28.3 MHz and a pulse width of 5 µs.
The range was only 2! miles.
By early June the range was  25 miles.
 It was realized by the NRL experimenters that higher radar frequencies were desired,  especially for shipboard application, where large antennas could not be tolerated.
However,  the necessary components did not exist.
The success of the experiments at 28 MHz encouraged  the NRL experimenters to develop a 200-MHz equipment.
The first echoes at 200 MHz were  received July 22, 1936, less than three months after the start of the project.
This radar was also  the first to employ a duplexing system with a common antenna for both transmitting and  receiving.
The range was only 10 to 12 miles.
In the spring of 1937 it was installed and tested on  the destroyer Leary.
T.he range of the 200-MHz radar was limited by the transmitter.
The  development of higher-powered tubes by the Eitel-McCullough Corporation allowed an  improved design of the 200-MHz radar known as XAF.
This occurred in January, 1938.
 Although the power delivered to the antenna was only 6 kW, a range of 50 miles-the limit of  the sweep-was obtained by February.
The XAF was tested aboard the battleship New York,  in maneuvers held during January and February of 1939, and met with considerable success.
 Ranges of 20 to 24 kiloyards were obtained on battleships and cruisers.
By October, 1939,  orders were placed for a manufactured version called the CXAM.
Nineteen of these radars  were installed on major ships of the fleet by 1941.
 The United States Army Signal Corps also maintained an interest in radar during the  early 1930s.
7 The beginning of serious Signal Corps work in pulse radar apparently resulted  from a visit to NRL in January, 1936.
By December of that year the Army tested its first pulse  radar, obtaining a range of 7 miles.
The first operational radar used for antiaircraft fire control  was the SCR-268, available in 1938,8 The SCR-268 was used in conjunction with searchlights  for radar fire control.
This was necessary because of its poor angular accuracy.
However, its  range accuracy was superior to that obtained with optical methods.
The SCR-268 remained  the standard fire-control equipment until January, 1944, when it was replaced by the SCR-584  microwave radar.
The SCR-584 could control an antiaircraft battery without the necessity for  searchlights or optical angle tracking ..
 In 1939 the Army developed the SCR-270, a long-range radar for early warning.
The attack  on Pearl Harbor in December, 1941, was detected by an SCR-270, one of six in Hawaii at the  time.1 (There were also 16 SCR-268s assigned to units in Honolulu.) But unfortunately, the  true significance of the blips on the scope was not realized until after the bombs had fallen.
A  modified SCR-270 was also the first radar to detect echoes1 from the moon in 1946.
 The early developments of pulse radar were primarily concerned with military applica­ tions.
Although it was not recognized as being a radar at the time, the frequency-modulated  THE NATURE OF RADAR 11  aircraft radio altimeter was probably the first commercial application of the radar principle.
 The first equipments were operated in aircraft as early as 1936 and utilized the same principle  of operation as the FM-CW radar described in Sec.
3.3.
In the case of the radio altimeter, the  target is the ground .
 .
In Brit.ain the development of radar began later than in the United States.8-11 But  because they felt the nearness of war more acutely and were in a more vulnerable position with  respect to air attack, the British expended a large amount of effort on radar development.
By  the time the United States entered the war, the British were well experienced in the military  applications of radar.
British interest in radar began in early 1935, when Sir Robert Watson­ Watt was asked about the possibility of producing a death ray using radio waves.
Watson­ Watt concluded that this type of death ray required fantasticaJly large amounts of power and  could he regarded as not being practical at that time.
Instead, he recommended that it would  be more promising to investigate means for radio detection as opposed to radio destruction.
 (The only available means for locating aircraft pr'ior to World War Il were sound locators  whose maximum detection range under favorable conditions was about 20 miles.) Watson- ._,, Watt was allowed to explore the possibilities of radio detection, and in February, 1935, he  issued two memoranda outlining the conditions necessary for an effective radar system.
In that  same month the detection of an aircraft was carried out, using 6-MHz communication equip­ ment, by observing the beats between the echo signal and the directly received signal (wave  interference).
The technique was similar to the first United States radar-detection experiments.
 The transmitter and receiver were separated by about 5.5 miles.
When the aircraft receded  from the receiver, it was possible to detect the beats to about an 8-mile range.
 By June, 1935, the British had demonstrated the pulse technique to measure range of an  aircraft target.
This was almost a year sooner than the successful NRL experiments with pulse  radar.
By September, ranges greater than 40 miles were obtained on bomber aircraft.
The  frequency was 12 MHz.
Also, in that month, the first radar measurement of the height of  aircraft above ground was made by measuring the elevation angle of arrival of the reflected  signal.
In March, 1936, the range of detection had increased to 90 miles and the frequency was  raised to 25 MHz.
 A series of CH (Chain Home) radar stations at a frequency of 25 MHz were successfully  demonstrated in April, 1937.
Most of the stations were operating by September, 1938, and  plotted the track of the aircraft which flew Neville Chamberlain, the British Prime Minister at  that time, to Munich to confer with Hitler and Mussolini.
In the same month, the CH radar  stations began 24-hour duty, which continued until the end of the war.
 The British realized quite early that ground-based search radars such as CH were not  sufficiently accurate to guide fighter aircraft to a complete interception at night or in bad  weather.
Consequently, they developed, by 1939, an aircraft-interception radar (AI), mounted  on an aircraft, for the detection and interception of hostile aircraft.
The AI radar operated at a  frequency of 200 MHz.
During the development of the AI radar it was noted that radar could  be used for the detection of ships from the air and also that the character of echoes from the  ground was dependent on the nature of the terrain.
The former phenomenon was quickly  exploited for the detection and location of surface ships and submarines.
The latter effect was  not exploited initially, but was later used for airborne mapping radars.
 Until the middle of 1940 the development of radar in Britain and the United States was  carried out independently of one another.
In September of that year a British technical mission  visited the United States to exchange information concerning the radar developments in the  two countries.
The British realized the advantages to be gained from the better angular  resolution possible at the microwave frequencies, especially for airborne and naval appJica­ tions.
They suggested that the United States undertake the development of a microwave AI  12 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  radar and a microwave antiaircraft fire-control radar.
The British technical m1ss1on  demonstrated the cavity-magnetron power tube developed by Randell and Boot and furnished  design information so that it could be duplicated by United States manufacturers.
The Randell  and Boot magnetron operated at a wavelength of 10 cm and produced a power output of  about 1 kW, an improvement by a factor of 100 over anything previously achieved at cen­ timeter ·wavelengths.
The development of the magnetron was one of the most important  contributions to the realization of microwave radar.
 The success of microwave radar was by no means certain at the end of 1940.
Therefore the  United States Service Laboratories chose to concentrate on the development of radars al the  lower frequencies, primarily the very high frequency (VHF) band, where techniques and  components were more readily available.
The exploration of the microwave region for radar  application became the responsibility of the Radiation Laboratory, organized in November,  1940, under the administration of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
 In addition to the developments carried out in the United States and Great Britain, radar  was developed essentially independently in Germany, France, Russia, Italy, and Japan during  the middle and late thirties.12 The extent of these developments and their subsequent military  deployment varied, however.
All of these countries carried out experiments with CW wave  interference, and even though the French and the Japanese deployed such radars opera­ tionally, they proved of limited value.
Each country eventually progressed to pulse radar  operation and the advantages pertaining thereto.
Although the advantages of the higher  frequencies were well recognized, except for the United States and Great Britain none of the  others deployed radar at frequencies higher than about 600 MHz during the war.
 The Germans deployed several different types of radars during World War II.
Ground­ based radars were av;,iilable for air search and height finding so as to perform ground control  of intercept (GCI).
Coastal, shipboard, and airborne radar were also employed successfully in  significant numbers.
An excellent description of the electronic battle in World War 11 between  the Germans and the Allies, with many lessons to offer, is the book" lnstrumettts of Darkness"  by Price.13  The French efforts in radar, although they got an early start, were not as energetically  supported as in Britain or the United States, and were severely disrupted by the German  occupation in 1940.12 The development of radar in Italy also started early, but was slow.
There  were only relatively few Italian-produced radars operationally deployed by the time they left  the war in September, 1943.
The work in Japan was also slow but received impetus from  disclosures by their German allies in 1940 and from the capture of United States pulse radars  in the Philippines early in 1942.
The development of radar in the Soviet Union was quite  similar to the experience elsewhere: By the summer of 1941 they had deployed operationally a  number of 80-MHz air-search radars for the defense· of Moscow against the German  invasion.14 Their indigenous efforts were interrupted by the course of the war.
 Thus, radar developed independently and simultaneously in several countries just prior to  World War II.
It is not possible' to single out any one individual as the inventor; there were  many fathers of radar.
This was brought about not only by the spread of radio technology to  many coun~ries, but by the maturing of the airplane during this same time and the common  recognition of its military threat and the need to defend against it.
 :; '  1.6 APPLICATIONS OF RADAR  Radar has been employed on·the ground, in the air, on the sea, and in space.
Ground-based  radar has been applied chiefly to· the detection, location, and tracking of aircraft or space  targets.
Shipboard radar is· used a~ a ·navigation aid and safetf device to locate buoys, shore  THE NATURE OF RADAR 13  lines.
and other ships, as well as for observing aircraft.
Airborne radar may be used to detect  other aircraft, ships, or land vehicles, or it may be used for mapping of land, storm avoidance,  terrain avoidance, and navigation.
In space, radar has assisted in the guidance of spacecraft  and for the remote sensing of the land and sea.
 The major user of radar, and contributor of the cost of almost all of its development, has  been the military: although there have been increasingly important civil applications, chieny  for marine and air navigation.
The major areas of radar application, in no particular order of  importance.
arc briefly described below.
 Air Tra(fic Control (A TC).
Radars are employed throughout the world for the purpose or  safely controlling air traffic en route and in the vicinity of airports.
Aircraft and ground  vehicular traffic at large airports arc monitored by means of high-resolution radar.
Radar  has been used with GCA (ground-control approach) systems to guide aircraft to a safe  landing in bad weather.
In addition, the microwave landing system and the widely used  A TC radar-beacon system are based in large part on radar technology.
 Aircr~fi Navigation.
The weather-avoidance radar used on aircraft to outline regions or preci­ pitation lo the pilot is a classical form of radar.
Radar is also used for terrain avoidance  and terrain following.
Although they may not always be thought of as radars, the radio  altimeter (either FM/CW or pulse) and the doppler navigator are also radars.
Sometimes  ground-mapping radars of moderately high resolution are used for aircraft navigation  purposes.
 Ship Sa(ety.
Radar is used for enhancing the safety of ship travel by warning of potential  collision with other ships, and for detecting navigation buoys, especially in poor visibility.
 In terms of numbers, this is one of the larger applications of radar, but in terms of physical  size and cost it is one of the smallest.
It has also proven to be one of the most reliable  radar systems.
Automatic detection and tracking equipments (also called plot extractors)  are commercially available for use with such radars for the purpose of collision avoi­ dance.
Shore-based radar of moderately high resolution is also used for the surveillance of  harbors as an aid to navigation.
 Space.
Space vehicles have used radar for rendezvous and docking, and for landing on the  moon.
Some of the largest ground-based radars are for the detection and tracking of  satellites.
Satellite-borne radars have also been used for remote sensing as mentioned  below.
 Remote Se11si11g.
All radars are remote sensors; however, as this term is used it implies the  sensing of geophysical objects, or the'.' environment." For some time, radar has been used  as a remote sensor of the weather.
It was also used in the past to probe the moon and the  planets (radar astronomy).
The ionospheric sounder, an important adjunct for HF (short  wave) communications, is a radar.
Remote sensing with radar is also concerned with  Earth resources, which includes the measurement and mapping of sea conditions, water  resources, ice cover, agriculture, forestry conditions, geological formations, and environ­ mental pollution.
The platforms for such radars include sateJiites as well as aircraft.
 Law £,iforcement.
In addition to the wide use of radar to measure the speed of automobile  traffic by highway police, radar has also been employed as a means for the detection of  intruders.
 Military.
Many of the civilian applications of radar are also employed by the military.
The  traditional role of radar for military application has been for surveillance, navigation, and  for the control and guidance of weapons.
It represents, by far, the largest use of radar.
 14 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  REFERENCES  1.
Guerlac, H.
E.: "OSRD Long History," vol.
V, Division 14, "Radar," available from Office of  Technical Services, U.S.
Department of Commerce.
 2.
British Patent 13,170, issued to Christian Hiilsmeyer, Sept.
22, 1904, entitled" Hertzian-wave Project­ ing and Receiving Apparatus Adapted to Indicate or Give Warning of the Presence of a Metallic  Body, Such as a Ship or a Train, in the Line of Projection of Such Waves."  3.
Marconi, S.
G.: Radio Telegraphy, Proc.
IRE, vol.
10, no.
4, p.
237, 1922.
 4.
Breit, G., and M.
A.
Tuve: A Test of the Existence of the Conducting Layer, Phys.
Rev., vol.
28,  pp.
554-575, September, 1926.
 5.
Englund, C.
R., A.
B.
Crawford, and W.
W.
Mumford: Some results of a Study of Ultra-short-wave  Transmission Phenomena, Proc.
IRE, vol.
21, pp.
475-492, March, 1933.
 6.
U.S.
Patent 1,981,884, "System for Detecting Objects by Radio," issued to A.
H.
Taylor, L.
C.
Young,  and L.A.
Hyland, Nov.
27, 1934.
 7.
Vieweger, A.
L.: Radar in the Signal Corps, IRE Trans., vol.
MIL-4, pp.
555-561, October, 1960.
 8.
Origins of Radar: Background to the Awards of the Royal Commission, Wireless World, vol.
58,  pp.
95-99, March, 1952.
 9.
Wilkins, A.
F.: The Story of Radar, Research (London), vol.
6, pp.
434-440, November, 1953.
 10.
Rowe, A.
P.: "One Story of Radar," Cambridge University Press, New York, 1948.
A very readable  description of the history of radar development at TRE (Telecommunications Research Establish­ ment, England) and how TRE went about its business from 1935 to the end of World War II.
 11.
Watson-Watt, Sir Robert: "Three Steps to Victory," Odhams Press, Ltd., London, 1957; "The Pulse of  Radar," The Dial Press, Inc., New York, 1959.
 12.
Susskind, C.: "The Birth of the Golden Cockerel: The Development of Radar," in preparation.
 13.
Price, A.: "Instruments of Darkness," Macdonald and Janes, London, 1977.
 14.
Lobanov, M.
M.: "lz Proshlovo Radiolokatzii" (Out of the Past of Radar), Military Publisher of the  Ministry of Defense, USSR, Moscow, 1969.
 15.
IEEE Standard Letter Designations for Radar-Frequency Bands, IEEE Std 521-1976, Nov.
30, 1976.
 16.
Villard, 0.
G., k: The Ionospheric Sounder and Its Place in the History of Radio Science, Radio  Science, vol.
11, pp.
847-860, November, 1976.
 CHAPTER  TWO  THE RADAR EQUATION  2.1 PREDICTION OF RANGE PERFORMANCE  The simple form of the radar equation derived in Sec.
1.2 expressed the maximum radar range  Rmu.
in terms of radar and target parameters:  [ P,GAecr] ''4  Rmu = ( )2 4n Sm1n  where P1 = transmitted power, watts  G = antenna gain  A, = antenna effective aperture, m2  <1 = radar cross section, m2  Smin = minimum detectable signal, watts (2.1)  All the parameters are to some extent under the control of the radar designer, except for the  target cross section cr.
The radar equation states that if long ranges are desired, the transmitted  power must be large, the radiated energy must be concentrate<I into a narrow beam (high  transmitting antenna gain), the received echo energy must be collected with a large antenna  aperture (also synonymous with high gain), and the receiver must be sensitive to weak signals.
 In practice, however, the simple radar equation does not predict the range performance of  actual radar equipments to a satisfactory degree of accuracy.
The predicted values of radar  range are usually optimistic.
In some cases the actual range might be only half that predicted.'  Part of this discrepancy is due to the failure of Eq.
(2.1) to explicitly include the various losses  that can occur throughout the system or the loss in performance usually experienced when  electronic equipment is operated in the field rather than under laboratory-type conditions.
 Another i,nportant factor that must be considered in the radaf equation is the statistical or  unpredictable nature of several of the parameters.
The minimum detectable signal Smin and the  ~arget cross section cr are both statistical in nature and must be expressed in statistical terms.
 16 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  Other statistical factors which do not appear explicitly in Eq.
(2.1) but which have an effect on  the radar performance are the meteorological conditions along the propagation path and the  performance of the radar operator, if one is employed.
The statistical nature of these several  parameters does not allow the maximum radar range to be described by a single number.
Its  specification must include a statement of the probability that the radar will detect a certain  type of target at a particular range.
 In this chapter, the simple radar equation will be extended to include most of the impor­ tant factors that influence radar range performance.
If all those factors affecting radar range  were known, it.
would be possible, in principle, to make an accurate prediction of radar  perfoqnance.
But, as is true for most endeavors, the quality of the prediction is a function of  the amount of effort employed in determining the quantitative effects of the various pa­ rameters.
Unfortunately, the effort required to specify completely the effects of all radar pa­ rameters to the degree of accuracy required for range prediction is usually not economically  justified.
A compromise is always necessary between what one would like.! to have and what  one can actually get with reasonable effort.
This will be better appreciated as we proceed  through the chapter and note the various factors that must be taken into account.
 A complete and detailed discussion of all those factors that influence the prediction of  radar range is beyond the scope of a single chapter.
For this reason many subjects will appear  to be treated only lightly.
This is deliberate and is necessitated by brevity.
More detailed  information will be found in some of the subsequent chapters or in the references listed at the  end of the chapter.
 2.2 MINIMUM DETECTABLE SIGNAL  ' ..
 The ability of a radar receiver to detect a weak echo signal is limited by the noise energy that  occupies the same portion of the frequency spectrum as does· the signal energy.
The weakest  signal the receiver can detect is called_ the minimum detectable signal.
The specification of the  minimum detectable signal is sometimes difficult because of its statistical nature and because  the criterion for deciding whether a target is present or not may not be too well defined.
 Detection is based on establishing a threshold level at the output of the receiver.
If the  receiver output exceeds the threshold, a signal is assumed to be present.
This is called threshold  detection.
Consider the output of a typical radar receiver as a function of time (Fig.
2.1 ).
This  might represent one sweep of the video output displayed on an A·scope.
The envelope has a  fluctuating appearance caused by the random nature of noise.
If a large signal is present such  as at A in Fig.
2.l, it is greater than the surrounding noise peaks and can be recognized on the  basis of its amplitude.
Thus, if the threshold level were set sufficiently high, the envelope would  not generally exceed.
the threshold if noise alone were present, but would exceed it if a strong  signal were present.
If the signal were small, however, it would be more difficult to recognize its  presence.
The threshold level must.
be low if weak signals are to be detected, but it cannot be so  low that noise peaks cross the threshold and give a false indication of the presence of targets.
 The v()ltage envelope iof -Fig.
2.1 · is assumed to be from a matched-filter receiver  (Sec.
10.2).
A matched filter is one designed to maximize the output peak signal to average  noise (power) ratio.
It has a frequency-response function which is proportional to the complex  conjugate of the signal spectrum.
(Thi_s is not the same as the concept of" impedance match"  of circuit theory.) The ideal matcheo-ftlter·receiver cannot always be exactly realized in prac­ tice, but it is possible to approach it with practical receiver circuits.
A matched filter for a radar  transmitting a rectangular ..
shaped .pulse is usually characterized by a bandwidth B approxi­ mately the reciprocal of the pulse width 1, or Br ~ 1.
The output of a matched-filter receiver is  ;, Q)  O'  0 -0 > THE RADAR EQUATION 17  T i m e ------*  Fi~un· 2.1 Typical envelope of the radar receiver output as a function of time, A, and B, and C represent  signal plus noise, A and B would be valid detections, but C is a missed detection,  the cross correlation between the received waveform and a replica of the transmitted  wavcf orm.
Hence it does not preserve the shape of the input waveform.
(There is no reason to  wish to preserve the shape of the received waveform so long as the output signal-to-noise ratio  is maximized.)  Let us return to the receiver output as represented in Fig.
2.1.
A threshold level is estab­ lished.
as shown by the dashed line.
A target is said to be detected if the envelope crosses the  threshold.
If the signal is large such as at A, it is not difficult to decide that a target is present.
 But consider the two signals at B and C, representing target echoes of equal amplitude.
The  noise voltage accompanying the signal at Bis large enough so that the combination of signal  plus noise exceeds the threshold.
At C the noise is not as large and the resultant signal plus  noise does not cross the threshold.
Thus the presence of noise will sometimes enhance·  the detection of weak signals but it may also cause the loss of a signal which would otherwise  be detected.
 Weak signals such as C would not be lost if the threshold level were lower.
But too low a  threshold increases the likelihood that noise alone will rise above the threshold and be taken  for a real signal.
Such an occurrence is called a false alarm.
Therefore, if the threshold is set too  low.
false target indications are obtained, but if it is set too high, targets might be missed.
The  selection of the proper threshold level is a compromise that depends upon how important it is  if a mistake is made either by ( 1) failing to recognize a signal that is present (probability of a  miss) or by (2) falsely indicating the presence of a signal when none exists (probability of a false  alarm).
 When the target-decision process is made by an operator viewing a cathode-ray-tube  display, it would seem that the criterion used by the operator for detection ought to be  analogous to the setting of a threshold, either consciously or subconsciously.
The chief differ­ ence between the electronic and the operator thresholds is that the former may be determined  with some logic and can be expected to remain constant with time, while the latter's threshold  might be difficult to predict and may not remain fixed.
The individual's performance as part of  the radar detection process depends upon the state of the operator's fatigue and motivation, as  well as training.
 The capability or the human operator as part of the radar detection process can be  determined only by experiment.
Needless to say, in experiments of this nature there are likely  to be wide variations between different experimenters.
Therefore, for the purposes of the  present discussion, the operator will be considered the same as an electronic threshold detec­ tor, an assumption that is generally valid for an alert, trained operator.
 The signal-to -noise ratio necessary to provide adequate detection is one of the important  18 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  parameters that must be determined in order to compute the minimum detectable signal.
 Although the detection decision is usually based on measurements at the video output, it is  easier to consider maximizing the signal-to-noise ratio at the output of the IF amplifier rather  than in the video.
The receiver may be considered linear up to the output of the IF.
It is shown  by Van Vleck and Middleton3 that maximizing the signal-to-noise ratio at the output of the IF  is equivalent to maximizing the video output.
The advantage of considering the signal-to-noise  ratio at the IF is that the assumption of linearity may be made.
It is also assumed that the IF  filter characteristic approximates the matched filter, so that the output signal-to-noise ratio is  maximized.
 2.3 RECEIVER NOISE  Since noise is the chief factor limiting receiver sensitivity, it is necessary to obtain some means  of describing it quantitatively.
Noise is unwanted electromagnetic energy which interferes with  the ability of the receiver to detect the wanted signal.
It may originate within the receiver itself,  or it may enter via the receiving antenna along with the desired signal.
If the radar were to  operate in a perfectly noise-free environment so that no external sources of noise accompanied  the desired signal, and if the receiver itself were so perfect that it did not generate any excess  noise, there would still exist an unavoidable component of noise generated by the thermal  motion of the conduction· electrons in the ohmic portions of the receiver input stages.
This is  called thermal noise, or Johnson noise, and is directly proportional to the temperature of the  ohmic portions of the circuit and the receiver bandwidth.60 The available thermal-noise power  generated by a receiver· of bandwidth Bn (in hertz) at a temperature T (degrees Kelvin) is  equal to  Available thermal-noise power= kTB" (2.2)  where k = Boltzmann's constant= 1.38 x 10-23 J/deg.
If the temperature T is taken to bt.:  290 K, which corresponds approximately to room temperature (62°F), the factor kT is  4 x 10-21 W/Hz of bandwidth.
If the receiver circuitry were at some other temperature, tht.:  thermal-noise power would be correspondingly different.
 A receiver with a reactance input such as a parametric amplifier need not have any  significant ohmic loss.
The limitation in this case is the thermal noise seen by the antemu.
and  the ohmic losses in the transmission line.
 For radar receivers of the superheterodyne type (the type of receiver used for most radar  applications), the receiver bandwidth is approximately that of the intermediate-frequency  stages.
It should be cautioned that the bandwidth B" of Eq.
(2.2) is not the 3-dB, or half-power,  bandwidth commonly employed by electronic engineers.
It is an integrated bandwidth and is  given by  (' I H(f) 12 df  Bn = .
-ail H(fo) 12 (2.3)  where H{f) = frequency-response characteristic of IF amplifier (filter) and Jo = frequency of  maximum response (usually occurs at midband).
 When H(f) is normalized · to unity at midband (maximum-response frequency).
 H{f0) = 1.
The bandwidth Bn is called·the noise bandwidth and is the bandwidth of an equiva­ lent rectangular filter whose noise:.power output is the same as the filter with characteristic  THE RADAR EQUATION 19  /l(f).
The J-dB ha11dwidth is defined as the separation in hertz between the points 011 the  frequency-response characteristic where the response is reduced to 0.707 (3 dB) from its maxi­ mum value.
The J-d B bandwidth is widely used.
since it is easy lo measure.
The measurement  of noise ba11dwi<l1.h.
however.
involves a complete knowledge of the response characteristic  H(f ).
The frequency-response characteristics of many practical radar receivers are such that  tile J-dB and tile noise bandwidths do not differ appreciaoly.
Therefore the 3-dB bandwidth  may be used in many cases as an approximation to the noise bandwidth.2  The noise power in practical receivers is often greater than can be accounted for by  thermal noise alone.
The additional noise components are due to mechanisms other than the  thermal agitation of the conduction electrons.
For· purposes of the present discussion,  however, the exact origin of the extra noise components is not important except to know that  it exists.
No matter whether the noise is generated by a thermal mechanism or by some other  mechanism, the total noise al the output of the receiver may be considered to be equal to the  thermal-noise power obtained from an "ideal" receiver multiplied by a factor called the noise  figure.
The noise figure F 11 of a receiver is defined by the equation  F n NO noise out of practical receiver --~--= ------------------k T0 B11 Ga noise out of ideal receiver at std temp T0 (2.4a)  where NO noise output from receiver, and Ga = available gain.
The standard temperature T0  is taken to be 290 K.
according to the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers  definition.
The noise NO is measured over the linear portion of the receiver input-output  characteristic.
usually at the output of the IF amplifier before the nonlinear second detector.
 The receiver bandwidth B11 is that or the IF amplifier in most receivers.
The available gain Ga is  the ratio or the signal out S0 to the signal in Si, and kT0 B11 is the input noise Ni in an ideal  receiver.
Equation (2.4a) may be rewritten as  (2.4b)  The noise figure may be interpreted, therefore, as a measure of the degradation of signal-to­ noise-ratio as the signal passes through the receiver.
 Rearranging Eq.
(2.4h), the input signal may be expressed as  S-= kToB,J 11S0  I N  0 (2.5)  If the minimum detectable signal Smin is that value of S1 corresponding to the minimum ratio or  output (IF) signal-to-noise ratio (S0 IN okin necessary for detection, then  kT0B11F11(§o) .
 No mm (2.6)  Substituting Eq.
(2.6) into Eq.
(2.
t) results in the following form of the radar equation:  (2.7)  Before continuing the discussion of the factors involved in the radar equation, it is  necessary to digress and review briefly some topics in probability theory in order to describe  the signal-to-noise ratio in statistical terms.
 20 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  2.4 PROBABILITY-DENSITY FUNCTIONS  The basic concepts of probability theory needed in solving noise problems may be found in  any of several references.4-8 In this section we shall briefly review probability and the  probability-density function and cite some examples.
 Noise is a random phenomenon.
Predictions concerning the average performance of  random phenomena are possible by observing and classifying occurrences, but one cannot  predict exactly what will occur for any particular event.
Phenomena of a random nature can he  described with the aid of probability theory.
 Probability is a measure of the likelihood of occurrence of an event.
The scale of probabil­ ity ranges from O to Lt An event which is certain is assigned the probability 1.
An impossible  event is assigned the probability 0.
The intermediate probabilities are assigned so that the  more likely an event, the greater is its probability.
 One of the more useful concepts of probability theory needed to analyze the detection of  signals in noise is the probability-density function.
Consider the variable x as representing a  typical measured value of a random process such as a noise voltage or current.
Imagine each x  to define a point on a straight line corresponding to the distance from a fixed reference point.
 The distance of x from the reference point might represent the value of the noise current or the  noise voltage.
Divide the line into small equal segments of length Ax and count the number of  times that x falls in each interval.
The probability-density function p(x) is then defined as  ( ) 1.
(number of values in range Ax at x )/ Ax p X = Im  &x ...
0 total number of values= N (2.8)  N ...
oo  The probability that a particular measured value lies within the infinitesimal width dx  centered at x is simply p(x) dx.
The probability that the value of x lies within the finite range  from x 1 to x2 is found by integrating p(x) over the range of interest, or  Probability (x1 < X < X2) = f2  p(x) dx x, (2.9)  By definition, the probability-density function is positive.
Since every measurement must yield  some value, the integral of the probability density over all values of x must be equal to unity;  that is,  f 00 p(x) dx = 1  -00 (2.10)  The average value of a variable function, </>(x), that is described by the probability-density  function, p(x ), is  (</>(x)).v = f 00 </>(x)p(x) dx  -00 (2.11)  This follows from the definition of an average value and the probability-density function.
The  mean, or average, value of x is  (x)av = m1 = f 00  xp(x) dx  -00 (2.12)  t Probabilities are sometimes expressed in percent (0 to 100) rather than O to 1.
 THE RADAR EQUATION 21  and the mean square value is  • 00  (x2)av = m2 = J x2p(x) dx  -co (2.13)  The quantities m 1 and 1112 are sometimes called the first and second moments of the random  variable x.
If x represents an electric voltage or current, m1 is the d-c component.
It is the value  read hy a direct-current voltmeter or ammeter.
The mean square va1ue (m2) of the current  when multiplied by the resistancet gives the mean power.
The mean square value of voltage  times the conductance is also the mean power.
The variance is defined as  The variance is the mean square deviation of x about its mean and is sometimes called the  second central moment.
If the random variable is a noise current, the product of the variance  and resistance gives the mean power of the a-c component.
The square root of the variance u is  called the standard deviation and is the root-mean-square (rms) value of the a-c component.
 We shall consider four examples of probability-density functions: the uniform, gaussian,  Rayleigh, and exponential.
The uniform probability-density (Fig.
2.2a) is defined as  p(x) Jk  \O for a< x <a+ b  for x < a and x > a + b  t In noise theory it is customary to take the resistance as 1 ohm or the conductance as 1 mho.
 I f"' b ---~ -~-----,  b  _____ __,__.J.........
______ ...L ___ _  a a+b X  (al  0  ( C) 0 Xo  ( b)  (d) X  w  f<igure 2.2 Examples of probability-density functions.
(a) Umform; (b) Gaussian; (c) Rayleigh (voltage);  (d) Rayleigh (power) or exponential.
 22 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  where k is a constant.
A rectangular, or uniform, distribution describes the phase of a random  sine wave relative to a particular origin of time; that is, the phase of the sine wave may be  found, with equal probability, anywhere from O to 2n, with k = l/2n:.
It also applies to the  distribution of the round-off (quantizing) error in numerical computations and in analog-to­ digital converters.
 The constant k may be found by applying Eq.
(2.10); that is,  oo a+b f p(x) dx = J k dx = 1  -oo a or  The average value of x is  a+b 1 b  m1 = f -x dx =a+ - a b 2 1 k=­b  This result could have been determined by inspection.
The second-moment, or mean square,  value is  and the variance is a+b xl bl  ml = f -dx = a2 + ab + - ·a b 3  b2 al= m2 -mf =-12  a= standard deviation=~  2y13  The gaussian, or normal, probability density (Fig.
2.2b) is one of the most important in  noise theory, since many sources of noise, such as thermal noise or shot noise, may be  represented by gaussian statistics.
Also, a gaussian representation is often more convenient to  manipulate mathematically.
The gaussian density function has a bell-shaped appearance and  is defined by  1 -(x -x0)2  p(x) = J 2 exp 2 2 2m, a (2.15)  where exp [ ] is the exponential function, and the parameters have been adjusted to satisfy the  normalizing condition of Eq.
(2.10).
It can be shown that  • 00  m1 = I xp(x) dx = x0 m2 = r00  xlp(x) dx = x5 + <r'  • -oo  The probability density of the sum of a large number of independently distributed quanti­ ties approaches the gaussian probability-density function no matter what the individual dis­ tributions may be, provided that the contribution of any one quantity is not comparable with  the resultant of all others.
This is the rentral limit theorem.
Another property of the gaussian  distribution is that no matter how large a value x we may choose, there is always some finite  probability of finding a greater value.
If the noise at the input of the threshold detector were  truly gaussian, then no matter how high the threshold were set, there would always be a chance  that it would be exceeded by noise and appear as a false alarm.
However, the probability  diminishes rapidly with increasing x, and for all practical purposes the probability of obtaining  an exceedingly high value of x _is negligibly small.
 The Rayleigh probability-density function is aiso of special interest to the radar systems  TIIE RADAR EQUATION 23  engineer.
It describes tile envelope of tile noise output from a narrow hand filter (such as the l F  filter in a supcrheterodyne receiver).
the cross-section fluctuations of certain types of complex  radar targets.
and many kinds of clutter and weather echoes.
The Rayleigh density function is  2x ( x2 ) p(x)= 2 exp -2 <x >av <x >av x~O (2.17)  This is plotted in Fig.
2.2c.
The parameter x might represent a voltage, and (x2).,.
the mean, or  average.
value of the voltage squared.
Ir x2 is replaced by w, where w represents power instead  of voltage (assuming the resistance is I ohm), Eq.
(2.17) becomes  1 ( w) r(w) = --·-exp ----- wo Wo w;:::: 0 (2.18)  where "'o is the average power.
This is the exponential probability-density function, but it is  sometimes called the Rayleigh-power probability-density function.
It is plotted in Fig.
2.2d.
 The standard deviation of the Rayleigh density of Eq.
(2.17) is equal to J(4/n) - l times the  mean value.
and for the exponential density of Eq.
(2.18) the standard deviation is equal to w0.
 There are other probahility-density functions of interest in radar, such as the Rice, log normal,  and the chi square.
These will he introduced as needed.
 Another mathematical description of statistical phenomena is the probability distrih11tio11  fi111ctio11 l'(x).
defined as the probability that the value xis less than some specified value  • X  P(x)= I r(x)dx or d  p(x) = dx P(x) (2.19)  -00  In some cases, the distribution function may be easier to obtain from an experimental set of  data than the density function.
The density functi<?n may be found from the distribution  function by differentiation.
 2.5 SIGNAL-TO-NOISE RATIO  In this section the results of statistical noise theory will be applied to obtain the signal-to-noise  ratio at the output of the IF amplifier necessary to achieve a specified probability of detection  without exceeding a specified probability of false alarm.
The output signal-to-noise ratio thus  ohtained may be substituted into Eq.
(2.6) to find the minimum detectable signal, which, in  turn.
is used in the radar equation, as in Eq.
(2.7).
 Consider an IF amplifier with bandwidth B,F followed by a second detector and a video  amplifier with bandwidth B,.
(Fig.
2.3).
The second detector and video amplifier are assumed  to form an envelope detector, that is, one which rejects the carrier lrequency but passes the  modulation envelope.
To extract the modulation envelope, the video bandwidth must be wide  enough to pass the low-frequency components generated by the second detector, but not so wide  as to pass the high-frequency components at or near the intermediate frequency.
The video  bandwidth B,.
must be greater than B,F/2 in order to pass all the video modulation.
Most radar  receivers used in conjunction with an operator viewing a CRT display meet this condition and  IF Second Video  amplifier 1- ~ amplifier  (81,) detector (Bvl Figure 2.3 Envelope detector.
 24 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  may be considered envelope detectors.
Either a square-law or a linear detector may be  assumed since the effect on the detection probability by assuming one instead of the other is  usually small.
 The noise entering the IF filter (the terms filter and amplifier are used interchangeably) is  assumed to be gaussian, with probability-density function given by  (2.20)  where p(v) dv is the probability of finding the noise voltage v between the values of v and  v + dv, ,j10 is the variance, or mean-square value of the noise voltage, and the mean value of 11 is  taken to be zero.
If gaussian noise were passed through a narrowband IF filter-one whose  bandwidth is small compared with the midfrequency-the probability density of the envelope  of the noise voltage output is shown by Rice9 to be  (2.21)  where R is the amplitude of the envelope of the filter output.
Equation (2.2 l} is a form of the  Rayleigh probability-density function.
 The probability that the envelope of the noise voltage will lie between the values of V1 and  Vi is  .Vi R ( Probability (V1 < R < V2) = J -:,:-exp  V1 'f'O R2)  2t/lo dR (2.22)  The probability that the noise voltage envelope will exceed the voltage threshold Vr is  00 R ( R2) Probability (Vr < R < oo) = J .,, exp -2.,, dR  V1·'f'O 'f'O (2.23)  (2.24)  Whenever the voltage envelope exceeds the threshold, a target detection is considered to have  occurred, by definition.
Since the probability of a false alarm is the probability that noise will  cross the threshold, Eq.
(2.24) gives the probability of a false alarm, denoted Pra.
 The average time interval between crossings of the threshold by noise alone is defined as  the false-alarm time Tra,  where Ji is the time between crossings of the threshold Vr by the noise envelope, when the  slope of the crossing is positive.
The false-alarm probability may also be defined as the ratio of  the duration of time the envelope is actually above the threshold to the total time it could have  been above the threshold, or  (2.25)  OJ  O'  E  0 ;- ~ v,  '6  C  ~ t/'ci1  OJ .
 n  0  <ii >  C  1 <l THE RADAR EQUATION 25  ----- T1r -------c------1*+1 ___ ______,_.__  Threshold  Time--+- Figure 2.4 Envelope of receiver output illustrating false alarms due to noise.
 where tk and T,, are defined in Fig.
2.4.
The average duration of a noise pulse is approximately  the reciprocal or the bandwidth B, which in the case of the envelope detector is BIF.
Equating  Eqs.
(2.24) and (2.25), we get  1 V}  Tra = BIF exp 2t/lo (2.26)  A plot of Eq.
(2.26) is shown in Fig.
2.5, with V} /2t/10 as the abscissa.
If, for example, the  bandwidth of the IF amplifier were 1 MHz and the average false-alarm time that could be  tolerated were 15 min, the probability of a false alarm is 1.ll x 10-9_ From Eq.
(2.24) the  threshold voltage necessary to achieve this false-alarm time is 6.45 times the rms value of the  noise voltage.
 The false-alarm probabilities of practical radars are quite small.
The reason for this is that  the false-alarm probability is the probability that a noise pulse will cross the threshold during  an interval of time approximately equal to the reciprocal of the bandwidth.
For a 1-MHz  bandwidth, there are of the order of 1Q6 noise pulses per second.
Herice the false-alarm  probability of any one pulse must be small ( < 10-6) if false-alarm times greater than 1 s are to  be obtained.
 The specification of a tolerable false-alarm time usually follows from the requirements  desired by the customer and depends on the nature of the radar application.
The exponential  relatjonship between the false-alarm time Tra and the threshold level Vr results in the false­ alarm time being sensitive to variations or instabilities in the threshold level.
For example, if·  the bandwidth were 1 MHz, a value of 10 log (V}/2ij, 0) = 12.95 dB results in an average  false-alarm time of 6 min, while a value of 14.72 dB results in a false-alarm time of 10,000 h.
 Thus a change in the threshold of only 1.77 dB changes the false-alarm time by five orders of  magnitude.
Such is the nature of gaussian noise.
In practice, therefore, the threshold level  would probably be adjusted slightly above that computed by Eq.
(2.26), so that instabilities  which lower the threshold slightly will not cause a flood of false alarms.
 If the recdver were turned off (gated) for a fraction of time (as in a tracking radar with a  servo-controlled range gate or a radar which turns off the receiver during the time of transmis­ sion), the false-alarm probability will be increased by the fraction of time the receiver is not  operative assuming that the average false-alarm time remains the same.
However, this is  usually not important since small changes in the probability of false alarm result in even  smaller changes in the threshold level because of the exponential relationship of Eq.
(2.26).
 Thus far, a receiver with only a noise input has been discussed.
Next, consider a sinc:-wave  signal of amplitude A to be present along with noise at the input to the IF filter.
The frequency  26 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  1 year  ·· 6 months  1,000  30 days  _,:;;.
2 weeks  h..~  (/) I week  E 100 '-0  0 3doys  <I)  U? 2 days 0 .....
 i::::  Q.) I day Q.)  3 -Q.)  ..0 12 h w E ·.;::.
 (I)  O"  0 '-Q.)  "" <1  1 h  15 min  0.1..._~~ ..........
~~ ........
~~..._~........,'---'----'~-'---'~~--'  8 9 10 .
It 12 13 14 15  Threshold-to-noise ratio vrY211'o, dB  Figure 2.5 Average time between false alarms as a function of the threshold level V, and the receiver  bandwidth B; t/10 is the mean square noise voltage.
 of the signal is the same as the IF midband frequency f.F.
The output of the envelope detec~or  has a probability-density function given by9  R ( R2 + A2 ) (RA) ps(R) = t/Jo exp -2t/Jo Io !po (2.27)  where /0(2) is the modified Bessel function of zero order and argument Z.
For Z large, an  asymptotic expansion for I 0(Z) is  I (Z) ~ -& (1 + l + · ··) 0 v 2n:Z 82  When the signal is absent, A = 0 and Eq.
(2.27) reduces to Eq.
(2.21 ).
the probability-density  function for noise alone.
Equation (2.27) is sometimes called the Rice probability-density  function.
 The probability that the signal will be detected (which is the probability of detection) is the  same as the probability that the enve]ope R will exceed the predetermined thresho]d VT.
The  THE RADAR EQUATION 27  probability· of detection Pd is therefore  Pd= ("'1,i(R)dR  ' I' 1 ·"" R ( R2 + A2 ) (RA) / ---exp - 10 -· dR  ' V r t/t O 2t/t O t/J 0 (2.28)  This cannot he evaluated by simple means, and numerical techniques or a series approxima­ tion must be used.
A series approximation valid when RA/t/1 0 ~ l, A ~ IR -A I, and terms in  A 3 and beyond can be neglected is9  where the error function is defined as  err z  A graphic illustration of the process of threshold detection is shown in Fig.
2.6.
The  prohahility density for noise alone [Eq.
(2.21)] is plotted along with that for signal and noise  [Eq.
(2.27)] with A/tllf/2 = 3.
A threshold voltage V7/t/tr/2 = 2.5 is shown.
The crosshatched  area to the right or V7/t/tA12 under the curve for signal-plus-noise represents the probability of  detection.
while the double-crosshatched area under the curve for noise alone represents the  probability of a false alarm.
If V7 /t/tl/2 is increased to reduce the probability of a false alarm,  the probability of detection will be reduced also.
 Equation (2.29) may be used to plot a family of curves relating the probability of detection  to the threshold voltage and to the amplitude of the sine-wave signal.
Although the receiver  designer prefers to operate with voltages, it is more convenient for the radar system engineer to  employ power relationships.
Equation (2.29) may be converted to power by replacing the  signal to nns-noise-voltage ratio with the following:  A signal amplitude J1(~ms si_gnal voltage) = (2 sig~al power) 112 = (2S) 112  tJrA'2 = rms noise voltage rms noise voltage noise power N  We shall also replace Vf/2t/t0 by In (l/Pra) [from Eq.
(2.24)1.
Using the above relationships,  the probability of detection is plotted in Fig.
2.7 as a function of the signal-to-noise ratio with  the probability of a false alarm as a parameter.
 06  0.5  0.'1  ~ 0 3  C).
 0.2  0.1 Noise alone  o..._::::..J...~...1-...L.l<.JOO""-.LLL...l.:.&.L..C:,,..L._--L~  0 4 5 6 7 R/ffo-Figure 2.6 Probability-density function for noise alone  and for signal-plus-noise, illustrating the process of  threshold detection.
 28 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  0.9999  0.9995  0.999  0.998  0.995  0.99  0.98  C 0.95 0  +-u w +-0.90 w  "Cl  '+-0  >.
0.80 .t:  :0  0 .0 0.70 0  L a..
0.60  0.50  0.40  0.30  0.20  0.10  0.05  4 6 ,.,., ..
ton1Dr-C02~  I I I I I I I I 00 000000 --------;  Probability of  1 i\ false alarm --+-------i  10-6 10-10-a,o-10-1010-n ,0-12 /  8 10 12 14 16 18 20  ( S/N )1, signal-to-noise ratio, dB  Figure 2.7 Probability of detection for a sine wave in noise as a function of the signal-to-noise (power)  ratio and the probability of false alarm.
 Both the false-alarm time and the detection probability are specified by the system require­ ments.
The radar designer computes the probability of the false alarm and from Fig.
2.7  determines the signal-to-noise ratio.
This is the signal-to-noise ratio that is used in the equa­ tion for minimum detectable signal [Eq.
(2.6)].
The signal-to-noise ratios of Fig.
2.
7 apply to a  single radar pulse.
For example, suppose that the desired false-alarm time was 15 min and tht:  IF bandwidth was 1 MHz.
This gives a false-alarm probability of 1.11 x 10-9.
Figure 2.
7  indicates that a signal-to-noise ratio of 13.1 dB is required to yield a 0.50 probability of  detection, 14.7 dB for 0.90, and 16.5 dB for 0.999.
 There are several interesting facts illustrated by Fig.
2.7.
At first glance, it might seem that  the signal-to-noise ratio required for detection is higher than that dictated by intuition, even  for a probability of detection of 0.50.
One might be inclined to say that so long as the signal is  greater than noise, detection should be accomplished.
Such reasoning may not be correct when  the false-alarm probability is properly taken into account.
Another interesting effect to be  noted from Fig.
2.7 is that a change of only 3.4 dB can mean the difference between reliable  detection (0.999) and marginal detection (0.50).
(When the target cross section fluctuates, the  THE RADAR EQUATION 29  change in signal-to-noise ratio is much greater than this for a given change in detection  probability, as discussed in Sec.
2.8.) Also, the signal-to-noise ratio required for detection is  not a sensitive function of the false-alarm time.For example, a radar with a 1-MHz bandwidth  requires a signal-to-noise ratio of 14.7 dB for a 0.90 probability of detection and a 15-min  false-alarm time.
If the false-alarm time were increased from 15 min to 24 h, the signal-to-noise  ratio would he increased to I S.4 dB.
If the false-alarm time were as high as l year, the required  signal-to-noise ratio would be 16.2 dB.
 2.6 INTEGRATION OF RADAR PULSES  The relationship bctwec11 the sig11al-to-110isc ratio.
the probability of detection, and the prnh­ ahility of false alarm as given in Fig.
2.7 applies for a single gulseQnly.
However, many pulses  arc usually returned from any particular target (111cach radi~r scan and can he used to improve  detection.
The number of pulscs111n)rcturncd from a point targeJ as the radar antenna scans  through its ~~~\~~-~j-~!!Jt is '/ ts,.\..
G •..
 '-fJs{fp .· Os fp  11a = 7!;i = ~-~ ~~;;, (2.30)  where On = antenna beamwidth, deg  J~ pulse repetition frequency, Hz  (}5 antenna scanning rate, deg/s  w.,, antenna scan rate, rpm  Typical parameters for a ground-based search radar might be pulse repetition frequency  300 Hz, 1.5° beamwidth, and antenna scan rate 5 rpm (30°/s).
These parameters result in  15 hits from a point target on eac:h scan.
The process of summing all the radar echo pulses for  the purpose of improving detection is called integration.
MaRy techniques might be employed  for accomplishing integration, as discussed in Secs.
10.7.
All practical integration techniques  employ some sort of storage device.
Perhaps the most common radar integration method is  the cathode-ray-tube display combined with the integrating properties of the eye and brain of  the radar operator.
The discussion in this section is concerned primarily with integration  performed hy electronic devices in which detection is made automatically on the basis of a  threshold crossing.
 Integration may be accomplished in the radar receiver either before the second detector  (in the IF) or after the second detector (in the video).
A definite distinction must be made  hctween these two cases.
Integration before the detector is called predetection, or coherent,  integration, while integration after the detector is called postdetection, or noncoherent, integra­ tion.
Predetection integration requires that the phase of the echo signal be preserved if full  benefit is to be obtained from the summing process.
On the other hand, phase information is  destroyed by the second detector; hence postdetection integration is not concerned with  preserving RF phase.
For this convenience, postdetection integration is not as efficient as  predetection integration.
 If n pulses, all of the same signal-to-noise ratio, were integrated by an ideal predetection  integrator, the resultant, or integrated, signal-to-noise (power) ratio would be exactly n times  that of a single pulse.
If the same ff pulses were integrated by an ideal postdetection device, the  resultant signal-to-noise ratio would be less than n times that of a single pulse.
This loss in  integration efficiency is caused by the nonlinear action of the second detector, which converts  some of the signal energy to noise energy in the rectification process.
 30 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  The comparison or predetection and postdetection integration may be briefly summarized  by stating that although postdetection integration is not as efficient as pn.:detection integra­ tion, it is easier to implement in most applications.
Postdetection integration is therefore  preforred, even though the integrated signal-to-noise ratio may not be as great.
As mentioned  in Sec.
10.6, an alert, trained operator viewing a properly designed cathode-ray tube display is  a close approximation to the theoretical postdetection integrator.
 The efficiency of postdetection integration relative to ideal predetection integration has  been computed by Marcum10 when all pulses are or equal amplitude.
The integration  efficiency may be defined as follows:  (2.31)  where n = number or pulses integrated  (S/N)i = value of signal-to-noise ratio of a single pulse required to produce given probability  of detection (for n = 1)  (S/ N),, = value of signal-to-noise ratio per pulse required to produce same probability or  detection when n pulses are integrated  The improvement in the signal-to-noise ratio when n pulses are integrated postdetection is  nE1(n) and is the integration-improvement factor.
It may also be thought or as the effective  number of pulses integrated by the postdetection integrator.
The improvement with ideal  predetection integration would be equal to n.
Examples of the postdetection integration­ improvement factor /i(n) = nEi(n) are shown in Fig.
2.8a.
These curves were derived from data  given by Marcum.
The integration loss is shown in Fig.
2.8b, where integration loss in decibels  is defined as L;(n) = 10 log [l/E;(n)].
The integration-improvement factor (or the integration  loss) is not a sensitive function of either the probability of detection or the probability of false  alarm.
 The parameter n1 for the curves of Fig.
2.8 is the false-alarm ,wmber, as introduced by  Marcum.10 It is equal to the reciprocal of the false-alarm probability Pr,.
defined previously by  Eqs.
(2.24) and (2.25).
Some authors, like Marcum, prefer to use the false-alarm numbi..:r  instead of the false-alarm probability.
On the average, there will he one false decision out of 111  possible decisions within the false-alarm time Tra.
Thus the average number of possible 1.kci­ sions between false alarms is defined to be n 1.
If r is the pulse width, Tp the pulse repetition  period, and/P = 1/TP is the pulse repetition frequency, then the number of decisions n1 in time  Tra is equal to the number of range intervals per pulse period r, = Tp/r = 1/fp r times the  number of pulse periods per second/p, times the false-alarm time Tra.
Therefore, the number of  possible decisions is n1 = Trafptf = Tra/r.
Since r:::: 1/B, where Bis the bandwidth, the false­ alarm number is n 1 = Tra B = 1/ Pra.
 Note that Pra = 1/Tra Bis the probability of false alarm assuming that independent deci­ sions as to the presence or absence of a target are made B times a second.
As the radar scans hy  a target it receives n pulses.
If these n pulses are integrated before a target decision is mad<.!,  then there are 8/n p~ssible decisions per second.
The false-alarm probability is thus II times as  great.
This does not mean that there will be more false alarms, since it is the rate of detection­ decisions that is reduced rather than the average time between alarms.
This is another reason  the average false-alarm time Tra is a more significant parameter than the false-alarm probabi­ lity.
In this text, Pra will be taken as the reciprocal or Tra B = 111, unless stated otherwise.
Some  authors 11 prefer to define a false-alarm number n'.r that takes account the number of pulses  integrated, such that n1 = n 1 /n.
Therefore, caution should be exercised when using d ilTerent  authors' computations for the signal-to-noise ratio as a function of probability of detection  10 100 1,000  n, number of pulses integrated (postdetection)  {a)  12 ------- --·-·· --------------t----- en 10 ·------- -o -</1  VI  0  C 8 ·-----· --··----·- 0 ·:;::  0  L  O'  <l) +-c 61-------···············------······-1-/t ::: 050  f/t ==0.90  ~ =099 10,000  2•------- -1-------···-t------~---,  10 100 1,000 10,000  n = number of pulses  ( b)  Fi~ure 2.8 (a) Integration-improvement factor.
square law detector.
P, = probability or detection.
 n 1 117;.
B = false alarm number, Tr.
average time between false alarms, B = bandwidth; (b) integra­ tion loss as a function of 11, the number of pulses integrated.
P4, and n1.
(After Marcum.to courtesy IRE  Tra11s.)  32 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  and probability of false alarm, or false-alarm number, since there is no standardiLution of  definitions.
They all can give the correct values for ..
use .
.in the radar equation provided I he  assumptions used by each author are understood.
 The original fa)se-alarm time of Marcum 10 is different from that used in this text.
He  defined it as the time in which the probability is l/2 that a false alarm will not occur.
A  comparison of the two definitions is given by Hollis.12 Marcum's definition of false-alarm time  is seldom used, although his definition of false-alarm number is often found.
 The solid straight line plotted in Fig.
2.8a represents a perfect predetection integrator  with E,(n) 1.
It is hardly ever achieved in practice.
When only a few pulses are integrated  postdetection (large signal-to-noise ratio per pulse), Fig.
2.8a shows that the integration­ improvement factor is not much different from a perfect predetection integrator.
When a large  number of pulses are integrated (small signal-to-noise ratio per pulse), the difference between  postdetection and predetection integration is more pronounced.
 The dashed straight line applies to an integration-improvement factor proportional to  n112• As discussed in Sec.
10.6, data obtained during World War II seemed to indicate that this  described the performance of an operator viewing a cathode-ray tube display.
More recent  experiments, however, show that the operator-integration performance when viewing a  properly designed PPI or B-scope display is better represented by the theoretical postdetec­ tion integrator as given by Fig.
2.8, rather than by the n112 law.
 The radar equation with n pulses integrated can be written  4 P,GAea  Rmax = (4n)2kT0Bnf11(S/N) 11 (2.32)  where the parameters are the same as that of Eq.
(2.7) except that (S/N)11 is the signal-to-noise  ratio of one of the n equal pulses that are integrated to produce the required probability of  detection for a specified probability of false alarm: To use this form of the radar equation it is  necessary to have a set of curves like those of Fig.
2.7 for each vaiue of 11.
Such curves are  available, 11 but are not necessary since only Figs.
2.7 and 2.8 are needed.
Substituting  Eq.
(2.31) into (2.32} gives  4 P,GAeanE;(n)  Rmax = (411:)2kT0BnFn(S/N)1 (2.33)  The value of (S/N)1 is found from Fig.
2.7 as before, and nE;(n) is found from Fig.
2.8(1.
 The post-detection integration loss described by Fig.
2.8 assumes a perfect integraior.
 Many practical integrators, however, have a" loss of memory" with time.
That is, the ampli­ tude of a signal stored in such an integrator decays, so that the stored pulses are not su mmc.:d  with equal weight as assumed above.
Practical analog integrators such as the recirculating  delay line (also called a feedback integrator), the low-pass filter, and the electronic storage  tube apply what is equivalent to an exponential weig.hting to the integrated pulses; that is, if 11  pulses are integrated, the voltage out of the integrator is  N  V = L Vi exp [ -( i -1 )y] (2.34)  l= l  where Jti is the voltage amplitude of the ith pulse and exp ( -y) is the attenuation per pulse.
In  a recirculating delay-line integrator, e-.., is the attenuation around the loop.
ln an RC  low-pass filter y = Tp/RC, where Tp is the pulse repetition period and RC is the filter time  constant.
 In order to find the signal-to ..
noise ratio for a given probability of detection and probabi­ lity or false alarm, an analysis similar to that used to obtain Figs.
2.
7 and 2.8 should he  THE RADAR EQUATION 33  repeated for each value of)' and 11.13 This is not done here.
Instead, for simplicity, an efficiency  will be defined which is the ratio of the average signal-to-noise ratio for the exponential  integrator to the average signal-to-noise ratio for the uniform integrator.
For a dumped  integrator, one which erases the contents of the integrator after II pulses and starts over, the  efficiency is 1 4  tanh (11y/2) p=  11 tanh (1,/2) (2.35a)  An example of an integrator that dumps is an electrostatic storage tube that is erased whenever  it is read.
The efficiency of an integrator that operates continuously without dumping is  [l -exp (-ny)]2  p = -----· --------- " tanh (r/2) (2.351,)  The maximum efficiency of a dumped integrator occurs for}'= 0, but for a continuous integra­ tor the maximum efficiency occurs for II}'= 1.257.
 2.7 RADAR CROSS SECTION OF TARGETS  The radar cross section of a target is the (fictional) area intercepting that amount of power  which.
when scattered equally in all directions, produces an echo at the radar equal to that  from the target; or in other terms,  power reflected toward source/unit solid angle I E 12  <J = incident power density/4n = !~ 4nR2 E:  where R = distance between radar and target  E, = reflected field strength at radar  E; = strength of incident field at target (2.36)  This equation is equivalent to the radar range equation"'of Sec.
1.2.
For most common types of  radar targets such as aircraft, ships, and terrain, the radar cross section does not necessarily  bear a simple relationship to the physical area, except that the larger the target size, the larger  the cross section is likely to be.
 Scattering and diffraction are variations of the same physical process.15 When an object  scatters an electromagnetic wave, the scattered field is defined as the difference between the  total field in the presence of the object and the field that would exist if the object were absent  (but with the sources unchanged).
On the other hand, the diffracted field is the total field in the  presence of the object.
With radar backscatter, the two fields are the same, and one may talk  about scattering and diffraction interchangeably.
 In theory, the scattered field, and hence the radar cross section, can be determined by  solving Maxwell's equations with the proper boundary conditions applied.16 Unfortunately,  the determination of the radar cross section with Maxwell's equations can be accomplished  only for the most simple of shapes, and solutions valid over a large range of frequencies are not  easy to obtain.
The radar cross section of a simple sphere is shown in Fig.
2.9 as a function of  its circumference measured in wavelengths (2na/,l, where a is the radius of the sphere and ,l is  the wavelength).11-19•34 The region where the size of the sphere is small compared with the  wavelength (2rra/,l ~ I) is called the Rayleigh region, after Lord Rayleigh who, in the early  1870s, first studied scattering by small particles.
Lord Rayleigh was interested in the scattering  of light by microscopic particles, rather than in radar.
His work preceded the orginal electro­ magnetic echo experiments of Hertz by about fifteen years.
The Rayleigh scattering region is of  34 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  N  t:l  I=::  '-..
1.0  ~ 0.1 .,  ,,:; a.
 b"'  0.01 Mie or resonance  region Optical  region  0.001 ..__ __ _,___-'--......,_.....,_....._ ............
......,_ __ __.
_ __.__J__J.......J.....J....-L...L-L- __ _J  0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.8 1.0 2 3 4 5 6 8 10 20  Circumference/ wavelength = 2 rr a/ X  Figure 2.9 Radar cross section of the sphere.
a = radius; l = wavelength.
 interest to the radar engineer because the cross sections of raindrops and other meteorological  particles fall within this region at the usual radar frequencies.
Since the cross section of objects  within the Rayleigh region varies as l -4, rain and clouds are essentially invisible to radars  which operate at relatively long wavelengths (low frequencies).
The usual radar targets are  much larger than raindrops or cloud particles, and lowering the radar frequency to the point  where rain or cloud echoes are negligibly small will not seriously reduce the cross section of  the larger desired targets.
On the other hand, if it were desired to actually observe, rather than  eliminate, raindrop echoes, as in a meteorological or weather-observing radar, the higher  radar frequencies would be preferred.
 At the other extreme from the Rayleigh region is the optical region, where the dimensions  of the sphere are large compared with the wavelength (2na/l ~ 1).
For large 2rca/l, the radar  cross section approaches the optical cross section na2• In between the optical and the Rayleigh  region is the Mie, or resonance, region.
The cross section is oscillatory with frequency within  this region.
The maximum value is 5.6 dB greater than the optical value, while the value of the  first null is 5.5 dB below the optical value.
(The theoretical values of the maxima and minima  may vary according to the method of calculation employed.) The behavior of the radar cross  sections of other simple reflecting objects as a function of frequency is similar to that of the  sphere.15-25  Since the sphere is a sphere no matter from what aspect it is viewed, its cross section will  not be aspect-sensitive.
The cross section of other objects, however, will depend upon the  direction as viewed by the radar.
 Figure 2.10 is a plot of the backscatter cross section of a long thin rod as a function of  aspect.
26 The rod is 39.t long and .t/4 in diameter, ~nd is made of silver.
If the rod were of steel  instead of silver, the first maximum would be about 5 dB below that shown.
The radar cross  section of the thin rod (and similar: objects) is small when viewed end-on (0 = 0°) since the  physical area is small.
However, at near end-on, waves couple onto the scatterer which travel  16  E 11.5  0 ::,  CT V, I 0 7 -I CV > I 0 I .0  0 I  0 2 -l QJ  L.
l 0  0 I .c u w -3 I • I ,  I !.1 t I I I I  I , ...
I I  I  20 -r-- Measured  Calculated  30 40 50 60  Angular orientalion B THE RADAR EQUATION 35  70 80 90  Figure 2.IO Backscatter cross section or a long thin rod.
(From l;eters,26 IRE Trans.)  down the length of the object and reflect from the discontinuity at the far end.
This gives rise to  a traveling wave component that is not predicted by physical optics theory.26•35  An interesting radar scattering object is the cone-sphere, a cone whose base is capped with  a sphere such that the first derivatives of the cone and sphere contours are equal at the join  between the two.
Figure 2.11 is a plot of the nose-on radar cross section.
Figure 2.12 is a plot as  a function of aspect.
The cross section of the cone-sphere from the vicinity of the nose-on  direction is quite low.
Scattering from any object occurs from discontinuities.
The discontinui­ ties, and hence the backscattering, of the cone-sphere are from the tip and from the join  between the cone and the sphere.
There is also a backscattering contribution ftom a" creeping  0  er =0.4 >..2  §  li; -201---1-~~~~~~~-+~~~~~~~~~~~  er = 0.01 X2  V>  l  ~ -.30-­e  u  Oiomefer (Wovefengths)  Figure 2.11 Radar cross section of a cone sphere with 15° half angle as a function of the diameter in  wavelengths.
(After Blore,21 IEEE Trans.) ·  180°  2700 90° (al  160°  90° (b)  Figure 2.12 Measured radar cross section (u/A2 given in dB) of a large cone-sphere with 12.5° half angle  and radius of base= 10.4A.
(a) horizontal (perpendicular) polarization, (b)vertical (parallel)polarization.
 (From Pannell et a/.61)  36  THE RADAR EQUATION 37  wave" which travels around the hasc of the sphere.
The nose-on radar cross section is small  and decreases as the square of the wavelength.
The cross section is small over a relatively large  angular region.
A large specular return is obtained when the cone-sphere is viewed at near  perpendicular incidence to the cone surface, i.e., when O = 90 -a, where a= cone half angle.
 From the rear half of the cone-sphere, the radar cross section is approximately that of the  sphere.
 The nose-on cross section of the cone-sphere varies, but its maximum value is approxi­ mately 0.412 and its minimum is 0.0U.2 for a wide range of half-angles for frequencies above  the Rayleigh region.
The null spacing is also relatively insensitive to the cone half-angle.
If a  "typical" value of cross section is taken as 0.
L.t2, the cross section at S band (.,l = 0.1 m) is  10--3 m2, and at X band (,l = 3 cm), the cross section is approximately 10-4 m2.
Thus, in  theory.
the cone-sphere can have very low backscatter energy.
Suppose, for example, that the  projected area of the cone-sphere were 1 m2• The radar cross section of a sphere, with the same  projected area, at S band is about 30 dB greater.
A corner reflector at S band, also of the same  projected area, has a radar cross section about 60 dB greater than the cone-sphere.
Thus,  objects with the same physical projected area can have considerably different radar cross  sections.
 In order to realize in practice the very low theoretical values of the radar cross section for  a cone-sphere, the tip or the cone must be sharp and not rounded, the surface must be smooth  (roughness small compared to a wavelength), the join between the cone and the sphere must  have a continuous first derivative, and there must be no hoJes, windows, or protuberances on  the surface.
A comparison of the nose-on cross section of several cone-shaped objects is given  in Fig.
2.13.
.
 Shaping of the target, as with the cone-sphere, is a good method for reducing the radar  cross section.
Materials such as carbon-fiber composites, which are sometimes used in aero­ space applications, can further reduce the radar cross section of targets as compared with that  produced by highly reflecting metallic materials.62  bl':'<  0  r::  Q  u  (I)  "' "' Ill  ~ u  ~  0  0  0  0:: +10  0  10  Cone Sphere  -20 ,  \ I  I 1-.
 \ 1 · Double -rounded cone  -30  40 -M ""--Circular ogive  -so---~~'--~-'-~~~~~---'~~--'~~ ........
~~--'  0 0 4 0 8 12 1 6 2.0 2.4  Oiomefer in wavelengths Figure 2.13 Radar cross section of  a set of 40° cones, double-backed  cones, cone-spheres, double­ rounded cones, and circular ogives  as a function of diameter in wave­ lengths.
(From Blore,21 IEEE  Trans.)  38 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  Complex targets.32·33 The radar cross section of complex targets such as ships, aircraft, cities,  and terrain are complicated functions of the viewing aspect and the radar frequency.
Target  cross sections may be computed with the aid of digital computers, or they may be measured  experimentally.
The target cross section can be measured with full-scale targets, but it is more  convenient to make cross-section measurements on scale models at the proper scaled  frequency.
63  A complex target may be considered as comprising a large number of independent objects  that scatter energy in all directions.
The energy scattered in the direction of the radar is of  prime interest.
The relative phases and amplitudes of the echo signals from the individual  scattering objects as measured at the radar receiver determine the total cross section.
The  phases and amplitudes of the individual signals might add to give a large total cross section, or  the relationships with one another might result in total cancellation.
ln general, the behavior is  somewhere b~tween total reinforcement and total cancellation.
If the separation between the  individual scattering objects is large compared with the wavelength-and this is usually true  for most radar applications-the phases of the individual signals at the radar receiver will vary  as the viewing aspect is changed and cause a scintillating echo.
 Consider the scattering from a relatively" simple" complex target consisting of two equal,  isotropic objects (such as spheres) separated a distance I (Fig.
2.14).
By isotropic scattering is  meant that the radar cross section of each object is independent of the viewing aspect.
The  separation I is assumed to be less than cr/2, where c is the velocity of propagation and r is the  pulse duration.
With this assumption, both scatterers are illuminated simultaneously by  the pulse packet.
Another restriction placed on I is that it be small compared with the distance  R from radar to target.
Furthermore, R 1 ~ R2 ::::: R.
The cross sections of the two targets are  assumed equal and are designated a0• The composite cross section a, of the two scatterers is  a, [ (4rr/ .
i) l a  O = 2 1 + cos -y-sm (, (2.37)  The ratio a,/a0 can be anything from a minimum of zero to a maximum of four times the cros~  section of an individual scatterer.
Polar plots of a,/a0 for various values of //J...
arc shown in  Fig.
2.15.
Although this is a rather simple example of a "complex" target, it is complicated  enough to indicate the type of behavior to be expected with practical radar targets.
 The radar cross sections of actual targets are ~ar more complicated in structure than the  simple two-scatterer target.
Practical targets are composed of many individual scatterers, each  with different scattering properties.
Also, interactions may occur between the scatterers which  affect the resultant cross section.
 An example of the cross section as a function of aspect angle for a propeller-driven  Rodar Figure 2.14 Geometry or the two-scatterer complex target.
 r \ \'\.
 ' \  \.,  \ oo  I  :J \  ~ ----\---~\~  ,.,.-,- \  \ \ CTr/CTo __ 900 2 3 4  I ~-1---7;_- / ' /\ -- \  00  I  • • k 4A-..1  (c) 00  I  • •  ~ 2A k  (b) THE RADAR EQUATION 39  Figure 2.15 Polar plots of a,/a0 for the two-scatterer complex target (Eq.
(2.37)].
(a) I= ,l.; (b) l = 2-l.;  (c) l = 4)..
 aircraft28 is shown in Fig.
2.16.
The aircraft is the B-26, a .World War II medium-range  two-engine bomber.
The radar wavelength was 10 cm.
These data were obtained exper­ imentally by mounting the aircraft on a turntable in surroundings free from other reflecting  objects and by observing with a nearby radar set.
The propellers were running during the  measurement and produced a modulation of the order of 1 to 2 kHz.
The cross section can  change by as much as 15 dB for a change in aspect of only 1°.
The maximum echo signal  occurs in the vicinity of broadside, where the projected area of the aircraft is largest.
 It is not usually convenient to obtain the radar cross section of aircraft by mounting the  full-size aircraft on a rotating table.
Measurements can be obtained with scale models on a  pattern range.
29 An example of such model measurements is given by the dashed curves in  Fig.
2.17.
If care is taken in the construction of the model and in the pattern-range  instrumentation, it is possible to achieve reasonably representative measurements.
 The radar cross section of an aircraft can also be obtained by computation.1 7 The target is  broken up into a number of simple geometrical shapes, the contribution of each (taking  40 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  35 dB  Figure 2.16 Experimental cross section of the B-26 two-engine bomber at 10-cm wavelength as a function  of azimuth angle.
(From Ridenour,28 courtesy McGraw-Hill Book Company, Inc.}  account of aspect changes and shadowing of one component by another) is computed and the  component cross sections are combined to yield the composite value.
The" theoretical" values  of Fig.
2.17 for B-47 were obtained by calculation.
 The most realistic method for obtaining the radar cross section of aircraft is to measure  the actual target in flight.
There is no question about the authenticity of the target being  measured.
An example of such a facility is the dynamic radar cross-section range of the U.S.
 Naval Research Laboratory.30 Radars at L, S, C and X bands illuminate the aircraft target in  flight.
The radar track data is used to establish the aspect angle of the target with respect to the  radar.
Pulse-to-pulse radar cross section is available, but for convenience in presenting the  data the values plotted usually are an average of a large number of values taken within a 10 by  10° aspect angle interval.
Examples of such data are given in Figs.
2.18 to 2.20.
The radar cross  section of the T-38 aircraft at head-on incidence is shown in Table 2.1.
This data was also  obtained from an aircraft in flight.
(The T-38 is a twin-jet trainer with a 7.7 m wing span and a  14 m length.)  Ll ..
 2 - 1,000  8  4 -Peok due  to leading  2 .
edge cl  Wtng \ I  100 8.
."-I ,, I  1 ·- I  " 0 'o I \ I  2  10' e\  5 \ \  4 \ \ I  \ I  \ I  V  ·- 2  10  8  6  4  2 -.....
__ THE RADAR EQUATION 41  --r -T-~--1··--r·--r---i-1-~--,,  I ' I '  I \  I I  I I  Peak due to / \ --Peak due  gos lank ----1--- ...
-r lo fuselage  I I  cl I I I  I I  0 ! 1  I I I  I I I  \ / I  I I I I o I  I / I  I I I I  I I I I \ I I I Peak due to  lroling edge  cl wing  I  f  I· I.
 I  I  I I I I I  I J I I  \ / /1 I --o--o  I I I '°\ I  \I I I / ,, lf I I / \  I o" \ f  J \ I ,,,/ '\, I  \ ---·/ • 'J .......
,,,,.,-· \  \ /  \ I \-~··  Azimuth angle -degrees Trailing  edge of  horizontal  toil I  Figure 2.17 Comparison of the theoretical and model-measurement horizontal-polarization radar cross  sections of the B-47 medium bomber jet aircraft with a wing span of 35 m and a length of 33 m.
Solid curve  is the average of the computed cross sections obtained by the University of Michigan Engineering  Research Institute at a frequency of 980 MHz.
Dashed curves are model measurements obtained by the  Ohio State University Antenna Laboratory at a frequency of 600 MHz.
Open circles are the maximum  values averaged over 10° intervals: solid circles are median values.
Radar is assumed to be in the same  plane as the aircraft.64  It can be seen that the radar cross section of an aircraft is difficult to specify concisely.
 Slight changes in viewing aspect or frequency result in large fluctuations in cross section.
 Nevertheless, a single value of cross section is sometimes given for specific aircraft targets for  use in computing the radar equation.
There is no standard, agreed-upon method for specifying  the single-valued cross section of an aircraft.
The average value or the median might be taken.
 Sometimes it is a "minimum" value, perhaps the value exceeded 99 percent of the time or 95  percent of the time.
It might also be the value which when substituted into the radar equation  assures that the computed range agrees with the experimentally measured range.
 Table 2.2 lists "example" values of cross section for various targets at microwave  frequencies.
Note that only a single value is given even though there can be a large variation.
 They should not be used for design purposes when actual data is available for the particular  targets of interest.
 A military propeller aircraft such as the AD-48 has a cross section of about 20 m2 at L  band, but a 100 m2 cross section at VHF.
The longer wavelengths at VHF result in greater  42 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  j  C  <O  :!:!  b • CTHH  o'~---o 20 40 -~80 -100 120 140 160 180  (b) Az,muth aspect angle {deg)  !al  30  20  10 ·--·-===-­c_.-----o--0  A=IBO  0o -10 -20 -30 -40  £1evolian aspect ong\e (degl kl Figure 2.18 (a) Azimuth variation of radar  cross section of a C-54 aircraft with constant  elevation angle of -10".
(The C-54 is the  military version of the four-piston-engined  DC-4 commercial aircraft with a wing span  of 36 m and a length of 29 m.) Each point  represents the average of medians obtained  from samples within a lO by 10" aspect cell.
 Frequency is 1300 MHz (L band) with linear  polarization.
V V = vertical polarization,  H H = horizontal polarization.
{b) Eleva­ tion-variation nose-on (azimuth = O") (c)  Elevation-variation tail-on {azimuth =  180°).
( From Olin and Queen.
;o)  cross section than microwaves because the dimensions of the scattering objects are compar­ able to the wavelength and produce resonance effects.
 An example of th~ measured radar cross section of a large ship (16,000 tons) is shown in  Fig.
2.21.
The aspect is at grazing incidence.
When averages of the cross section are taken  about the port and starboard bow and quarter aspects of a number of ships (omitting the peak  at broadside), a simple empirical expression is obtained for the median (50th percentile) value  of the cross section:  a = 52f i /'1.
D312  Oo 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 .
160 180  Az11nuth os.:,ec1 ongle(degl  (al 40~------~ 40r--------=,.,..--,  ,£' 30  b 10 A• o•  -10 -20  (bl 30  20  10 A• 1so•  ·30 -40 °i) -10--=-20 -30 -40  Elevatoon os;pec1 11119le( <1c9 I le I (2.38)  Figure 2.19 Same as Fig.
2.18 except fre­ quency is 9225 MHz (X band).
VH and  HV represent cross•polarized components.
 (From Olin and Queen.30)  i ,/ In!  I  ~-:: 1)" !  !=,~F~I ?P  '" ""1r1  ,,, ~( I ---·  0 0 ·~.,:::·::::::-::=·----·----~~;~  ' ------- ,1 -1nn"  '.o ·-j -'1('  (t,) fll",<111r"1n,;prrlo11'1t"{drfll (r.l THE RADAR EQUATION 43  Figure 2.20 Same as Fig.
2.19, but for circu­ lar polarization.
RR = right-hand polariza­ tion, LL = left-hand polarization; RL an<l  LR are cross-polarized components.
(From  Olin and Q11ee11.30)  Table 2.
la Radar cross section (square meters) of the T-3866  Head-on aspect ( ± 1.0 degree)  x,.,.
X I.R Svv Lvv  Percentile 20 50 80 20 50 80 20 50 80 20 50 80  Landing  gear up 0.33 0.83 l.7 0.21 0.53 1.2 1.6 3.1 4.7 1.5 1.8 2.2  Landing  gear extended 0.53 J .6 3.5 0.24 0.80 2.1 1.1 2.3 4.4 0.99 2.6 4.5  Table 2.lb Median cross section (X ,.,_) for aspects near nose-on  Azimuth angle (degrees) Azimuth angle (degrees)  Elevation Elevation  angle 0 2 5 7 angle 0 2 5 7  () lUn 16 0.72 0.45 0.90 1.2  (i 0.68 0.61 0.99 0.82 18 .
0.43 0.44 1.3 0.84  8 1.2 0.94 1.7 2.2 20 0.43 0.52 0.63 0,64  10 1.4 1.6 :u I .4 22 0.45 0.66 l.l l.1  12 U.70 1.0 1.6 2.1 24 0.65  14 0.79 0.60 0.63 1.5  Xu.: Transmit left circular polarization, receive left circular (X band).
XLR: Transmit left circular  polarization, receive right circular (X band).
Svv: Transmit vertical polarization, receive vertical (S band).
 Ln-: Same for L band.
 44 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  Table 2.2 Example radar cross sections at microwave frequencies  Conventional, unmanned winged missile  Small, single engine aircraft  Small fighter, or 4-passenger jet  Large fighter  Medium bomber or medium jet airliner  Large bomber or large jet airliner  Jumbo jet  Small open boat  Small pleasure boat  Cabin cruiser  Ship at zero grazing angle  Ship at higher grazing angles  Pickup truck  Automobile  Bicycle  Man  Bird  Insect Square meters  0.5  I  2  6  20  40  100  0.02  2  10  See Eq.
{2.38)  Displacement tonnage  expressed in m2  200  100  2  1  o.oi  10-s  where er= radar cross section in square meters,!= radar frequency in megahertz, and Dis the  ship's (full load) displacement in kilotons.31 This expression was derived from measurements  made at X, S, and L bands and for naval ships ranging from 2000 to 17,000 tons.
Although it  is probably valid outside this size and frequency range, it does not apply to elevation  angles other than grazing inc;idence.
At higher elevation angles, as might be viewed from  aircraft, the cross sections of ships might be considerably less than at grazing incidence,  perhaps by an order of magnitude.
When no better information is available, a very rough order  of magnitude estimate of the ship's cross section at other-than-grazing incidence can be had by  taking the ship's displacement in tons to be equal to its cross section in square meters.
The  average cross section of small pleasure boats 20 to 30 ft in length might have a radar cross  section in the vicinity of a few square meters at X band.68 Boats from 40 to 50 ft in length  might have a cross section of the order of 10 square meters.
 The radar cross section of an automobile at X band is generally greater than that of an  aircraft or a boat.
From the front the cross section might vary from 10 to 200 m2 at X band,  with 100 m2 being a typical value.65 The cross section increases with increasing frequency (up  to 60 GHz, the range of the measurements).
 The measured radar cross section of a man has been reported32 to be as follows:  Frequency, MHz  410  1,120  2,890  4,800  9,375 a, m2  0.033-2.33  0.098-0.997  0.140-1.05  0.368-1.88  0.495-1.22  The spread in cross-section values represents the variation with aspect and polarization.
 THE RADAR EQUATION 45  IPORTl  18d'  (a)  160W)  d  1ac!  (b)  figure 2.21 Azimuth v:iriation of the radar cross-section or a large Naval Auxiliary Ship at (a) S band  (2800 MHz) and (h) X band (9225 MHz).
both with horizontal polarization.
 46 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  The cross-section data presented in this section lead to the conclusion that it would not be  appropriate simply to select a single value and expect it to have meaning in the computation of  the radar equation without further qualification.
Methods for dealing with the cross sections of  complicated targets are discussed in the next section.
 2.8 CROSS-SECTION FLUCTUATIONS  The discussion of the minimum signal-to-noise ratio in Sec.
2.6 assumed that the echo signal  received from a particular target did not vary with time.
In practice, however, the echo signal  from a target in motion is almost never constant.
Variations in the echo signal may be caused  by meteorological conditions, the lobe structure of the antenna pattern, equipment instabili­ ties, or variations in the target cross section.
The cross sections of complex targets (the usual  type of radar target) are quite sensitive to aspect.30•36 Therefore, as the target aspect changes  relative to the radar, variations in the echo signal will result.
 One method of accounting for a fluctuating cross section in the radar equation is to select  a lower bound, that is, a value of cross section that is exceeded some specified (large) fraction  of time.
The fraction of time that the actual cross section exceeds the selected value would he  close to unity (0.95 or 0.99 being typical).
For all practical purposes the value selected is a  minimum and the target will always present a cross section greater than that selected.
This  procedure results in a conservative prediction of radar range and has the advantage of simpli­ city.
The minimum cross section of typical aircraft or missile targets generally occurs at or near  the head-on aspect.
 However, to properly account for target cross-section fluctuations, the prohahility­ density function and the correlation properties with time must be known ror the particular  target and type of trajectory.
Curves of cross section as a function of aspect and a knowkdgi..: of  the trajectory with respect to the radar are needed to obtain a true description of the dynami­ cal variations of cross section.
The probability-density function gives the probability of finding  any particular value of target cross section between the values of a and a + da, while the  autocorrelation function describes the degree of correlation of the cross section with time or  number of pulses.
The spectral density of the cross section (from which the autocorrdation  function can be derived) is also sometimes of importance, especially in tracking radars.
It is  usually not practical to obtain the experimental data necessary to compute the prohabiiity­ density function and the autocorrelation function from which the overall radar performance is  determined.
Most radar situations are of too complex a nature to warrant obtaining comrli..:ti..:  data.
A more economical method to assess the effects of a fluctuating cross section is lo  postulate a reasonable model for the fluctuations and to analyze it mathematically.
Swerling3 7  has calculated the detection probahilities for four different fluctuation models of cross section.
 In two of the four cases, it is assumed that the fluctuations are completely correlated during a  particular scan but are completely uncorrelated from scan to scan.
Jn the other two casi..:s, thi..:  fluctuations are assumed to be more rapid and uncorrelated pulse to pulse.
The four tluctua­ tion models are as follows:  Case /.
The echo pulses received from a target on any one scan are of constant amplitude  throughout the entire scan but are independent (uncorrelated) from scan to scan.
This  assumption ignores the effect of the antenna beam shape on the echo amplitude.
An echo  fluctuation of this type will be .referred to as scan-to-scan fluctuation.
The probability- • I L .
 THE RADAR EQUATION 47  (it:nsity function for the cross section er is given by tl1e density function  p( r;) = 1 exp ( -a ) a., a.,.
a20 (2.39a)  where era, is tile average cross section over all target lluctuations.
 Case 2.
The probability-density function for the target cross section is also given by Eq.
(2.39a),  hut the fluctuations arc more rapid than in case J and arc taken to be independent from  pulse to pulse instead of from scan to scan.
 Case 3.
In this case.
the fluctuation is assumed to be independent from scan to scan as in case  I.
hut tl1c ptohahility-drnsity function is given by  4cr ( 2<T) 11(cr) = 2 exp - CT av O"av (2.39b)  / Case 4.
The fluctuation is pulse to pulse according to Eq.
(2.39b)  The probability-density function assumed in cases l and 2 applies to a complex target  consisting of many independent scatterers of approximately equal echoing areas.
Although, in  theory, the number of independent scatterers must be essentially infinite, in practice the  number may be as few as four or five.
The probability-density function assumed in cases 3 and  4 is more indicative of targets that can be represented as one large rellector together with other  small rellectors.
In all the above cases, the value of cross section to be substituted in the radar  equation is the average cross section <Ta".
The signal-to-noise ratio needed to achieve a  specified probability of detection without exceeding a specified false-alarm probability can be  calculated for each model of target behavior.
For purposes of comparison, the nonlluctuating  cross section will he called case 5.
 A comparison of these five models for a false-alarm number "I= 108 is shown in Fig.
2.22  for 11 = 10 hits integrated.
When the detection probability is large, all four cases in which the  target cross section is not constant require greater signal-to-noise ratio than the constant cross  section of case 5.
For example, if the desired probability of detection were 0.95, a signal-to­ noise ratio of 6.2 dB/pulse is necessary if the target cross section were constant (case 5), but if  the target cross section fluctuated with a Rayleigh distribution and were scan-to-scan uncor­ related (case I), the signal-to-noise ratio would have to be 16.8 dB/pulse.
This increase in  signal-to-noise corresponds to a reduction in range by a factor of 3.28.
Therefore, if the  characteristics of the target cross section are not properly taken into account, the actual  performance of the radar might not measure up to the performance predicted as if the target  cross section were constant.
Figure 2.22 also indicates that for probabilities of detection  greater than about O.JO.
a greater signal-to-noise ratio is required when the fluctuations are  uncorrelated scan to scan (cases I and 3) than when the fluctuations are uncorrelated pulse to  pulse (cases 2 and 4).
In fact.
the larger the number of pulses integrated, the more likely it will  be for the fluctuations to average out.
and cases 2 and 4 will approach the nonfluctuating case.
 Curves exist ii ..
n for various values of hits per scan, 11, that give the signal-to-noise ratio  per pulse as a function of Pd and 111.
The signal-to-noise ratio per pulse can be used in the form  of the radar equation as given by Eq.
(2.32).
It is not necessary, however, to employ such an  elaborate set of data since for most engineering purposes the curves of Figs.
2.23 and 2.24 may  be used as corrections to the probability of detection (as found in Fig.
2.
7) and as the integration  improvement factor (Fig.
2.8a) for substitution into the radar equation of Eq.
(2.33).
 48 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  0.99  0.98  0.95  0.90  ((' 0.80  C  ._g 0.70  u  ~ 0.60  OJ  'O ....
0.50  0  ro 'O 0.40  0.30  0.20  0.10  0.05  0.02  0.01  -10  -15  OJ  C  0  L  0 -10 .2  0  L  <lJ  <I)  0  C ' 0  ...--5  0  C 0,  <I)  0 c::  0 :;::  "O 0 "O  <{ -5 0 5 10 15 20  Signal-to-noise ratio per pulse, dB 25 Figure 2.22 Comparison of detec­ tion probabilities for five different  models of target fluctuation for  11 = 10 pulses integrated and  30 false-alarm number n1 108.
 (Adapted from Swerling.
31)  Figure 2.23 Additional signal-to-noise  ratio required to achieve a particular  probability of detection, when the  target cross section fluctuates, as com- _5 '--...l.--..1..----1.._--1.._..___.___._-1--..1._..1..-_.i.___--1.._-1-.,....J pared with a non fluctuating target;  0.01 0.05 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.5 0.7 0.8 0.9 0.95 0.99 single hit, n = L (To be used in con- Probability of detection junction with Fig.
2.7 to find (S//\1) 1.)  30  ro  "O  0 25 u  .E  c  <lJ  E 20 <I.I > e a.
 ~  C 15 g  !:'.
 O'  :E  '=  " 10  <::  ~  5  10 THE RADAR EQUATION 49  ~Case 4 -50% Pd  Coses 1 and 3 -50, 90, 99% Pd  Cose 5 -99% Pd  Cose 5 -50% Pd  n, = 108  100  Number of pulses inlegroted, n 1000  Figure 2.24 Integration-improvement factor as a function of the number of pulses integrated for the five  types of target tluctuation considered.
 The procedure ror usirig the radar equation when the target is described by one of the  Swerling models is as follows:  1.
Find the signal-to-noise ratio from Fig.
2.7 corresponding to the desired value of detection  probability Pd and false-alarm probability Pr •.
 2.
From Fig.
2.23 determine the correction factor for either cases 1 and 2 or cases 3 and 4 to be  applied to the signal-to-noise ratio found from step 1 above.
The resultant signal-to-noise  ratio (S/ N)i is that which would apply if detection were based upon a single pulse.
 3.
If" pulses are integrated, the integration-improvement factor l;(n) = nE;(n) is found from  Fig.
2.24.
The parameters (S/ N)1 and 11£;(11) are substituted into the radar equation (2.33)  along with <Ta,.
 The integration-improvement raclor in Fig.
2.24 is in some cases greater than 11, or in  other words, the integration efficiency factor E1(n) > 1.
One is not getting something for  nothing, for in those cases in which the integration-improvement factor is greater than n, the  signal-to-noise ratio required for n 1 is larger thari for a nonfluctuating target.
The signal­ to-noise per pulse will always be less than that of an ideal predetection integrator for reasonable  values of Pd.
It should also be noted that the data in Figs.
2.23 and 2.24 are essentially  independent of the false-alarm number, at least over the range of 106 to 1010.
 The two probability-density functions of Eqs.
(2.39a) and (2.39b) that describe the  Swerling fluctuation models are special cases of the chi-square distribution of degree 2m.
3 8 The  probability density function is  m (mu)m- t ( mu) p(o-) = · 1 - exp --, (m -1).
!Tav <Tav O'av (i > 0 (2.40)  50 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  It is also called the gamma distribution.
In statistics texts, 2m is the number of degrees of  freedom, and is an integer.
However, when applied to target cross-section models, 2m is not  required to be an integer.
Instead, m can be any positive, real number.
When m = l, the  chi-square distribution of Eq.
(2.40) reduces to the exponential, or Rayleigh-power, distribu­ tion ofEq.
(2.39a) that applies to Swerling cases 1 and 2.
Cases 3 and 4, described by Eq.
(2.39b ),  are equivalent to m = 2 in the chi-square distribution.
The ratio of the variance to the average  value of the cross section is equal tom-112 for the chi-square distribution.
The larger the value  of m, the more constrained will be the fluctuations.
The limit of m equal to infinity corresponds  to the nonfluctuating target.
 The chi-square distribution is a mathematical model used to represent the statistics of thc  fluctuating radar cross section.
These distributions might not always fit the observed data, but  they are fair approximations in many cases and are used nevertheless for convenience.
The  chi-square distribution is described by two parameters: the average cross section a..,, and the  number of degrees of freedom 2m.
Analysis39 of measurements on actual aircraft Hying  straight, level courses shows that the cross-section fluctuations at a particular aspect are well  fitted by the chi-square distribution with the parameter m ranging from 0.9 to approximately 2  and with aav varying approximately 15 dB from minimum to maximum.
The parameters of the  fitted distribution vary with aspect angle, type of aircraft, and frequency.
The value of mis near  unity for all aspects except at broadside; hence, the distribution is Rayleigh with a varying  average value with the most variation at broadside aspect.
It was also found that the averagc  value has more effect on the calculation of the probability of detection than the value of m.
 Although the Rayleigh model might provide a good approximation to the radar cross sections  of aircraft in many cases, it is not always applicable.
Exceptions occur at broadside, as  mentioned, and for smaller aircraft.38 There are also examples where no chi-square distribu­ tion can be made to fit the experimental data.
 The chi-square distribution has been used to approximate the statistics of other-than­ aircrafl targets.
Weinstock38•40 showed that this distribution can describe certain simple  shapes, such as cylinders or cylinders with fins that are characteristic of some satellite objects.
 The parameter m varies between 0.3 and 2, depending on aspect.
These have sometimes been  called Weinstock cases.
 The chi-square distribution with m = 1 (Swerling cases 1 and 2) is the Rayleigh, or  exponential, distribution that results from a large number of independent scatterers, no one of  which contributes more than a small fraction of the total backscatter energy.
Although the  chi-square distribution with other than m = 1 has been observed empirically to give a reason­ able fit to the radar cross section distribution of many targets, there is no physical scallaing  mechanism on which it is based.
It has been said that the chi-square distribution with m = 2  (Swerling cases 3 and 4) is indicative of scattering from one large dominant scatterer togel her  with a colJection of small independent scatterers.
However, it is the Rice distribution that  follows from such a model.67 The Rice probability density function is  l+s [ u l ( p(a) = exp -s --{l + s) /0 2  O'av O'av !!:_ s(l + s)),  Uav (2.4 I}  wheres is the ratio of the radar cross section of the single dominant scatterer to the total cross  section of the small scatterers, and I 0( ) is the modified Bessel function of zero order.
38 This is  a more correct description of the single dominant scatterer model than the chi-square with  m = 2.
However it has been shown that the chi-square with m = 2 approximates the Rice when  the dominant-scatterer power is equal to the total cross section of the other, small scatterers,  and so long as the probability of detection is not large.41  THE RADAR EQUATION 51  The log-normal distribution has also been considered for representing target echo nuctua­ tions.
It can be expressed as  p(a) = (J > 0 (2.42)  where s4 standard deviation of In (a/am), and <Tm= median or a.
The ratio orthe mean to the  median value of a is exp (sJ/2).
There is no theoretical model of target scattering that leads to  the Jog-normal distribution, although it has been suggested that echoes from some satellite  bodies, ships, cylinders, plates, and arrays can be approximated by a log-normal probability  <l istribution.
42·4]  Figure 2.25 is a comparison of the several distribution models for a false alarm number of  l06 when all pulses during a scan are perfectly correlated but with pulses in successive scans  independent (scan-to-scan fluctuation).
 The fluctuation models considered in this section assume either complete correlation  'between pulses in any particular scan but with scan-to-scan independence (slow fluctuations),  -..
_., or else complete independence from pulse to pulse (fast fluctuation).
These represent two  extreme cases.
In some instances, there might be partial correlation of the pulses within a scan  (moderate nuctuation ).
Schwartz44 considered the effect of partial correlation for the case of  two pulses per scan (11 2).
The results for partial correlation fall between the two extremes of  completely uncorrclatc<l and completely corrclate<l, as might be expected.
Thus to estimate  0 99  098  0 95 ..
 090 - r;: 0 80  g O 70  u % 060  "O  -050  0  :;;::.
0 40 ·  15 o 30 ·  0 .0  !:.' 0 20 a.
 010  0  0  0 01  -10 -i- 0 5 15 20 25 30  Signal to noise roho per pulse dB  Figure 2.25 Comparison of detection probabilities ror Rice, log normal, chi-square with m = 2 (Swerling  case J) and nonfluctuating target models with "= 10 hits and false-alarm number n1 = 106• Ratio of  dominant-to-background equals unity (s = 1) for Rice distribution.
Ratio or mean-to-median cross section  for log-normal distribution = p.
 52 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  performance for partially correlated pulses, interpolation between the results for the correlated  and uncorrelated conditions can be used as an approximation.
A more general treatment  of partially correlated fluctuations has been given by Swerling.45 His analysis applies to a large  family of probability-density functions of the signal fluctuations and for very general correla­ tion properties.
Methods for the design of optimal receivers for the detection of moderately  fluctuating signals have been considered.46  It is difficult to be precise about the statistical model to be applied to any particular  target.
Few, if any, real targets fit a mathematical model with any precision and in some cases  it is not possible to approximate actual data with any mathematical model.
Even if the  statistical distribution of a target were known, it might be difficult to relate this to an actual  radar measurement since a target generally travels on some well-defined trajectory rather than  present a statistically independent cross section.
to the radar.
Thus the various mathematical  models cannot, in general, be expected to yield precise predictions of system performance.
 It has been suggested38•39 that if only one parameter is to be used to describe a complex  target, it should be the median value or the cross section with Rayleigh statistics (Swerling  cases 1 and 2).
Quite often Swerling case 1 is specified for describing radar performance since it  results in conservative values.
The uncertainty regarding fluctuating target models makes the  use of the constant (nonfluctuating) cross section in the radar equation an attractive alterna­ tive when a priori information about the target is minimal.
 2.9 TRANSMITfER POWER  The power P1 in the radar equation (2.1) is called by the radar engineer the peak power.
The  peak pulse power as used in the radar equation is not the instantaneous peak power of a sine  wave.
It is defined as the power averaged over that carrier-frequency cycle which occurs at the  maximum of the pulse of power.
(Peak power is usually equal to one-half the maximum  instantaneous power.) The average radar power Pav is also of i11terest in radar and is defined as  the average transmitter power over the pulse~repetition period.
If the transmitted waveform is  a train of rectangular pulses of width 1 and pulse-repetition period TP = ljf P, the average  power is related to the peak power by  (2.43)  The ratio Pav/ P,, r/Tp, or rf11 is called the duty cycle of the radar.
A pulse radar for detection of  aircraft might have typically a duty cycle of 0.001, while a CW radar which transmits contin­ uously has a duty cycle of unity.
 Writing the radar equation in terms of the average power rather than the peak power, we  get  R4 _ Pa.,GAeanEi(n)  mu -(4n)2kTo Fn(Bn r)(S/N)i fp (2.44u)  The bandwidth and the pulse width are grouped together since the product of the two is  usually of the order of unity in most pulse-radar applications.
 If the transmitted waveform is not a rectangular pulse, it is sometimes more convenient to  express the radar equation in terms of the energy Ei = PavUp contained in the transmiued  waveform:  4 E,GAe«nEi(n)  Rmax = (41t)2kT0Fn(Bnt)(S/N)1 (2.44b)  THE RADAR EQUATION 53  In this form.
the range does not depend explicitly on either the wavelength or the pulse  repetition frequency.
The important parameters affecting range are the total transmitted  energy 11£1• the transmitting gain G, the effective receiving aperture Ae, and the receiver noise  figure F".
 2.IO PULSE REPETITION FREQUENCY AND RANG(£ AMBIGUITIES  The pulse repetition frequency (prf) is determined primarily by the maximum range at which  targets arc expected.
Ir the prf is made too high, the likelihood of obtaining target echoes from  the wrong pulse transmission is increased.
Echo signals received after an interval exceeding the  pulse-repetition period are called 11111/tiple-time-arormd echoes.
They can result in erroneous or  confusing range measurements.
Consider the three targets labeled A, B, and C in Fig.
2.26a.
 Target A i~ located within the maximum unambiguous range Runamb [Eq.
(1.2)] of the radar,  target B is at a distance greater than Runamb but less than 2Runamb, while target C is greater  than 2Runarnh but less than 3Runarnh.
The appearance of the three targets on an A-scope is  sketched in Fig.
2.26/J.
The multiple-time-around echoes on the A-scope cannot be distin­ guished from proper target echoes actually within the maximum unambiguous range.
Only the  range measured for target A is correct; those for B and C are not.
 One method of distin_g.u-ishing multiple-time-around echoes from unambiguous echoes is  to operate with a varying pulse repetition frequency.
The echo signal from an unambiguous  range target will appear at the same place on the A-scope on each sweep no matter whether the  prf is modulated or not.
However, echoes from multiple-time-around targets will be spread  over a finite range as shown in Fig.
2.26c.
The prf may be changed continuously within  prescribed limits.
or it may be changed discretely among several predetermined values.
The  number of separate pulse repetition frequencies will depend upon the degree of the multiple­ time targets.
Second-time targets need only two separate repetition frequencies in order to be  resolved.
 n _____ ~ ~' n f!_' C ~" 11 ~--~' L_J L_: LI\__; L_  ~ ..
Runomb---1 I I  I I  I I  t =O t =1/t p t = 2/fp t == 3/tp  Time (or range) __,._  (a)  ~ 8 C 4  (\ (\ (\  Range - (b)  n A& (\  Range -...+- ( C)  Figure 2.26 Multiple-time-around echoes that give rise to ambiguities in range.
(a) Three targets A, Band  C.
where A is within R110,mb.
and B and C are multiple-time-around targets; (b) the appearance of the  three targets on the A-scope; (c) appearance of the three targets on the A-scope with a changing prf.
 54 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  Instead of modulating the prf, other schemes that might he employed to" mark" succcs­ sive pulses so as to identify multiple-time-around echocs include changing thi.: pulsi.: amplitudi.:,  pulse width, frequency, phase, or polarization of transmission from pulse to pulse.
Genaally,  such schemes are not so successful in practice as one would like.
One of the fundamental  limitations is the foldover of nearby targets; that is, nearby strong ground targets (clutter) can  be quite large and can mask weak multiple-time-around targets appearing at the same place  on the display.
Also, more time is required to process the data when resolving ambiguities.
 Ambiguities may theoretically be resolved by observing the variation of the echo signal  with time (range).
This is not always a practical technique, however, since the echo-signal  amplitude can fluctuate strongly for reasons other than a change in range.
Instead, the range  ambiguities in a multiple prf radar can be conveniently decoded and the true range found by  the use of the Chinese remainder theorem41 or other computational algorithms:Hi  2.11 ANTENNA PARAMETERS  Almost all radars use directive antennas for transmission and reception.
On transmission, the  directive antenna channels the radiated energy into a beam to enhance the energy con­ centrated in the direction of the target.
The antenna gain G is a measure of the power radiatcd  in a particular direction by a directive antenna to the power which would have been radiati.:d  in the same direction by an omnidirectional antenna with 100 percent efficiency.
More  precisely, the power gain of an antenna used for transmission is  G(n "') = pow~r radiated per unit solid angle in azimuth O and elevation <j)  o, 'I' d b f .
(2.45) power accepte y antenna rom its generator/4n  Note that the antenna gain is a function of direction.
If it is greater than unity in some  directions, it must be less than unity in other directions.
This follows from the conservation of  energy.
When we speak of antenna gain in relation to the radar equation, we shall usually  mean the maximum gain G, unless otherwise specified.
One of the basic principles of antenna  theory is that of reciprocity, which states that the properties of an antenna are the same no  matter whether it is used for transmission or reception.
 The antenna pattern is a plot of antenna gain as a function of the direction of radiation.
( A  typical antenna pattern plotted as a function of one angular coordinate is shown in Fig.
7.1.)  Antenna beam shapes most commonly employed in radar are the pencil beam (Fig.
2.27£1) and  the fan beam (Fig.
2.27b).
The pencil beam is axially symmetric, or nearly so.
Beamwidths of  typical pencil-beam antennas may be of the order of a few degrees or less.
Pencil bi.:ams arc  commonly used where it is necessary to measure continuously the angular position of a target  in both azimuth and elevation, as, for example, the target-tracking radar for the control of  weapons or missile guidance.
The pencil beam may be generated with a metallic rdlector  surface shaped in the form of a paraboloid of revolution with the electromagnetic energy fed  from a point source placed at the focus.
 Although a narrow beam can, if necessary, search a large sector or even a hemisphere, it is  not always desirable to do so.
Usually, operational requirements place a restriction on the  maximum scan time (time for the beam to return to the same point in space-) so that the radar  cannot dwell too long at any one radar resolution cell.
This is especially true if there is a large  number of resolution cells to be searched.
The number of resolution cells can be matcrial.ly  reduced if the narrow angular resolution cell of a pencil-beam radar is replaced by a beam in  which one dimension is broad while the other dimension is narrow, that is, a fan-shaped  pattern.
One method of generating a fan beam is with a parabolic reflector shaped to yield the  (al  (bl THE RADAR EQUATION 55  Figure 2.17 (a) Pencil-beam antenna pattern; (b)  fan-beam-antenna pattern.
 proper ratio between the azimuth and elevation beamwidths.
Many long-range ground-based  search radars use a ran-beam pattern narrow in azimuth and broad in elevation.
 The rate at which a fan-beam antenna may be scanned is a compromise between the rate  at which target-position information is desired (data rate) and the ability to detect weak  targets (probability or detection).
Unfortunately, the two are at cdds with one another.
The  more slowly the radar antenna scans, the more pulses will be available for integration and the  better the detection capability.
On the other hand, a stow scan rate means a longer time  hetwcen looks at the target.
Scan rates of practical search radars vary from 1 to 60 rpm, 5 or  6 rpm being typical for the long-range surveillance or aircraft.
 The coverage of a simple fan beam is usually inadequate for targets at high altitudes close  to the radar.
The simple fan-beam antenna radiates very little of its energy in this direction.
 However.
it is possible to modify the antenna pattern to radiate more energy at higher angles.
 One technique for accomplishing this is to employ a fan beam with a shape proportional to the  square of the cosecant of the elevation angle.
In the cosecant-squared antenna (Sec.
7.7), the  gain as a function of elevation angle is given by  G(<J,) = G(</>o) csc2 <P  csc2 <Po (2.46)  where G( <J,) gain at elevation angle <J,, and <Po and <Pm are the angular limits between which the  beam follows a csc2 shape.
This applies to the airborne search radar observing ground targets  as well as ground-based radars observing aircraft targets.
(In the airborne case, the angle</> is the  depression angle.) From <J, = 0 to <J, =<Po, the antenna pattern is similar to a normal antenna  pattern.
but from <J, = <Po to ¢ = <Pm, the antenna gain varies as csc2 ¢.
Ideally, the upper limit  <Pm should he 90°.
but it is always less than this with a single antenna because of practical  difficulties.
The cosecant-squared antenna may be generated by a distorted section or a parab­ ola or by a true parabola with a properly designed set of multiple feed horns.
The cosecant­ squared pattern may also be generated with an array-type antenna.
 56 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  The cosecant-squared antenna has the important property that the echo power P,  received from a target of constant cross section at constant altitude h is independent of the  target's range R from the radar.
Substituting the gam of the cosecant-squared antenna  [Eq.
(2.46)] into the simple radar equation gives  p _ P,G2(<j,0) csc4 <j,l2<J csc4 <j,  r -(41t)3 csc4 <Po R4 = K 1 -R4 (2.47)  where K 1 is a constant.
The height h of the target is assumed constant, and since csc <j, = R/h,  the received power becomes  (2.48)  where K 2 is a constant.
The echo signal is therefore independent of range for a constant­ altitude target.
 In practice, the power received from an antenna with a cosecant-squared pattern is not  truly independent of range because of the simplifying assumptions made.
The cross section er  varies with the viewing aspect, the earth is not flat, and the radiation pattern of any real  antenna can be made to only approxfmate the desired cosecant-squared pattern.
The gain of a  typical cosecant-squared antenna used for ground-based search radar might be about 2 dB  less than if a fan beam were generated by the same aperture.
 The maximum gain of an antenna is related to its physical area A (aperture) by  G _ 41tAp  -.A.2 (2.49)  where p = antenna efficiency and A= wavelength of radiated energy.
The antenna efficiency  depends on the aperture illumination and the efficiency of the antenna feed.
The product of p...l  is the effective aperture Ae.
A typical reflector antenna with a parabolic shape will produce a  beamwidth approximately equal to  (JO = 65).
 l (2.50)  where I is the dimension of the antenna in the plane of the angle 0, and).
and I are measured in  the same units.
The value of the constant, in this case taken to be 65, depends upon the )  distribution of energy (illumination) across the aperture.
 2.12 SYSTEM LOSSES  At the beginning of this chapter it was mentioned that one of the important factors omitk<l  from the simple radar equation was the losses that occur throughout the radar system.
The  losses reduce the signal-to-noise ratio at t_he receiver output.
They may be of two kinds,  depending-upon whether or not they can be predicted with any degree of precision beforehand.
 The antenna beam-shape loss, collapsing loss, and losses in the microwave plumbing are  examples or losses which can be calculated if the system configuration is known.
These losses  are very real and cannot be ignored in any serious prediction or radar performance.
The loss  due to the integration of many pulses (or integration efficiency) has already been mentioned in  Sec.
2.6 and need not be discus·sed further.
Losses not readily subject to calculation and which  are less predictable include·those due,to' field degradation and to operator fatigue or lack of  operator motivation.
Estimates of the,'latter type of loss must be made on the basis of prior  TIIE RADAR EQUATION 57  experience and experimental observations.
They may be subject to considerable variation and  uncertainly.
Although the loss associated with any one factor may be small, there are many  possible loss mechanisms in a complete radar system, and their sum total can be significant.
 In this section, loss (number greater than unity) and efficiency (number less than unity)  are used interchangeably.
One is simply the reciprocal of the other.
 Plumbing loss.
There is always some finite loss experienced in the transmission lines which  co1111ect the output of the transmitter to the antenna.
The losses in decibels per 100 ft for radar  transmission lines are shown in Fig.
2.28.
At the lower radar frequencies the transmission line  introduces little loss, unless its length is exceptionally long.
At the higher radar frequencies,  attenuation may not always be small and may have to be taken into account.
In addition to the  losses in the transmission line itself, an additional loss can occur at each connection or bend in  the line and at the antenna rotary joint if used.
Connector losses are usually small, but if the  connection is poorly made.
it can contribute significant attenuation.
Since the same transmis­ sion line is generally used for both receiving and transmission, the loss to be inserted in the  radar equation is twice the one-way loss.
 The signal suffers attenuation as it passes through the duplexer.
Generally, the greater the  isolation required from the duplexer on transmission, the larger will be the insertion loss.
By  insertion loss is meant the loss introduced when the component, in this case the duplexer, is  inserted into the transmission line.
The precise value of the insertion loss depends to a large  extent on the particular design.
For a typical duplexer it might be or the order of 1 dB.
A  .::: 1.0  0  0  '-.
 QJ  -0 .
 C  0  0 :,  C  !!  <l 0.1 "" '-0.90 X 0.40  "-..
1.122 X 0.497  "-._1.372 X 0.622  ~ 1.872 X 0.872  ~""2.84 X 1.34  "" 3.4 X 1.7 .~  4.3 X 2.15 &  ~ ~ J>~  ~ 6.5x3.25 §  i;Oo'f.
\.
7.
7 X 3.85 [!t.e::- .
\0 \"' ~ ,•~I o'f.
"' 9.75 X 4.875 "'?" -61/6.
id i;O \ 11.5 X 5.
75  ,•fl ~' 9 '\.
'-15 X 7.5  "-18x9  21 X 10.5  o.01.__~--'----'--'-'-...l..-1-'-'-.,__~-'---l'---'---'--'--'-'-'--'--~-'---.J ........
1-1.
..................
 0.1 1.0 10 100  Frequency, gigacycles  Figure 2.28 Theoretical (one-way) attenuation of RF transmission lines.
Waveguide sizes are inches and  are the inside dimensions.
(Data .from Armed Services Index of R.F.
Transmission Lines and Fittings,  ASESA.
49-28.}  58 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  gas-tube duplexer also introduces loss when in the fired condition (arc loss); approximately  1 dB is typical.
 In an S-band (3000 MHz) radar, for example, the plumbing losses might be as follows:  100 ft of RG-113/U Al waveguide transmission line (two-way)  Loss due to poor connections (estimate)  Rotary-joint loss  Duplexer loss  Total plumbing loss 1.0 dB  0.5 dB  0.4 dB  1.5 dB  3.4 dB  Beam-shape loss.
The antenna gain that appears in the radar equation was assumed to be a  constant equal to the maximum value.
But in reality the train of pulses returned from a target  with a scanning radar is modulated in amplitude by the shape of the antenna beam.
To properly  take into account the pulse-train modulation caused by the beam shape, the computations  of the probability of detection (as given in Secs.
2.5, 2.6, and 2.8) would have to be performed  assuming a modulated train of pulses rather than constant-amplitude pulses.
Some authors do  indeed take account of the beam shape in this manner when computing the probability of  detection.
Therefore, when using published computations of probability of detection it should  be noted whether the effect of the beam shape has been included.
In this text, this approach is  not used.
Instead a beam-shape loss is added to the radar equation to account for the fact that  the maximum gain is employed in the radar equation rather than a gain that changes pulse to  pulse.
This is a simpler, albeit less accurate, method.
It is based on calculating the reduction in  signal power and thus does not depend on the probability of detection.
It applies for detection  probabilities in the vicinity of 0.50, but it is used as an approximation with other values as a  matter of convenience.
 Let the one-way-power antenna pattern be approximated by the gaussian expression  exp (-2.78lJ2/0i), where 8 is the angle measured from the center of the beam and 08 is the  beamwidth measured between hair-power points.
If n8 is the number of pulses received within  the half-power beam width 08, and 11 the total number of pulses integrated (11 does not neces­ sarily equal 118), then the beam-shape Joss (number greater than unity) relative to a radar that  integrates all n pulses with an antenna gain corresponding to the maximum gain at the beam  center is  11 Beam-shape loss= (n-i,,2 ··--·-·--·-- (2.51)  1 + 2 L exp ( -5.55k2 /ni)  ,.
= 1  For example, if we integrate 11 pulses, all lying uniformly between the 3-dB beamwidth.
the  loss is 1.96 dB.
 The beam-shape loss considered above was for.
a beam shaped in one plane only.
It  applies to a fan beam, or to a pencil beam if the target passes through its center.
If the target  passes through any other point of the.
pencil beam, the maximum signal received will 11ot  correspond to the signal from the beam center.
The beam-shape loss is reduced by the ratio of  the square of the maximum antenna gain at which the pulses were transmitted divided by the  square of the antenna gain at beam center.
The ratio involves the square because of the  two-way transit.
 When there are a large number of pulses per beamwidth integrated, the scanning loss is  generally taken to be 1.6 dB for a fan beam scanning in one coordinate and 3.2 d R when  two-coordinate scanning is used.49-si  When the antenna scans rapidly enough that the gain on transmit is not the same as the  gain on receive, an additional loss has to be computed, called the scanning loss.
The technique  THE RADAR EQUATION 59  for computing scanning loss is similar in principle to that for computing beam-shape loss.
 Scanning loss can be important for rapid-scan antennas or for very Jong range radars such as  those designed to view extraterrestrial objects.
A similar loss must be taken into account when  covering a search volume with a step-scanning pencil beam, as with a phased array/8 since not  all regions of space are illuminated by the same value of antenna gain.
 Limiting loss.
Limiting in the radar receiver can lower the probability of detection.
Although a  well-designed and engineered receiver will not limit the received signal under normal circum­ stances.
intensity modulated CRT displays such as the PPI or the B-scope have limited dyna­ mic range and may limit.
Some receivers, however, might employ limiting for some special  purpose, as for pulse compression processing for example.
 Limiting results in a loss of only a fraction of a decibel for a large number of pulses  integrated, provided the limiting ratio (ratio of video limit level to rms noise level) is as large as  2 or 3.10 Other analyses of bandpass limiters show that for small signal-to-noise ratio, the  reduction in the signal-to-noise ratio of a sine-wave imbedded in narrowband gaussian noise is  n/4 (about l dB).53 However, by appropriately shaping the spectrum of the input noise, it has  been suggested54 that the degradation can be made negligibly small.
 Collapsing loss.
Ir the radar were to integrate additional noise samples along with the wanted  signal-to-noise pulses, the added noise results in a degradation called the collapsing loss.
It can  occur in displays which collapse the range information, such as the C-scope which displays  elevation vs.
azimuth angle.
The echo signal from a particular range interval must compete in a  collapsed-range C-scope display, not only with the noise energy contained within that range  interval, but with the noise energy from all other range intervals at the same elevation and  azimuth.
In some 3D radars (range, azimuth, and elevation) that display the outputs at all  elevations on a single PPI (range, azimuth) display, the collapsing of the 3D radar information  onto a 2D display results in a loss.
A collapsing loss can occur when the output of a high­ resolution radar is displayed on a device whose resolution is coarser than that inherent in the  radar.
A collapsing loss also results if the outputs of two (or more) radar receivers are  combined and only one contains signal while the other contains noise.
 The mathematical derivation of the collapsing loss, assuming a square-law detector.
may  be carried out as suggested by Marcum10 who has shown that the integration of m noise  pulses.
along with 11 signal-plus-noise pulses with signal-to-noise ratio per pulse (S/ N)n, is  equivalent to the integration of m + n signal-to-noise pulses each with signal-to-noise ratio  n(S/ N),, /(m + 11 ).
The collapsing loss in this case is equal to the ratio of the integration loss L;  (Sec.
2.6) form + 11 pulses to the integration loss for n pulses, or  (2.52)  For example.
assume that 10 signal-plus-noise pulses are integrated along with 30 noise pulses  and that Pd= 0.90 and 111 108• From Fig.
2.8b, L1(40) is 3.5 dB and L1(10) is 1.7 dB, so that  the collapsing loss is 1.8 <l B.
It is also possible to account for the collapsing loss by substituting  into the radar equation of Eq.
(2.33) the parameter E1(m + n) for E1(n), since E1(n) = 1/Li(n).
 The above applies for a square-law detector.
Trunk55 has shown that the collapsing loss  for a linear detector differs from that of the square-law detector, and it can be much greater.
 The comparison between the two is shown in Fig.
2.29 as a function of the collapsing ratio  (m + 11)!11.
The difference between the two cases can be large.
As the number of hits II increases,  the difference becomes smaller.
 60 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  18  16  14  !g 12  ::; 10 0  g' 8 .
 iii C.
E 6 -·  0 u 4 -- 2  2 n=I  n=B  n=64  4 6 10 20 40 60 100 200  Collapsing rolio "' l m + n) In Linear  detector  Figure 2.29 Collapsing loss versus collapsing ratio {m + ri)/n, for a false alarm prohahilily of JO O and a  detection probability of 0.5.
(From Trunk,ss co11r1esy Proc.
IHEE.)  Nonideal equipment.
The transmitter power introduced into the radar equation was assumed  to be the output power (either peak or average).
However, transmitting tubes are not all uniform  in quality, nor should it be expected that any individual tube will remain at the same level of  performance throughout its useful life.
Also the power is usually not uniform over the operat­ ing band of the device.
Thus, for one reason or another, the transmitted power may be other  than the design value.
To allow for this, a loss factor may be introduced.
This factor can vary  with the application, but lacking a better number, a loss of about 2 dB might be used as an  approximation.
 Variations in the receiver noise figure over the operating band also are to be expected.
 Thus, if the best noise figure over the band is used in the radar equation, a loss factor has to be  introduced to account for its poorer value elsewhere within the band.
 If the receiver is not the exact matched filte.r for the transmitted waveform, a loss in  signal-to-noise ratio will occur.
Examples are given in Table 10.1.
A typical value of loss for a  nonmatched receiver might be about l dB.
Because of the exponential relation between the  false-alarm time and the threshold level [Eq.
(2.26)], a slight change in the threshold can caus1.:  a significant change in the false alarm time.
In practice, therefore, it may be necessary to set the  threshold level slightly higher than calculated so as to insure a tolerable false alarm time in  the event of circuit instabilities.
This increase in the threshold is equivalent to a loss.
 Operator loss.
An alert, motivated, and well-trained operator should perform as well as  described by theory.
However, when distracted, tired, overloaded, or not properly trained,  operator performance will decrease.
There is little guidance available on how to account for  the performance of an operator.
 Based on both empirical and experimental results, one study69 gives the operator­ efficiency factor as  (2.53)  THE RADAR EQUATION 61  where Pd is the single-scan probability of detection.
This was said to apply to a good operator  viewing a PPI under good conditions.
Its degree of applicability, however, is not clear.
 It is not unusual to find no account of the operator loss being taken in the radar equation.
 This is probably justified when operators are alert, motivated, and well trained.
It is also  justified when automatic (electronic) detections are made without the aid of an operator.
 When the operator does introduce loss into the system, it is not easy to select a proper value to  account for it.
The better action is to take steps to correct loss in operator performance rather  than tolerate it by including it as a loss factor in the radar equation.
 Field degradation.
When a radar system is operated under laboratory conditions by engineer­ ing personnel and experienced technicians, the inclusion of the above losses into the radar  equation should give a realistic description of the performance of the radar under normal  conditions (ignoring anomalous propagation effects).
However, when a radar is operated  under field conditions.
the performance usually deteriorates even more than can be accounted  for hy the above losses, especially when the equipment is operated and maintained by inexper­ ienced or unmotivated personnel.
It may even apply, to some extent, to equipment operated hy  professional engineers under adverse field conditions.
Factors which contribute to field degra­ dation arc poor tuning, weak tubes, water in the transmission lines, incorrect mixer-crystal  current, deterioration of receiver noise figure, poor TR tube recovery, loose cable connections,  etc.
 To minimize field degradation, radars should be designed with built-in automatic  performance-monitoring equipment.
Careful observation of performance-monitoring instru­ ments and timely preventative maintenance can do much to keep radar performance up to  design level.
Radar characteristics that might be monitored include transmitter power, receiver  noise figure, the spectrum and/or shape of the transmitted pulse, and the decay time of the TR  tube.
 A good estimate of the field degradation is difficult to obtain since it cannot be predicted  and is dependent upon the particular radar design and "the conditions under which it is  operating.
A degradation or 3 dB is sometimes assumed when no other information is  available.
 Other los.~ factors.
A radar designed to discriminate between moving targets and stationary  objects (MTI radar) may introduce additional loss over a radar without this facility.
The MTI  discrimination technique results in complete loss of sensitivity for certain values of target  velocity relative to the radar.
These are called blind speeds.
The blind-speed problem and the  loss resulting therefrom are discussed in more detail in Chap.
4.
 In a radar with overlapping range gates, the gates may be wider than optimum for  practical reasons.
The additional noise introduced b_y the nonoptimum gate width will result in  some degradation.
The straddling loss accounts for the loss in signal-to-noise ratio for targets  not at the center of the range gate or at the center of the filter in a multiple-filter-bank  processor.
 Another factor that has a profound effect on the radar range performance is the propaga­ tion medium discussed briefly in the next section and in Chap.
12.
 There are many causes of loss and inefficiency in a radar.
Not all have been included here.
 Although they may each be small, the sum total can result in a significant reduction in radar  performance.
It is important to understand the origins of these losses, not only for better  predictions of radar range, but also for the purpose of keeping them to a minimum by careful  radar design.
 62 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  2.13 PROPAGATlON EFFECTS  In analyzing radar performance it is convenient to assume that the radar and target are both  located in free space.
However, there are very few radar applications which approximate  free-space conditions.
In most cases of practical interest, the earth's surface and the medium in  which radar waves propagate can have a significant effect on radar performance.
In-some  instances the propagation factors might be important enough to overshadow all other factors  that contribute to abnormal radar performance.
The effects of non-free-space propagation on  the radar are of three categories: (1) attenuation of the radar wave as it propagates through the  earth's atmosphere, (2) refraction of the radar wave by the earth's atmosphere, and (3) lohe  structure caused by interference between the direct wave from radar to target and the wave  which arrives at the target via reflection from the ground.
 In general, for most applications of radar at microwave frequencies, the attenuation in  propagating through either the normal atmosphere or through precipitation is usually not  sufficient to affect radar performance.
However, the re.fle~tion of the radar signal from rain  (clutter) is often a limiting factor in the performance of radar in adverse weather.
 The decreasing density of the atmosphere with increasing altitude results in a bending, or  refraction, of the radar waves in a manner analogous to the bending of light waves by an  optical prism.
This bending usually results in an increase in the radar line of sight.
Normal  atmospheric conditions can be accounted for in a relatively simple manner by considering the  earth to have a larger radius than actual.
A "typical" earth radius for refractive effects is  four-thirds the actual radius.
At times, atmospheric conditions might cause more than usual  bending of the radar rays, with the result that the radar range will be considerably increased.
 This condition is called superrefraction, or ducting, and is a form of anomalous propagation.
 It is not necessarily a desirable condition since it cannot be relied upon.
It can degrade the  performance of MTI radar by extending the range at which ground clutter is seen.
·  The presence of the earth's surface not only restricts the line of sight, but it can cause  major modification of the .coverage within the line of sight by breaking up the antenna  elevation pattern into many lobes.
Energy propagates directly from the radar to the target, but  there can also be energy that travels to the target via a path that includes a reflection from the  ground.
The direct and ground-reflected waves interfere at the target either destructively or  constructively to produce nulls or reinforcements (lobes).
The lobing that resuhs causes non­ uniform illumination of the coverage, and is an important factor that influences the capability  of a radar system.
 Most propagation effects that are of importance cannot be easily included into the radar  equation.
They must be properly taken into account, however, since they can have a major  impact on performance.
Further discussion of the effects of propagation on radar is given in  Chap.
12.
 2.14 OTHER CONSIDERATIONS  Prediction of radar range.
In this chapter, some of the more important factors that enter in10  the radar equation for the prediction of range were briefly considered.
The radar equation  (2.1 ), with the modifications indicated in this chapter, becomes  -R4 _ .
PavGAp 0anE;(11)  max -(4n)2kTo f n(Br)fp(S/N), Ls (2.54)  THE RADAR F.Ql/ATION 63  where R,,, ..
= maximum radar range, 111  (i = antenna gain  A = antenna aperture, m2  l'a = antenna efficiency  11 = number of hits integrated  E;(11) = integration efficiency (less than unity)  L, = system losses (greater than unity) not included in other parameters  rr = radar cross section of target, m2  F" = noise figure  k = Boltzmann's constant= 1.38 x 10-23 J/deg  T0 = standard temperature= 290 K  B = receiver bandwidth, Hz  r = pulse width.
s  .f,, = pulse repetition frequency, Hz  (SI N)1 = signal-to-noise ratio required at receiver output (based on single-hit  detection)  This equation can also he written in terms of energy rather than power.
The energy in the  transmitted pulse is E, = f'a,/1~ = P1 r and the signal-to-noise power ratio (S/N) 1 can be  replaced hy the signal-to-noise energy ratio (E/ N 0)1, where E = S/r is the energy in the  received signal.
and N0 = N/B is the noise power per unit bandwidth, or the noise energy.
Also  note that Br ~ 1, and T0 Fn = ~ is defined as the system noise temperature.
Then the radar  equation becomes  R4 = Er GAp 0<rnE;(11)  max (4rr)2kJ;(E/No)1 Ls (2.55)  Although Eq.
(2.55) was derived for a rectangular pulse, it can be applied to other waveforms  as well, provided matched-filter detection is employed.
Most calculations for probability of  detection with signal-to-noise ratio as the parameter apply equally well when the ratio of  signal-energy lo noise-power-per-hertz is used instead.
The radar equation developed in this  chapter for pulse radar can be readily modified to accommodate CW, FM-CW, pulse-doppler,  MTI.
or tracking radar.47·56·57  Radar performance figure.
This is a figure of merit sometimes used to express the relative  performance of radar.
It is defined as the ratio of the pulse power of the radar transmitter to  the minimum detectable signal power of the receiver.
It is not often used.
 Blip-scan ratio.
This is the same as the single-scan probability of detection.
It predates the  widespread use of the term probability of detection and came about by the manner in which  the performance of ground-based search-radars was checked.
An aircraft would be flown on a  radial course and on each scan of the antenna it would be recorded whether or not a target blip  had been detected on the radar display.
This was repeated many times until sufficient data was  obtained to compute, as a funct_ig1J of r<!_11ge, the ratio of the average num~er of scans the target  was seen al a particular range (blips) to the total number of times it could have been seen  (scans).
This is the blip-scan ratio and is the probability of detecting a target at a particular  range.
altitude, and aspect.
The head-on and tail-on are the two easiest aspects to provide in  field measurements.
The experimentally found blip-scan ratio curves are subject to many  limitations.
but it represents one of the few methods for evaluating the performance of an  actual radar equipment against real targets under somewhat controlled conditions.
 64 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  Cumulative probability of detection.
If the single scan probability of detection for a surveil­ lance radar is Pd, the probability of detecting a target at least once during N scans is called the  cumulative probability of detection, and may be written  (2.56)  The variation of Pd with range might have to be taken into account when computing P,.
The  variation of range based on the cumulative probability of detection can be as the third power  rather than the more usual fourth power variation based on the single scan probability.
59  The cumulative probability has sometimes been proposed as a measure of the detectabi­ lity of a radar rather than the single-scan probability of detection, which is more conservative.
 In practice the use of the cumulative probability is not easy to apply.
Furthermore, radar  operators do not usually use such a criterion for reporting detections.
They seldom report a  detection the first time it is observed, as is implied in the definition of cumulative probability.
 Instead, the criterion for reporting a detection might be a threshold crossing on two successive  scans, or threshold crossings on two out of three scans, three out of five, or so forth.
In  track-while-scan radars the measure of performance might he the probability of initiating a  target track rather than a criterion based on detection alone.
 Surveillance-radar range equation.
The form of the radar equation described in this chapter  applies to a radar that dwells on the target for n pulses.
It is sometimes called the searchlight  range equation.
In a· search or surveillance radar there is usually an additional constraint  imposed that modifies the range equation significantly.
This constraint is that the radar is  required to search a specified volume of space within a specified time.
Let n denote the angular  region to be searched in the scan time ts.
(For example, Q mjght represent a region 360° in  azimuth and 30° in elevation.) The scan time is ts= t0n;n0, where t0 is the time on target=  11/JP, and n0 is the soi id angular beam width which is approximately equal to the product of the  azimuth beamwidth 80 times the elevation beamwidth 8e.
(This assumes that 0.-t /Oe and 0£ /0~  are integers, where O A is the total azimuth coverage and 0£ the total elevation coverage, such  that n ~ 8 A fh .) The antenna gain can be written as G = 4rr/00.
With the above substitutions  into Eq.
(2.54) the radar equation for a search radar becomes  R4 = PavAeO"Ei(n) ts  max 4rrkT0 Fn(S/N)i Ls n (2.57)  This indicates that the important parameters in a search radar are the average power and the  antenna effective aperture.
The frequency does not appear explicitly in the search-radar range  equation.
However, the lower frequencies are preferred for a search radar since large power  and large aperture are easier to obtain at the lower frequencies, it is easier to build a good MTI  capability, and there is little effect from adverse weather.
 Different radar range equations can .be derived for different applications, depending on  the particular constraints imposed.
The radar equation will also be considerably different if  clutter echoes or external noise, rather than receiver noise, determine the background with  which the radar signal must compete.
Some of these other forms of the radar equation are  given elsewhere in this text.
 Accuracy of the radar equation.
The predicted value of the range as found from the radar  equation cannot be expected to be checked experimentally with any degree of accuracy.
It is  difficult to determine precisely all the important factors that must be included in the radar  equation and it is difficult to establish a set of controlled, realistic experimental conditions in  which to test the calculations.
Thus it might not be worthwhile to try to obtain too great a  THE RADAR EQUATION 65  precision in the individual parameters of the radar equation.
Nevertheless, if a-particular range  is required of a radar, the systems engineer must provide it.
The safest means lo achieving a  specified range performance is to design conservatively and add a safety factor.
The inclusion  of a safety factor in design is not always appreciated, especially in competitive procurements,  but it is a standard procedure in many other engineering disciplines.
In the few cases where this  luxury was permitted.
fine radars were obtained since they accomplished what was needed  even under degraded conditions.
 REFERENCES  L Ridenour, L.
N.: "Radar System Fnginccring," MIT Radiation Laboratory Series, vol.
I.
p.
592.
 McGraw-Hill Book Company.
New York.
1947.
 2.
Lawson.
J.
Land G.
E.
Uhlcnbeck (eds.): "Threshold Signals," MIT Radiation Laboratory Series,  vol.
24, McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York, 1950, p.
177.
 3.
Van Vlcek.
J.
H ..
and D.
Middleton: A Theoretical Comparison of the Visual, Aural, and Meter  Reception or Pulsed Signals in the Presence of Noise, J.
Appl.
Phys ..
vol.
17, pp.
940-971, November,  1946.
 4.
Bennett, W.
R.: Methods of Solving Noise Problems, Proc.
IRE, vol.
44, pp.
609-638, May, 1956.
 5.
Davenport.
W.
B..
and W.
L Root: "Introduction to Random Signals and Noise," McGraw-Hill  Book Co ..
New York, 1958.
 6.
Bendat.
J.
S.: "Principles and Application:; of Random Noise Theory,'' John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New  York, 1958.
 7.
Helstrom, C.
W.: "Statistical Theory of Signal Detection," Pergamon Press.
New York, 1960.
 8.
Parzcn.
E.: "Modern Probability Theory and Its Applications," John Wiley & Sons, lnc., New York,  1960.
 9.
Rice.
S.
0.: Mathematical Analysis of Random Noise, Bell System Tech.
J., vol.
23, pp.
282-332, 1944.
 and vol.
24.
pp.
46 · I 56, 1945.
 10.
Marcum.
J.
I.: A Statistical Theory of Target Detection by Pulsed Radar, Mathematical Appendix,  I RE Trans., vol.
IT-6, pp.
145-267, April, 1960.
 I 1.
Meyer, 0.
P ..
and H.
A.
Mayer:" Radar Target Detection," Academic Press, New York, 1973.
 12.
Hollis, R.: False Alarm Time in Pulse Radar, Proc.
IRE, vol.
42, p.
1189, July, 1954.
 13.
Trunk, G.
V.: Detection Results for Scanning Radars E!nploying Feedback Integration, IEEE Trans ..
 vol.
AES-6, pp.
522-527, July, 1970.
 14.
Harrington, J.
V., and T.
F.
Rogers: Signal-to-noise Improvement through Integration in a Storage  Tuhc, Proc.
IRE, vol.
38, pp.
1197-1203, October, 1950.
 15.
Mentzer.
J.
R.: "Scattering and OilTraction of Radio Waves," Pergamon Press, New York, 1955.
 16.
King.
R.
W.
P ..
and T.
T.
Wu:" The Scattering and Diffraction of Waves," Harvard University Press,  Cambridge, Mass ..
1959.
 17.
Crispin, J.
W ..
Jr., and K.
M.
Siegel:" Methods of Radar Cross-Section Analysis," Academic Press,  New York, 1968.
 18.
Rowman, J.
LT.
8.
A.
Senior, and P.
L.
E.
Uslengh: "Electromagnetic and Acoustic Scattering by  Simple Shapes." North-Holland Publishing Co., Amsterdam, and John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York,  1969.
 19.
Ruck, G.
T., D.
E.
Barrick, W.
D.
Stuart, and C.
K.
Krichbaum:" Radar Cross-Section Handbook," (2  vols.), Plenum Press, New York, 1970.
 20.
Siegel.
K.
M., F.
V.
Schultz, B.
H.
Gere, and F.
8.
Sleator: The Theoretical and Numerical Determina­ tion of the Radar Cross Section of a Prolate Spheroid, IRE Trans., vol.
AP-4, pp.
266-275, July, 1956.
 21.
Mathur, P: N., and E.
A.
Mueller: Radar Back-scattering Cross Sections for Nonspherical Targets.
 lRE Trans., vol.
AP-4, rp.
51-53, January, 1956.
 22.
Scharf man, H.: Scattering from Dielectric Coated Spheres in the Region of the First Resonance, J.
 Appl.
Pltys ..
vol.
25, pp.
1352--1356, November, 1954.
 2J Andreasen, M.
G.: Back-scattering Cross Section of a Thin, Dielectric, Spherical Shell, IRE Trans .•  vol.
AP-5, pp.
267-270, July.
1957.
 24.
King, D.
D.: The Measurement and Interpretation of Antenna Scattering, Proc.
IRE, vol.
37,  rp.
770-777.
July, 1949.
 25.
Siegel.
K.
M.: Far Field Scattering from Bodies of Revolution, Appl.
Sci.
Research, sec.
B.
vol.
7,  pp.
293-328.
1958.
 6(i INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  26.
Peters, L., Jr.: End-fire Echo Area of Long, Thin Bodies, I RE Trans., vol.
AP-6, pp.
133 -139, January,  1958.
 27.
Blore, W.
E.: The Radar Cross Section of Ogives, Double~Backed Cones, Double-Rounded Coni::s  and Cone Spheres, IEEE Trans., vol.
AP-12, pp.
582-589, September, 1964.
 28.
Ridenour, L.
N.: u Radar System Engineering," MIT Radiation Laboratory Series, vol.
1, fig.
3.8,  McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York, 1947.
 29.
Blacksmith, P., Jr., R.
E.
Hiatt, and R.
B.
Mack: Introduction to Radar Cross-Section Measurements,  Proc.
IEEE, vol.
SJ, pp.
901-920, August, 196S.
 30.
Olin, L D., and F.
D.
Queen: Dynamic Measurement or Radar Cross Sections, Proc.
IEEE, vol.
S3,  pp.
9S4-961, August, 196S.
 31.
Skolnik, M.
I.: An Empirical Formula for the Radar Cross Section of Ships at Grazing Incidence,  IEEE Trans., vol.
AES-10, p.
292, March, 1974.
 32.
Schultz, F.
V., R.
C.
Burgener, and S.
King: Measurement of the Radar Cross Section or a Man, Proc.
 IRE, vol.
46, pp.
476-481, February, 1958.
 33.
Kell, R.
E., and R.
A.
Ross: Radar Cross Section of Targets, chap.
27 of the" Radar Handbook," M.
I.
 Skolnik (ed.), McGraw-Hill Book Co., New York, 1970.
 34.
Rheinstein, J.: Backscatter from Spheres: A Short Pulse View, IEEE Trans., vol.
AP-16, pp.
89-97,  January, 1968.
 35.
Miller, E.
K., G.
J.
Burke, B.
J.
Maxum, G.
M.
Pjerrou, and A.
R.
Neureuther: Radar Cross Section of  a Long Wire, IEEE Trans., vol.
AP-17, pp.
381-384, May, 1969.
 36.
Dunn, J.
H., and D.
D.
Howard: Target Noise, chap.
28 of" Radar Handbook," M.
I.
Skolnik (ed.~  McGraw-Hin Book Co., New York, 1970.
 37.
Swerling, P.: Probability of Detection for Fluctuating Targets, IRE Trans., vol.
IT-6, pp.
269·308,  April, 1960.
 38.
Nathanson, F.
E.: "Radar Design Principles," McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York, 1969,  chap.
5.
 39.
Wilson, J.
D.: Probability of Detecting Aircraft Targets, IEEE Trans., vol.
AES-8, pp.
757-761,  November, 1972.
 40.
Weinstock, W.: "Target Cross Section Models for Radar Systems Analysis," doctoral dissertation,  University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, 1964.
 41.
Scholefield, P.
H.
R.: Statistical Aspects of Ideal Radar Targets, Proc.
IEEE, vol.
55, pp.
587-S89,  April, 1967.
 42.
Polton, G.
E.: Statistical Parameters for Scattering from Randomly Oriented Arrays, Cylinders, and  Plates, IEEE Trans., vol.
AP-18, pp.
68-75, January, 1970.
 43.
Heidbreder, G.
R., and R.
L.
Mitchell: Detection Probabilities for Log-Normally Distributed Signals,  IEEE Trans., vol.
AES-3, pp.
5-13, January, 1967.
 44.
Schwartz, M.: Effects of Signal Fluctuation on the Detection of Pulse Signals in Noise, IRE Trans.,  vol.
IT-2, pp.
66-71, June, 19S6.
 45.
Swerling, P.: Detection of Fluctuating Pulsed Signals in the Presence of Noise, I RE Trans., vol.
IT-3,  pp.
175-178, September, 1957.
 46.
Scholtz, R.
A., J.
J.
Kappl, and N.
E.
Nahi: The Detection of Moderately Fluctuating Rayleigh  Targets, IEEE Trans;, vol.
AES-12, pp.
117-125, March, 1976.
 47.
Mooney, D.
H., and W.
A.
Skillman: Pulse-doppler Radar, chap.
19 or" Radar Handbook," M.
I.
 Skolnik (ed.), McGraw•Hill Book Co., New York, 1970.
 48.
Hovanessian, S.
A.: An Algorithm for Calculation or Range in a Multiple PRF Radar, IEEE Trans.,  vol.
AES-12, pp.
287-290, March, 1976.
 49.
Blake, L.
V.: The Effective Number or Pulses Per Beamwidth for a Scanning Radar, Proc.
IRE, vol.
41,  pp.
770-774, June, 1953.
 50.
Hall, W.
M., and D.
K.
Barton: Antenna Pattern Loss Factor for Scanning Radars, Proc.
l EEE.
 vol.
53, pp.
1257-l2S8, September, 1965.
 St.
Hall, W.
M.: Antenna Beam-Shape Factor in Scanning Radars, IEEE Trans., vol.
AES-4, pp.
402-409,  May, 1968.
 52.
Trunk, G.
V.: Detection Results for Scanning Radars Employing Feedback Integration, IEEE Trans.,  vol.
AES-6, pp.
522-527, July, 1970.
·  53.
Davenport, W.
B., Jr.: Signal-to-noise Ratios in Band-pass Limiters, J.
Appl.
Phys., vol.
24,  pp.
720-727, June, 1953.
 S4.
Manasse, R., R.
Price, and R.
M.
Lerner: Loss of Signal Detectability in Band-pass Limiters, IRE  Trans., vol.
1T·4, pp.
34-38, Marchr 1958.
 55.
Trunk, G.
V.: Comparison of th~ Collapsing Losses in Linear and Square-law Detectors, Proc.
IEEE,  vol.
60, pp.
743-744, June, 1972.
 THE RADAR EQUATION 67  56.
Barton, D.
K.: "The Radar Equation," Artech House, Dedham, Mass., 1974.
 57.
Blake, L.
V.: Prediction of Radar Range, chap.
2 of" Radar Handbook," M.
I.
Skolnik (ed.), McGraw­ Hill Book Co., New York, 1970.
 58.
Hahn, P.
M., and S.
D.
Gross: Beam Shape Loss and Surveillance Optimization for Pencil Beam  Arrays, IEEE Trans., vol.
AES-5, pp.
674-675, July, 1969.
 59.
Mallett, J.
D., and L.
E.
Brennan: Cumulative Probability of Detection for Targets Approaching a  Uniformly Scanning Search Radar, Proc.
IEEE, vol.
51, 596-601, April, 1963, and vol.
52, pp.
708-709,  June, 1964.
 60.
Johnson.
J.
B.: Thermal Agitation of Electricity in Conductors, Phys.
Rev., vol.
32, pp.
97-109, 1928.
 61.
Pannell, J.
H., J.
Rheinstein.
and A.
F.
Smith: Radar Scattering from a Conducting Cone-Sphere,  MIT Lincoln Laboratory Tech.
Rept.
no.
349, Mar.
2, 1964.
(See also Chap.
6 of ref.
19.)  62.
Elphick, B.
L., M.
J.
Chappell, and R.
Batty: The Measured and Calculated RCS of a Resistive Target  Model, IEE (Lo11do11) Radar-77, pp.
120-124, Oct.
25-28, 1977.
 63.
Sinclair, G.: Theory of Models of Electromagnetic Systems, Proc.
IRE, vol.
36, pp.
1364-1370,  November, 1948.
 64.
Schensted, C.
E., J.
W.
Crispin, and K.
M.
Siegel: Studies in Radar Cross-Sections XV: Radar  Cross-Sections of the B-47 and B-52 Aircraft, Univ.
of Michigan, Radiation Laboratory Report  2260-1-T, August 1954 (unclassified), AD 46 74l.
 65.
Chandler.
R.
A., and L.
E.
Wood: System Considerations for the Design of Radar Braking Sensors,  IEEE Trans., vol.
VT-26.
pp.
151 160, May, 1977.
 66.
Queen, F.
D.: Radar Cross Sections or the T-38 Aircraft for the Head-On Aspects in L, S, and X  Bands, Nal'al Researclt Lahoratory' Report 7951, Jan.
8, 1976.
 67.
Jao, J.
K., and M.
Elbaum: First-Order Statistics of a Non-Rayleigh Fading Signal and Its Detection,  Proc.
IEEE, vol.
66, pp.
781-789, July, 1978.
 68.
Williams, P.
D.
L., H.
D.
Cramp, and K.
Curtis: Experimental Study of the Radar Cross-Section or  Maritime Targets, IEE (London) Journal on Electronic Circuits a11d Systems, vol.
2, no.
4, pp.
121-136,  July, 1978.
 69.
Varela, A.
A.: The Operator Factor Concept, Its History and Present Status, Symposium on Radar  Detection Theory, ONR Symposium Report ACR-10, Mar.
l-2, 1956, DOC No.
117533.
 CHAPTER  THREE  CW AND FREQUENCY-MODULATED RADAR  3.1 THE DOPPLER EFFECT  A radar detects the presence of objects and locates their position in space by transmitting  electromagnetic energy and observing the returned echo.
A pulse radar transmits a relatively  short burst of electromagnetic energy, after which the receiver is turned on to listen for the  echo.
The echo not only indicates that a target is present, but the time that elapses between the  transmission of the pulse and the receipt of the echo is a measure of the distance to the target.
 Separation of the echo signal and the transmitted signal is made on the basis of differences in  time.
 The radar transmitter may be operated continuously rather than pulsed if the strong  transmitted signal can be separated from the weak echo.
The received-echo-signal power is  considcrahly smaller than the transmitter power; it might be as little as 10-18 that of the  transmitted power-sometimes even less.
Separate antennas for transmission and reception  help segregate the weak echo from the strong leakage signal, but the isolation is usually not  sufficient.
A feasible technique for separating the received signal from the transmitted signal  when there is relative motion between radar and target is based on recognizing the change in  the echo-signal frequency caused by the doppler effect.
 It is well known in the fields of optics and acoustics that if either the source of oscillation  or the observer of the oscillation is in motion, an apparent shift in frequency will result.
This is  the doppler effect and is the basis of CW radar.
If R is the distance from the radar to target, the  total number of wavelengths).
contained in the two-way path between the radar and the target  is 2R/ X The distance R and the wavelength ).
are assumed to be measured in the same units.
 Since one wavelength corresponds to an angular excursion of 2n radians, the total angular  excursion ct, made by the electromagnetic wave during its transit to and from the target is  411:R/,i radians.
If the target is in motion, Rand the phase cf, are continually changing.
A change  68  CW AND FREQUENCY-MODULATED RADAR 69  in cf, with respect to time is equal to a frequency.
This is the doppler angular frequency wd,  given by  .
d</J 4n dR 4n:vr  rr)d = 2n/d = ·· · = ···· --= ---.
de ,t dr ,t (3.1)  where fd = doppler frequency shift and llr = relative ( or radial) velocity of target with respect  to radar.
The doppJer frequency shift is  .
211, 2v, Io Jd=-r =-c- (3.2a)  where f~ = transmitted frequency a11J c velocity of propagation = 3 x 108 m/s.
If fd is in  hertz.
1·, in knots.
and ).
in meters,  .rd  A plot of this equation is shown in Fig.
3.
L 1.03v,  ).
(3.2b)  The relative velocity may be written u, = v cos 6, where vis the target speed and (} is the  angle made by the target trajectory and the line joining radar and target.
When (} = 0, the  <loppler frequency is maximum.
The doppler is zero when the trajectory is perpendicular to  the radar line of sight (0 = 90°).
 The type of radar which employs a continuous transmission, either modulated or unmod­ ulated.
has had wide application.
Historically, the early radar experimenters worked almost  exclusively with continuous rather than pulsed transmissions (Sec.
1.5).
Two of the more  10,000 r-r-tTTT ! 11  ...
 CJ.>  0.
0.
 0  0 I  1,000 -- 10'---L-.J....--L-...,_,...LJ_,_,_,__..L.-...,___-"--1-lc....><JW-J..'---~....__._ .........
'-'-' .........
...._~.._._._....._.___...........,  10 100 1,000 !0,000 100,000  Rodar frequency, MHz  Figure .J.I Doppler frequency (Eq.
(3.2h)] as a function of radar rrequency and target relative velocity.
 70 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  important early applications of the CW radar principle were the proximity (YT) fuzc and the  FM-CW altimeter.
The CW proximity fuze was first employed in artilkry projectiles during  World War II and greatly enhanced the effectiveness of both field and antiaircraft artillery.
 The first practical model of the FM-CW altimeter was developed by the Weskrn Electric  Company in 1938, although the principle of altitude determination using radio-wave  reflections was known ten years earlier, in 1928.1  The CW radar is of interest not only because of its many applications, hut its study also  serves as a means for better understanding the nature and use or the doppler information  contained in the echo signal, whether in a CW or a pulse radar (MTI) application.
In addition  to allowing the received signal to be separated from the transmitted signal, thl! CW radar  provides a measurement of relative velocity which may be used to distinguish moving targds  from stationary objects or clutter.
 3.2 CW RADAR  Consider the simple CW radar as illustrated by the block diagram of Fig.
3.2a.
The transmitkr  generates a continuous (unmodulated) oscillation of frequency .fo, which is radiated hy the  antenna.
A portion of the radiated energy is intercepted by the target and is scattered, some of  it in the direction of the radar, where it is collected by the receiving antenna.
If the target is in  motion with a velocity v, relative to the radar, the received signal will be shifted in frequency  from the transmitted frequency Jo by an amount ± J;i as given by Eq.
(3.2).
The plus sign  associated with the doppler frequency applies if the distance between target and radar is  decreasing (closing target), that is, when the received signal frequency is greater than the  transmitted signal frequency.
The minus sign applies if the distance is increasing (receding  target).
The received echo signal at a frequency Jo ±.fd enters the radar via the antenna and is  heterodyned in the detector (mixer) with a portion of the transmitter signal Io to product: a  doppler beat note of frequency fd.
The sign of.fj is lost in this process.
 lo  ~~.::.:>~  fo ± l,i  (1)  <I)  C  0 a.
 <I)  (1)  0:: fa CW  H------1 transmitter  fo±0 fr: fo  Detector  (mixer)  (al  Frequency  ( b) Beot-frequency  amplifier Indicator  Fiaure 3.2 (a) Simple CW radar block diagram; (b) response characteristic of hcat-fmiucncy amplifier.
 CW AND FREQUENCY-MODULATED RADAR 71  The purpose of the doppler amplifier is to eliminate echoes from stationary targets and to  amplify the doppler echo signal to a level where it can operate an indicating device.
It might  have a frequency-response characteristic similar to that of Fig.
3.2b.
The low-frequency cutoff  must he high enough to reject the d-c component caused by stationary targets, but yet it must  he low enough to pass the smallest doppler frequency expected.
Sometimes both conditions  cannot· he met simultaneously and a compromise is necessary.
The upper cutoff frequency is  selected to pass the highest doppler frequency expected.
 The indicator might be a pair of earphones or a frequency meter.
If exact knowledge of the  doppler frequency is not necessary, earphones are especially attractive provided the doppler  frequencies lie within the audio-frequency response of the ear.
Earphones are not only simple  devices.
but the ear acts as a selective bandpass filter with a passband of the order of 50 Hz  centered about the signal frequency.2 The narrow-bandpass characteristic of the ear results in  an effective increase in the signal-to-noise ratio of the echo signal.
With subsonic aircraft  targets and transmitter frequencies in the middle range of the microwave frequency region, the  doppler frequencies usually fall within the passband of the ear.
If audio detection were desired  for those combinations of target velocity· and transmitter frequency which do not result in  audible doppler frequencies, the doppler signal could be heterodyned to the audible range.
The  doppler frequency can also be detected and measured by conventional frequency meters,  usually one that counts cycles.
An example of the CW radar principle is the radio proximity  {VT) fuze, used with great success during World War II for the fuzing of artillery projectiles.
It  may seem strange that the radio proximity fuze should be classified as a radar, but it fulfills the  same basic function of a radar, which is the detection and location of reflecting objects by  "radio" mcans.3·4  Isolation between transmitter and receiver.
A single antenna serves the purpose of transmission  and reception in the simple CW radar described above.
In principle, a single antenna may be  employed since the necessary isolation between the transmitted and the received signals is  achieved via separation in frequency as a result of the doppler effect.
In practice, it is not  possible to eliminate completely the transmitter leakage.
However, transmitter leakage is not  always undesirable.
A moderate amount of leakage entering the receiver along with the echo  signal supplies the reference necessary for the detection of the doppler frequency shift.
If a  leakage signal of sufficient magnitude were not present, a sample of the transmitted signal  would have to be deliberately introduced into the receiver to provide the necessary reference  frequency.
 There are two practical effects which limit the amount of transmitter leakage power which  can be tolerated at the receiver.
These are ( 1) the maximum amount of power the receiver  input circuitry can withstand before it is physically damaged or its sensitivity reduced  (burnout) and (2) the amount of transmitter noise due to hum, microphonics, stray pick-up,  and instability which enters the receiver from the transmitter.
The additional noise introduced  by the transmitter reduces the receiver sensitivity.
Except where the CW radar operates with  relatively low transmitter power and insensitive receivers, additional isolation is usually  required hctwc·cn the transmitter and the receiver if the sensitivity is not to be degraded either  by burnout or by excessive noise.
 The amount of isolation required depends on the transmitter power and the accompany­ ing transmitter noise as well as the ruggedness and the sensitivity of the receiver.
For example,  if the safe value of power which might be applied to a receiver were 10 mW and if the  transmitter power were l kW, the isolation between transmitter and receiver must be at least  50 dB.
 The amount of isolation needed in a long-range CW radar is more often determined by  72 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  the noise that accompanies the transmitter leakage signal rather than by any damage caused  by high power.5 For example, suppose the isolation between the transmitter and receiver were  such that 10 mW of leakage signal appeared at the receiver.
If the minimum detectable signal  were 10-13 watt (100 dB below 1 mW), the transmitter noise must be at least 110 dB  (preferably 120 or 130 dB) below the transmitted carrier.
 The transmitter noise of concern in doppler radar includes those noise components that  lie within the same frequency range as the doppler frequencies.
The greater the desired radar  range, the more stringent will be the need for reducing the noise modulation accompanying the  transmitter signal.
If complete elimination of the direct leakage signal at the receiver could be  achieved, it might not entirely solve the isolation problem since echoes from nearby fixed  targets (clutter) can also contain the noise components of the transmitted signal.6·69  It will be recalled (Sec.
1.3) that the receiver of a pulsed radar is isolated and protected  from the damaging effects of the transmitted pulse by the duplexer, which short-circuits the  receiver input during the transmission period.
Turning off the receiver during transmission  with a duplexer is not possible in a CW radar since the transmitter is operated continuously.
 Isolation between transmitter and receiver might be obtained with a single antenna by using a }  hybrid junction, circulator, turnstile junction, or with separate polarizations.
Separate  antennas for transmitting and receiving might also be used.
The amount of isolation which can  be readily achieved between the arms of practical hybrid junctions such as the magic-T, rat  race, or short-slot coupler is of the order of 20 to 30 dB.
In some instances, when extreme  precision is exercised, an isolation of perhaps 60 dB or more might be achieved.
One limitation  of the hybrid junction is the 6-dB loss in overall performance which results from the inherent  waste of half the transmitted power and half the received signal power.
Both the loss in  performance and the difficulty in obtaining large isolations have limited the application of the  hybrid junction to short-range radars.
 Ferrite isolation devices such as the circulator do not suffer the 6-dB loss inherent in the  hybrid junction.
Practical devices have isolation of the order of 20 to 50 dB.
Turnstile junc­ tions 7 achieve isolations as high as 40 to 60 dB.
 The use of orthogonal polarizations for transmitting and receiving is limited to short­ range radars because of the relatively small amount of isolation that can be obtained.8  An important factor which limits the use of isolation devices with a common antenna is  the reflections produced in the transmission line by the antenna.
The antenna can never be  perfectly matched to free space, and there will always be some transmitted signal reflected back  toward the receiver.
The reflection coefficient from a mismatched antenna with a voltage­ standing-wave ratio <J is IP I = (<J -1)/(<T + 1).
Therefore, if an isolation of 20 dB is to be  obtained, the VSWR must be less than 1.22.
If 40 dB of isolation is required, the VSWR must  be less than 1.02.
 The largest isolations are obtained with two antennas-one for transmission, the other for  reception-physically separated from one another.
Isolations of the order of 80 dB or more  are possible with high-gain antennas.
The more directive the antenna beam and the greater the  spacing between antennas, the greater will be the· isolation.
When the antenna designer is  restricted by the nature of the application, large isolations may not be possible.
For example,  typical isolations.
between transmitting and receiving antennas on missiles might be about  50 dB at X band, 70 dB at K band and as low as 20 dB at L band.9 Metallic baffles, as well as  absorbing material, placed between the antennas can provide additional isolation.
10  It has been reported 11 that the -isolation between two X-band horn antennas of 22 dB  gain can be increased from a normal .value of 70 dB to about 120 dB by separating the two  with a smooth surface covered by a sheet of radar-absorbing material and providing screening  ridges at the edges of the horns.
A common radome enclosing the two antennas should be  avoided since it limits the amount of isolation that can be achieved.
 CW AND FREQUENCY-MODULATED RADAR 73  The separate antennas of the AN/MPQ~46 CW tracker-illuminator of.the Hawk missile  system are shown in Fig.
3.3.
The Cassegrain receiving antenna is on the right.
Both antennas  have a "tunnel" around the periphery for further shielding.
 Additional isolation can be obtained by properly introducing a controlled sample of the  transmitted signal directly into the receiver.
The phase and amplitude of this" buck-off" signal  are adjusted to cancel the portion of the transmitter signal that leaks into the receiver.
An  additional 10 dB of isolation might be obtained.12 The phase and amplitude of the leakage  signal, however, can vary as the antenna scans, which results in varying cancellation.
There­ fore.
when additional isolation is necessary, as in the high-power CW tracker-illuminator, a  dynamic canceler can he used that senses the proper phase and amplitude required of the  nulling signal.
5• 13 Dynamic cancelation of the leakage by this type of" feed through nulling"  can exceed .10 dB.·"  The transmitter signal is never a pure CW waveform.
Minute variations in amplitude  (AM) and phase (FM) can result in sideband components that fall within the doppler  frequency band.
These can generate false targets or mask the desired signals.
Therefore both  AM and FM modulations can result in undesired sidebands.
AM sidebands are typically  120 dB below the carrier, as measured in a 1 kHz band, and are relatively constant across the  : •rJ m , 1' ~r t? f ··i ..
i,t'·tf ...
···· ...
, ..
'I,., } ......
,...
.·.
 ~.·.
-;.·'.·:~'('.
.~[\ i .
.r 1·'~t!'!;J ::;'1--;::.
-~  , rr ..
' ,•1·i: •  Figurl' 1.1 i\N/MP()-46 <:W trnckcr-i1111minator for the Hawk missile system showing separate transmit­ ting and receiving antennas.
(Courtesy Ra_l'tlremt Co.).
 74 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  usual doppler spectrum of interest.31.69 The normaJ antenna isolation plus feedthrough nul­ ling usually reduces the AM components below receiver noise in moderate power radars.
FM  sidebands are usually significantly greater than AM, but decrease with increasing offset from  the carrier.
5 The character of FM noise in the leakage signal is also affected by stabilizing the  output frequency of the CW transmitter and by active noise-degeneration using a microwave  bridge circuit to extract the FM noise components.
These are then fed back to the transmitter  in such a manner as to reduce the original frequency deviation.
31 It has been said69 that  experience indicates that a satisfactory measurement of AM noise over the doppler frequency  band provides assurance that both AM and FM noise generated by the tube are within  required limits.
 The transmitter noise that enters the radar receiver via backscatter from the clutter is  sometimes called transmitted clutter.69 It can appear at the same frequencies as the doppler  shifts from moving targets and can mask desired targets or cause spurious responses.
This  extraneous noise is produced by ion oscillations in the tube (usually a klystron amplifier)  rather than by the thermal noise,· or noise figure.
When the ion oscillations appear, they  usually have a magnitude about 40 dB below the carrier, or else they are not measurable.69  Thus there is no need to specify a measurement of this noise to a level better than 40 dB below  the carrier to insure the required noise levels.
Since ion oscillations may occur at some  combination of tube parameters and not at others, the CW radar tube should be tested for  noise-free operation over the expected range of beam voltage, heater voltage, RF drive level,  and load VSWR.
Noise-free operation also requires well-filtered beam power-supplies and a  de heater supply.
.
 Since ion osciUations require" a· fin~te time to develop (tens of microseconds), a pulse­ doppler radar with a pulse width of less than 10 µs should not experience this form of noise .
 • 1.,.
••  Intermediate-frequency.
receiver.
The .receiver.
of the simple CW radar of Fig.
3.2 is in some  respects analogous to a superheterodyne receiver.
Receivers of this type are called homodyne  receivers, or superheterodyne receivers with zero IF.14 The function of the local oscillator is  replaced by the leakage·signaHrom the transmitter.
Such a receiver is simpler than one with a  more conventional intermediate frequericy since no IF amplifier or local oscillator is required.
 However, the simpler receiver is not as sensitive because of increased noise at the lower  intermediate frequencies caused by flicker effect.
Flicker-effect noise occurs in semiconductor  devices such as diode qetectors'and cathodes of vacuum tubes.
The noise power produced by  the flicker effect varies as ·t!f«, where tx, is approximately unity.
This is in contrast to shot noise  or thermal noise, which is independent of frequency.
Thus, at the lower range of frequencies  (audio or video region), ·where the doppler frequencies usually are found, the detector of the  CW receiver can introduce a considerable amount of flicker noise, resulting in reduced receiver  sensitivity.
For short-range, low,..power.! applications this decrease in sensitivity might be  tolerated since it can.
be compensated ·hy a modest· increase in antenna aperture and/or  additional transmitt~r· power, But:ror·mi:,imum efficiency with CW radar, the reduction in  sensitivity caused by the simple doppler:r~iver with ·zero IF.
cannot be tolerated.
 The effects of flicker:·noise)ire ·"' -,.
'"in ttie.
normal superheterodyne receiver by using  an intermediate frequericyJ~igh;eito o~render.
th'e flic~er noise small compared with the  normal receiver noise'::'Thk- resultgifron{the' inverse.
frequency dependence of flicker noise.
 Figure _3.4 shows a bto'ck:~iagra#t·'oft~cf.W radarWhose receiver operates with a nonzero IF.
 Separate antennas are··shown{~r,transmission and reception.
Instead of the usual local oscilla­ tor fou~d in.
the.
con~entio~a._1\~~~~~et~iO?yrie .receiver, th.e loc~l oscill~tor {~r reference  signal) ts denved m this receiver from a portion of the transmitted signal maxed with a locally  generated signal of frequency equal to that of the receiver IF.
Since the output of the mixer  Tronsmilfing  antenna  ~ cw  ~ --,E-----J lransmifler  fo fo  Receiving  antenna Oscillator  ~f CW AND FREQUENCY-MODULATED RADAR 75  2d  detector Doppler  amplifier Indicator  Figure 3.4 Block diagram of CW doppler radar with nonzero IF receiver, sometimes called sideband  s11 perhet erod y11e.
 consists or two sidebands on either side of the carrier plus higher harmonics, a narrowband  filter selects one of the sidebands as the reference signal.
The improvement in receiver sensi­ tivity with an intermediate-frequency superheterodyne might be as much as 30 dB over the  simple receiver of Fig.
3.2.
 Receiver bandwidth.
One of the requirements of the doppler-frequency amplifier in the simple  CW radar (Fig.
3.2) or the IF amplifier of the sideband superheterodyne (Fig.
3.4) is that it be  wide enough to pass the expected range of doppler frequencies.
In most cases of practical  interest the expected range of doppler frequencies will be much wider than the frequency  spectrum occupied by the signal energy.
Consequently, the use of a wideband amplifier cover­ ing the expected dopplcr range will result in an increase in noise and a lowering of the receiver  sensitivity.
If the frequency of the doppler-shifted echo signal were known beforehand, a  narrowband filter-one just wide enough to reduce the excess noise without eliminating a  significant amount of signal energy-might be used.
If the waveform of the echo signal were  known, as well as its carrier frequency, the matched filter could be specified as outlined in  Sec.
10.2.
 Several factors tend to spread the CW signal energy over a finite frequency band.
These  must be known if an approximation to the bandwidth required for the narrowband doppler  filter is to be obtained.
 If the received waveform were a sine wave of infinite duration, its frequency spectrum  would be a delta function (Fig.
3.5a) and the receiver bandwidth would be infinitesimal.
But a  sine wave of infinite duration and an infinitesimal bandwidth cannot occur in nature.
The  more normal situation is an echo signal which is a sine wave of finite rather than infinite  duration.
The frequency spectrum of a finite-duration sine wave has a shape of the form  [ sin rr(f-/~)c5]/rr(.f -lo), where lo and c5 are the frequency and duration of the sine wave,  respectively, and l is the frequency variable over which the spectrum is plotted (Fig.
3.5b).
 Practical receivers can only approximate this characteristic.
(Note that this is the same as the  spectrum of a pulse of sine wave, the only difference being the relative value of the duration <5.)  In many instances, the echo is not a pure sine wave of finite duration but is perturbed by  fluctuations in cross section, target accelerations, scanning fluctuations, etc., which tend to  76 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  .c £ ti D -+j ~-lll ~ 118 ~ ~  D D  C C  0 0  D D  0 0  N N  I I  ' ' >- >-e' e' QJ QJ C C w w  lo lo  Frequency Frequency  (a) (b)  Figure 3.5 Frequency spectrum of CW oscillation of (u) infinite duration and (b) finite duration.
 broaden the bandwidth still further.
Some of these spectrum-broadening effects are considaed  below.
 Assume a CW radar with an antenna beam width of 08 deg scanning at the rate of Os deg/s.
 The time on target (duration of the received signal) is f> = 08/0s s.
Thus the signal is of finite  duration and the bandwidth of the receiver must be of the order of the reciprocal of the time on  target iJs/08.
Although this is not an exact relation, it is a good enough approximation for  purposes of the present discussion.
If the antenna beam width were 2° and if the scanning rate  were 36°/s (6 rpm), the spread in the spectrum of the received signal due to the finite time on  target would be equal to 18 Hz, independent of the transmitted frequency.
 In addition to the spread of the received signal spectrum caused by the finite time on  target, the spectrum may be further widened if the target cross section fluctuates.
The 1foctua­ tions wi_den the spectrum by modulating the echo signal.
In a particular case, it has been  reported12 that the aircraft cross section can change by 15 dB for a change in target aspect of  as little as 1°.
The echo signal from a propeller-driven aircraft can also contain modulation  components at a frequency proportional to the propeller rotation.15 The spectrum produced  by propeller modulations is more like that produced by a sine-wave signal and its harmonics  rather than a broad, white-noise spectrum.
The frequency range of propeller modulation  depends upon the shaft-rotation speed and the number of propeller blades.
It is usually in the  vicinity of 50 to 60 Hz for World War II aircraft engines.
This could be a potential source of  difficulty in a CW radar since it might mask the target's doppler signal or it might cause an  erroneous measurement of doppler frequency.
In some instances, propeller modulation can be  of advantage.
It might permit the detection of propeller-driven aircraft passing on a tangential  trajectory, even though the doppler frequency shift is zero.
The rotating blades of a helicopter  and the compressor stages of a jet engine can also result in a modulation of the echo and a  widening of the spectrum that can degrade the performance of CW doppler radar.
 If the target's relative velocity is not constant, a further widening of the received signal  spectrum can occur.
If a, is the acceleration of the target with respect to the radar, the signal  will occupy a bandwidth  ( 3.3)  Ir, for example, a, is twice the acceleration of gravity, the receiver bandwidth must be approxi­ mately 20 Hz when the radar's wavelength is 10 cm.
 When the doppler-shifted echo signal is known to lie somewhere within a relatively wide  band of frequencies, a bank of narrowband filters (Fig.
3.6) spaced throughout the frequency  range permits a measurement of frequency and improves the signal-to~noise ratio.
The  CW AND FREQUENCY-MODULATED RADAR 77  1 Filter No.
1  Filler  No.2 ~Jl  l>-IF .~ --..
j Filler No.3 l-~-i__  amplifier Indicator  Filter No.4  Filter No.n  (a)  ~ IF bandwidth  QJ  "' C  0 0.
 Vl  (1)  0::  fi f2 f3 '4 fn  Frequency  (bl  fi~ure .16 {a) Block diagram or IF doppler filter bank; (b) frequency-response characteristic of doppler  filter hank.
 bandwidth of each individual filter is wide enough to accept the signal energy, but  not so wide as to introduce more noise than need be.
The center frequencies of the filters are  staggered to cover the entire range of doppler frequencies.
If the filters are spaced with their  half-power points overlapped, the maximum reduction in signal-to-noise ratio of a signal  which lies midway between adjacent channels compared with the signal-to-noise ratio at  1idband is 3 dB.
The more filters used to cover the band, the less will be the maximum loss  experienced, but the greater the probability of false alarm.
 A bank of narrowband filters may be used after the detector in the video of the simple CW  radar of Fig.
3.2 instead of in the IF.
The improvement in signal-to-noise ratio with a video  filter bank is not as good as can be obtained with an IF filter bank, but the ability to measure  the magnitude of doppler frequency is still preserved.
Because of foldover, a frequency which  lies to one side of the IF carrier appears, after detection, at the same video frequency as one  which lies an equal amount on the other side of the IF.
Therefore the sign of the doppler shift is  lost with a video filter bank, and it cannot be directly determined whether the doppler  frequency corresponds lo an approaching or to a receding target.
(The sign of the doppler may  be determined in the video by other means, as described later.) One advantage of the foldover  in the video is that only half the number of filters are required than in the IF filter bank.
The  equivalent of a bank of contiguous bandpass filters may also be obtained by converting the  analog If or video signal to a set of sampled, quantized signals which are processed with  digital circuitry by means of the fast Fourier transform algorithm.16  A hank of overlapping doppler filters.
whether in the IF or video, increases the complexity  f the receiver.
When the system requirements permit a time sharing of the doppler frequency  range, the bank of doppler filters may be replaced by a single narrowband tunable filter which  searches in frequency over the band of expected doppler frequencies until a signal is found.
 78 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  After detecting and recognizing the signal, the filter may be programmed to continue its search  in frequency for additional signals.
One of the techniques for accomplishing this is similar 10  the tracking speed-gate mentioned in Sec.
5.8, the phase-locked filler, 1 7 or the phase-locked  loop.
 If, in any of the above techniques, moving targets are to be dislinguished from stalionary  objects, the zero-doppler-frequency component must be removed.
The zero-dopplcr-frequency  component has, in practice, a finite bandwidth due to the finite time on target, clutter tluclua­ tions, and equipment instabilities.
The clutter-rejection band of the doppler filter must be wide  enough to accommodate this spread.
In the multiple-filter hank, removal of those filters in the  vicinity of the RF or IF carrier removes the stationary-target signals.
 Sign of the radial velocity.
In some applications of CW radar it is of interest to know whether  the target is approaching or receding.
This might be determined with separate filters located  on either side of the intermediate frequency.
If the echo-signal frequency lies below the carrier,  the target is receding; if the echo frequency is greater than the carrier, the targel is approaching  (Fig.
3.7).
 Although the doppler-frequency spectrum "folds over" in the video because of 1he  action of the detector, it is possible to determine its sign from a technique borrowed from  single-sideband communications.
If the transmitter signal is given by  £1 = Eo COS Wot  the echo signal from a moving target will be  where £0 = amplitude of transmitter signal  k1 = a constant determined from the radar equation  w0 = angular freque11cy of transmitter, racl/s  wd = <lopper angular frequency shift  </> = a constant phase shift, which depends upon range of initial detection (3.4)  ( 3.5)  The sign of the doppler frequency, and therefore the direc.tion of target motion, may be found  by splitting the received signal into two channels as shown in Fig.
3.8.
In channel A the signal  is processed as in the simple CW radar of Fig.
3.2.
The received signal and a portion of the  transmitter heterodyne in the detector (mixer) to yield a difference signal  (3.6)  OJ OJ  11 I u u ::, ::, -~ -ci.
a.
E  Id E Id- <{ <{  fo lo· lo  Frequency Frequency Frequency  (a) (bl (c)  Figure 3.7 Spectra of received signals.
(a) No doppler shift, no relative target motion; (b) approaching  target; (c) receding target.
·  CW AND FREQUENCY-MODULATED RADAR 79  T ronsrnitting  antenna  Rt>ceivinq  antenna phase  shift  Mixer  ~-A~-Ch~n~-el_A_I .-------,  ~+----~ L Synchronous  Mixer Channel B  B motor  indicator  Figure 3.8 Measurement of doppler direction using synchronous, two-phase motor.
 The other channel is similar.
except for a 90° phase delay introduced in the reference signal.
 The output of the channel B mixer is  EB= k2E0 cos ( ±wdt + </> + ~) (3.7)  H the target is approaching (positive doppler), the outputs from the two channels are  E.~( +) = k2 Ea cos (w4t + </>) EB(+)= k2E0 cos ( wdt + </> + ~) (3.8a)  On the other hand, if the targets are receding (negati\le doppler),  En( - ) = k2 Ea cos ( wd t -</> -; ) (3.8h)  The sign of <1Jd and the direction of the target's motion may be determined according to  whether the _output of channel B leads or lags the output of channel A.
One method of  determining the relative phase relationship between the two channels is to apply the outputs to  a synchronous two-phase motor.18 The direction of motor rotation is an indication of the  direction of the target motion.
 Electronic methods may be used instead of a synchronous motor to sense the relative  phase of the two channels.
One application of this technique has been described for a rate-of­ climb meter for vertical take-off aircraft to determine the velocity of the aircraft with respect to  the ground d ming take-off and landing.
19 It has also been applied to the detection of moving  targets in the presence of heavy foliage, 20 as discussed in Sec.
13.6.
 The Doppler frequency shirt.
The expression for the doppler frequency shift given previously  hy Eq.
(J.2) is an approximation that is valid for most radar applications.
The correct expres­ sion for the frequency f • from a target moving with a relative velocity v, when the frequency f  is transmitted is21 23• 70  (* = r (l + lJ/c)  · · (1 -l'/c) (3.9)  80 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  where c is the velocity of propagation.
When, as is usually the case, u ~ c, Eq.
(3.9) reduces 10  the classical form of the doppler frequency shift.
The phase shift associated with the return  signal is (4~/R 0/c)/(1 -v/c), where R0 is the range at time t = 0.
 Applications of CW radar.24·25 The chief use of the simple, unmodulated CW radar is for the  measurement of the relative velocity of a moving target, as in the police speed monitor or in  the previously mentioned rate-of-climb meter for vertical-take-off aircraft.
In support of auto­ mobile traffic, CW radar has been suggested for the control of traffic lights, regulation of toll  booths, vehicle counting, as a replacement for the" fifth-wheel" speedometer in vehicle testing,  as a sensor in antilock braking systems, and for collision avoidance.
For railways, CW radar  can be used as a speedometer to replace the conventional axle-driven tachometer.
In such an  application it would be unaffected by errors caused by wheelslip on accelerating or wheelslide  when braking.
It has been used for the measurement of railroad-freight-car· velocity during  humping operations in marshalling yards, and as a detection device to give track maintenance  personnel advance warning of approaching trains.
CW radar is also employed for monitorinf  the docking speed of large ships.
It has also seen application for intruder alarms and for the  measurement of the velocity of missiles, ammunition, and baseballs.
 The principal advantage of a CW doppler radar over other (nonradar) methods of meas­ uring speed is that there need not be any physical contact with the object whose speed is being  measured.
In industry this has been applied to the measurement of turbine-blade vibration, the  peripheral speed of grinding wheels, and the monitoring of vibrations in the cables of suspen­ sion bridges.
- Most of the above applications can be satisfied with a simple, solid-state CW source with  powers in the tens of milliwatts.
High-power CW radars for the detection of aircraft and other  targets have been developed and have been used in such systems as the Hawk missile systems  (Fig.
3.3 ).
However, the difficulty of eliminating the leakage of the transmitter signal into the  receiver has limited the utility of unmodulated CW radar for many Jong-range applications.
A  notable exception is the Space Surveillance System (Spasur) for the detection of satellites.
2 6· 17  The CW transmitter of Spasur at 216 MHz radiates a power of up to one megawatt from an  antenna almost two miles long to produce a narrow, vertically looking fan beam.
The receiver  is separated from the transmitter by a distance of several hundred miles.
Each receiver site  consists of an interferometer antenna to obtain an angle measurement in the plane of the fan  beam.
There are three sets of transmitter-receiver stations to provide fence coverage of the  southern United States.
 The CW radar, when used for short or moderate ranges, is characterized by simpler  equipment than a pulse radar.
The amount of power that ·can be used with a CW radar is  dependent on the isolation that can be achieved between the transmitter and receiver since the  transmitter noise that finds its way into the receiver limits the receiver sensitivity.
(The pulsi.:  radar has no similar limitation to its maximum range because the transmitter is not operative  when the receiver is turned on.)  Perhaps one of the greatest shortcomings of the simple CW radar is its inability to obtain  a measurement of range.
This limitation can be overcome by modulating the CW carrier, as in  the frequency-modulated radar described in the next section.
 Some anti-air-warfare guided missile systems employ semiactive homing guidance in  which a receiver in the missile receives energy from the target, the energy having been trans­ mitted from an" illuminator" external to the missile.
The illuminator, for example, might be at  the launch platform.
CW illumination has been used in many successful systems.
An example  is the Hawk tracking illuminator shown in Fig.
3.3.
It is a tracking radar as welt as an  illuminator since it must be able to follow the target as it travels through space.
The doppler )  X+D  --X Scan  reference  ~~ Phase  comp  Scon  detector  Magnelran SCR 1584  servo system  Narrow !rock- ing fiHer -+fi,_._  Speed  gate  X Tt\L  I  XTAL  Pedestal control CW AND FRE()lJENCY-MODUl.ATFD RADAR RI  lkHz 30kHz M  Doppler  amplifier  Bolonced  mixer  Signal IF  ~ AFC  Reference  IF  Figure 3.9 Block diagram of a CW tracking-illuminator.31 (Courtesy IEEE.)  discrimination of a CW radar allows operation in the presence of clutter and ,has been well  suited for low altitude missile defense systems.
A block diagram of a CW tracking illuminator  is shown in Fig.
3.9.
31 Note that following the wide-band doppler amplifier is a speed gate,  which is a narrow-band tracking filter that acquires the target's doppler and tracks its chang  ing dorpler frequency shift.
 3.3 FREQUENCY-l\'IOOULATEO CW RADAR  The inability of the simple CW radar to measure range is related to the relatively narrow  spectrum (bandwidth) of its transmitted waveform.
Some sort of timing mark must be applied  to a CW carrier if range is to be measured.
The timing mark permits the time of transmission  and the time of return to be recognized.
The sharper or more distinct the mark, the more  accurate the measurement of the transit time.
But the more distinct the timing mark, the  broader will be the transmitted spectrum.
This follows from the properties of the Fourier  transform.
Therefore a finite spectrum must of necessity be transmitted if transit time or range  is to be measured.
 The spectrum of a CW transmission can be broadened by the application of modulation,  either amplitude.
frequency, or phase.
An example of an amplitude modulation is the pulse  radar.
The narrower the pulse, the more accurate the measurement of range and the broader  the transmitted spectrum.
A widely used technique to broaden the spectrum of CW radar is to  frequency-modulate the carrier.
The timing mark is the changing frequency.
The transit time is  proportional to the difference in frequency between the echo signal and the transmitter signal.
 The greater the transmitter frequency deviation in a given time interval, the more accurate the  measurement of the transit time and the greater will be the transmitted spectrum.
 82 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  Range and doppler measurement.
In the frequency-modulated CW radar (abbreviated  FM-CW), the transmitter frequency is changed as a function of time in a known manner.
 Assume that the transmitter frequency increases linearly with time, as shown by the solid line  in Fig.
3.10a.
If there is a reflecting object at a distance R, an echo signal will return after a time  T = 2R/c.
The dashed line in the figure represents the echo signal.
If the echo signal is  heterodyned with a portion of the transmitter signal in a nonlinear element such as a diode, a  beat note Jb will be produced.
If there is no doppler frequency shift, the beat note (difference  frequency) is a measure of the target's range andJb = f,., where!,.
is the beat frequency due only  to the target's range.
If the rate of change of the carrier frequency is Jo, the beat frequency is  .
2R .
 f,.
= Jo T = -Jo  C (3.10)  In any practical CW radar, the frequency cannot be continually changed iri one direction  only.
Periodicity in the modulation is necessary, as in the triangular frequency-modulation  waveform shown in Fig.
3.10b.
The modulation need not necessarily be triangular; it can be  sawtooth, sinusoidal·, or some other shape.
The resulting beat frequency as a function of time is  shown in Fig.
3.10c for triangular modulation.
The beat note is of constant frequency except at  the turn-around region.
If the frequency is modulated at a rate Jm over a range 11.f, the beat  frequency is  !lJ = 4RJm !lJ (3.11)  C  Thus the measurement of the beat frequency determines the range R.
 A block diagram illustrating the principle of the FM-CW radar is shown in Fig.
3.11.
A  portion of the transmitter signal acts as the reference signal required to produce the beat  frequency.
It is introduced directly into the receiver via a cable or other direct connection.
 >,  u  C  Q)  :::,  c,­ Q)  \...
u..
~~---"'-----------------~  Time - (al  t  b,.f >,  u  C  Q) & fo i,c::--"'----_.:;_----::....c-"~--+----::-:---7f""----,.,"""- Q)  L u..
 -----~Vt.
_______ __, m  (b)  >-.
 U I ! ~· lf-----~y-------~,,/----- (l) Time -(cl Figure 3.10 Frequency-time relation­ ships in FM-CW radar.
Solid curve  represents transmitted signal; dashed  curve represents echo.
(a) Linear fre­ quency modulation; (b) trianguJar fre­ quency modulation; (c) beat note of  (b).
 l ransmitfinq  onter1no  FM  I ransmitter  Receiving.
Reference signal  on!enno  ~ Mi~er -Amplifier Li mil.er  Figure 3.11 Block diagram of FM-CW radar.
CW AND FREQUENCY-MODULATED RADAR 83  Frequency  counter Indicator  Ideally, the isolation between transmitting and receiving antennas is made sufficiently large so  as to reduce to a negligible level the transmitter leakage signal which arrives at the receiver via  •.he coupling between antennas.
The beat frequency is amplified and limited to remove any  amplitude fluctuations.
The frequency of the amplitude-limited beat note is measured with a  cycle-counting frequency meter calibrated in distance.
 In the above, the target was assumed to be stationary.
H this assumption is not applicable,  a doppler frequency shift will be· superimposed on the FM range beat note and an erroneous  range measurement results.
The doppler frequency shirt causes the frequency-time plot of the  echo signal to be shifted up or down (Fig.
3.12a).
On one portion of the frequency-modulation  cycle, the heat frequency (Fig.
3.12b) is increased by the doppler shift, while on the other  portion, it is decreased.
If.
for example, the target is approaching the radar, the beat frequency  J;,(up) produced during the increasing, or up, portion of the FM cycle will be the difference  between the beat frequency due to the range fr and the doppler frequency shirtf4 [Eq.
(3.12a }].
 Similarly, on the decreasing portion, the beat frequency !,,(down) is the sum of the two  [ Eq.
(3.12b )l  J,,(up) J,.-J.,  J,,(down) J,.
+ f4 (3.12a)  (3.12b)  The range frequency fr may be extracted by measuring the average beat frequency; that is,  ![Jb(up) + Jb(down)] J,..
Ir J,,(up) and J,,(down) are measured separately, for example, by  switching a frequency counter every half modulation cycle, one-half the difference between the  frequencies will yield the doppler frequency.
This assumes.fr> fa.
If, on the other hand,!,.
<fa,  such as might occur with a high-speed target at short range, the roles of the averaging and the  difference-frequency measurements are reversed; the averaging meter will measure doppler  velocity, and the difference meter, range.
If it is not known that the roles of the meters are  ,,.,., -· Tronsm/tted signal // Received siqnol  ~/ ~ '"",,  ~~~~~~..,....:,...,_~----.~~~~...:,,.....~~~--,,:.""-~  (a)  Figure 3.12 Frequency-time relation­ ships in FM-CW radar when the  received signal is shifted in frequency  by the doppler effect {a) Transmitted  {solid curve) and echo (dashed curve)  frequencies; (b) beat frequency.
 84 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  reversed because of a change in the inequality sign between/~ and/~, an incorrect interpreta­ tion of the measurements may result.
 When more than one target is present within the view of the radar, lhe mixer output will  contain more than one difference frequency.
Uthe system is linear, there will be a frequency  component corresponding t9 each target.
In principle, the range to each target may be  determined by measuring the individual frequency components and applying Eq.
(3.11) to  each.
To measure the individual frequencies, they must be separated from one another.
This  might be accomplished with a bank of narrowband filters, or alternatively, a single frequency  corresponding to a single target may be singled out and continuously observed with a narrow­ band tunable filter.
But if the motion of the targets were to produce a dopplcr frc<.Jucncy shift,  or if the frequency-modulation waveform were nonlinear, or if the mixa were not operated in  its linear region, the problem of resolving targets and measuring the range of each bccomt:s  more complicated.
 If the FM-CW radar is used for sing1e targets only, such as in the radio altimeter, it is not  necessary to employ a 1inear modulation waveform.
This is certainly advantageous since a  sinusoidal or almost sinusoidal frequency modulation is easier to obtain with practical equip­ ments than are linear modulations.
The beat frequency obtained with sinusoidal modulation is  not constant over the modulation cycle as it is with linear modulation.
However, it may he  shown that the average beat frequency measured over a modulation cycle, when substituted  into Eq.
(3.11) yields the correct value of target range.
Any reasonable-shape modulation  waveform can be used to measure the range, provided the average beat frequcncy is  measured.
28•29 If the target is in motion and the beat signal contains a component due to the!  doppler frequency shift, the range frequency can be extracted, as before, if the average  frequency is measured.
To extract the doppler frequency, the modulation waveform must have  equal upsweep and downsweep time intervals.
 The FM-CW radar principle was known and used at about the same time as pulse radar,  although the early development of these two radar techniques seemed to be relatively indepen­ dent of each other.
FM-CW was applied to the measurement of the height of the ionosphere in  the 1920s32 and as an aircraft altimeter in the 1930s.33  FM-CW altimeter.
The FM-CW radar principle is used in the aircraft radio altimeter to  measure height above the surface of the earth.
The large backscatter cross scction and the  relatively short ranges required of altimeters permit low transmitter power and low antenna  gain.
Since the relative motion between the aircraft and ground is small, the effect of tht:  doppler frequency shift may usually be neglected.
 The band from 4.2 to 4.4 GHz is reserved for radio altimeters, although they have in the  past operated at UHF.
The transmitter power is relatively low and can be obtained from a CW  magnetron, a backward-wave oscillator, or a reflex klystron, but these have been replaced by  the solid state transmitter.
 The altimeter can employ a simple homodyne 71 receiver, but for better sensitivity and  stability the superheterodyne is to be prefered whenever its more complex construction can  be tolerated.
A block diagram of the FM-CW radar with a sideband superheterodyne receiver  is shown in Fig.
3.13.
A portion of the frequency-modulated transmitted signal is applied to a  mixer along with the oscillator signal.
The selection of the local-osciHator frequency is a bit  different from that in the usual superheterodyne receiver.
The local-oscillator frequency flF  should be the same as the intermediate frequency used in the receiver, whereas in the conven­ tional superheterodyne the LO frequency is of the same order of magnitude as the RF signal.
 The output of the mixer consists of the varying transmitter frequency /0(t) plus two sideband  frequencies; one on either side of/0(t) and separated from/ 0(t) by the local-oscillator frequency  FM  transmitter  fol tl + lir  foU l  fo(tl-fir  Receiver  mixer loco\  oscillator  IF  amplifier CW AND FREQUENCY-MODULATED RADAR 85  firning signal  Balanced  detector Low-frequency  amplifier l  I  I  I  I  j  I  Switched  frequency  counter Doppler  velocity  Average Range  frequency  counter  Figure 3.13 Block diagram of FM-CW radar using sideband superheterodyne receiver.
 ./iF.
The filler selects the lower sideband f0(t) -.fir and rejects the carrier and the upper  sideband.
The sidehand that is passed by the filter is modulated in the same fashion as the  transmitted signal.
The sideband filter must have sufficient bandwidth to pass the modulation,  but not the carrier or other sideband.
The filtered sideband serves the function of the local  oscillator.
 When an echo signal is present, the.
output of the receiver mixer is an IF signal of  frequency fir + f,,, where f,, is composed of the range frequency fr and the doppler velocity  frequency f4• The IF signal is amplified and applied to the balanced detector along with the  local-oscillator signal .fiF.
The output of the detector contains the beat frequency {range  frequency and the doppler velocity frequency), which is amplified to a level where it can  actuate the frequency-measuring circuits.
 In Fig.
3.13, the output of the low-frequency amplifier is divided into two channels: one  feeds an average-frequency counter to determine range, the other feeds a switched frequency  counter tc> determine the doppler velocity (assuming f, > !&).
Only the averaging frequency  counter need be used in an altimeter application, since the rate of change of altitude is usually  small.
 A target at short range will generally result in a strong signal at low frequency, while one  at long range will result in a weak signal at high frequency.
Therefore the frequency character­ istic of the low-frequency amplifier in the FM-CW radar may be shaped to provide attenua­ tion at the low frequencies corresponding to short ranges and large echo signals.
Less  attcntuation is applied to the higher frequencies, where the echo signals are weaker.
 The echo signal from an isolated target varies inversely as the fourth power of the range,  as is well known from the radar equation.
With this as a criterion, the gain of the low­ frequency amplifier should be made to increase at the rate of 12 dB/octave.
The output of the  amplifier would then be independent of the range, for constant target cross section.
Amplifier  response shaping is similar in function to sensitivity time control (STC) employed in conven­ tional pulse radar.
However, in the altimeter, the echo signal from an extended target such as  the ground varies inversely as the square (rather than the fourth power) of the range, since the  86 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  greater the range, the greater the echo area illuminated hy the hcam.
For extended targets,  therefore, the low-frequency amplifier gain should increase 6 dB/octave.
A compromise  between the isolated (12-dB slope) and extended (6-dB slope) target echoes might be a  characteristic with a slope of 9 dB/octave.
The constant output produced by shaping the  doppler-amplifier frequency-response characteristic is not only helpful in lowering the dy­ namic range requirements of the frequency-measuring device, but the attenuation of the low  frequencies effects a reduction of low-frequency interfering noise.
Lowered gain at low alti­ tudes also helps to reduce interference from unwanted rellections.
The response at thc uppcr  end of the frequency characteristic is rapidly reduced for frequencies beyond that correspond­ ing to maximum range.
If there is a minimum target range, the response is also cut off at the  low-frequency end, to further reduce the extraneous noise entering the receiver.
 Another method of processing the range or height information from an altimcter so as to  reduce the noise output from the receiver and improve the sensitivity uses a narrow-bandwidth  low-frequency amplifier with a feedback loop to maintain the beat frequency constant.
30·34  When a fixed-frequency excursion (or deviation) is used, as in the usual altimeter, the heat  frequency can vary over a considerable range of values.
The low-frequency-amplifier hand­ width must be sufficiently wide to encompass the expected range of beat frequencies.
Since tile  bandwidth is broader than need be to pass the signal energy, the signal-to-noise ratio is  reduced and the receiver sensitivity degraded.
Instead of maintaining the frequency excursion  flf constant and obtaining a varying beat frequency, 4f can be varied to maintain the heat  frequency constant.
The beat-frequency amplifier need only be wide enough to pass the  received signal energy, thus reducing the amount of noise with which the signal must com pctc.
 The frequency excursion is maintained by a servomechanism to that value which permits the  beat frequency to fall within the passband of the narrow filter.
The value of the frequency  excursion is then a measure of the altitude and may be substituted into Eq.
(3.11 ).
 When used in the FM aitimeter, the technique of servo-controlling the frequency excur­ sion is usually applied at all altitudes above a predetermined minimum.
Since the frequency  excursion !if is inversely proportional to range, the radar is better operated at very low  altitudes in the more normal inanner with a fixed AJ, and hence a varying beat frequency.
 Measurement errors.
The absolute accuracy of radar altimeters is usually of more importance  at low altitudes than at high altitudes.
Errors of a few meters might not be of significance when  cruising at altitudes of 10 km, but are important if the altimeter is part of a blind landing  system.
 The theoretical accuracy with which distance can be measured depends upon thc band­ width of the transmitted signal and the ratio of signal energy to noise energy.
In addition,  measurement accuracy might be limited by such practical restrictions as the accuracy of the  frequency-measuring device, the residual path-length error caused by the circuits and trans­ mission lines, errors caused by multiple reflections and transmitter leakage, and the frequency  error due to the turn-around of the frequency modulation.
 A common form of frequency-measuring device is the cycle counter, which measures the  number of cycles or half cycles of the beat during the modulation period.
The total cycle count  is a discrete- number since the.
counter is unable to measure fractions of a cycle.
The  discreteness of the frequency measurement gives rise to an error called the fixed t:rror, or !itt:p  error.
It has also been called the quantization error, a more descriptive name.
The average  number of cycles N of the beat frequenc;y fb in one period of the modulation cycle/~ is .Tb !fm,  \  where the bar over Ji, denotes time average.
Equation (3.11) may be written as  · ,·, ·· cN  .
'· · -R = 4 !if (3.13)  l'W i\Nl> FRl'<)llFNC'Y-MODULJ\TED RADAR 87  wltcre R = range (altitude).
m  c = velocity of rroragation.
m/s  /if= frequency excursion.
Hz  Since the output of the frequency counter N is an integer, the range will be an integral multiple  of c/(4 /if) and will give rise to a quantization error equal to  C  /)R = 4 11( (3.14a)  75  c'>R (m) = "ti.r (MHz) or (3.14h)  Note that the fixed error is independent of the range and carrier frequency and is a function of  the frequency excursion only.
Large frequency excursions are necessary if the fixed error is to  be small.
 Since the fixed error is due to the discrete nature of the frequency counter, its elTects can  he reduced by wobbling the modulation frequency or the phase of the transmitter output.
 Wobbling the transmitter phase results in a wobbling of the phase of the beat signal so that an  average reading of the cycle counter somewhere between N and N + 1 will be obtained on a  normal meter movement.
In one altimeter,30 the modulation frequency was varied at a 10-Hz  rate.
causing the phase shift of the beat signal to vary cyclically with time.
The indicating  system was designed so that it did not respond to the 10-Hz modulation directly, but it caused  the fixed error to be averaged.
Normal fluctuations in aircraft altitude due to uneven terrain,  waves on the water.
or turbulent air can also average out the fixed error provided the time  constant of the indicating device is large compared with the time between fluctuations.
Over  smooth terrain, such as an airport runway, the fixed error might not be averaged out.
Note that  even if the fixed error were not present, the accuracy with which the height can be measured  will depend on the signal-to-noise ratio, as discussed in Sec.
11.3, and can be comparable to  the fixed error as given by Eq.
(3.14).
 Other errors might be introduced in the CW radar if there are uncontrolled variations in  the transmitter frequency, modulation frequency, or frequency excursion.
Target motion can  cause an error in range equal to v, T0, where v, is the relative velocity and T0 is the observation  time.
A.t short ranges the residual path error can also result in a significant error unless  compensated for.
The residual path error is the error caused by delays in the circuitry and  transmission lines.
Multipath signals also produce error.
Figure 3.14 shows some of the  unwanted signals that might occur in the FM altimeter.36·37 The wanted signal is shown by  the solid line.
while the unwanted signals are shown by the broken arrows.
The unwanted  signals include:  1.
The reflection of the transmitted signals at the antenna caused by impedance mismatch.
 2.
The standing-wave pattern on the cable feeding the reference signal to the receiver, due to  poor mixer match .
 .
l The leakage signal entering the receiver via coupling between transmitter and receiver  antennas.
This can limit the ultimate receiver sensitivity, especially at high altitudes.
 4.
The interference due to power being reflected back to the transmitter, causing a change in  the impedance seen by the transmitter.
This is usually important only at low altitudes.
It  can be reduced by an attenuator introduced in the transmission line at low altitude or by a  directional coupler or an isolator.
 5.
The double-bounce signal.
 Reflections from the landing gear can also cause errors.
 88 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  Receiver  Figure 3.14 Unwanted signals in FM altimeter.
(Frum  Capel/i,36 I RE Trans.)  Transmitter leakage.
The sensitivity of FM-CW radar is limited by the noise accompanying  the transmitter signal which leaks into the receiver.
Although advances have been made in  reducing the AM and FM noise generated by high-power CW transmitters, the noise is usually  of sufficient magnitude compared with the echo signal to require some means of minimizing  the leakage that finds its way into the receiver.
The techniques described previously for  reducing leakage in the CW radar apply equally well to the FM-CW radar.
Separate antennas  and direct cancellation of the leakage signal are two techniques which give considerable  isolation.
 Sinusoidal modulation.
The ability of the FM-CW radar to measure range provides an addi­ tional basis for obtaining isolation.
Echoes from short-range targets-including the leakage  signal-may be attenuated relative to the desired target echo from longer ranges by propcrly  processing the difference-frequency signal obtained by heterodyning the transmitted and  received signals.
 If the CW carrier is frequency-modulated by a sine wave, the difference frequency oblained  by heterodyning the returned signal with a portion of the transmitter signal may be expanded  in a trigonometric series whose terms are the harmonics of the modulating frequency/~ .9·18  Assume the form of the transmitted signal to he  sin ( 2~{0t + t{ sin 2n;fmt)  .m  where .fo = carrier frequency  fm = modulation frequency  11.f = frequency excursion (equal to twice the frequency derivation)  The difference frequency signal may be written  t'o = Jo(D) cos (2n;/;it -<Po)+ 2J1(D) sin (2~{4t -t/Jo) cos (2nfmt -<Pm)  -2J2(D) COS (21Tf4t -<Po) COS 2(2rrfmt- <Pm)  2J3(D) sin (2~fat -</>o) cos 3(2~fmt -<Pm)  + 2J4(D) cos (2rrf4l -</>o) cos 4(2~fmr -<Pm)+ 2Js(D) ··· (3.15)  (3.16)  CW AND FREQUENCY-MODULATED RADAR 89  where JO, J 1• J 2, etc= Bessel functions of first kind and order 0, 1, 2, etc ..
respectively  D = (f'J//1~) sin 2rr/~R 0/c  R0 = distance to target at time t = 0 (distance that would have been meas­ ured if target were stationary)  c = velocity of propagation  Id= 2t'r .f~/c = doppler frequency shift  1·, = relative velocity of target with respect to radar  ¢0 = phase shift approximately equal to angular distance 4rr.f0 R0/c  <Pm = phase shift approximately equal to 2nfm R0/c  The difference-frequency signal of Eq.
(3.16) consists of a doppler-frequency component  of amplitude J 0(D) and a series of cosine waves of frequency fm, ~fm, ~fm, etc.
Each of these  harmonics off~ is modulated by a doppler-frequency component with amplitude proportional  to J"(LJ).
The product of the doppler-frequency factor times the nth harmonic factor is equiva­ lent to a suppressed-carrier double-sideband modulation (Fig.
3.15).
 In principle, any of the J" components of the difference-frequency signal can be extracted  in the FM-CW radar.
Consider first the d-c term J 0(D) cos (2rr.fd t -</>0).
This is a cosine wave  at the <loppler frequency with an amplitude proportional to J 0(D ).
Figure 3.16 shows a plot of  several of the Bessel functions.
The argument D of the Bessel function is proportional to range.
 The JO amplitude applies maximum response to signals at zero range in a radar that extracts  the d-c doppler-frequency component.
This is the range at which the leakage signal and its  noise components (including microphony and vibration) are found.
At greater ranges, where  the target is expected, the effect of the JO Bessel function is to reduce the echo-signal amplitude  in comparison with the echo at zero range (in addition to the normal range attenuation).
 Therefore, if the JO term were used, it would enhance the leakage signal and reduce the target  signal.
a condition opposite to that desired.
 An examination of the Bessel functions (Fig.
3.16) shows that if one of the modulation­ frequency harmonics is extracted (such as the first, second, or third harmonic), the amplitude  of the leakage signal at zero range may theoretically be made equal to zero.
The higher the  number oft he harmonic, the higher will be the order of the Bessel function and the less will be the  amount of rnicrophonism-leakage feedthrough.
This results from the property that J n(x) be­ haves as x" for small x.
Although higher-order Bessel functions may reduce the zero-range  response, they may also reduce the response at the desired target range if the target happens to  fall at or near a range corresponding to a zero of the Bessel function.
When only a single target  is involved.
the frequency excursion ~f can be adjusted to obtain that value of D which places  the maximum of the Bessel function at the target range.
 Q.l  TI  ::J  a  E  0  0.,  >  0  Q.l er  0 2 f!J1  Frequency Figure 3.15 Spectrum of the difference­ frequency signal obtained from an  FM-CW radar sinusoidally modulated  at a frequency fm when the target  motion produces a doppler frequency  shift J;,.
(After Saunders,9 I RE Trans.)  90 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  LO  0.9  0.8  0.7  0.6  0.5 J3(D)  0.4  c::i 0.3  ~  0.2  0.1  0  -0.1  -0.2  -0.3  -0.4 12 0  Figure 3.16 Plot of Bessel function~  of order 0, I, 2, and 3; D =  (!lflfm) sin 2nfmRo/c.
 The technique of using higher-order Bessel functions has been applied to the type of  doppler-navigation radar discussed in the next section.
A block diagram of a CW radar using  the third harmonic (J3 term) is shown in Fig.
3.17.
The transmitter is sinusoidally frequency­ modulated at a frequency fm to generate the waveform given by Eq.
(3.15).
The doppler-shifted  echo is heterodyned with the transmitted signal to produce the beat-frequency signal of  Eq.
(3.16).
One of the harmonics offm is selected (in this case the third) by a filter centered at  the harmonic.
The filter bandwidth is wide enough to pass both doppler-frequency sidebands.
 The filter output is mixed with the (third) harmonic of.fm.
The doppler frequency is extracted  by the low-pass filter.
 Since the total energy contained in the beat-frequency signal is distributed among all the  harmonics, extracting but one component wastes signal energy contained in the other har­ monics and results in a loss of signal as compared with an ideal CW radar.
However, the  signal-to-noise ratio is generally superior in the FM radar designed to operate with the: 11th  Circulator  Mixer x3  frequency  multiplier  3d harmonic  filter Mixer Low· poss  filter Doppler  frequency  Figure 3.17 Sinusoidally modulated FM-CW radar extracting the third harmonic (J 3 Bessd component).
 CW AND FREQUENCY-MODULATED RADAR 91  harmonic as compared with a practical CW radar because ·the transmitter leakage noise is  suppressed by the 11th-order Bessel function.
The loss in signal energy when operating with the  J-' Bessel component is reported9·3u4 to be from 4 to 12 dB.
Although two separate transmit­ ting and receiving antennas may he used, it is not necessary in many applications.
A single  antenna with a circulator is shown in the block diagram of Fig.
3.17.
Leakage introduced by  the circulator and by reflections from the antenna are at close range and thus are attenuated by  the J 3 factor.
 A plot of JJ(D) as a function of distance is shown in Fig.
3.18.
The curve is mirrored  because of the periodicity of D.
The nulls in the curve suggest that echoes from certain ranges  can be suppressed if the modulation parameters are properly selected.
 If the target is stationary (zero doppler frequency), the amplitudes of the modulation­ frequency harmonics are proportional to either J "(D) sin </>o or J n(D) cos </>o, where </>o =  4rf0 R0/c = 4nR0/ k Therefore the amplitude depends on the range to the target in RF  wavelengths.
The sine or the cosine terms can take any value between + 1 and -1, including  zero.
for a change in range corresponding to one RF wavelength.
For this reason, the extrac­ tion of the higher-order modulation frequencies is not practical with a stationary target, such  as in an altimeter.
 In order to use the properties of the Bessel function to obtain isolation in an FM-CW  altimeter, when the doppler frequency is essentially zero, the role of the doppler frequency shift  may be artificially introduced by translating the reference frequency to some different value.
 This might be accomplished with a single-sideband generator (frequency translator) inserted  between the directional coupler and the RF mixer of Fig.
3.17.
The frequency translation in the  reference signal path is equivalent to a doppler shift in the antenna path.
The frequency  excursion of the modulation waveform can be adjusted by a servomechanism to maintain the  maximum of the Bessel function at the aircraft's altitude.
The frequency translator is not  needed in an airborne doppler navigator since the antenna beam is directed at a depression  angle .:,ther than 90° and a doppler-shifted echo is produced by the motion of the aircraft.
 !\latched filter detection.
The operation of the FM-CW radar described earlier in this section  does not employ optimum signal processing, such as described in Chap.
10.
The receiver is not  designed as a matched filter for the particular transmitted waveform.
Therefore, the sensitivity  of the FM-CW receiver described here is degraded and the ability to operate with multiple  targets is usually poor.
For a radio altimeter whose target is the earth, these limitations usually  present no problem.
When used for the long-range detection of air targets, for example, the  nonoptimum detection of the classical FM-CW radar will seriously hinder its performance  when compared to a properly designed pulse radar.
It is possible, however, to utilize matched­ filter processing in the FM-CW radar in a manner similar to that employed with FM (chirp)  pulse compression radar as described in Sec.
11.5, and thus overcome the lower sensitivity and  multiple-target problems.
JR.39 As the duty cycle of an FM pulse compression waveform in­ creases it becomes more like the FM-CW waveform of unity duty cycle.
Hence, the processing  QJ  D  .2  0.
 E  <l  Distance  Figure J.18 Plot of J.1(/)) as a function of distance.
(From Sa1111ders.9 IRE Trans.)  92 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  techniques can be similar.
Pseudorandom phase-coded waveforms40 and random noise  waveforms41•42 may also be applied to CW transmission.
When the modulation period is long,  it may be desirable to utilize correlation detection instead of matched filter detection.
 3.4 AIRBORNE DOPPLER NA VIGATION43 -s6  An important requirement of aircraft flight is for a self-contained navigation system capable of  operating anywhere over the surface of the earth under any conditions of visibility or weather.
 It should provide the necessary data for piloting the aircraft from one position to another  without the need of navigation information transmitted to the aircraft from a grour:d station  One method of obtaining a self-contained aircraft navigation system is base_d 01 the CW  doppler-radar principle.
Doppler radar can provide the drift angle and true spe d of the  aircraft relative to the earth.
The drift angle is the angle between the horizontal projection of  the centerline of the aircraft (heading) and the horizontal component of the aircraft velocity  vector (ground track).
From the ground-speed and drift-angle measurements, the aircraft's  present position can be computed by dead reckoning.
 An aircraft with a doppler radar whose antenna beam is directed at an angle )' to the  horizontal (Fig.
3.19a) will receive a doppler-shifted echo signal from the ground.
The shift in  (a)  ----------~ V  (b) /.
 Figure 3.19 (a) Aircraft with single  doppler navigation antenna beam at an  angle y to the horizontal; (b) aircraft  employing four doppler-navigation  beams to obtain vector velocity.
 CW AND FREQUENCY-MODULATED RADAR 93  frequency is.f~ = 2(10/c)v cos r, where/~ is the carrier frequency, vis the aircraft velocity, and c  is the velocity of propagation.
Typically, the depression angle}' might be in the vicinity of 65 to  70°.
A single antenna beam from a doppler radar measures one component of aircraft velocity  relative to the direction of propagation.
A minimum of three noncoplanar beams are needed to  determine the vector velocity, that is, the speed and direction of travel.
 Doppler-navigation radar measures the vector velocity relative to the frame of reference  of the antenna assembly.
To convert this vector velocity to a horizontal reference on the  ground, the direction of the vertical must he determined by some auxiliary means.
The heading  of the aircraft, as might be obtained from a compass, must also be known for proper naviga­ tion.
The vertical reference may be used either to stabilize the antenna beam system so as to  align it with the horizontal, or alternatively, the antennas might be fixed relative to the aircraft  and the ground velocity components calculated with a computer.
 A practical form of doppler-navigation radar might have four beams oriented as in  Fig.
3.19b.
A doppler-navigation radar with forward and rearward beams is called a Janus  system, after the Roman god who looked both forward and backward at the same time.
 Assume initially that the two forward and two backward beams are symmetrically disposed  ahout the axis of the aircraft.
If the aircraft's velocity is not in the same direction as the aircraft  heading.
the doppler frequency in the two forward beams will not be the same.
This difference  in frequency may be used to generate an error signal in a servomechanism which rotates the  antennas until the doppler frequencies are equal, indicating that the axis of the antennas is  aligned with the ground track of the aircraft.
The angular displacement of the antenna from  the aircraft heading is the drift angle, and the magnitude of the doppler is a measure of the  speed along the ground track.
 The use of the two rearward beams in conjunction with the two forward beams results in  considerable improvement in accuracy.
It eliminates the error introduced by vertical motion of  the aircraft and reduces the error caused by pitching movements of the antenna.
 Navigation may also be performed with only two antenna beams if some auxiliary means  is used to obtain a third coordinate.
Two beams give the two components of the aircraft  velocity tangent to the surface of the earth.
A third component, the vertical velocity, is needed  and may be provided from some nondoppler source such as a barometric rate-of-climb meter.
 The primary advantage of the two-beam system is a reduction in equipment.
However, the  accuracy is not as good as with systems using three or four beams.
 In principle, the CW radar would seem to be the ideal method of obtaining doppler­ navigation information.
However, in practice, leakage between transmitter and receiver can  limit the sehsitivity of the CW doppler-navigation radar, just as it does in any CW radar.
One  method of eliminating the ill effects of leakage is by pulsing the transmitter on and turning the  receiver off for the duration of the transmitted pulse in a manner similar to the pulse-doppler  radar described in Sec.
4.10.
The pulse-doppler mode of operation has the further advantage in  that each beam can operate with a single antenna for both transmitter and receiver, whereas a  CW radar must usually employ two separate antennas in order to achieve the needed isolation.
 However, pulse systems suffer from loss of coverage and/or sensitivity because of" altitude  holes." These are caused by the high prf commonly used with pulse-doppler radars when it is  necessary to achieve unambiguous doppler measurements.
The high prf, although it gives  unambiguous doppler, usually results in ambiguous range.
But more important, a pulse radar  with ambiguous prf can result in lost targets.
If the transmitter is pulsed just when the ground  echo arrives back at the radar, it will not be detected.
Thus, altitude holes exist at or near those  altitudes where the echo time is an integral multiple of the pulse-repetition period.
Techniques  exist for reducing the undesired effects of altitude holes, but not without some inconvenience  or possible loss in overall performance.44  94 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  The Janus system can be operated incoherently by using the same transmitter to feed a  pair of beams simultaneously.
Typically, one beam is directed ahead and to the right of the  ground track, and the other aft and to the left.
A forward-left and an aft-right are also fed by  the transmitter as a second channel.
The two channels may be operated simultaneously or  timed-shared.
By heterodyning in a mixing element the echo signal received in the fore and aft  beams, the doppler frequency is extracted.
The difference frequency resulting from the mixing  operation is twice the doppler frequency.
A stable transmitter frequency is not needed in this  system as it is in the coherent system.
Coherence is obtained on a relative basis in the process  of comparing the signals received from the forward and backward direction.
Changes in  transmitter frequency affect the echo signals in the two directions equally and are therefore  canceled when taking the difference frequency.
 Another method of achieving the necessary isolation in a doppler-navigation radar is  with a sinusoidal frequency-modulated CW system.
By frequency-modulating "the transmis­ sion, the leakage signal may be reduced relative to the signal from the ground by extracting a  harmonic of the modulating frequency and taking advantage of one of the higher-order Bessel  functions as described in the previous section.
It has been claimed that a dopplcr navigation  system based on this principle can provide 150 dB of isolation, the amount necessary to  operate at altitudes of 50,000 ft.49  The frequency band from 13.25 to 13.4 GHz has been allocated for airborne doppler  navigation radar, but such radars may also operate within the band from 8.75 to 8.85 MHz.
 The doppler navigator over land can provide a measurement of ground speed with a  standard deviation of from 0.13 to 0.5 percent.
55 The standard deviation of the drift angle can  be less than 0.25°.
Over water the accuracies are slightly worse.
The backscatter energy over  water, except for near vertical incidence, is generally less than over land, thus lowering the  signal-to-noise ratio.
Also there is an apparent increase in the angle of depression since the  rapid variation of sea echo (a0) as a function of the depression angle y favors returns from  the lower half of the incident beam.
It results in the center of the doppler spectrum being  shifted, so that the direction as determined from the doppler spectrum will differ from that of  the center of the antenna beam.
This is sometimes called the calibration-shift error.
This error  can be corrected by lobe switching; that is, by periodically switching the antenna beam a small  amount in they-direction at a 1ow rate (perhaps 20 Hz).55 Two displaced doppler-frequency  spectra are produced at the two antenna positions.
A narrow tracking filter tracks the cross- ..
7  over of the two spectra.
The frequency of this crossover is the same for water as for land.
 Hence, there will beno bias error over water.
A very narrow antenna beam will also reduce the  over-water bias error without the need for lobe switching.
Another source of error is the mass  movement of water caused by tides, currents, and winds, which result in a doppler frequency  shift in addition to that caused by the aircraft's motion.
 In order to use the doppler radar for navigation purposes, a heading reference is required  to refer the antenna direction indication to some navigational coordinate system, such as true  north.
A computer is also needed to· integrate the velocity measurements so as to give the  distance traveled.
 The AN/APN-200 doppler navigation· radar used in the Navy's S3A aircraft, and the  similar AN/APN-213 in the Air Force's E3A (AWACS) operate at 13.3 GHz with 1 watt of  CW power obtained from a solid:state IMPA TT diode transmitter.56 The waveform is unmod­ ulated CW.
The antenna is a fixed array with an integral radome producing four receive  beams and four transmit beams with a minimum of 70 dB of isolation between transmit and  receive.
The one-way! beamwidths are· approximately 2.5° (fore-aft) by 5° (lateral).
The four  beams are displaced symmetrically'at an outward angle of 25° from the vertical.
The beams are  time shared by a single channel which is switched through the four-beam sequence every  CW AND FREQUENCY-MODULATED RADAR 95  250 ms.
A phase-monopulse technique is used to reduce the terrain bias effect.68 The unit  weighs 44 pounds including radome, and requires 165 VA of power.
It is required to operate  from 50 to 1000 knots at attitudes of ± 25° pitch and ± 45° roll of the aircraft, at an altitude  of 40,000 ft over water.
Therms accuracy is claimed to be within 0.13 percent ±0.1 knots of  the true ground velocity.
 3.5 J\'tULTIPLE-FREQUENCY CW RADAR 12·57_ 63  Although it has been said in this chapter that CW radar does not measure range, it is possible  under some circumstances to <lo so by measuring the phase of the echo signal relative to the  phase of the transmitted signal.
Consider a CW radar radiating a single-frequency sine wave of  the form sin 2rrt;, r.
(The amplitude of the signal is taken to be unity since it does not influence  the result.) The signal travels to the target at a range R and returns to the radar after a time  T = 2R/c.
where c is the velocity of propagation.
The echo signal received at the radar is  sin [2rrf0(t -T)].
If the transmitted and received signals are compared in a phase detector,  the output is proportional to the phase difference between the two and is 11</> = 2rrf0 T =  4rrf~ R/c.
The phase difference may therefore be used as a measure of the range, or  R = ~ l1</> = 3_ 11</>  4~fo 4n (3.17)  However, the measurement of the phase difference 11</> is unambiguous only if 11</> does not  exceed 2n radians.
Substituting 11</> = 2n into Eq.
(3.17) gives the maximum unambiguous  range as )./2.
At radar frequencies this unambiguous range is much too small to be of practical  interest.
 The region of unambiguous range may be extended considerably by utilizing two separate  CW signals dilTering slightly in frequency.
The unambiguous range in this case corresponds to  a half wavelength at the difference frequency.
 The transmitted waveform is assumed to consist of two continuous sine waves of  frequency .f1 and .f~ separated by an amount 11f For convenience, the amplitudes of all signals  arc set equal to unity.
The voltage waveforms of the two components of the transmitted signal  r1, and r27 may be written as  ,, 11 = sin (2rrf1 t + <I> i)  l1ir = sin (2nf2t + </>2) (3.18a)  (3.18b)  where</> 1 and </>2 are arbitrary (constant) phase angles.
The echo signal is shifted in frequency  by the doppler effect.
The form of the doppler-shifted signals at each of the two frequencies f1  and f2 may be written  l'JR=sm [2n(f1 ±Jdi)t-4rrf~Ro +<t>1]  fl2R = SIil [ 21t(f2 ±fd2)t -41tf; Ro + <P2] (3.19a)  (3.19b)  where R0 = range to target at a particular time t = t0 (range that would be measured ir  target were not moving)  _fc,1 = doppler frequency shift associated with frequency J1  _fc,2 = doppler frequency shift associated with frequency J2  96 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  Since the two RF frequencies/ 1 andfi are approximately the same (that is.Ji = /1 + A/, where  flf 4:fd the doppler frequency shifts /di and fd2 are approximately equal to one another.
 Therefore we may write /.t1 = I.ti = h.
 The receiver separates the two components of the echo signal and heterodynes each  received signal component with the corresponding transmitted waveform and extracts the two  doppler-frequency components given below:  The phase difference between these two components is  Hence fl</> = 41t(/2 -/1 )Ro = 4n 4{R0  C C  C fl</>  Ro= 4n flf  which is the same as that of Eq.
(3.17), with L\J substituted in place of fo.
(3 .20a)  (3.20h)  (3.21)  (3.22)  The two-frequency CW technique for measuring range was described as using the dopplcr  frequency shift.
When the doppler frequency is zero, as with a stationary target, it is also  possible, in principle, to extract the phase difference.
If the target carries a beacon or some  other form of echo-signal augmentor, the doppler frequency shift may be simulated by trans­ lating the echo frequency, as with a single-sideband modulator.
 The two frequencies of the two-frequency radar were described as being transmitted  simultaneously.63 They may also be transmitted sequentially in some applications by rapidly  switching a single RF source.
 A large difference in frequency between the two transmitted signals improves the accuracy  of the range measurement since large /:if means a proportionately large change in 6.<j) for a  given range.
However, there is a limit to the value of fl/, since fl</> cannot be greater than 2n  radians if the range is to remain unambiguous.
The maximum unambiguous range Runamt, is  C  Runamb = 2 L\J (3.23)  Therefore flf must be Jess than c/2Runamb.
Note that when A/ is replaced by the pulse repetition  rate, Eq.
(3.39) gives the maximum unambiguous range of a pulse radar.
 A qualitative explanation of the operation of the two-frequency radar may be had by  considering both carrier frequencies to 'be in phase at zero range.
As they progress outward  from the radar, the reJative phase between the two increases because of their difference in  frequency.
This phase difference may be used as a measure of the elapsed time.
When the two  signals slip in phase by 1 cycle, the measurement of phase, and hence range, becomes  ambiguous.
 The two-frequency CW radar is essentially a single-target radar since only one phase  difference can be measured at a time.
If more than one target is present, the echo signal  becomes 9omplicated and the meaning of the phase measurement is doubtful.
The theoretical  accuracy with which range can be measured with the two-frequency CW radar can be found  CW AND FREQUENCY-MODULATED RADAR 97  from the methods described in Sec.
11 .
.1.
It can be shown that the theoretical rms range error is  C c5R = ----- -----.
-- 4rr ~1(2E/ N 0)112 (3.24)  "··ere E = energy contained in received signal and N0 = noise power per hertz of bandwidth.
 II ,his is compared with the rms range error theoretically possible with the linear FM pulse­ cc npression waveform whose spectrum occupies the same bandwidth ~{, the error obtained  with the two-frequency CW waveform is less by the factor 0.29.
 Fquation (3.24) indicates that the greater the separation ~{between the two frequencies,  the less will be the rms error.
However, the frequency difference must not be too large if  unambiguous measurements arc to be made.
The selection of ~f represents a compromise  between the requirements of accuracy and ambiguity.
Both accurate and unambiguous range  measurements can be nnde by transmitting three or more frequencies instead of just two.
 For example, if the three frequencies/1,/2, and/3 are such that/3 -/1 = k(f2 -/1), where  k is a factor of the order of 10 or 20, the pair of frequencies /3, /1 gives an ambiguous but  accurate range me: -;urement while the pair of frequencies /2, f, are chosen close to resolve  the ambiguities in the /3, f1 measurement.
Likewise, if further accuracy is required a fourth  frequency can be transmitted and its ambiguities resolved by the less accurate but unambiguous  r11cas11rcmcnt ohtained from the three frequencies .f1, /2, /3• As more frequencies are added.
 the spectrum and target resolution approach that obtained with a pulse or an FM-CW  waveform.
 The measurement of range by measuring the phase difference between separated frequen­ cies is analogous to the measurement of angle by measuring the phase difference between  widely spaced antennas, as in an interferometer antenna.
The interferometer antenna gives an  accurate but ambiguous measurement of angle.
The ambiguities may be resolved by additional  antennas spaced closer together.
The spacing between the individual antennas in the interfer­ ometer system corresponds to the separation between frequencies in the multiple-frequency  distance-measuring technique.
The minitrack system is an example of an interferometer in  which angular ambiguities are resolved in a manner stmilar to that described.64  The multiple-frequency CW radar technique has been applied to the accurate measure­ ment of distance in surveying and in missile guidance.
The Tellurometer is the name given to a  portable electronic surveying instrument which is based on this principle.57-59 It consists of a  master unit at one end of the line and a remote unit at the other end.
The master unit transmits  a carrier frequency of 3,000 MHz, with four single-sideband modulated frequencies separated  from the carrier by 10.000, 9.990, 9.900, and 9.000 MHz.
The 10-MHz difference frequency  provides the basic accuracy measurement, while the difference frequencies of 1 MHz, 100 kHz,  and 10 kHz permit the resolution of ambiguities.
 The remote unit at the other end of the line receives the signals from the master unit and  amplifies and retransmits them.
The phases of the returned signals at the master unit are  compared with the phases of the outgoing signals.
Since the master and the remote units are  stationary, there is no dopplcr frequency shift.
The function of the doppler frequency is  provided by modulating the retransmitted signals at the remote unit in such a manner that a  1-k Hz beat frequency is obtained from the heterodyning process at the receiver of the master  unit.
The phase of the 1-k Hz signals contaii1s the same information as the phase of the multiple  frcquc1cies.
 1 ,e MRB 201 Tellurometer is capable of measuring distances from 200 to 250 km,  assuminr reasonable line of sight conditions, with an accuracy of ±0.5 m ± 3 x 10-6 d,  where dis the distance being measured.
The transmitter power is 20(\ mW and the antenna is a  small paraboloid with crossed feeds to make the polarizations of the transmitted and received  98 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  signals orthogonal.
The MRA 5 operates within the 10 to 10.5 GHz band, from 100 m to  50 km range with an accuracy of ±0.05 m ± 10-5 d, assuming a correction is made for  meteorological conditions.
 In addition to its use in surveying, the multiple CW frequency method of measuring range  has been applied in range-instrumentation radar for the measurement or the distance to a  transponder-equipped missile;65 the distance to satellites;66 in satellite navigation systems  based on range measurement;67 and for detecting the presence of an obstacle in the path of a  moving automobile by measuring the distance, the doppler velocity, and the sign or the  doppler (whether the target is approaching or receding).63  REFERENCES  l.
Sandretto, P.
C.: The Long Quest, IRE Trans., vol.
ANE-1, no.
2, p.
2, June, 1954.
 2.
Van Vleck, J.
H., and D.
Middleton: A Theoretical Comparison of the Visual, Aural, and Meter  Reception of Pulsed Signals in the Presence of Noise, J.
Appl.
Phys., vol.
17, pp.
940-971, November.
 1946.
 3.
Selridge, H.: Proximity Fuzes for Artillery, Electronics, vol.
19, pp.
104-109, February, 1946.
 4.
Bonner, H.
M.: The Radio Proximity Fuse, Elec.
Eng., vol.
66, pp.
888-893, September, 1947.
 5.
Saunders, W.
K.: CW and FM Radar, chap.
16 of"Radar Handbook," M.
I.
Skolnik (ed.), McGraw­ Hill Book Co., New York, 1970.
 6.
Barlow, E.
J.: Doppler Radar, Proc.
IRE, vol.
37, pp.
340-355, April, 1949.
 7.
Meyer, M.
A., and A.
B.
Goldberg: Applications of the Turnstile Junction, I RE Trans., vol.
MTT-3,  pp.
40-45, December, 1955.
 8.
Roberts, W.
B.: Rotating Wave Radar, Electronics, vol.
19, pp.
130-133, July, 1946.
 9.
Sanders, W.
K.: Post-war Developments in Continuous-wave and Frequency-modulated Radar, I RE  Trans., vol.
ANE-8, pp.
7-19, March, 1961.
 10.
Saunders, W.
K.: Control of Surface Currents by the Use of Channels, I RE Trans., vol.
A P-4,  pp.
85-87, January, 1956.
 11.
Agar, W.
0., and M.
Morgan: Isolation of Separate Transmitter and Receiver Aerials for Continuous  Wave Radars, Marconi Review, vol.
26, pp.
25-34, 1st qtr., 1963.
 12.
Ridenour, L.
N.: "Radar System Engineering," MIT Radiation Laboratory Series, vol.
l, McGraw­ Hill Book Co., New York, 1947.
 13.
O'Hara, F.
J., and G.
M.
Moore: A High Performance CW Receiver Using Feedthru Nulling, Micro­ wave J., vol.
6, pp.
63-71,'September; 1963.
 14.
Greene, J.
C., and J.
F.
Lyons: Receivers with Zero Intermediate Frequency, Proc.
I RE, vol.
47.
 pp.
335-33~ February, 195~  15.
Kerr, D.
E.
(ed.):" Propagation of Short Radio Waves," MIT Radiation Laboratory Series, vol.
13,  pp.
539-543, McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York, 1951.
 16.
Rabiner, L.
R., and C.
M.
Rade·r (eds.): "Digital Signal Processing," IEEE Press, New York, 1972.
 17.
Gardner, F.
M.: DOPLOC Uses Phase-locked Filter, Electronic Ind., vol.
18, pp.
96-99, October,  1959.
 18.
Kalmus, H.
P.: Direction Sensitive Doppler Device, Proc.
I RE, vol.
43, pp.
698-700, June, 19SS.
 19.
Logue, S.
H.: Rate-of-climb Meter Uses Doppler Radar, Electronics, vol.
30, no.
6, pp.
150 152, June  1.
1957.
 20.
Kalmus, H.
P.: Doppler Wave Recognition with High Clutter Rejection, IEEE Trans., vol.
AES-3,  no.
6 Suppl., pp.
334-339, November, 1967.
 21.
Ternes, C.
L.: Relativistic Considerations of Doppler Shift, IRE Trans., vol.
ANE-6.
p.
37, March,  1959.
 22.
Knop, C.
M.: A Note on Doppler-Shifted Signals, Proc.
IEEE, vol.
54, pp.
807-808, May.
1966.
 23.
Gill, T.
P.: "The Doppler Effect," Academic Press, New York, 1965.
 24.
Merriman, R.H ..
and J.
W.
Rush: Microwave Doppler Sensors, Microwal'e J ..
vol.
17.
pp.
27-30.
July,  1974.
..
.
 25.
Whelton, C.
P.: Industrial and Scientific Applications of Doppler Radar, Microwan.' J..
vol.
18,  pp.
39-42, November, 1975.
·  26.
Easton, R.
L..
and J.
J.
Fleming: The Navy Space Surveillance System.
Proc.
I RE, vol.
48, pp.
663-669.
 April, 1960.
 CW AND FREQUENCY-MODULATED RADAR 99  27.
Klass.
P.
J.: Navy Improves Accuracy, Detection Range of Space Surveillance Chain, Aviario11 Week,  Aug.
16.
1965.
 28.
Ismail, M.A.
W.: A Study of the Double Modulated FM Radar, Inst.
Hock(requenzted1.
an der E.
T.H.
 Rept.
21.
Verlag Leemann, Zurich, 1955.
 29.
Luck.
D.
G.
C.: "Frequency Modulated Radar," McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York, 1949.
 30.
Wimberley, F.
T ..
and J.
F.
Lane.
Jr.: The AN/APN-22 Radio Altimeter, IRE Trans., vol.
ANE-1,  no.
2, pp.
8-14, June.
1954.
 31.
Banks.
D.
S.: Continuous Wave (CW) Radar, EASCON '75 Record, IEEE Publ.
75 CHO 998-5  EASCON, rr I07-A to 107-G, 1975.
 32.
Appleton, E.
V ..
and M.
A.
F.
Barnett: On Some Direct Evidence for Downward Atmospheric  Renee! ion of Fleet ric Rays.
Prnc.
Ro J'.
Soc., vol.
A 109.
p.
621, 1925.
 33.
Espenshied.
L..
and R.
C.
Newhouse: A Terrain Clearance Indicator.
Bell Sys.
Tecli.
J., vol.
18,  pp.
222-234.
19.39.
 34.
Block, A ..
K.
F..
Huecks.
and A.
G.
Heaton: Improved Radio Altimeter, »'ireless l"Yorld, vol.
60,  pp.
13H 140, March.
1954.
 35.
Glegg, K.
C.
M.: A Low Noise CW Doppler Technique.
Nari.
Con( Proc.
Aero11aut.
Electronics  (Dayton, Ohio), pp.
133-144.
1958.
 36.
Capelli, M.: Radio Altimeter, IRE Trans., vol.
ANE-1, no.
2, pp.
3-7, June, 1954.
 37.
Sollenberger.
T.
E.: Multipath Phase Errors in CW-FM Tracking Systems, IRE Trans .• vol.
AP-3,  pp.
185-192.
October, 1955.
 38.
Withers, M.
J.: Matched Filter for Frequency-Modulated Continuous-Wave Radar Systems, Proc.
 IEE (London}.
vol.
t 13.
pp.
405-412, March, 1966.
 39.
Barrick.
D.
E.: FM/CW Radar Signals and Digital Processing, National Oceanic and Atmospheric  Administration.
Boulder, Colorado, NOAA Technical Report ERL 283-WPL 26, July, 1973.
 40.
Craig.
S.
W.
Fishbein, and 0.
E.
Rittenback: Continuous-Wave Radar with High Range Resolu- tion and Unambiguous Velocity Determination, I RE Trans., vol.
MIL-6, pp.
153-161, April, 1962.
 41.
Horton.
B.
M.: Noise-Modulated Distance Measuring System, Proc.
IRE, vol.
47, pp.
821-828, May,  1959.
 42.
Chadwick, R.
B ..
and G.
R.
Cooper: Measurement of Distributed Targets with the Random Signal  Radar.
IEEE Tra11s., vol.
AES-8, pp.
743-750, November, 1972.
 4J.
Berger.
F.
B.: The Nature of Doppler Velocity Measurement, IRE Trans., vol.
ANE-4, pp.
103-112,  September.
1957.
 44.
Rerger, F.
8.: The Design or Airborne Doppler Velocity Measuring Systems, IRE Trans., vol.
ANE-4.
 pp.
157 175.
December.
1957.
 45.
Fried.
W.
R.: Principles and Performance Analysis of Doppler Navigation Systems, IRE Trans.,  vol.
ANE-4, pp.
176-196, December, 1957.
 46.
Condie.
M.
A.: Basic Design Considerations: Automatic Navigator AN/APN-67, IRE Trans.,  vol.
ANE-4.
pp.
197-201.
December, 1957.
 47.
McMahon, F.
A.: The AN/APN-81 Doppler Navigation System, IRE Trans., vol.
ANE-4,  pp.
202-211, December.
1957.
 48.
McKay, M.
W.: The AN/APN-96 Doppler Radar Set, IRE Natl.
Conv.
Record, vol.
6, pt.
5, pp.
71-79,  1958.
 49.
Brown.
R.
K ..
N.
F.
Moody.
P.
M.
Thompson, R.
J.
Bibby, C.
A.
Franklin, J.
H.
Ganton, and J.
 Mitchell: A Lightweight and Self-contained Airborne Navigational System, Proc.
IRE, vol.
47,  pp.
778-807.
May, 1959.
 50.
Glegg.
K.
C.
M.: A Low Noise CW Doppler Technique, Natl.
Conf.
Proc.
Aeronaut, Electronics  (Dayton.
Ohio).
pp.
133-144.
1958.
 51.
Tollefson.
R.
D.: Application of Frequency Modulation Techniques to Doppler Radar Sensors, Natl.
 Con( Proc.
Aero11a11t.
Electro11ics (Dayton, Ohio), pp.
683-687, 1959.
 52.
Kramer, E.: A Historical Survey of the Application of the Doppler Principle for Radio Navigation.
 IEEE Trans ..
vol.
AES-8.
pp.
258-263, May.
1972.
 53.
Fried.
W.
R.: New Developments in Radar and Radio Sensors for Aircraft Navigation, IEEE Trans.,  vol.
AES-IO.
pp.
25-33, January, 1974.
 54.
Gray, T.: Airborne Doppler Navigation Techniques, chap.
13 of" Radar Techniques for Detection,  Tracking, and Navigation." W.
T.
Blackband (ed.).
Gordon and Breach Science Publishers, New  York.
1966.
 55.
Fried, W.R.: Doppler Navigation, chap.
6 of "Avionics Navigation Systems," M.
Kayton and W.R.
 Fried (eds.).
John Wiley and Sons.
Inc., New York.
1969.
 56.
Andreone.
V.
M ..
and C.
N.
Bates: Doppler Radar Boast Design Innovations, Microwat•es, vol.
13,  pp.
72-82.
October.
1974.
 100 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  57.
Wadley, T.
L.: Electronic Principles of the Tellurometcr, Trans.
South African Inst.
Elec.
Enyrs.,  vol.
49, pp.
143-161, May, 1958; discussion, pp.
161--172.
 58.
Poling, A.
C.: Tellurometer Manual, U.S.
Dept.
Commerce P11bl.
62-1, 1959.
 59.
Robinson, T.
A.: Application of Electronic Distance Measuring Equipment in Surveying, IRE Trans.,  vol.
MIL-4, pp.
263-267, April-July, 1960.
 60.
Varian, R.
H., W.
W.
Hansen, and J.
R.
Woodyard: Object Detecting and Locating System, LJ.S.
 Patent 2,435,615, Feb.
10, 1948.
 61.
Skolnik, M.
I.: An Analysis of Bistatic Radar, Appendix, IRE Trans., vol.
A NE-8, pp.
19 27, March,  1961.
 62.
Hastings, C.
E.: Raydist: A Radio Navigation and Tracking System, Tele-Tech, vol.
6, pp.
30-33,  100-103, June, 1947.
 63.
Boyer, W.
D.: A Diplex, Doppler Phase Comparison Radar, IEEE Trans., vol.
ANE-10, pp.
27-33.
 March, 1963.
 64.
Mengel, J.
T.: Tracking the Earth Satellite and Data Transmission by Radio, Proc.
I RE, vol.
44,  pp.
755-760, June, 1956.
 65.
Mertens, L.
E., and R.
H.
Tabeling: Tracking lnstrumentati )n and Accuracy on the: Eastern Test  Range, IEEE Trans., vol.
SET-11, pp.
14-23, March, 1965.
 66.
McCaskill, T.
B., J.
A.
Buisson, and D.
W.
Lynch: Principles and Techniques of Satellite Navigation  Using the Timation II Satellite, Naval Research Laboratory Rep.
7252, June 17, 1971, Washington,  D.C.
 67.
Easton, R.
L.: The Role of Time/Frequency in Navy Navigation Satellites, Proc.
IEEE, vol.
60,  pp.
557-563, May, 1972.
 68.
Bates, C.
N.: New Advances in Doppler Radar, Countermeasures, vol.
2, pp.
34-37, April, 1976.
 69.
Acker, A.
E.: Eliminating Transmitted Clutter in Doppler Radar Systems, Microwave J., vol.
18,  pp.
47-50, November, 1975.
 70.
Gupta, P.
D.: Exact Derivation of the Doppler Shift Formula for a Radar Echo Without Using  Transformation Equations, Am.
J.
Phys., vol.
45, pp.
674-675, July, 1977.
 71.
King, R.
J.:" Microwave Homodyne Systems," Peter Peregrinus Ltd., Stevenage, Herts, England, 1978  (an Inst.
Elect.
Engs.
pub!.).
 72.
Blomfield, D.
L.
H.: Low-Noise Microwave Sources, International Co11ference on Radar-Present arul  Future, Oct.
23-25, 1973, IEE (London) Publ.
no.
105, pp.
178-183.
 73.
Ashley, J.
R., T.
A.
Barley, and G.
J.
Rast, Jr.: The Measurement of Noise in Microwave Transmitters,  IEEE Trans., vol.
MTT-25, pp.
294-318, April, 1977.
 CHAPTER  FOUR  MTI AND PULSE DOPPLER RADAR  4.1 INTRODUCTION  The doppler frequency shift [Eq.
(3.2)] produced by a moving target may be used in a pulse  radar.
just as in the CW radar discussed in Chap.
3, to determine the relative velocity of a  target or to separate desired moving targets from undesired stationary objects (clutter).
 Although there are applications of pulse radar where a determination of the target's relative  velocity is made from the doppler frequency shift, the use of doppler to separate small moving  targets in the presense of large clutter has probably been of far greater interest.
Such a pulse  radar that utilizes the doppler frequency shift as a means for discriminating moving from fixed  targets is called an MT/ (moving target indication) or a pulse doppler radar.
The two are based  on the same physical principle, but in practice there are generally recognizable differences  between them (Sec.
4.10).
The MTI radar, for instance, usually operates with ambiguous  doppler measurement (so-called hli11d speeds) but with unambiguous range measurement (no  second-time-around echoes).
The opposite is generally the case for a pulse doppler radar.
Its  pulse repetition frequency is usually high enough to operate with unambiguous doppler (no  blind speeds) but at the expense of range ambiguities.
The discussion in this chapter, for the  most part, is based on the MTI radar, but much of what applies to MTI can be extended to  pulse dopplcr radar as well.
 MTI is a necessity in high-quality air-surveillance radars that operate in the presence of  clutter.
Its design is more challenging than that of a simple pulse radar or a simple CW radar.
 An MTI capability adds to a radar's cost and coniplexity and often system designers must  accept compromises they might not wish to make.
The basic MTI concepts were introduced  during World War II.
and most of the signal processing theory on which MTI (and pulse  doppler) radar depends was formulated during the mid-1950s.
However, the reduction of  theory to practice was paced by the availability of the necessary signal-processing technology.
 It took almost twenty years for the full capabilities offered by MTI signal-processing theory to  be converted into practical and economical radar equipment.
The chief factor that made this  possible was the introduction of reliable.
small, and inexpensive digital processing hardware.
 t 111  102 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  Description of operation.
A simple CW radar such as was descrihed in Sec.
3.2 is shown in  Fig.
4.
la.
It consists of a transmitter, receiver, indicator, and the necessary antennas.
In princi­ ple, the CW radar may be converted into a pulse radar as shown in Fig.
4.lh hy providing a  power amplifier and a modulator to turn the amplifier on and off for the purpose of generating  pulses.
The chief difference between the pulse radar of Fig.
4.
lb and the one described in  Chap.
1 is that a small portion of the CW oscillator power that generates the transmitted  pulses is diverted to the receiv'er to take the place of the local oscillator.
However, this CW  signal does more than function as a replacement for the local oscillator.
It acts as the coherent  reference needed to detect the doppler frequency shift.
By coherent it is meant that the phase of  the transmitted signal is preserved in the reference signal.
The reference signal is the distin­ guishing feature of coherent MTI radar.
 H the CW oscillator voltage is represented as A 1 sin 2rr/; r, where A 1 is the amplitude and  _(, the carrier frequency.
the reference signal is  Vrer = A1 sin 2rr.f;r  and the doppler-shifted echo-signal voltage is  V .
[2 ( r f') 4rrf;R0] echo= A3 Sill 7t .Ir±.
d ( --~--- where A1 = amplitude of reference signal  A 3 = amplitude of signal received from a target at a range R0  .f.i = doppler frequency shift  t = time  c = velocity of propagation (4.
l)  (4.2)  The reference signal and the target echo signal are heterodyned in the mixer stage of the  receiver.
Only the low-frequency (difference-frequency) component from the mixer is of intt!r­ est and is a voltage given by  cw  oscillator .~ Reference signal  ~14-..----1 Receiver  (a)  Pulse  modulator  14-_ __, Receiver  (bl Indicator  cw  oscillator  fi  Indicator (4.3)  Figure 4.1 (a) Simple CW radar; (b)  pulse radar using doppler informa­ tion.
 MTl AND PULSE DOPPLER RADAR 103  Nole that Fqs.
(4.1) to (4.:1) represent sine-wave carriers upon which the pulse modulation is  imposed.
The difference frequency is equal to the doppler frequencyfd.
For stationary targets  the <loppler frequency shift/d will be zero; hence Vd;rr will not vary with time and may take on  any constant value from + .'14 to -/14• including zero.
However, when the target is in motion  relative to the radar, /4 has a value other than zero and the voltage corresponding to the  dilkrence frequency from the mixer [Eq.
(4.3)] will be a function of time.
 An example of the output from the mixer when the doppler frequency/;, is large compared  with the reciprocal of the pulse width is shown in Fig.
4.2b.
The doppler signal may be readily  discerned from the information contained in a single pulse.
If, on the other hand, fd is small  compared with the reciprocal of the pulse duration, the pulses will be modulated with an  amplitude given by Eq.
(4.3} (Fig.
4.2c} and many pulses will be needed to extract the dopp\er  inrormation.
The case illustrated in Fig.
4.2c is more typical of aircraft-detection radar, while  the waveform or Fig.
4.2b might be more applicable to a radar whose primary function is the  detection or extraterrestrial targets such as ballistic missiles or satellites.
Ambiguities in the  measurement of doppler frequency can occur in the case of the discontinuous measurement of  Fig.
4.2c.
hut not when the measurement is made on the basis of a sing!e pulse.
The video  signals shown in Fig.
4.2 are called bipolar, since they contain both positive and negative  amplitudes.
 Moving targets may be distinguished from stationary targets by observing the video  output on an A-scope (amplitude vs.
range).
A singl~ sweep on an A-scope might appear as in  Fig.
4.Ja.
This sweep shows several fixed targets and two moving targets indicated by the two  arrows.
On the basis of a single sweep, moving targets cannot be distinguished from fixed  targets.
(It may be possible to distinguish extended ground targets from point targets by the  stretching of the echo pulse.
However, this is not a reliable means of discriminating moving  from fixed targets since some fixed targets can look like point targets, e.g., a water tower.
Also,  some moving targets such as aircraft nying in formation can look like extended targets.)  Successive A-scope sweeps (pulse-repetition intervals) are shown in Fig.
4.3b toe.
Echoes from  fixed targets remain constant thrnughout, but echoes from moving targets vary in amplitude  from sweep to sweep at a rate corresponding to the doppler frequency.
The superposition of  (a)  (bl  ( C)  Figure 4.2 (a) RF echo pulse train; (h) video pulse train for doppler frequency /,1 > 1/r; {c) video pulse  train for doppler freuqncy ./~ < 1/r.
 104 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  (a)  {bl  ( C)  (d}  ( e)  (f) Figure 4.3 (a-e) Successive sweeps of  an MTI radar A-scope display (echo  amplitude as a function of time);  (J) superposition of many sweeps;  arrows indicate position of moving  targets.
 the successive A-scope sweeps is shown in Fig.
4.3f.
The moving targets produce, with time, a  "butterfly" effect on the A-scope.
 Although the butterfly effect is suitable for recognizing moving targets on an A-scope, it is  not appropriate for display on the PPL One method commonly employed to extract doppler  information in a form suitable for display on the PPI scope is with a delay-line canceler  (Fig.
4.4).
The delay-line canceler acts as a filter to eliminate the d-c component of fixed targets  and to pass the a-c components of moving targets.
The video portion oft he receiver is divided  into two channels.
One is a normal video channel.
In the other, the video signal experiences a  time delay equal to one pulse-repetition period (equal to the reciprocal of the pulse-repetition  frequency).
The outputs from the two channels are subtracted from one another.
The fixed  targets with unchanging amplitudes from pulse to pulse are canceled on subtraction.
 flowcvcr, the amplitudes of the moving-target echoes arc not constant from pulse lo pulse, and  subtraction results in an uncanceled residue.
The output of the subtraction circuit is bipolar  Bipolar video .--~~--.
.--~~-, 0-- Receiver Deloy-line  T= 1/prt Subtroctor  circuit  Figure 4.4 MTI receiver with delay-line canceler.
Full·wove  rectifier  MTI AND PULSE DOPPLER RADAR 105  video.
just as was the input.
Before bipolar video can intensity-modulate a PPI display, it must  he converted to unipotcntial voltages (unipolar video) by a full-wave rectifier.
 The simple MTI radar shown in Fig.
4.lb is not necessarily the most typical.
The block  diagram of a more common MTI radar employing a power amplifier is shown in Fig.
4.5.
The  significant difference between this MTI configuration and that of Fig.
4.
lh is the manner in  which the reference signal is generated.
In Fig.
4.5, the coherent reference is supplied by an  oscillator called the colio, which stands for coherent oscillator.
The coho is a stable oscillator  whose frequency is the same as the intermediate frequency used in the receiver.
In addition to  providing the reference signal.
the output of the coho.fc is also mixed with the local-oscillator  frc4uem:y J1• The lot:al ost:illator must also be a stable oscillator and is called sralo, for stable  local oscillator.
The RF echo signal is heterodyned with the stalo signal to produce the IF  signal j11sl as in lhc convenlional superhetcrndyne receiver.
The stalo, coho.
and the mixer in  which they arc combined plus any low-level amplification are called the receiver-exciter be­ cause of the dual role they serve in hoth the receiver and the transmitter.
 The characteristic feature of coherent MTI radar is that the transmitted signal must be  coherent (in phase) with the reference signal in the receiver.
This is accomplished in the radar  system diagramed in Fig.
4.5 by generating the transmitted signal from the coho reference  signal.
The function of the stalo is to provide the necessary frequency translation from the IF  lo the transmitted (RF) frequency.
Although the phase of the stalo influences the phase of the  transmitted signal, any stalo phase shift is canceled on reception because the stalo that  generates the transmitted signal also acts as the local oscillator in the receiver.
The reference  signal from the coho and the IF echo signal are both fed into a mixer called the phase detector.
 The phase detector differs from the normal amplitude detector since its output is proportional  to the phase difference between the two input signals.
 Any one or a number of transmitting-tube types might be used as the power amplifier.
 These include the triode.
tetrode, klystron, traveling~wave tube, and the crossed-field amplifier.
 Duplexer  To  delay-line  canceler Pulse  modulator  Power  amplifier  Sta lo  Ii.
 Coho  {  Reference signal Mix  Figure 4.S Block diagram of MTI radar with  power-amplifier transmitter.
 106 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  Duplexer  Mix  To  delay-line  canceler Magnetron  oscillator Pulse  modulator  RF locking pulse  Stoia  Coho  CW reference  signal Mix  IF locking  pulse Trigger  generator  Figure 4.6 Block diagram of MTI radar with power-oscillator transmitter.
 Each of these has its advantages and disadvantages, which are discussed in Chap.
6.
A trans­ mitter which consists of a stable· low-power oscillator followed by a power amplifier is  sometimes called MqPA, which stands for master-oscillator power amplifier.
 Before the development of the klystron amplifier, the only high-power transmitter avail­ able at microwave frequencies for' radar application was the magnetron oscillator.
In an  oscillator the phase of the RF bears no relationship from pulse to pulse.
For this reason the  reference signal cannot be generated by a continuously running oscillator.
However, a coher­ ent reference signal may be readily obtained with the power oscill~tor by readjusting the phase  of the coho at the beginning of each sweep according to the phase of the transmitted pulse.
The  phase of the coho is locked to the phase of the transmitted pulse each time a pulse is generated.
 A block diagram of an MTI radar (with a power oscillator) is shown in Fig.
4.6.
A portion  of the transmitted signal is mixed with the stalo oµtput to produce an IF beat signal whose  phase is directly related to the phase of the transmitter.
This IF pulse is applied to the coho  and causes the phase of the coho CW oscillation to "lock" in step with the phase of the IF  reference pulse.
The phase of the coho is then related to the phase of the transmitted pulse and  may be used as the reference signal for echoes received from that particular transmitted pulse.
 Upon the next transmission another IF locking pulse is generated to relock the phase of the  CW coho until the next locking pulse comes along.
The type of MTI radar illustrated in  Fig.
4.6 has had wide application.
 4.2 DELAY-LINE CANCELERS  The simple MTI delay-line canceler shown in Fig.
4.4 is an example of a time-domain filter.
 The capability of this device depends on the quality of the medium used as the delay line.
The  delay line must introduce a time delay equal to the pulse repetition interval.
For typical  ground-based air-surveillance radars this might be several milliseconds.
Delay times of this  magnitude cannot be.
achieved with practical electromagnetic transmission lines.
By convert­ ing the electromagnetic signal to an ·acoustic signal it is possible to utilize delay lines of a  MTI AND PULSE DOPPLER RADAR 107  reasonable physical length since the velocity of propagation of acoustic waves is about 10-5  that of electromagnetic waves.
After the necessary delay is introduced by the acoustic line, the  signal is converted back to an electromagnetic signal for further processing.
The early acoustic  delay lines developed during World War ll used liquid delay lines filled with either water or  mercury.
1 Liquid delay lines were large and inconvenient to use.
They were replaced in the  mid-l 950s by the solid fused-quartz delay line that used multiple internal reflections to obtain  a compact device.
These analog acoustic delay lines were, in turn supplanted in the early 1970s  by storage devices based on digital computer technology.
The use of digital delay lines requires  that the output of the MTI receiver phase-detector be quantized into a sequence of digital  words.
The compactness and convenience of digital processing allows the implementation of  more complex delay-line cancelers with filter characteristics not practical with analog  methods.
 One of the advantages of a time-domain delay-line canceler as compared to the more  conventional frequency-domain filter is that a single network operates at all ranges and does  not require a separate filter for each range resolution cell.
Frequency-domain doppler filter­ banks are of interest in some forms of MTI and pulse-doppler radar.
 Filter characteristics of the delay-line canceler.
The delay-line canceler acts as a filter which  rejects the d-c component of clutter.
Because of its periodic nature, the filter also rejects energy  in the vicinity of the pulse repetition frequency and its harmonics.
 The video signal [Eq.
(4.3)] received from a particular target at a range R0 is  (4.4)  where ¢0 = phase shift and k = amplitude of video signal.
The signal from the previous  transmission, which is delayed by a time T = pulse repetition interval, is  V2 = k sin [2nfd(t -T) -<Po] (4.5)  Everything else is assumed to remain essentially constant over the interval Tso that k is the  same for both pulses.
The output from the subtractor is  V = V1 -Vi = 2k sin nf4 T cos [2nf4( t -~) -<Po] (4.6)  It is assumed that the gain through the delay-line canceler is unity.
The output from the  canceler [Eq.
(4.6)] consists of a cosine wave at the doppler frequency f4 with an amplitude  2k sin nf, T: Thus the amplitude of the canceled video output is a function of the doppler  frequency shift and the pulse-repetition interval, or prf.
The magnitude of the relative  frequency-response of the delay-line canceler [ratio of the amplitude of the output from the  delay-line canceler, 2k sin (nf.t T), to the amplitude of the normal radar video k] is shown in  Fig.
4.7.
 (  o 1/r 2/r 3/r 4/r 5/r  Frequency  Figure 4.
7 Frequency response or the single delay-line canceler; T = delay time = 1/f,,.
 108 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  Blind speeds.
The response of the single-delay-line canceler will be zero whenever the argu­ ment rrJj Tin the amplitude factor of Eq.
(4.6) is 0, n, 2n, ...
, etc., or when  (4.7)  where 11 = 0, 1, 2, ...
, and j~ = pulse repetition frequency.
The delay-line cancela not only  eliminates the d-c component caused by clutter (n = 0), but unfortunately it also rejects any  moving target whose doppler frequency happens to be the same as the prf or a multiple  thereof.
Those relative target velocities which result in zero MTI response arc called hli11J  speeds and are given by  n = 1, 2, 3, ...
(4.8)  where lln is the nth blind speed.
If ,1..
is measured in meters,.fP in Hz, and the relative velocity in  knots, the blind speeds are  (4.9)  The blind speeds are one of the limitations of pulse MTI radar which do not occur with  CW radar.
They are present in pulse radar because doppler is measured by discrete samples  (pulses) at the prf rather than continuously.
If the first blind speed is to be greater than the  maximum radial velocity expected from the target, the product )JP must be large.
Thus the  MTI radar must operate at long wavelengths (low frequencies) or with high pulse repetition  frequencies, or both.
Unfortunately, there are usually constraints other than blind speeds  which determine the wavelength and the pulse repetition frequency.
Therefore blind speeds  might not be easy to avoid.
Low radar frequencies have the disadvantage that antenna bcam­ widths, for a given-size antenna, are wider than at the higher frequencies and would not be  satisfactory in applications where angular accuracy or angular resolution is important.
The  pulse repetition frequency cannot always be varied over wide limits since it is primarily  determined by the unambiguous range requirement.
In Fig.
4.8, the first blind speed ll1 is  plotted as a function of the maximum unambiguous range (Runamb = c1 /2), with radar  frequency as the parameter.
If the first blind speed were 600 knots, the maximum unambiguous  range would be 130 nautical miles at a frequency of 300 MHz (UHF), 13 nautical miles at  3000 MHz (S band), and 4 nautical miles at 10,000 MHz (X band).
Since commercial jet  aircraft have speeds of the order of 600 knots, and military aircraft even higher, blind speeds in  the MTI radar can be a serious limitation, ..
,  In practice, long-range MTI radars that operate in the region of Lor S band or higher and  are primarily designed for the detection of aircraft must usually operate with ambiguous  doppler and blind speeds if they are to operate with unambiguous range.
The presence of blind  speeds within the doppler-frequency band reduces the detection capabilities of the radar.
Blind  speeds can sometimes be traded for ambiguous range, so that in systems applications which  require good MTI performance, the first blind speed might be placed outside the range of  expected doppler frequencies if ambiguous range can be tolerated.
(Pulse-doppler radars  usually operate in this manner).
As .will be described later, the effect of blind speeds can be  significantly reduced, without incurring range ambiguities, by operating with more than one  pulse repetition frequency.
This is called a staggered-pr_{ MT/.
Operating at more than one RF  frequency can also reduce the effect of blind speeds.
 MTI AND PULSE DOPPLER RADAR 109  V,  0  C  --"' .
 "CJ  Q.)  OJ a  V,  "CJ 1,000  C  Li  +-V,  L  ii:  10 100 1,000  Maximum unambiguous range, nautical miles  Figure 4.8 Plot of MTI radar first blind speed as a function of maximum unambiguous range.
 Uouble cancellation.
The frequency response of a single-delay-line canceler (Fig.
4.7) does not  always have as broad a clutter-rejection null as might be desired in the vicinity or d-c.
The  clutter-rejection notches may be widened by passing the output of the delay-line canceler  through a second delay-line canceler as shown in Fig.
4.9a.
The output of the two single-delay­ line cancelers in cascade is the square of that from a single canceler.
Thus the frequency  response is 4 sin2 nfd T.
The configuration or Fig.
4.9a is called a double-delay-line canceler, or  simply a double canceler.
The relative response of the double canceler compared with that of a  single-delay-line canceler is sho..yn in Fig.
4.10.
The finite width of the clutter spectrum is also  shown in this figure so as to illustrate the additional cancellation of clutter offered by the  double canceler.
 The two-delay-line configuration of Fig.
4.9b has the same frequency-response character­ istic as the double-delay-line canceler.
The operation of the device is as follows.
A signal! (t) is  inserted into the adder along with the signal from the preceding pulse period, with its ampli­ tude weighted by the factor -2, plus the signal from two pulse periods previous.
The output of  the adder is therefore  Input -------- Input -~ f(t) -~f(t + T) + f(t + 2T)  Deloy line T=1/fp Deloy line T=lffp  (al  +1  Deloy line T = 'lfp 1---------.----i--1·Deloy line T= 111p t---+-'-t - -2  (b)  figure 4.9 (a) Double·delay·line canceler; (b) three·pulse canceler.
Output  Output  110 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  1.0  (I.>  ::'.! 0.8  0 0.
 la 0.6  L.
 .~ 0.4 -0 £ 0.2 Clutter  spectrum Single  cancellation  I I  I  I I /  I  I  Double  cancellation---""\  \  \ Clutter lo/dover~  / " I '- / \  I \  I \  I \  I \  I \  O~'..LL~~~~---1..~~~~_L~....,CLL~~~~........L~~~~_..l-J-D,,"""":......J...~~  0 fp =Yr 2 Ip  Frequency  Figure 4.10 Relative frequency response of the single-delay-line canceler (solid curve) a9d the double­ delay-line canceler (dashed curve).
Shaded area represents clutter spectrum.
 which is the same as the output from the double-delay-line canceler.
 /(t) -f(t + T) -f(t + T) + f(t + 2T)  This configuration is commonly called the three-pulse canceler.
 Tramversal ·filters.
The three-pulse canceler shown in Fig.
4.9b is an example of a transversal  filter.
Its general form with N pulses and N -1 delay lines is shown in Fig.
4.11.
It is also  sometimes known as afeedforward filter, a nonrecursive filter, a.finite memory filter or a tapped  delay-line filter.
The weights w1 for a three-pulse canceler utilizing two delay lines arranged as a  transversal filter are l, -2, 1.
The/requency response function is proportional to sin2 nh T.
 A transversal filter with three delay lines whose weights are 1, -3, 3, -I gives a sin 3 nf, T  response.
This is a four-pulse'canceler.
Its response is e~uivalent to a triple canceler consisting  of a cascade of three single-delay-line cancelers.
(Note the potentially confusing nomenclature.
 A cascade configuration of three delay lines, each con.nected as a single canceler, is called  a triple canceler, but when connected as.
a transversal fi1ter it is called a four-pulse canceler.)  The weights for a transversal filter with n delay lines that gives a response sin" nf,, T are the  coefficients of the expansion of (1 ...:..
xY,, which are the bi~omial coefficients with alternating  signs:  Input Deloy  r, ( )1-1 n!  Wi= -l (n-i+l)!(i-1)!'  Deloy  Tz Deloy  T3  Summer  Output Deloy  9-/-1 i = 1, 2, ...
, n + 1 (4.10)  Figure 4.11 General form of a trans­ versal ( or nonrecursivc) filter for MTI  signal processing.
 MTI AND PULSE·DOPPLER RADAR 111  The transversal filter with alternating binomial weights is closely related to the filter  which maximizes the average or the ratio le= (S/C)0u1/(S/C)in, where (S/C)our is the signal-to­ clutter ratio at the output of the filter, and (S/C);n is the signal-to-clutter ratio at the input.3•4  The average is taken over the range of doppler frequencies.
This criterion was first formulated  in a limited-distribution report by Emerson.
5 The ratio le was called in the early literature the  reference gain, hut it is now called the improvement factor for clutter.
It is independent of the  target velocity and depends only on the weights wi, the autocorrelation function (or power  spectrum) describing the clutter, and the number of pulses.
For the two-pulse canceler (a single  delay line).
the optimum weights based on the above criterion are the same as the binomial  weights, when the clutter spectrum is represented by a gaussian function.6 The differenc~  between a transversal filter with optimal weights and one with binomial weights for a three­ pulse canceler (two delay lines) is less than 2 dB.4·5 The difference is also small for higher­ order cancelers.
Thus the improvement obtained with optimal weights as compared with  binomial weights is relatively small.
This applies over a wide range of clutter spectral widths.
 Similarly, it is found that the use of a criterion which maximizes the clutter attenuation (ratio  of input clutter power to the output clutter power) is also well approximated by a transversal  filter with binomial weights of alternating sign when the clutter spectrum can be represented  hy a gaussian function whose spectral width is small compared to the pulse repetition  frequency.
7 Thus the delay line cancellers with response sin" 1t/& Tare" optimum" in the sense  that they approximate the filters which maximize the average signal-to-clutter ratio or  the average clutter attentuation.
It also approximates the filter which maximizes the probabil­ ity of detection for a target at the midband doppler frequency or its harmonics.6  In spite of the fact that such filters are" optimum" in several senses as mentioned above,  they do not necessarily have characteristics that are always desirable for an MTI filter.
The  notches at de, at the prf, and the harmonics of the prf are increasingly broad with increasing  number of delay lines.
Although added delay lines reduce the clutter, they also reduce the  number of moving targets detected because of the narrowing of the passband.
For example, if  the -10 dB response of the filter characteristic is taken as the threshold for detection and if  the targets are distributed uniformly across the doppler frequency band, 20 percent of all  targets will be rejected by a two-pulse canceler (single delay-line canceler), 38 percent will be  rejected by a three-pulse canceler (double canceler), and 48 percent by a four-pulse canceler  (triple canceler).
These filters might be "optimum" in that they satisfy the specified criterion,  but the criterion might not be the best for satisfying MTI requirements.
(Optimum is not a  synonym fo.r best; it means the best under the given set of assumptions.) Maximizing the  signal-to-clutter ratio over all doppler frequencies, which leads to the binomial weights and  sin" 1tf& T filters, is not necessarily a pertinent criterion for design of an MTI filter since this  criterion is independent of the target signal characteristics.
3-5 It would seem that the MTI  filter should be shaped to reject the clutter at d-c and around the prf and its harmonics, but  have a flat response over the region where no clutter is expected.
That is, it would be desirable  to have the freedom to shape the filter response, just as with any conventional filter.
 The transversal, or nonrecursive, filter of Fig.
4.11 can be designed to achieve filter  responses suitable for MT11-10 but a relatively large number of delay lines are needed for  filters with desirable characteristics.
An N -1 delay-line canceler requires N pulses, which sets  a restriction on the radar's pulse repetition frequency, beamwidth, and antenna rotation rate,  or dwell time.
 Figure 4.1226 shows the amplitude response for (1) a classical three-pulse canceler with  sin2 nf& T response, (2) a five-pulse" optimum" canceler designed to maximize the improve­ ment factor3 and (3) a 15-puJse canceler with a Chebyshev filter characteristic.
(The amplitude  N  is normalized by dividing the output of each tap by the square root of L wf, where  '"' I  112 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  2.0.---.----.-----.-----,---.----.----,---~-~-~  1.6  lJ..
 I  I  <1> 1.2  VI  C  0 a.
 VI  <1> ...
 ~ 0.8  ~  C.
 E 4  0.4 ( 1)  Frequency  Figure 4.12 Amplitude responses for three MTI delay-line cancelers.
(1) Classical three-pulse canceler,  (2) five-pulse delay-line canceler with "optimum" weights, and (3) 15-pulse Chebyshev design.
( Afcer fl outs  and Burlage.26)  W; = weight at the ith tap.) A large number of delay lines are seen to be required of a  nonrecursive canceler if highly-shaped filter responses are desired.
It has been suggested, 26  however, that even with only a five-pulse c·anceler, a five-pulse Chebyshev design provides  significantly wider bandwidth 'tha'n the.
five-pulse "optimum" design.
To achieve the wider  band the Chebyshev design has··a lower improvement factor (since it is not "optimum"), but in  many cases the trade is worthwhile especially if the clutter spectrum is narrow.
However, when  only a few pulses are available fo'r' processing ~here is probably little that can be done to  control the shape of the filter characteristic.
Thus, there is ~ot much to be gained in trying to  shape the nonrecursive filter response for three-or four-pulse cancelers other than to use the  classical sin2 or sin3 response· of the," optimum,, canceler.
 The N-pulse nonrecursive delay-line canceler allows the designer N zeros for synthesizing  the frequency response.
The result is that many delay lines are required for.highly-shaped filter  responses.
There are limits to the' n'umber of delay lines (and pulses) that can he emplGyed.
 Therefore other approaches to MTI filter implementation are sometimes desired.
 Shaping the frequency responsi Nonrecursive filters employ only feedforward loops.
If feed­ back loops are used, as well as feedfcirward.
loops, each delay line can provide one pole as well  as one zero for increased design flexibility.
The canonical configuration of a time-domain filter  with feedback as well as feedforward loops is illustrated in Fig.
4.13.
When feedback loops are  > I '  Deloy Deloy Deloy Deloy Vout  Figure 4.13 Canonical-configuration comb filter.
(After White and Ruvin,2 IRE Natl.
Conv.
Record.)  MTI ANU PULSE DOPPLER RADAR 113  used ti1e filter is called recursive.
Using the Z-Lransform as the basis for design it is possible in  principle to synthesize almost any frequency-response function.2•11-13  The canonical configuration is useful for conceptual purposes, but it may not always be  desirable to design a filter in this manner.
White and Ruvin2 state that the canonical  configuration may be broken into cascaded sections, no section having more than two delay  elements.
Thus no feedback or feed forward path need span more than two delay elements.
This  type of configuration is sometimes preferred to the canonical configuration.
 The synthesis technique described by White and Ruvin may be applied with any known  low-pass filter characteristic, whether it is a Butterworth, Chebyshev, or Bessel filter or one of  the filters based on the elliptic-function transformation which has equal ripple in the rejection  band as well as in the passband.
An example of the use of these filter characteristics applied to  the design of a delay-line periodic filter is given in either of White's papers.2•12 Consider the  frequency-response characteristic of a three-pole Chebyshev low-pass filter having 0.5 dB  ripple in the passband (Fig.
4.14).
The three different delay-line-filter frequency-response char­ acteristics shown in Fig.
4.14b to d were derived from the low-pass filter characteri!.tic of  Fig.
4.14a.
This type of filter characteristic may be obtained with a single delay line in cascade  with a double delay line as shown in Fig.
4.15.
The weighting factors shown on the feedback  paths apply to the characteristic of Fig.
4.14c.
 The additional degrees or freedom available in the design of recursive delay-line filters  olTer a steady-state response that is superior to that or comparable nonrecursive filters.
How­ ever the feedback loops in the recursive filter result in a poor transient response.
The presence  -1 0  10[  0.5  0 I  0  (l)  "' C  0  5t 1 0 -t .
 ~ 0.5 -2 3  Angular frequency, w  (a) 4  -:\,[  1/T  (b) 5  ·g O __ L______.l._~1--~~~-~  ~ 0 1/T  (c)  r:\,L  1/T  Frequency  (d) Figure 4.14 (a) Three-pole Chebyshev low-pass filter  characteristic with 0.5 dB ripple in the passband; (b-d)  delay-line filter ·;haracteristics derived from (a).
(After  White.12)  114 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  t 1  Deloy T f--+--i  -1  0.61 Delay T Vout  Deloy T  Figure 4.15 Form of the delay-line filter required to achieve the characteristic of Fig.
4.14c.
 of large clutter returns can effectively appear as a large step input to the filter with the result  that severe ringing is produced in the filter output.
The ringing can mask the target signal until  the transient response dies out.
In the.
usual surveillance radar application, the number of  pulses from any target is limited, hence· 'the operation of an MTI filter is almost :always in the  transient state for most recursive filters.16 It has been said that a frequency response character­ istic with steep sides might allow 15 to 30 or more pulses to be generated at the filter output  because of the feedback.14 This might make the system unusable in situations in the presence  of large discrete clutter, and where interference from nearby radars or intentional jamming is  encountered.
The poor transient response might also be undesirable in a radar with a step-scan  antenna (as in a phased array), since these extra pulses might have to be gated out after the  beam is moved to a new position.
In the step-scan antenna it has been suggested that the  undesirable transient effects can.be mitigated by using the initial return from each new beam  position, or an average of the first few returns, to apply initial conditions to the MTI filter for  processing the remaining returns from that position.15 The clutter returns can be approxi­ mated by a step-input equal in magnitude to the first return for that beam position so that the  steady-state values that would normally appear in the filter memory elements after an  infinitely long sequence of these inputs can be immediately calculated and loaded into the filter  to suppress the transient response.
 Although the undesirable transient effects of a recursive filter can be reduced to some  extent, other approaches to MTI filtering are often desired.
One alternative the designer has  available is the use of multiple pulse-repetition frequencies for achieving the desired MTI filter  characteristics, as described next.
 4.3 MULTIPLE, OR STAGGERED, PUI.SE REPETITION  FREQUENC1Ess,11-22,s 1.s2  The use of more than one pulse repetition frequency offers additional flexibility in the design of  MTI doppler filters.
It not only reduces the effect of the blind speeds [Eq.
(4.8)], but it also  aJJows a sharper low-frequency cutoff in the frequency response than might be obtained with a  cascade of single-delay-line cancelers with sin" xf4Tresponse.
 The blind speeds of two independent radars operating at the same frequency will be  different if their pulse repetition frequencies are different.
Therefore, if one radar were "blind "  to moving targets, it would be unlikely that the other radar would be" blind" also.
Instead of  using two separate radars, the same result can be obtained with one radar which time-shares  its pulse repetition frequency between two or more different values (multiple prf's ).
The pulse  repetition frequency might be switched every other scan or every time the antenna is scanned a  half beamwidth, or the period might be alternated on every other pulse.
When the switching is  pulse to pulse, it is known as a staggered prf.
 An example of the composite (average) response of an MTI radar operating with two  separate pulse repetition frequencies on a time-shared basis is shown in Fig.
4.16.
The pulse  MTI AND PULSE DOPPLER RADAR 115  Q,.\ 1.0  Vl  § 0.8 a  ~ 0.6  .E: 0.4 -¥ 0.2  0::  1/,; 2/r; 3/,; 4/Tj  rrequency  (a)  1.0 - Q,.\ .,,  g 0.8 - 0.
 :G 0.6  L  -~ 0.4  0 a:; 0.2  0:::  0 0 1/r2 2/r2 3/r2 4/'2 5/r2  Frequency  ( b)  1.0  Q,.\ g 0.8  a  ::l 0.6 ·  L  ~ 0.4 -~ 0.2  a:: 0  1/r2 1/Tj Z/r2 2/Tj 3/r2 3/,; 4/r2 4/r.
5/,; 0  1, 2  Frequency  ( C)  Figure 4.16 (a) Frequency-response of a single-delay-line canceler for/,.= 1/T1; (b) same for/,.= l/T2;  (c) composite response with Ti/T2 = ! .
 repetition fr~quencies are in the ratio of 5 : 4.
Note that the first blind speed of the composite  response is increased several times over what it would be for a radar operating on only a single  pulse repetition frequency.
Zero response occurs only when the blind speeds of each prf  coincide.
In the example of Fig.
4.16, the blind speeds are coincident for 4/T1 = 5/T2•  Although the first blind speed may be extended by using more than one prf, regions of low  sensitivity might appear within the composite passband.
 The closer the ratio T1 : T2 approaches unity, the greater will be the value of the first blind  speed.
However, the first null in the vicinity of fd = 1/T1 becomes deeper.
Thus the choice of  T1 /T2 is a compromise between the value of the first blind speed and the depth of the nulls  within the filter pass band.
The depth of'the nuJ1s can be reduced and the first bJind speed  increased by operating with more than two interpulse periods.
Figure 4.17 shows the response  of a five-pulse stagger (rour periods) that might be used with a long-range air traffic control  radar.
8 In this example the periods are in the ratio 25: 30: 27: 31 and the first blind speed is  28.25 times that of a constant prf waveform with the same average period.
If the periods of the  staggered waveforms have the relationship n1 /T1 = n1 /T1 = · · · = nN /TN, where ni, n1 •.•.
, nN  are integers, and ff VB is equal to the first blind speed of a nonstaggered waveform with a  116 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  5  0  5  -15  iD :g  OJ 10  "' C  0  ~ -20  Q.)  0:  -25  -30  -35 5  0  --5  Symmetrical --1 5  about  vlv8 14.125 -1 0  20  25  30  35  40  Figure 4.17 Frequency response of a five-pulse (four-period) stagger.
(From Shrader,8 Co11rteS}' McGraw­ Hill Book Co.)  constant period equal to the average period Tav = (T1 + T2 + · · · TN)/ N, then the first blind  speed 111 is  v1 n1 + n2 + · · · + nN -= --------- VB N ( 4.11)  It is also possible to apply weighting to the received pulses of a staggered prf waveform.
 An example is shown in Fig.
4.18.22 The dashed curve is the response of a five-pulse canceler  with fixed prf and with weightings of i 1, -3i, 1, l The solid curve is for a staggered prf with  0  -10  en -20 ::9.
 ()j  Ill  C  0 a.
 Ill 30 '" 0:  -40 I  I I  I  I  l I I I ii ti  11 II  II I  I  \ :  I I  \ I  I I I I ·  II II  ---- Fixed prf  --- Staggered prf \ I  I I  I I  I I \ /  \ I I l  I ,' I  I I II " II ,,  Target velocity relative to first blind velocity ol fixed prf \  I  \  I  I  I  \ I I  I  I  I  I  Figure 4.18 Response of a weighted five-pulse canceler.
Dashed curve, constant prf; solid curve, staggered  prf's.
(From Zverev,22 Courtesy IEEE.)  MTI AND PULSE DOPPLER RADAR 117  the same weightings, but with 4 interpulse periods of -15 percent, -5 percent, + 5 percent,  and + 15 percent of the fixed period.
The response at the first blind speed of the fixed period  waveform is down only 6.6 dB.
 A disadvantage of the staggered prf is its inability to cancel second-time-around clutter  echoes.
Such clutter does not appear at the same range from pulse to pulse and thus produces  uncanceled residue.
Second-time-around clutter echoes can be removed by use of a constant  prf.
providing there is pulse-to-pulse coherence as in the power amplifier form of MTI.
The  constant prf might be ~mployed only over those angular sectors where second-time-around  clutter is expected (as in the ARSR-3 of Sec.
14.3), or by changing the prf each time the  antenna scans half-a-beamwidth (as in the MTD of Sec.
4.7), or by changing the prf every scan  period (rotation of the antenna).
 4.4 RANGE-GATED DOPPLER FILTERS  The delay-line canceler, which can be considered as a time-domain filter, has been widely used  in MTI radar as the means for separating moving targets from stationary clutter.
It is also  possible to employ the more usual frequency-domain bandpass filters of conventional design  in MTI radar to sort the doppler-frequency-shifted targets.
The filter configuration must be  more complex, however, than the single, narrow-bandpass filter.
A narrowband filter with a  passband designed to pass the doppler frequency components of moving targets will "ring"  when excited by the usual short radar pulse.
That is, its passband is much narrower than the  reciprocal of the input pulse width so that the output will be of much greater duration than the  input.
The narrowband filter "smears" the input pulse since the impulse response is approxi­ mately the reciprocal of the filter bandwidth.
This smearing destroys the range resolution.
If  more than one target is present they cannot be resolved.
Even if only one target were present,  the noise from the other range ceHs that do not contain the target .vill interrere with the desired  target signal.
The result is a reduction in sensitivity due to a collapsing loss (Sec.
2.12).
 The loss of the range information and the collapsing loss may be eliminated by first  quantizing the range (time) into small intervals.
This process is called range gating.
The width  of the range gates depends upon the range accuracy desired and the complexity which can be  I tolerated, but they are usually of the order of the pulse width.
Range resolution is established by  gating.
Once the radar return is quantized into range intervals, the output from each gate may  be applied to a narrowband filter since the pulse shape need no longer be preserved for range  resolution.
~A collapsing loss does not take place since noise from the other range intervals is  excluded.
 A block diagram of the video of an MTI radar with multiple range gates followed by  clutter-rejection filters is shown in Fig.
4.19.
The output of the phase detector is sampled  sequentially by the range gates.
Each range gate opens in sequence just long enough to sample  the voltage of the video waveform corresponding to a different range interval in space.
The  range gate acts as a switch or a gate which opens and closes at the proper time.
The range gates  are activated once each pulse-repetition interval.
The output for a stationary target is a series  of pulses of constant amplitude.
An echo from a moving target produces a series of pulses  which vary in amplitude according to the doppler frequency.
The output of the range gates is  stretched in a circuit called the boxcar generator, or sample-and-hold circuit, whose purpose is  to aid in the filtering and detection process by emphasizing the fundamental of the modulation  frequency and eliminating harmonics of the pulse repetition frequency (Sec.
5.3).
The clutter­ rejection filter is a bandpass filter whose bandwidth depends upon the extent of the expected  clutter spectrum.
 118 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  Phase  detector Range  gate  No.
1  Range  gate  No.2  Range  gate  Na.3  Range  gate  No.n Boxcar  generator  Boxcar  generator  Boxcar  generator Bandpass  (Doppler)  filter Full-wave  linear  detector Low poss  filter  (integrator)  Figure 4.19 Block diagram of MTI radar using range gates and filters.
Threshold  Threshold  To data ____..
.
__..
process11i,,  ~~ or displo1  Threshold  Following the doppler filter is a full-wave linear detector and an integrator (a low-pass  filter).
The purpose of the detector is to convert the bipolar video to unipolar video.
The  output of the integrator is applied to a threshold-detection circuit.
Only those signals which  cross the threshold are reported as targets.
Following the threshold detector, the outputs from  each of the range channels must be properly combined for display on the PPI or A-scope or for  any other appropriate indicating or data-processing device.
The CRT display from this type of  MTI radar appears." cleaner" than the display from a normal MTI radar, not only because of  better clutter rejection, but also because the threshold device eliminates many of the unwanted  false alarms due to noise.
The frequency-response characteristic of the range-gated MTl might  appear as in Fig.
4.20.
The shape of the rejection band is determined primarily by the shape  of the bandpass filter of Fig.
4.19.
·  The bandpass filter can· be designed with a variable low-frequency cutoff that can be  selected to conform to the prevailing clutter conditions.
The selection of the lower cutoff might  be at the option of the operator or it can be done adaptively.
A variable lower cutoff might be  advantageous when the width of the clutter spectrum changes with time as when the radar  receives unwanted echoes from birds.
A relatively wide notch at zero frequency is needed to  remove moving birds.
If the notch were set wide enough to remove the birds, it might be wider  than necessary for ordinary clutter and desired targets might be removed.
Since the appear­ ance of birds varies with the time of day and the season, it is important that the width of the  notch be controlled according to the local conditfons .
 .
,  w  [l/ l, f l:f l.J  w er 0 ~='Ir  Frequency 2~· 3ip  Figure 4.20 Freq!Jency-response characteristic of an MTI using range gates and filters.
 MTI ANO PULSE DOPPLER RADAR 119  MTl radar using range gates and filters is usually more complex than an MTI with a  single-delay-line canceler.
The additional complexity is justified in those applications where  good MTI performance and the nexibility of the range gates and filter MTI are desired.
The  better MTI performance results from the better match between the clutter filter characteristic  and the clutter spectrum.
·  4.5 OIGITAL SIGNAL PROCESSING  The introduction of practical and economical digital processing to MTI radar allowed a  significant increase in the options open to the signal processing designer.
The convenience of  digital processing mcaus Iha\ multiple .~t!lay-li11~ canc~l-~rs_with ta_iloreJL[rco~1:1cncy-response  characteristics can he readily achieved.
/\ digital MTI processor does not, in prindple-;doany  helter than a well-designed analog canceler; hut it is more dependable, it requires less adjust­ ments and attention, and can do some tasks easier.
Most of the advantages of a digital MTI  processor are due to its use of digital ~Ji~ rather than analog delay lines which are  characterized by variations due to temperature, critical gains, and poor on-line availability.
 A simple block diagram of a digital MTJ processor is shown in Fig.
4.21.
From the output/  of the IF amplifier the signal is split into two channels.
One is denoted/, for in-phase cltannel.
\  The other is denoted Q, for quadrature channel, since a 90° phase change (n/2 radians) is\  introduced into the coho reference signal at the phase detector.
This causes the outputs of the '\  two detectors to be 90° out of phase.
The purpose of the quadrature channel is to eliminate the  elTects of hlind phases, as will be described later.
It is desirable to eliminate blind phases in any )  MTI processor.
but it is seldom done with analog delay-line cancelers because of the complex- - ity of the added analog delay lines of the second channel.
The convenience of digital processing  allows the quadrature channel to be added without significant burden so that it is often  included in digital processing systems.
It is for this reason it is shown in this block diagram,  but was not included in the previous discussion of MTI deb.y-line cancelers.
 Following the phase detector the bipolar video signal is sampled at a rate sufficient to  ohtain one or more samples within each· range resolution cell.
These voltage samples are  converted to a series of digital words by the analog-to-digital (A/D) converter.23•24 The digital  Pho~~  det~ctor  Coho  From --JF  Phase  deteclor !, or m -phase, channel  Sample A/0 and ...
converter hold  Sample A/0 and converter hold  0, or quadrature, channel Digital Sub- store tractor  Magnitude  {/2 + 02,112  Digital Sub- s lore I roe tor  Figure 4.21 Block diagram of a simple digital MTI signal processor.
0/A To  converter display  120 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  words are stored in a digital memory for one pulse repetition period and are then suhtracred  from the digital words of the next sweep.
The digital outputs of the I and Q channels are  combined by taking the square root of /2 + Q2• An alternative method of combining, which is  adequate for most cases, is to take I I I + IQ j.
The combined output is then converted to an  analog signal by the digital-to-analog (D/A) converter.
The unipolar video output is then  ready to be displayed.
The digital MTI processor depicted in Fig.
4.21 is that of a single-delay­ line canceler.
Digital processors are likely to employ more complex filtering schemes, but the  simple canceler is shown here for convenience.
Almost any type of digital storage device can be  used.
A shift register is the direct digital analogy of a delay line, but other digital computer  memories can also be used effectively.
 The A/D converter has been, in the past, one of the critical parts of the MTI signal  processor.
It must operate at a speed high enough to preserve the information content of the  radar signal, and the number of bits into which it quantizes the signal must be sufficient for the  precision required.
The number of bits in the A/D converter determines the maximum im­ provement factor the MTI radar can achieve.
8• 7 5• 76 Generally the A/D converter is designed to  cover the peak excursion of the phase detector output.
A limiter may be necessary to ensure  this.
An N-bit converter divides the output of the phase detector into 2N 1 discrete intervals.
 According to Shrader,8 the quantization noise introduced by the discrete nature of the A/D  converter causes, on the average, a limit to the improvement factor which is  Io.N = 20 log [(2N -l )j0.75] (dB) (4.12)  This is approximately equal to 6 dB per bit since each bit represents a factor of two in  amplitude resolution.22 When a fixed signal of maximum level is present, a possible error of  one quantization interval is possible.
A 9-bit A/D converter therefore has a maximum di:,cri­ mination of 1 out of 511 levels; or approximately 54 dB.
(Equation (4.12) on the other hand,  predicts 52.9 dB for 9-bit quantization.)  In the above it was said that the addition of the Q channel removed the problem of  reduced sensitivity due to blind phases.
This is different than the blind speeds which occur when  the pulse sampling appears at the same point in the doppler cycle at each sampling instant, as  shown in Fig.
4.22a.
Figure 4.22b shows the in-phase, or /, channel with the pulse train such  Doppler  frequency  ,....""' >'/ '\  I \  01 Oz /­ <I)  u I '\ ::, I \.
 a.
E  <l \ I ' / ' /  \  \ ....__  I  I Rodar  echo  ,...-,, / pulses  I _,,.,.,...-- / _.---\ I  Time  \ ' / , __ (a)  (b)  {c) Figure4.22 (a) Blind speed in an MTI radar.
 The target doppler frequency is equal to the  prf.
(b) Effect of blind phase in the l channel,  and (c) in the Q channel.
 MTI AND PULSE DOPPLER RADAR 121  that the signals are of the same amplitude and with a spacing such that when pulse a1 is  subtracted from pulse a2, the result is zero.
However, a residue is produced when pulse a3 is  subtracted from pulse a4, but not when a5 is subtracted from a4, and so on.
In the quadrature  channel, the doppler-frequcncy signal is shifted 90° so that those pulse pairs that were lost in  the I channel are recovered in the Q drnnnel, and vice versa.
The combination or the I and Q  channels thus results in a uniform signal with no loss.
The phase of the pulse train relative to  that of the doppler signal in Fig.
4.22b and c is a special case to illustrate the effect.
With other  phase and frequency relationships, there is still a loss with a single channel MTI that can be  recovered by the use of both the I and Q channels.
An extreme case where the blind phase with  only a single channel results in a complete loss of signal is when the doppler frequency is half  the prf and the phase relationship between the two is such that the echo pulses lie on the zeros  or the doppler-frequency sine wave.
This is not the condition for a blind speed but nevertheless  there is no signal.
However, if the phase relationship is shifted 90°, as it is in the Q channel,  then all the echo pulses occur at the peaks of the doppler-frequency sine wave.
Thus, to ensure  the signal will be obtained without loss, both I and Q channels are desired.
 Digital signal processing has some significant advantages over analog delay lines, parti­ cularly those that use acoustic devices.
As with most digital technology, it is possible to achieve  greater stability, repeatability, and precision with digital processing than with analog delay­ line cancelers.
Thus the reliability is better.
No special temperature control is required, and it  can be packaged in convenient size.
The dynamic range is greater since digital MTI processors  do not experience the spurious responses which limit signals in acoustic delay lines to about 35  to 40 dB above minimum detectable signal level.25 (A major restriction on dynamic range in  a digital MTI is that imposed by the A/D converter.) In an analog delay-line canceler the delay  time and the pulse repetition period must be made equal.
This is si~plified in a digital MTI  since the timing or the sampling of the bipolar video can be controlled readily by the timing of  the transmitted pulse.
Thus, different pulse repetition periods can be used without the necessity  of switching delay lines of various lengths in and out.
The echo signals for each interpulse  period can be stored in the digital memory with reference to the time of transmission.
This  allows more elaborate stagger periods.
The flexibility of the digital processor also permits more  freedom in the selection and application of amplitude weightings for shaping the filters.
It has  also allowed the ready incorporation of the quadrature channel for elimination of blind  phases.
In short, digital MTI has allowed the radar designer the freedom to take advantage of  the full theoretical capabilities of doppler processing in practical radar systems.
 The development of digital processing technology has not only made the delay-line  canceler a more versatile tool for the MTI radar designer, but it has also allowed the applica­ tion or the contiguous filter bank for added flexibility in MTI radar design.
One of the major  factors in this regard has been the introduction of digital devices for conveniently computing  the Fourier transform.
 Digital filter banks and the FFT.
A transversal filter with N outputs (N pulses and N 1  delay lines) can be made to form a bank of N contiguous filters covering the frequency range  from O lo fr, where fr= pulse repetition frequency.
A filter bank covering the doppler  frequency range is of advantage in some radar applications and offers another option in the  design or MTI signal processors.
Consider the transversal filter that was shown in Fig.
4.11 to  have N -1 delay lines each with a delay time T = 1/f,,.
Let the weights applied to the outputs  of the N taps be:  W _ e-1121t(i-1)k/NJ  ik - (4.13)  122 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  where i = 1, 2, ...
, N represents the ith tap, and k is an index from Oto N -1.
Each value of k  corresponds to a different set of N weights, and to a different doppler-filter response.
The N  filters generated by the index k constitute the filter bank.
Note that the weights of Eq.
(4.13)  and the diagram of Fig.
4.11 are similar in form to the phased array antenna as described in  Sec.
8.2.
 The impulse response of the transversal filter of Fig.
4.11 with the weights given by  Eq.
(4.13) is  N  hk(t) = L b[t -(i -l)T]e-jlrr(i-l)k/N (4.14)  i"= I  The Fourier transform of the impulse response is the frequency response function  N H.(.f) = e-j2rtfl L ej2n(i-l)(fT-k/NI (4.15)  i == I  The magnitude of the frequency response function is the amplitude passband characteristic of  the filter.
Therefore  I H ( f) I = I r, ei2rr<i-llffT-k/NI I= I si~ [nN(.IT -~{N)J I  k · i == 1 sm [ n(.fT -k/ N)] (4.16)  By analogy to the discussion of the array antenna in Sec.
8.2, the peak response of the filter  occurs when the denominator of Eq.
(4.16) is zero, or when n(.IT -k/N) = 0, n, 2n, ....
For  k = 0, the peak response of the filter occurs at f = 0, 1/T, 2/T, ...
, which defines a filter  centered at de, the prf, and its harmonics.
This filter passes the clutter component at de, hence  it has no clutter rejection capability.
(Its output is useful, however, in some MTI radars for  providing a map of the clutter.) The first null of the filter response occurs when the numerator  is zero, or when/= 1/NT.
The bandwidth between the first nulls is 2/NT and the half-power  bandwidth is approximately 0.9/NT (Fig.
4.23).
 When k = 1, the peak response occurs atf= 1/NT as well asf= 1/T + 1/NT, 2/T +  l/NT, etc.
Fork= 2, the peak response is at f = 2/NT, and so forth.
Thus each value of the  index k defines a separate filter response, as indicated in Fig.
4.23, with the total response  covering the region from f= 0 to f = 1/T =fp· Each filter has a bandwidth of 2/NT as  measured between the first nulls.
Because of the sampled nature of the signals, the remainder of  the frequency band is also covered with similar response, but with ambiguity.
A bank of filters,  as in Fig.
4.23, is sometimes called a coherellt integratio11 filter.
 To generate the N filters simultaneously, each of the taps of the transversal filter of  Fig.
4.11 would have to be divided into N separate outputs with separate weights correspond- Ill  'O ::,  a.
 E <t  1 2 3 4 5 6 7  O NT NT NT NT NT NT NT  Frequency 1 T Figure 4.23 MTI doppler filter  bank resulting from the processing  of N = 8 pulses with the weights of  Eq.
(4.13), yielding the response or  Eq.
(4.16).
Filter sidelobes not  shown.
 MT! AND PULSE DOPPLER RADAR 123  ing to the k =Oto N -1 weighting as given by Eq.
(4.13).
(This is analogous to generating N  independent beams from an N-elemcnt array by use of the Blass multiple-beam array as in  Fig.
8.26.) When generating the filter bank by digital processing it is not necessary literally to  subdivide each of the N taps.
The equivalent can be accomplished in the digital computations.
 The generation by digital processing of N filters from the outputs of N taps of a transver­ sal filter requires a total of (N -l )2 multiplications.
The process is equivalent to the computa- 1 io11 or a disnl'tl' Fo11ri1•r trc111sfiJ1m.
1 lowcver, when N is some power of 2, that is, N = 2, 4, 8,  16 .....
an algorithm is available that requires approximately (N/2) log2 N multiplications  instead of (N I )2.
wlticlt results in a considerable saving in processing time.
This is the.f<1st  Fo11ria trw1sfi1r111 (FFT), which has been widely described in the literature.11·27 29  Since each filter occupies approximately 1/Nth the bandwidth of a delay-line canceler, its  signal-to-noise ratio will be greater than that of a delay-line canceler.
The dividing of the  f rcqucncy band into N independent parts by the N filters also allows a measure of the doppler  frequency to be made.
Furthermore if moving clutter, such as from birds or weather, appears  at other-than-zero frequency, the threshold of each filter may be individually adjusted so as to  adapt to the clutter contained within it.
This selectivity allows clutter to be removed which  would be passed by a delay-line canceler.
The first sidelobe of the filters described by Eq.
(4.16)  has a value of -13.2 dB with respect to the peak response of the filter.
If this is too high for  proper clutter rejection, it may be reduced at the expense of wider bandwidth by applying  amplitude weights wi.
Just as is done in antenna design, the filter sidelobe can be reduced by  using Chebyshev, Taylor, sin2 x/x2, or other weightings.39 (In the digital signal processing  literature, filter weighting is called windowing.80 Two popular forms of windows are the  Hamming and hanning.) It may not be convenient to display the outputs of all the doppler  filters of the filter bank.
One approach is to connect the output of the filters to a greatest-a,(  circuit so that only a single output is obtained, that of the largest signal.
(The filter at de which  contains clutter would not be included.)  the improvement factor for each of the 8 filters of an 8-pulse filter bank is shown in  Fig.
4.24 as a function of the standard deviation of the clutter spectrum assuming the spectrum  to he represented by the gaussian function described by Eq.
(4.19).
The average improvement  for all filters is indicated by the dotted curve.
For comparison, the improvement factor for an  N-pulse canceler is shown in Fig.
4.25.
Note that the improvement factor of a two-pulse  canceler is almost as good as that of the 8-pulse doppler-filter bank.
The three-pulse canceler is  even better.
(As mentioned previously, maximizing the average improvement factor might not  be the only criterion used in judging the effectiveness of MTI doppler processors.)  If a two-or three-pulse canceler is cascaded with a doppler-filter bank, better clutter  rejection is provided.
Figure 4.26 shows the improvement factor for a three-pulse canceler and  an eight-pulse filter bank in cascade, as a function of the clutter spectral width.
The upper  figure assumes uniform amplitude weighting ( -13.2 dB first sidelobe) and the lower figure  shows the effect of Chebyshev weighting designed to produce equal sidelobes with a peak value  of -25 dB.
It is found that doubling to 16 the number of pulses in the filter bank does not  offer significant -advantage over an eight-pulse filter.30 More pulses do not necessarily mean  more gain in signal-to-clutter ratio, because the filter widths and sidelobe levels change relative  to the clutter spectrum as the number of pulses (and number of filters) is varied.
If the sidelobes  of the individual fllters of the doppler filter bank can be made Jow enough, the inclusion of  the delay-line canceler ahead of it might not be needed.
 124 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  I  60 -----------·----+ -t-- al 50 - ------- -0  0 u 40 2  20  10  01......~~~-L-~~J.-~l-.....!_-L..-L.....J-......Jl---~~~-L-~~.L.-~1..-'""""::::i:::...L_L_.l__J  0.001 0.01 0.1  Clutter spectral width/radar prf .
5  4, 6  3, 7  2,8  Figure 4.24 Improvement factor for each filter of an 8-pulse doppler filter bank with uniform weighting as  a function of the clutter spectral width (standard deviation).
The average improvement for all filters is  indicated by the dotted curve.
(From Andrews.30)  140  120  al 100  -0  0 80 u 2  c  <1J E 60 - <1J ::,, e a.
 _§  40  20  0 0.001 ------·--- 0.01 I  I· ..
t - I I  ·---·---j-· _L ___ J_.
~-1  0.1  Clutter spectral width /radar prf  Figure 4.25 Improvement factor for an N-pulse delay-line canceler with optimum weights (solid curves)  and binomial weights (dashed curves), as a function of the clutter spectral width.
(Afcer Andrews.31.32)  ro  "CJ 140  120  100  O 80 E  ~  ~ 60 -----,  > e  0  _E  40  20 .
I·  0  0 001  140  120  ID 100 "CJ  I  £ u 80 .!:!  c  Cl)  E 60 Cl)  > 0 a E  40  20  0  0 001 0.01  Clutter ~,rectrol width I radar prf  (a) MTI AND PULSE DOPPLER RADAR 125  I -·  5  4,6  · --ave.
 3, 7  2,8  0.1  --·--- ----t---+--l·--l-1--1---+-l  001  Cluller spectral width /radar prf  (h) 0 l 5  ove,  4, 6  3 , 7  2,8  Figure 4.26 Improvement factor for a 3-pulse (double-canceler) MTI cascaded with an 8-pulse doppler  filter hank.
or integrator.
(a) Uniform amplitude weights and (h) 25-dB Chebyshev weights.
The average  improvement for all filters is indicated hy the dotted curve.
(From Andrews.30)  126 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  4.6 OTHER MTI DELAY LINES  There are delay lines other than digital devices that have been used in MTI signal processors.
 Originally, MTI radar used acoustic delay lines in which electromagnetic signals were con­ verted into acoustic waves; the acoustic signals were delayed, and then converted back into  electromagnetic signals.
The process was lossy (50 to 70 dB might be typical), of limited  dynamic range, and spurious responses were generated that could be confused for legitimate  echoes.
Since acoustic waves travel with a speed about 10-s that of electromagnetic waves, an  acoustic line can be of practical size whereas an electromagnetic delay is not.
However,  acoustic delay lines are larger and heavier than digital lines and must usually be kept in a  temperature-controlled environment to prevent unwanted changes in delay time.
They  typically operate at frequencies from 5 to 60 MHz.
The first MTI acoustic delC:lY lines were  liquid and used water or mercury.
The development of the solid quartz delay iine for MTI  application in the 1950s offered greater convenience than the liquid lines.
33 The solid line is  constructed of many facets so that a relatively long delay time can be obtained with a small  volume by means of multiple internal reflections.
In one popular design the quartz was cut as  a 15-sided polygon in which the acoustic signal made 31 internal passes to achieve a total  delay time of 1 ms.
 Electrostatic storage tubes have also been used for MTI delay lines.
34·40 The signals are  stored in the form of electrostatic charges on a mosaic or mesh similar to that of a TV camera  tube.
The first sweep reads the signal on the storage tube.
The next sweep is written on the same  space and generates the difference between it and the first sweep, as required for two-pulse  MTI cancellation.
Two storage tubes are required: one to write and store the new sweep, the  other to subtract th~ new sweep from the old sweep.
One advantage of a storage tube  compared to an acoustic delay line is that it can be used with different pulse repetition  frequencies.
That is, a constant prf is not needed.
The matching of the delay time and the pulse  repetition period is not critical as in an acoustic line because the timing of the transmitter  pulse starts the sweep of the storage tube.
 The charge transfer device (CTD) is a sampled-data, analog shift-register that may be used  in MTI processors as delay lines, transversal filters, and recursive filters.35-38 There are two  basic types of CTDs.
One is the bucket-brigade device (BBD) which consists of capacitive  storage elements separated by switches.
Analog information is transferred through the BBD at  a rate determined by the rate at which the switches are operated.
The delay time can be varioo  by changing either the number of stages (a capacitive storage element and its associated  switch) or by changing the switching frequency controlled by a digital clock.
CCDs provide a  similar function except that charge packets are transferred to adjacent potential wells by  clocked voltage gradients.
The sampling frequency must be such as to obtain one or two  samples per range resolution cell.
Since the timing is controlled by a digital clock, the delay  can be made very stable, just as with digital processors.
However, no A/Dor D/A converters  are required as in digital systems.
It has been claimed that such devices are more economical in  cost, consume less power, are of less size, and of greater reliability than digital processing.
 The MTI cancellation may also be done at iF rather than in the video after the phase  detector.8 Although there may be some advantages in IF cancellation (such as no blind  phases), it is more complicated than video cancellation.
It is difficult for IF cancelers to  compete with the flexibility and convenience of digital processing containing I and Q channels.
 FM delay-line cancelers have also been considered for MTI application.
The signals are  frequency modulated so as to avoid the problems associated with the amplitude stability of  acoustic delay-iine cancelers.41 ,.,.,·"  MTI AND PULSE DOPPLER RADAR 127  4.7 EXAMPLE OF AN MTI RADAR PROCESSOR  The Moving Target Detector (MTD) is an MTI radar processor originally developed by the  MIT Lincoln Laboratory for the FAA 's Airport Surveillance Radars (ASR).42-44 The ASR is a  medium range (60 nmi) radar located at most major United States airports.
It operates at S  band (2.7--2.9 GHz) with a pulse width of less than 1 µs, a 1.4° azimuth beamwidth, an antenna  rotation rate of from 12.5 to 15 rpm depending on the model, a prf from 700 to 1200 Hz  (1030 Hz typical), and an average power of from 400 to 600 W.
The MTD processor employs  several techniques for the increased detection of moving targets in clutter.
Its implementation  is based on the application of digital technology.
It utilizes a three-pulse canceler followed by  an 8-pulse FFT doppler filter-bank with weighting in the frequency domain to reduce the filter  sidelobes, alternate prrs to eliminate blind speeds, adaptive thresholds, and a clutter map that  is used in detecting crossing targets with zero radial velocity.
The measured MTI improvement  factor of the MTD on an ASR radar was about 45 dB, which represented a 20 dB increase over  the ASR 's conventional three-pulse MTI processor with a limiting IF amplifier.
In addition,  the MTD achieves a narrower notch at zero velocity and at the blind speeds.
 The processor is preceded by a large dynamic range receiver to avoid the reduction in  improvement factor caused by limiting (Sec.
4.8).
The output of the IF amplifier is fed to I and  Q phase detectors.
The analog signals from the phase detectors are converted into 10-bit  digital words by A/D converters.
The range coverage, which totaled 47.5 nmi in the original  implementation, is divided into 11r, nmi intervals and the azimuth into !-degree intervals, for a  total of 365,000 range-azimuth resolution cells.
In each !-degree azimuth interval (about  one-hair the beamwidth) ten pulses are transmitted at a constant prf.
On receive, this is called a  coherent processing interval (CPI).
These ten pulses are processed by the delay-line canceler  and the doppler filter-bank, to form eight doppler filters.
Thus, the radar output is divided into  approximately 2,920,000 range-azimuth-doppler cells.
Each of these cells has its own adaptive  threshold.
In the alternate 1-degree azimuth intervals another 10 pulses are transmitted at  a different prf to eliminate blind speeds and to unmask moving targets hidden by weather.
 Changing the prf every 10 pulses, or every half beamwidth, eliminates second-time-around  clutter returns that would normally degrade an MTI with pulse-to-pulse variation of the prf.
 A block diagram of the MTD processor is shown in Fig.
4.27.
The input on the left is from  the out put of the I and Q A/0 converters.
The three-pulse canceler and the eight-pulse doppler  filter-bank eliminate zero-velocity clutter and generate eight overlapping filters covering the  doppler interval, as described in the previous section.
The use of a three-pulse canceler ahead  of the filter2bank eliminates stationary clutter and thereby reduces the dynamic range required  I ,Q 3-pulse  canceler  Zero velocity  filter 8-pulse doppler  filter bank  Magnitude Weighting  and  magnitude  r------- Clutter mop Thresholding  ,recursive _____ _,  filler  Memory  (clutter map) Hit report  Figure 4.27 Simple block diagram of the Moving Target Detector (MTD) signal processor.
 128 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  of the doppler filter-bank.
The fast Fourier transform algorithm is used to implement thl.!  doppler filter-bank.
Since the first two pulses of a three-pulse canceler are meaningless, only  the last eight of the ten pulses output from the canceler are passed to the filter-bank.
Following  the filter-bank, weighting is applied in the frequency domain to reduce the filter siddobes.
 Although unweighted filters with -13.2-dB sidelobes might be satisfactory for most ground  clutter, the frequency spectrum of rain and other windblown clutter often requires lower  sidelobe levels.
The magnitude operation forms (12 + Q2)112.
Separate thresholds are applied  to each filter.
The thresholds for the nonzero-velocity resolution cells are established by  summing the detected outputs of the signals in the same velocity filter in 16 range cells, eight  on either side of the cell of interest.
Thus, each filter out put is averaged over one mile in range  to establish the statistical mean level of nonzero-velocity clutter (such as rain) or noise.
The  filter thresholds are determined by multiplying the mean levels by an appropriate constant to  obtain the desired false-alarm probability.
This application of an adaptive threshold to each  doppler filter at each range cell provides a constant false-alarm rate (CF AR) and results in  subweather visibility in that an aircraft with a radial velocity sufficiently different from the rain  so as to fall into another filter can be seen even if the aircraft echo is substantially less than the  weather echo.
 A digital clutter map is generated which establishes the thresholds for the zero-velocity  cells.
The map is implemented with one word for each of the 365,000 range-azimuth cells.
The  original MTD stored the map on a magnetic disc memory.
The purpose of the zero-velocity  filter is to recover the clutter signal eliminated by the MTI delay-line canceler and to use this  signal as a means for detecting targets on-crossing trajectories with zero velocities that would  normally be lost in the usual MTI.
Only targets larger than the clutter would be so detected.
In  each cell of the ground clutter map is stored the average value of the output of the zero­ velocity filter for the past eight scans (32 seconds).
On each scan, one-eighth of the output of  the zero-velocity filter is added to seven-eighths of the value stored in the map.
Thus, the map  is built up in a recursive manner.
About 10 to 20 scans are required to establish steady-clutter  v3Jues.
As rain moves in~o the area, or as propagation conditions result in changing ground­ clutter levels, the clutter map changes accordingly.
The values stored in the map are multiplied  by an appropriate constant to establish the threshold for zero-relative-velocity targets.
This  eliminates the usual MTI blind speed at zero radial velocity and permits the detection of  crossing ~argets in clutter if the target cross section is sufficiently large.
 Thus, in Fig.
4.28 the zero-velocity filter (No.
1) threshold is determined by the output of  the clutter map.
The thresholds for fiJters 3 through 7 are obtained from the mean level of the  signals in the 16 range cells centered around the range cell of interest.
Both a mean-level  Filter number 5 6  pr f -I  prf -2  Aircraft aliases 8  0 2 3 4 5  True  aircraft  velocity  Radial velocity Figure 4.28 Detection of aircraft in  rain using two prf's with a doppler  filter bank, illustrating the effect of  doppler foldover.
(From Muehe,43  Courtesy IEEE.)  MTJ AND PULSE DOPPLER RADAR 129  threshold from the 16 range cells and a clutter threshold from the clutter map are calculated  for filters 2 and 8 adjacent to the zero-velocity filter, and the larger of the two is used as the  threshold.
 The advantage of using l wo prf's to detect targets in rain is illustrated by Fig.
4.28.
The  prf's differ by about 20 percent.
A typical rain spectrum with a nonzero average velocity is  depicted on the bottom line.
(Precipitation at S band might typically have a spectral width of  about 25 to 30 knots centered anywhere from -60 to + 60 knots, depending on the wind  conditions and the antenna pointing.42) The narrow spectrum of the moving aircraft is at the  right of the figure.
Because of foldover it is shown as occupying filters 6 and 7 on prf-l, and  filters 7 and 8 on prf-2.
With prf-2, the aircraft velocity is shown competing with the rain  clutter; but with prf-1 it appears in one filter (No.
6) without any rain clutter).
Thus, by  using two prf's which are alternated every lO pulses (one-half beamwidth), aircraft targets will  usually appear in at least one filler free from rain except for a small region (approximately 30  knots wide) when the target's radial velocity is exactly that of the rain.
 Interference from other radars might appear as one large return among the ten returns  normally processed.
In the MTD, an interference eliminator compares the magnitude of each  of !he 10 pulses against the average magnitude of the ten.
If any pulse is greater than five times  the average, all information from that range-azimuth cell is discarded.
A saturation detector  detects whether any of the 10 pulses within a processing interval saturates the A/D converter  and if it docs, the entire 10 pulses are discarded.
 The output of the MTD is a hit report which contains the azimuth, range, and amplitude  of the target return as well as the filter number and pr[ On a particular scan, a large aircraft  might he reported from more than one doppler filter, from several coherent processing inter­ vals.
and from adjacent range gates.
As many as 20 hit-reports might be generated by a single  large target.43 A post processor groups together all reports which appear to originate from the  same target and interpolates to find the best azimuth, range, amplitude, and radial velocity.
 The target amplitude and doppler are used to eliminate small cross section and low-speed  angel echoes before the target reports are delivered to the automatic tracking circuits.
The  tracking circuits also eliminate false hit-reports which do not form logical tracks.
The output  of the automatic tracker is what is displayed on the scope.
Since the MTD processor eliminates  a large amount of the clutter and has a low false-detection rate, its output can be reliably  rcmotcd via narrow bandwidth telephone circuits.
 4.8 Lll\tllTATIONS TO MTI PERFORMANCE  The improvemenl in signal-to-clutter ratio or an MTI is affected by factors other than the  design of the doppler signal processor.
Instabilities or the transmitter and receiver, physical  motions of the clutter, the finite time on target (or scanning modulation), and limiting in the  receiver can all detract from the performance of an MTI radar.
Before discussing these effects,  some definitions will be stated.
 MT/ improvement factor.
The signal-to-clutter ratio at the output of the MTI system divided  by the signal-to-clutter ratio at the input, averaged uniformly over all target radial veloci:  ties of interest.
 Suhclutter visihility.
The ratio by which the targ~t echo power may be weaker than the  coincident clutter echo power and still be detected with specified detection and false­ alarm probabilities.
AIi target radial velocities are assumed equally likely.
A subclutter  visibility of, for example, 30 dB implies that a moving target can be detected in the  presence or clutter even though the clutter echo power is 1000 times the target echo  130 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  power.
Two radars with the same subclutter visibility might not have the same ability to  detect targets in clutter if the resolution cell of one is greater than the other and accepts a  greater clutter signal power; that is, both radars might reduce the clutter power equally,  but one starts with greater clutter power because its resolution cell is greater and ..
sees"  more clutter targets.
 Clutter visibility factor.
The signal-to·clutter ratio, after cancellation or doppler filtering, that  provides stated probabilities of detection and false alarm.
 Clutter attenuation.
The ratio of clutter power at the canceler input to the clutter residue at the  output, normalized to the attenuation of a single pulse passing through the unprocessed  channel of the canceler.
(The clutter residue is the clutter power remaining at the output of  an MTI system.)  Cancellation ratio.
The ratio of canceler voltage amplification for the fixed-target echoes  received with a fixed antenna, to the gain for a single pulse passing thro11gh the un­ processed channel of the canceler.
 The improvement factor (l) is equal to the subclutter visibility (SCV) times the clutter  visibility factor (Voe), In decibels, /(dB)= SCV(dB) + Voc(dB).
When the MTI is limited by  noiselike system instabilities, the clutter visibility factor should be chosen as is the signal-to­ noise ratio of Chap.
2.
When the MTI performance is limited by the antenna scanning fluctua­ tions, Shrader8 suggests letting V0c = 6 dB.
(Although not stated by Shrader, it seems this  value is for a single pulse.) The improvement factor is the preferred measure of MTI radar  performance.
 Still another term sometimes employed in MT[ radar is the interclutter visibility.
This  describes the ability of an MTI radar to detect moving targets which occur in the relatively  clear resolution cells between patches of strong clutter.
Clutter echo power is not uniform, so  if a radar has sufficient resolution it can see targets in the clear areas between clutter patches.
 The higher the radar resolution, the better the interclutter visibility.
Radars with "moderate"  resolution might require only enough improvement factor to deal with the median clutter  power, which may be 20 dB less than the average clutter power.45 According to Shrader a  medium-resolution radar with a 2 µs pulse width and a 1.5° beam width, is of sufficient resolution  to achieve a 20 dB advantage over low-resolution radars for the detection of targets in ground  clutter.50  Equipment instabilities.
Pulse-to-pulse changes in the amplitude, frequency, or phase of the  transmitter signal, changes in the stalo or coho oscillators in the receiver, jitter in the timing of  the pulse transmission, variations in the time delay through the delay lines, and changes in the  pulse width can cause the apparent frequency spectrum from perfectly stationary clutter to  broaden and thereby lower the improvement factor of an MTI radar.
The stability of the  equipment in an MTI radar must be considerably better than that of an ordinary radar.
It can  limit the performance of an MTI radar if sufficient care is not taken in design, construction,  and maintenance.
 Consider the effect of phase _variations in an oscillator.
If the echo from stationary clutter  on the first pulse is represented PY A cos wt and from the second pulse is A cos (wt + At/>), ' '• where A¢ is the change in oscillator phase between the two, then the difference between the  two after subtraction is A cos wt -A cos (wt+ A¢)= 2A sin (A¢/2) sin (wt + A¢/2).
For  small phase errors, the amplitude of the resultant difference is 2A sin A¢/2 ::::: A A¢.
Therefore  the limitation on the improvement.
fa~tor· due_ to oscillator instability is  ..
/ , , I '' :I.
; '• ; ' l .
 I= (A¢)2 (4.17)  MTI AND PULSE DOPPLER RADAR 131  This would arrly 10 the coho Jocking or to the phase change introduced by a power amplifier.
 A phase change pulse-to-pulse of 0.01 radians results in an improvement-factor limitation of  40 dB.
The limits to the improvement factor imposed by pulse-to-pulse instability are listed  below:A.46.47  Transmitter frequency  Sta lo or coho frequency  Transmitter phase shift  Coho locking  Pulse timing  Pulse width  Pulse amplitude (m:\fr r 2  (2rr llJTr2  (ll</J r 2  (ll<t> r 2  r2 /(llt)22Br  r2/(llr}2Br  (A/llA)2  where llf = interpulse frequency change, r = pulse width, T = transmission time to and from  target.
ll</> = interpulse phase change, llt = time jitter, Br = time-bandwidth product of pulse  compression system ( = unity for simple pulses,) llr = pulse-width jitter, A = pulse amplitude,  llA = intcrpulse amplitude change.
In a digital signal processor the improvement factor is also  limited by the quantization noise introduced by the A/D converter, as was discussed in  Sec.
4.5.
The digital processor, however, does not experience degradation due to time jitter of  the transmitted pulse since the system clock controlling the processor timing may be started  from the detected rf envelope of the transmitted pulse.
 Internal fluctuation of clutter.
48 Although clutter targets such as buildings, water towers, bare  hills.
or mountains produce echo signals that are constant in both phase and amplitude as a  function of time, there are many types of clutter that cannot be considered as absc,lutely  stationary.
Echoes from trees, vegetation, sea, rain, and chaff fluctuate with time, and these  fluctuations can limit the performance of MTI radar.
 Because of its varied nature, it is difficult to describe precisely the clutter echo signal.
 However, for purposes of analysis, most fluctuating clutter targets may be represented by a  model consisting of many independent scatterers located within the resolution cell of the radar.
 The echo at the radar receiver is the vector sum of the echo signals received from each of the  individual scatters; that is, the relative phase as well as the amplitude from each scatterer  innuences the resultant composite signal.
If the individual scatters remain fixed from pulse to  pulse, the resultant echo signal will also remain fixed.
But any motion of the scatterers relative to  the radar will result in different phase relationships at the radar receiver.
Hence the phase and  amplitude of the new resultant echo signal will differ pulse to pulse.
 Examples of the power spectra of typical clutter are shown in Fig.
4.29.
These data apply  at a frequency of 1000 MHz.
The experimentally measured power spectra of clutter signals  may he approximated by  where W(f) = clutter-power spectrum as a function of frequency  g(f) = Fourier transform of input waveform (clutter echo)  .f~ = radar carrier frequency  a = a parameter dependent upon clutter (4.18)  Values of the parameter a which correspond to the clutter spectra in Fig.
4.29 are given in the  caption.
 132 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  0.2  ......
 at 0.1  0.05  2  0.02  0.01  0 5 10 15  Frequency, Hz 20 25 Figure4.29 Power spectra of various clutter targets.
 (I) Heavily wooded hills, 20 mi/h wind blowing  (a= 2.3 x 1017); (2) sparsely wooded hills, calm  day (a = 3.9 x 1019); (3} sea echo, windy day  (a= 1.41 x 1016); (4) rain clouds (a= 2.8 x 1015);  (5) chaff (a= l x 1016).
(From Barlow,49 Proc.
 IRE.)  The clutter spectrum can also be expressed in terms of an rms clutter frequency spread cr,  in hertz or by therms velocity spread <lv in m/s.46 Thus Eq.
(4.18) can be written  ( r2) ( r2).2) W(f) = W0 exp -la; = Wo exp -· So} (4.19)  where W0 = l9ol2.
<I,= 2<Ivfl,).
=wavelength= c/fo, and c = velocity of propagation.
It can  be seen that a= c2/8<I~.
The rms velocity spread <Iv is usually the preferred method for  describing the clutter fluctuation spectrum.
 The improvement factor can be written as  I = (So/Co) = (So) x Ci = (So) x CA (4.20) S;/Cj ave Si ave Co Sj ave  where S0/C0 = output signal-to-clutter ratio, SdC; = input signal-to-clutter ratio, and  CA = clutter attentuation.
The average is taken over all target doppler frequencies of interest.
 For a single-delay-line canceler, the clutter attentuation is  J: W(.f) df  CA= s: W(f)I H(f)l 2~7 (4.21)  where H(.f) is the frequency response function of the canceler.
Since the frequency response  function of a delay line of time delay T is exp (-j2nf T), II(!) for the single-delay-line  canceler is  H(f) = 1 -exp ( -j2nf T) = 2j sin (nf T) exp ( -jnf T) (4.22)  Substituting Eqs.
(4.19) and (4.22) into Eq.
(4.21) and assuming that <I,~ l/T, the clutter  attentuation is f; Wo exp (-f2/2a;) df CA = ~-·:::....:;._----------'---- J0 W0 exp (-f2/2a;)4 sin2 nf T df  0.5 (4.23)  MTI AND PULSE DOPPLER RADAR 133  If the exponent in the denominator of Eq.
(4.23) is small, the exponential term can be replaced  hy the first two terms of a series expansion, or  f/ f/ ).2 af/ CA=----= = -- (4.24) · 4rr2a; 16rr2a~ 2rr2Ja2  where f,,.
the pulse repetition frequency, has been substituted for 1/T.
The average gain  (So /S,)a,·• of the single delay-line-c:111celer can be shown to be equal to 2.
Therefore.
the  improvement factor is  (4.25)  Similarly.
for a double canceler.
whose average gain is 6, the improvement factor is  f/ J/ ,l 4 a2f/ lie"'--·--=--~-= ---8rr4a: 128n4<r! 2n4f04 (4.26)  !\ plot of Fq.
(4.26) for the double canceler is shown in Fig.
4.30.
The parameter describing the  curves is Jp).· Example prf's and rrequencies are shown.
Several "representative" examples of  clutter are indicated, based on published data for a11, which for the most part dates back to  World War 11.46·49 Although each type of clutter is shown at a particular value of <Tv, nature is  more variable than this.
Actual measurements cover a range of values.
The spectral spread in  velocity is with respect to the mean velocity, which for ground clutter is usually zero.
Rain and  ro u 60 - 50  2 40 u  0  C  OJ  ~ 30 - > 0 ..
0.
 E  20 - 10 -Sparse  woods Wooded hills  10 knots Wooded hills Seo echo Rain  40 knots Chaff  0'------'---'---'--'-_._~~---~~~~_._~~~--~-~--'--~~~  0 001 01 1·0 10  c,11 = rms velocity spread, mis  Figure 4.30 Plot of double-canceler clutter improvement factor [Eq.
(4.26)] as a function of uv = rms  velocity spread of the clutter.
Parameter is the product of the pulse repetition frequency (/p) and the  radar wavelength (,l).
 134 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  chaff, however, as well as sea echo, can have a nonzero mean velocity4 7 which must be  properly accounted for when designing MTI signal processors.
 The frequency dependence of the clutter spectrum as given by Eqs.
(4.25) and (4.26)  cannot be extended over too great a frequency range since account is not taken of any  variation in radar cross section of the individual scatterers as a function of frequency.
The  leaves and branches of trees, for example, might have considerably different reflecting proper­ ties at K0 band (,.l = 0.86 cm), where the dimensions are comparable with the wavelength, from  those at VHF (l = 1.35 m), where the wavelength is long compared with the dimensions.
 The general expression for improvement factor for an N-pulse canceler with N1 = N -I  delay lines is61  (4.27)  Antenna scanning modulation.
46.49-52 As the antenna scans by a target, it observes the target  for a finite time equal to t0 = n8/ J, = 88/()1, where n8 = number of hits received, J, = pulse  repetition frequency, ()8 = antenna beamwidth and (J1 = antenna scanning rate.
The received  pulse train of finite duration t0 has a frequency spectrum (which can be found by taking the  Fourier transform of the waveform) whose width is proportional to 1/t0.
Therefore, even if the  clutter were perfectly stationary, there will still be a finite width to the clutter spectrum because  of the finite time on target.
If the clutter spectrum is too wide because the observation time is  too short, it will affect the improvement factor.
This limitation has sometimes been called  scanning fluctuations or scanning modulation.
 The computation of the limitation to the improvement factor can be found in a manner  similar to that of the clutter fluctuations described previously.
The clutter attentuation is first  found using Eq.
(4.21), except that the power spectrum JYs(f) describing the spectrum  produced by t~e finite time on target is used.
The clutter attenuation is  C -s: Ws(f) df  A -J; Ws(f) I H(f) 12 df (4.lS)  where H(f) is the frequency response function of the MTI signal processor.
If the antenna  main-beam pattern is approximated by the gaussian shape, the spectrum will also be gaussian.
 Therefore, the results previously derived for a gaussian clutter spectrum can be readily applied.
 Equations 4.25 and 4.26 derived for the clutter fluctuation improvement factor apply for the  antenna scanning fluctuations by proper interpretation of a,, the standard deviation, or the  rms spread of the frequency spectrum about the mean.
 The voltage waveform of the received signaJ is modulated by the square of the antenna  electric-field-strength-pattern, which is equal to the (one-way) antenna power pattern G(O),  described by the gaussian function as  ( 2.77682 ) G(8) = G0 exp -Di (4.29)  Since the antenna is scanning at a rate of tJ.
deg/s the time waveform may be found from  Eq.
(4.29) by dividing both the numerator and denominator of the exponent by {},.
Letting  0/()1 = t, the time variable, and noting that 08/fJ1 = t0, the time on target, the modulation of  the received signal due to the antenna pattern is  ( ) k ( 2.776 t2 ) s11 t = exp -2 to (4.30)  MTI AND PULSE DOPPLER RADAR 135  where k constant.
The angular frequency spectrum or this time waveform is found by taking  its Fourier transform, which is  (l'.) ( 2 776t2 ) S0(f) = k J_ro exp -· 15 exp (-j2nft) dt  (4.31)  where k 1 = constant.
Since this is a gaussian runction, the exponent is of the formf 2 /2a} where  a 1 = standard deviation.
Therefore  (4.32)  This applies to the voltage spectrum.
Since the standard deviation or the power spectrum is  less than that of the voltage spectrum by j2, the power spectrum due to antenna scanning can  be described by a standard deviation  1.178 1 (4.33)  50  rn  "O  I  0 40 - u  J:'  c  (I)  E 30 - (I)  > 0 ....
 0  E  20 - o, 100 1000  "9, number of hits wilhin 3 dB beomwidth  Figure 4.31 Limitation to improvement factor due to a scanning antenna.
Antenna pattern assumed to be  of gaussian shape.
 136 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  This can be substituted for <J, in Eqs.
(4.25) and {4.26) to obtain the limitation to the improve­ ment factor caused by antenna scanning.
These are  (single canceler) (4.34)  (double canceler) (4.35)  These are plotted in Fig.
4.31.
 A stepped-scan antenna that dwells at a particular region in space, rather than scan  continuously, also is limited in MTI performance by the finite time on target t0• The time  waveform is constant so that it will have a different spectral shape and a different improvement  factor than that produced by the gaussian beam assumed in the above.
 Limiting in MTI radar.8·53-55 A limiter is usually employed in the IF amplifier just hcforc the  MT( processor to prevent the residue from large clutter echoes from saturating the display.
 Ideally an MTI radar should reduce the clutter to a level comparable to rece.ivcr noise.
 60  50  0)  "O  I ...
 0 40 ti  0 C/L 0 dB -c C/L == 10 dB (I)  E  (I) 30 > 0 ...
a.
 E  20.
 10  n8 = 50 n8 = 20 n8 = 10 n8 5  o~~--'-~~-'-~----'-~--'-~-'-~'-'-~_.___.___.~~~~~~~~~~~  0·001 0 01  (a)  m u  I  E u  l?  c a.,  E a.,  > 0 0 E 50  40 - 30  20  10 "  0  0001 MT! AND PULSE DOPPLER RADAR 137  001  Figure 4.32 Effect or limit level on the improvement factor ror (a) two-pulse delay-line canceler and  (b) three-pulse delay-line canceler.
C/L = ratio of rms clutter power to limit level.
(From Ward and  Slirader,53 Courtesy IEEE.)  However, when the MTI improvement factor is not great enough to reduce the clutter  sufficiently.~the clutter residue will appear on the display and prevent the detection of aircraft  targets whose cross sections arc larger than the clutter residue.
This condition may be pre­ vented hy selling the limit level L relative to the noise N, equal to the MTI improvement  factor I; or L/N = /.
If the limit level relative to noise is set higher than the improvement  factor.
clutter residue ohscures part of the display.
Hit is set too low there may be a" black  hole" effect on the display.
The limiter provides a constant false alarm rate (CFAR) and is  essential to usable MTI performance.50  Unfortunately, nonlinear devices such as limiters have side-effects that can degrade  performance.
Limiters cause the spectrum of strong clutter to spread into the canceler pass­ band, and result in the generation of additional residue that can significantly degrade MTI  performance as compared with a perfect linear system.
 An example of the effect of limiting is shown in Fig.
4.32, which plots the improvement  factor for two-pulse and three-pulse cancelers with various levels of limiting.53 The abscissa  applies to a gaussian clutter spectrum that is generated either by clutter motion with standard  deviation <r,.
at a wavelength A.
and a prf fp, or by antenna scanning modulation with a  138 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  gaussian-shaped beam and 118 pulses between the half-power beamwidth of the one-way  antenna pattern.
The parameter C/L is the ratio of the rms clutter power to the receiver-IF  limit level.
 The loss of improvement factor increases with increasing complexity of the canceler.
 Limiting in ·the three-pulse canceler will cause a 15 to 25 dB reduction in the performance  predicted by linear theory.50 A four-pulse canceler (not shown) with limiting is typically only  2 dB better than the three-pulse canceler in the presence of limiting clutter and offers little  advantage.
Thus the added complexity of higher-order cancelers is seldom justified in such  situations.
The linear analysis of MTI signal processors is therefore not adequate when limit­ ing,is employed and can lead to disappointing differences between theory and measurement of  actual systems.
 Limiters need not be used if the MTI is linear over the entire range of clutter signals and if  the processor has sufficient improvement factor to reduce the largest clutter to tre noise level.
 To accomplish this the signal processor must provide at least 60 dB improvement factor,  which is a difficult task.
56 Not only must the signal processor be designed to reduce the clutter  by this amount, but the receiver must be linear over this range, there must be at least eleven  bits in the A/D converter of the digital processor, the equipment must be sufficiently stable,  and the number of pulses processed (for reducing antenna scanning modulation) must be  sufficient to achieve this large value of improvement factor.
 4.9 NONCOHERENT MTI  The composite echo signal from a moving target and clutter fluctuates in both phase and  amplitude.
The coherent MTI and the pulse-doppler radar make use of the phase fluctuations  in the echo signal to recognize the doppler component produced by a moving target.
In these  systems, amplitude fluctuations are removed by the phase detector.
The operation of this type  of radar, which may be called coherent MT/, depends upon a reference signal at the radar  receiver that is coherent with the transmitter signal.
 It is also possible to use the amplitude fluctuations to recognize the doppler component  produced by a moving target.
MTI radar which uses amplitude instead of phase fluctuations is  called noncoherent (Fig.
4.33).
It has also been called externally coherent, which is a more  descriptive name.
The noncoherent MTI radar does not require an internal coherent reference >I  signal or a phase detector as does the coherent form of MTI.
Amplitude limiting cannot be  TR Power  oscillator  LO  To cancellation circuits Modulator  Figure 4.33 Block diagram of a noncoherent MTI radar.
 MTI AND PULSE DOPPLER RADAR 139  employed in the noncoherenl MTI receiver,.else the desired amplitude fluctuations would be  lost.
Therefore the IF amplifier must be linear, or if a large dynamic range is required, it can  be logarithmic.
A logarithmic gain characteristic not only provides protection from saturation,  but it also tends to make the clutter fluctuations at its output more uniform with variations in  the clutter input amplitude [Sec.
( 13.8)].
The detector following the IF amplifier is a conven­ tional amplitude detector.
The phase detector is not used since phase information is of no  interest to the noncoherenl radar.
The local oscillator of the noncoherent radar does not have  lo he as frequency-stable as in the coherent MTI.
The transmitter must be sufficiently stable  over the pulse duration to prevent beats between overlapping ground clutter, but this is not as  severe a requirement as in the case of coherent radar.
The output of the amplitude detector is  followed by an MTI processor such as a delay-line canceler.
The doppler component con­ t.1i11ed in the amplitude fluctuations may also be detected by applying the output of the  amplitude detector to an A-scope.
Amplitude fluctuations due to doppler produce a butterfly  modulation similar to that in Fig.
4.3, but in this case, they ride on top of the clutter echoes.
 Except for the inclusion of means to extract the doppler amplitude component, the noncoher­ ent MTI block diagram is similar to that of a conventional pulse radar.
 The advantage of the noncoherent MTI is its simplicity; hence it is attractive for those  applications where space and weight are limited.
Its chief limitation is that the target must be  in the presence of relatively large clutter signals if moving-target detection is to take place.
 Clutter echoes may not always be present over the range at which detection is desired.
The  clutter serves the same function as does the reference signal in the coherent MTI.
If clutter  were not present, the desired targets would not be detected.
It is possible, however, to provide  a switch to disconnect the noncoherent MTI operation and revert to normal radar whenever  sufficient clutter echoes are not present.
If the radar is stationary, a map of the clutter might be  stored in a digital memory and used to determine when to switch in or out the noncoherent  MTI.
 The improvement factor of a noncoherent MTI will not, in general, be as good as can be  obtained with a coherent MTI that employs a reference oscillator (coho).
The reference signal  in the noncoherent case is the clutter itself, which will not be as stable as a reference oscillator  because of the finite width of the clutter spectrum caused by its own internal motions.
If a  nonlinear IF amplifier is used, it will also limit the improvement factor that can be achieved.
 4.10 PULSE DOPPLER RADAR57  ~.
 A pulse radar that extracts the doppler frequency shift for the purpose of detecting moving  targets in the presence of clutter is either an MT/ radar or a pulse doppler radar.
The distinc­ tion between them is based on the fact that in a sampled measurement system like a pulse  radar, ambiguities can arise in both the doppler frequency (relative velocity) and the range  {time delay) measurements.
Range ambiguities are avoided with a low sampling rate (low pulse  repetition frequency), and doppler frequency ambiguities are avoided with a high sampling  rate.
However, in most radar applications the sampling rate, or pulse repetition frequency,  cannot be selected to avoid both types of measurement ambiguities.
Therefore a compromise  must be made and the nature of the compromise generally determines whether the radar is  called an MTI or a pulse doppler.
MTI usually refers to a radar in which the pulse repetition  frequency is chosen low enough to avoid ambiguities in range (no multiple-time-around  echoes).
but with the consequence that the frequency measurement is ambiguous and results in  blind speeds, Eq.
(4.8).
The pulse doppler radar, on the other hand, has a high pulse repetition  frequency that avoids blind speeds, but it experiences ambiguities in range.
It performs doppler  140 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  filtering on a single spectral line of the pulse spectrum.
(A radar which employs multiple pulse  repetition frequencies to avoid blind speeds is usually classed as an MTI if its average prf  would cause blind speeds.
The justification for this definition is that the technology and design  philosophy of a multiple prf radar are more like that of an MTI than a pulse dopplcr.)  The pulse doppler radar is more likely to use range-gated doppler filter-banks than  delay-line cancelers.
Also, a power amplifier such as a klystron is more likely to be used than a  power oscillator like the magnetron.
A pulse doppler radar operates at a higher duty cycle  than does an MTI.
Although it is difficult to generalize, the MTI radar seems to be the more  widely used of the two, but pulse doppler is usually more capable of reducing clutter.
 When the prf must be so high that the number of range ambiguities is too large to be  easily resolved, the performance of the pulse-doppler radar approaches that of the CW doppler  radar.
The pulse-doppler radar, like the CW radar, may be limited in its ability to measure  range under these conditions.
Even so, the pulse-doppler radar has an advanta&e over the CW  radar in that the detection performance is not limited by transmitter leakage or by signals  reflected from nearby clutter or from the radome.
The pulse-doppler radar avoids this  difficulty since its receiver is turned off during transmission, whereas the CW radar receiver is  always on.
On the other hand, the detection capability of the pulsc-doppler radar is reduc1.:J  because of the blind spots in range resulting from the high prf.
 One other method should be mentioned of achieving coherent MTI.
If the number of  cycles of the doppler frequency shift contained within the duration of a single pulse is  sufficient, the returned echoes from moving targets may be separated from clutter by suitable  RF or IF filters.
This is possible if the doppler frequency shift is at least comparable with or  greater than the spectral width of the transmitted signal.
It is not usually applicable to aircrafl  targets, but it can sometimes be applied to radars designed to detect extraterrestrial targets  such as satellites or astronomical bodies.
In these cases, the transmitted pulse width is rela­ tively wide and its spectrum is narrow.
The high speed of extraterrestrial targets results in  doppler shifts that are usually significantly greater than the spectral width of the transmitted  signal.
 4.11 MTI FROM A MOVING PLATFORM  When the radar itself is in motion, as when mounted on a ship or an aircraft, the detection of a  moving target in the presence of clutter is more difficult than if the radar were stationary.
The  doppler frequency shift of the clutter is no longer at de.
It varies with the speed of the radar  platform, the direction of the antenna in azimuth, and the cl.evation angle to the clutter.
Thus  the clutter rejection notch needed to cancel clutter cannot be fixed, but must vary.
The design  of an MTI is more difficult with an airborne radar than a shipborne radar because the higher  speeds and the greater range of elevation angles result in a greater variation of the clutter  spectrum.
 In addition to shifting the center frequency of the clutter, its spectrum is also widened.
An  approximate measure of the spectrum width can be found by taking the differential of the  doppler frequency .f.i = 2(v/l) cos 0, or  4fd = 2; sin O !lO (4.36)  where v = platform speed, l = wavelength, and O is the azimuth angle between the aircraft's  velocity and the direction of the antenna beam.
(The negative sign introduced by differentia­ tion of cos O is ignored and the elevation angle is assumed to be zero.) If the beamwidth is  MTI AND PULSE DOPPLER RADAR 141  taken as MJ, then M~ is a measure of the width of doppler frequency spectrum.
When the  antenna points in tile direction of tile platform velocity (0 = 0), the doppler shift of the clutter  is maximum, but the width of the doppler spectrum llfd is a minimum.
On the other hand,  when the antenna is directed perpendicular to the direction of the platform velocity (0 = 90°),  the clutter doppler center-frequency is zero, but the spread is maximum.
This widening of the  clutter spectrum can set a limit on the improvement factor.
 Thus the elTect of platform velocity can be considered as having two components.
One is  in the direction of antenna pointing and shifts the center frequency of the clutter doppler  spectrum.
The other is normal to the direction of antenna pointing and results in a widening of  the clutter doppler spectrum.
These two components are compensated by two different  techniques.
 J\n MTI radar on a moving platform is called AMTI.
Although the "A" originally stood  for airborne, the term is now often applied to an MTI radar on any moving platform.
Most of  the interest in AMTI, however, is for airborne radar.58  Compensation for clutter doppler shift.
When the clutter doppler frequency is other than at  de, the null of the frequency response of the MTI processor must be shifted accordingly.
The  effect on the improvement factor when the center of the clutter doppler frequency is shifted by  an amount./~ is shown in Fig.
4.34 for a three-pulse delay-line canceler.61•69 There are two  basic methods for providing the doppler frequency compensation.
In one implementation the  frequency of the coherent oscillator (coho) is changed to compensate for the shirt in the clutter  doppler frequency.
This may be accomplished by mixing the output of the coho with a signal  from a tunable oscillator, the frequency of which is made equal to the clutter doppler.
The  other implementation is to insert a phase s~ifter in one branch of the delay-line canceler and  adjust its phase to shift the null of the frequency response.
(A phase shift \JI in one branch of the  canceler corresponds to a frequency shift 2nfd = \JI /Tp, where TP = pulse repetition interval.)  The clutter-doppler-frequency compensation can, in some cases, be made open loop by  using the a priori knowledge of the velocity of the platform carrying the radar and the  direction of the antenna pointing.
This is more practical with a shipborne radar rather than  with an airborne radar.
When the clutter-doppler-frequency compensation cannot be obtained  100  90  m  "O  ...
 !? u 2  c  Q)  E  Q)  > 0 a E  10  0  0001 001 0·1  Uclfp  Figure 4.34 Effect of a nonzero clutter doppler frequency on the improvement factor of a three-pulse  canceler.
fr= mean frequency of the clutter spectrum, u, = standard deviation of clutter spectrum,  fP = pulse repetition frequency.
(From Andrews.61)  142 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  in this fashion, the clutter frequency can be measured directly by sampling the received echo  signal over an interval of range.
The sampled range interval is selected so that clutter is likely  to be the dominant signal.
From this measurement of clutter doppler within the sampled range  interval, compensation is made over the entire range of observation either by changing the  reference signal from the coho or by adjusting the phase shifter inserted in one of the arms of  the delay-line canceler.
Generally, the average doppler frequency or phase shift is obtained by  averaging the sampled range-interval over a number of pulse repetition periods.
A single  doppler measurement and subsequent compensation might not suffice over the entire range of  the radar, especially if the radar is elevated as in an aircraft.
The doppler shift from clutter will  be range dependent with an elevated radar since the doppler frequency is a function of the  elevation angle from the radar to the clutter cell.
Thus more than one doppler measurement  may be necessary to compensate for the variation of the clutter doppler with range.
 An MTI radar that measures the average doppler frequency shift of clutter qver a sampled  range interval and uses this measurement to cause the clutter mean-doppler-frequency to  coincide with the null of the MTI doppler-filter-frequency response over the remainder of the  range of observation is called a clutter-lock MT/.
 One version of a clutter-lock MTI is TACCAR, which stands for time-averaged-clutter  coherent airborne radar.8 Although the name was originally applied to a particular airborne  MTI radar system developed by MIT Lincoln Laboratory, it continues to be used to refer to  the clutter-lock technique that was the special feature of that system.
The name is even  retained when the technique is applied to a shipboard radar or when the radar is on land and  used for the compensation of moving clutter.
The chief feature of TACCAR is the use of a  voltage-controlled osci11ator arranged in a phase-lock loop.
As with other clutter-lock  methods, the correction for the clutter doppler is obtained from the averaged measurement of  the clutter doppler frequency within a sampled range interval.
 Other methods that have been proposeci for compensating the clutter doppler shift seen  by a moving radar include the "matrix MTI "60 for implementation in digital MTI, and a  "trial and error" tech~ique59•68 that provides simultaneously a number of possible doppler  corrections and uses that one which produces the minimum residue over the sampled range  interval.
 Still another technique that is attractive when it can be applied, is to use a doppler  processor with a rejection notch wide enough to reject the clutter doppler even when the radar  platform is in motion.
This is applicable only when the first blind speed is high (a low radar  frequency and/or high prf) and when the platform speed is low, as it would be with a ship­ mounted radar.
 Generally, most clutter-lock MTI techniques· do not adequately eliminate both stationary  and moving clutter when they appear simultaneously within the same range resolution cell.
A  TACCAR, for example, might be designed to reject ground clutter close in, and weather or  chaff at a different doppler at ranges beyond the ground clutter; but not to cancel two different  clutter doppler frequencies simultaneously.8 An exception is the adaptive MTI62•65 which can  adapt to any type of clutter.
Using technology similar to that of the antenna sidelobe canceler,  nulls are adaptively placed at those frequencies containing large clutter.
A three-loop adaptive  canceler, for example, can adaptively place three nulls at three different frequencies or it can  place the three nulls so as to make a single wide notch, depending on the nature of the clutter  spectrum.
 Compensation for clutter doppler spread.
The simple expression of Eq.
(4.36) shows that the  spread in the clutter spectrum is a function of the angle 8 betwC?Cn the velocity vector of the  moving platform and the antenna beam-pointing direction.
It also depends on the wavelength.
 MTl AND PULSE DOPPLER RADAR 143  Based on an analysis of antenna radiation patterns and experimental data, Staudaher58 gives  the standard deviation of the clutter spectrum due to platform motion as  '1pm ::::::0: 0.6 Vx a (4.37)  where vx is the horizontal component of the velocity perpendicular to the antenna pointing­ direction and a is the effective horizontal aperture width.
The antenna beamwidth is assumed  to be approximated by 08 = },_/a.
[Equation ( 4.3 7) is not inconsistent with the simpJe derivation  of Eq.
(4.36 ).] If the mean doppler-frequency shift of the clutter echo is perfectly com­ pensated, the limitations on the improvement factor due to clutter spread can be found by  assuming a gaussian spectral shape and substituting the standard deviation of Eq.
(4.37) into  the expression of Eq.
(4.27) to obtain  I pm = (; ( l.~n ~~~jJ 2N1 (4.38)  where N1 is the number of delay lines in the MTI processor.
If the clutter spread cr11mdue to the  platform motion combines with the clutter spread <le due to internal clutter motion such that  the total standard deviation <rr of the clutter spectrum is o-} = a-; + o-:m, the MTI improve­ ment factor for the total clutter spectrum is  (4.39)  The solid curves of Fig.
4.35 plot this equation for a three-pulse delay~line canceller (N1 = 2).
 If the widening oft he spectrum is a result of the radar platform·s velocity, its effects can be  mitigated by making the radar antenna appear stationary.
This might be accomplished with  (D  u  ...
 0 u  0 .....
 c  ID  E «> > 0  0.
 f 80 ---------.....
_  X"" 0 01 -- X::: Q 01 ---60 ~ ---- 40  20  X = 01  o~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~---'-~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~  0001 0·01 0·1  Ratio of clutter spectral width lo pulse repetition frequency (o-c lfp)  Figure 4.35 Solid curves show the improvement factor of a three-pulse canceler limited by platform  motion [Eq.
(4.39)].
Dashed curves show the effect or the DPCA compensation.
x is the fraction of the  antenna aperture that the antenna is displaced per interpulse period (x = 0 corresponds to no platform  motion.) (From Andrew.s.63)  144 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  two separate antennas with the distance between them equal to Tpl'x = TPv sin Oa, where  Oa = angle between velocity vector of the vehicle and the antenna beam-pointing direction,  and TP = pulse repetition period.
Orie pulse is transmitted on the forward antenna, and the  other pulse is transmitted on the rear antenna so that the two pulses from the two different  antennas are transmitted and received at the same point in space.
The result is as if the  radar antenna were stationary.
The distance traveled between pulses is generally less than  the antenna dimension so that the two antenna beams might be generated with two  overlapping reflector antennas or with a phased array divided into two overlapping  subarrays.64 The effective separ~tion between the antennas, T pvx, varies with the angle  00 as well as the aircraft velocity v.
With reflector antennas, it is not convenient to change  the antenna physical separation to compensate for changes in Oa or v.
The pulse repetition  period TP might be varied to provide compensation, but this can introduce other complica­ tions into the radar design and the signal processing.
With a phased array divided into two  overlapping subarrays, a constant pulse repetition frequency can be used and the horizontal  separation of the two overlapping subarrays can be controlled electronically to compensate for  platform motion.
However, it is possible to change the effective phase center of a rcllcctor  antenna by employing two feeds to produce two squinted overlapping beams, as in an  amplitude-comparison monopulse radar (Sec.
5.4).
The outputs of the two feeds are combined  using a hybrid junction to produce a sum pattern I: and a difference pattern L\.
By taking  I: ± jkL\, the effective phase center can be shifted depending on the value of k.
(The factor j  multiplying the difference pattern signifies a 90° phase shift added to the difference signal  relative to the sum signal.) The use of this technique in an AMTI radar to compensate for the  effects of platform motion is called DPCA1 which stands for Displaced Phase Center Antenna.
 The sum and difference patterns can be obtained by connecting a hybrid junction to the  outputs of the two antenna feeds as described in Sec.
5.4.
The sum pattern is used 0:1 transmit  and both the sum and the difference patterns are extracted on receive.
The signal received on  the difference pattern is weighted by the factor k, shifted in phase by 90° and is added to the  sum-pattern signal in the delayed channel and subtracted from the sum-pattern signal in the  undelayed channel.
Because of the phase relationships between the lobes of the difference  pattern and the sum pattern, the resu1t is an apparent forward displacement of the pattern on  the first transmission, and a displacement to the rear on the second transmission.
When th~  gains of the sum and difference channels are properly adjusted, and when the distance between  the phase centers of the two antenna beams is 2Tpvx the combined sum and difference p~tterns  on successive pulses illuminate the same region and the antenna appears stationary.
511 (The  factor 2 appea·rs in the distance between phase centers.
as a result of using both feeds for  transmission.
The phase center on transmit is half-way between the two feeds, and the phast:  center on receive alternates from one feed to the other.) As the antenna pointing-direction  changes from the port to starboard side of the vehicle, the sign of the difference signal must be  reversed to keep the displaced beams in the proper orientation.
 The dashed curves of Fig.
4.35 show the improvement in MTJ processing that is theo­ retically possible with DPCA and a three-pulse delay-line canceler.
(Note that the DPCA  corrects only one canceler of a multiple-stage MTl.63) The curve for x = 0 applies for no  platform motion and represents the maximum improvement offered by an idea platform­ motion cancellation method.
It is seen that when the clutter spectral width is small, as for  overland clutter, a significant improvement is offered by DPCA.
 The limitation to the improvement factor due to antenna rotation, or scanning modula­ tion, can be redu~ed by a method.similar to DPCA.51•58•66 DPCA applies the difference  pattern in quadrature (90° phase shift) to the sum pattern while compensation for scanning  modulation requires the difference pattern to be applied in phase with the sum pattern.
Thus it  MTI AND l'UI.SE DOl'PLF.R RADAR 145  is possible to combine the two techniques for compensating platform motion and scanning  modulation.58  If the antenna sidelobes of an airborne MTI radar are not sufficiently low, the clutter that  enters the receiver via the sidelobes can set a limit to the improvement factor equal to58  _ K f " G2(0) dO  /~,--J-G 2(0)d0  sl (4.40)  where G(O) is the one-way power gain of the antenna in the plane of the ground surface.
The  lower integral is taken outside the main-beam region.
This assumes the sidelobcs are well  distributed in azimuth.
The constant K is the average gain of the delay line canceler (K = 2 for  a two-pulse canceler and 6 for a three-pulse canceler.) The combined improvement factor for  DPCA and the sibelobe limitation is  l + I~, l nrcA (4.41)  Adaptive array antennas may be employed to compensate for platform motion in an  AMTI radar.6' The full array is illuminated on transmission so that the transmit pattern is the  same from pulse to pulse.
On receive, the array is made adaptive by obtaining a separate  output from each element.
Each element output can be weighted separately and the outputs  added together to form an aperture illumination function that adaptively permits motion or  the antenna phase center so as to compensate for platform motion.
Adaptive loops are also  used in the delay-line canceler to control the doppler response of the canceler as well as the  antenna angular response.
In addition, compensation for scattering from near-field aircraft  structure that distorts the antenna pattern and degrades AMTI performance can also be  performed with this adaptive circuitry, as can the adaptive nulling of external interference  sources.
 For applications that cannot afford a fully adaptive array antenna, a design procedure can  he formulated that applies an optimal correction to an arbitrary receive array antenna pattern  hased on the use of a least-mean-squares algorithm to minimize the total clutter residue of an  I\ MTI radar averaged over all angtes.74  Sidelobes and pulse-doppler radar.
Since the pulse-doppler radar is capable of good MTI  performance, it is also a good AMTI radar.
However, if the antenna sidelobes are not low, the  clutter that enths the radar via the sidelobes can limit the improvement factor, as mentioned  previously [Eq.
(4.40)].
The effect of the sidelobe clutter must often be considered in the design  of the signal processor of an airborne pulse-doppler radar.
 The spectrum of the signal received by an airborne pulse-doppler radar might appear as  in Fig.
4.36.
Only that portion of the spectrum in the vicinity of the carrier frequency lo is  shown since the prf of a pulse-doppler radar is chosen to avoid overlap of target signals from  adjacent spectral lines (no blind speeds).
Thus the prf is at least twice the maximum target  doppler-frequency.
The leakage of the transmitter signal into the receiver produces the spike at  a frequency lo and the spikes at Jo ± ,,JP where n is an integer and JP is the pulse repetition  frequency.
Also in the vicinity of lo is the clutter energy from the sidelobes which illuminate the  ground directly beneath the aircraft.
The echo from the ground directly beneath the aircraft is  called the altiwde return.
The altitude return is not shifted in frequency since the relative  velocity between radar and ground is essentially zero.
Clutter to either side of the perpendicu­ lar will have a relative-velocity component and hence some doppler frequency shift; con­ sequently the clutter spectrum from the altitude return will be of finite width.
The shape of the  146 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  ~ Transmitter to receiver leakage  Altitude return-...,..
 Frequency ,,,, Main-lobe clutter y  ,.-Target echo (head-on)  fo+fc t fo+fd  f0+2v/A  Figure 4.36 Portion of the received signal spectrum in the vicinity of the RF carrier frequency h.
for a pub  doppler AMTI radar.
( After M aquire, 70 Proc.
Natl.
Conj on Aero11aut.
Electro11ics.)  altitude-return spectrum will depend upon the variation of the clutter cross section as a  function of antenna depression angle.
The cross section of the clutter directly beneath the  aircraft for a depression angle of 90° can be quite large compared with that at small depression  angles.
The large cross section and the close range can result in considerable altitude return.
(_)1  The clutter illuminated by the antenna sidelobes in directions other than directly beneath  the aircraft may have any relative velocity from + v to -v, depending on the angle made by  the antenna beam and the aircraft vector velocity (v is the aircraft velocity).
The clutter  spectrum contributed by these sidelobes will extend 2v/).
Hz on either side of the transmitter  frequency.
The shape of the spectrum will depend upon the nature of the clutter illuminated  and the shape of the antenna sidelobes.
For purposes of illustration it is shown in Fig.
4.36 as a  uniform spectrum.
 The altitude return may be eliminated by turning the receiver off (gating) at that range  corresponding to the altitude of the aircraft.
Gating the altitude return has the disadvantage  that targets at ranges corresponding to the aircraft altitude will also be eliminated from the  receiver.
Another method of suppressing the altitude return in the pulse radar is to  eliminate the signal in the frequency domain, rather than in the time domain, by inserting a  rejection filter at the frequency .fo.
,The same rejection filter will also suppress the transmitter­ to-receiver leakage.
The clutter energy from the main beam may also be suppressed by a  rejection filter, but since the doppler frequency of this clutter component is not fixed, the  rejection filter must be tunable and servo-controlled to track the main-beam clutter as it  changes because of scanning or because of changes in aircraft velocity.
 The position of the target echo in the frequency spectrum depends upon its velocity  relative to that of the radar aircraft.
H the target aircraft approaches the radar aircraft head on  (from the forward sector), the doppler frequency shift of the target will be greater than the  doppler shifts of the clutter echoes, as shown in Fig.
4.36.
A filter can be used to exclude the  clutter but pass the target echo.
Similarly, if the targets are receding from one a not her along  headings 180° apart, the target doppler frequency shift will again lie outside the clutter spec­ trum and may be readily separated.
from the clutter energy by filters.
In other situations where  the radar may be closing on the target from the tail or from the side, the relative velocities may  be small and the target doppler will.lie within the clutter doppler spectrum.
In such situations  the target echo must compete with thedutter energy for recognition.
A large part of the clutter  energy may be removed with a bank of fixed narrowband filters covering the expected range of  doppler frequencies.
The bandwidthof each individual filter must be wide enough to accept  the energy contained in the target echo signal.
The width of the filter will depend upon the time  on target, equipment fluctuations~ and other effects which broaden the echo-signal spectrum as  discussed previously_.
Each of the doppler filters can have its own individually set threshold  whose level is determined by the amount of noise or clutter within the filter.
This can be done  MTI AND PULSE DOPPLER RADAR 147  adaptively.
A separate set of filters is required for each range gate.
A consequence of the high  prf of the pulse doppler radar is that there are fewer range gates so that fewer sets of filter­ banks are needed.
In some pulse-doppler radars, the duty factor might be as high as 0.3 to 0.5  so that only one set of filters is needed.
Such a high-duty factor radar is sometimes called  illtcrr11pted CW, or ICW.
 Noncoherent AMTI.
The noncoherent MTI principle that uses the clutter echo instead of a  coho as the reference signal can also be applied to a radar on a moving platform.
Although it is  attractive for operation in aircraft where space and weight must be kept to a minimum, its  MTI performance is limited, as is its ground-based counterpart, by the lack of spectral purity  of the clutter when used as a reference signal, and by the spatial inhomogeneity (or patchiness)  of the clutter.
 Mo,·ing cluuer and stationary radar.
The discussion in this section has been concerned with  the oreration of an MTI radar when the clutter doppter-frequency was not at de but had some  finite value hccausc of tile motion of the vehicle carrying the radar.
Thr.
clutter doppler  frequency will also be other than at de if the radar is stationary and the clutter has a compo­ nent of velocity relative to the radar, as when the clutter is due to rain storms, chaff, or birds.
 Many of the AMT! techniques described above can be applied to the stationary MTI radar  that must cope with moving clutter.
Most conventional techniques fail, however, when both  stationary and moving clutter are within the same range resolution cell.
In such situations the  MTI signal processor must have the capability of placing separate rejection notches at the  dopplcr frequencies of the clutter.
7 uz  4.12 OTHER TYPES OF MTI  Two-frequency MTI.
78· 79 The first blind speed of an MTI radar is inversely proportional to the  carrier frequency, as described by Eq.
(4.8).
This can result in the appearance of many blind  speeds in conventional MTI radar that operate at the higher microwave frequencies.
One of  the methods sometimes suggested for increasing the first blind speed is to transmit two carrier  frequencies./~ and J;i + llf and extract the difference frequency llf for MTI processing.
The  resulting blind speeds will be the same as if the radar transmitted the difference frequency  rather than the carrier.
For example, if llf = O.lf0, the first blind speed corresponding to the  difference frequency is 10 times that of an MTI radar at the carrier frequency Jo.
Thus, it would  seem that the advantages of a VHF or UHF MTI might be obtained with radars operating at  the higher microwave frequencies.
A two-frequency MTI transmits a pair of pulses, either  simultaneously or in close sequence, at two separate carrier frequencies.
The two received  signals are mixed in a nonlinear device and the difference frequency is extracted for normal  MTI signal processing.
 The advantage of the greater first blind speed obtained with the two-frequency MTI is  accompanied by several disadvantages.73 H the ratio of the two frequencies is ,.
< l, the  standard deviation of the clutter doppler spectrum a, for a single-frequency MTI is increased  to rr,( 1 + r2 )1 '2 in a two-frequency MTI.
(This assumes that the clutter-velocity spectrum  width a,.
is the same for both carriers, or a1 = ra2 where 111 and 112 are the clutter doppler­ frequency spreads.
This results in less improvement factor for a two-frequency MTI as  compared with a single-frequency MTI.
Note also that the clutter doppler spread of a radar  which actually radiated a carrier frequency !if would be less than that of a radar at carrier  frequency .f~.
by the amount 1!,.f!f~.
The two-frequency MTI might have the blind speeds of a  148 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  radar at the difference frequency but it has none of its other favorable clutter characteristics.
 Although the first blind speed is greater in a two-frequency MTI, there may he deeper nulls  than one might desire in the doppler response characteristic, just as there would be in a  staggered MTI with only two pulse repetition frequencies.
The two-frequency MTI has the  advantage of being less sensitive than a single-frequency MTI to a mean clutter-doppkr­ frequency other than de, assuming the single-frequency MTI employs no compensation such  as TACCAR.
This also results, however, in the loss of detection of targets with low doppler­ frequency shift that otherwise would have been detected with the single-frequency MTI.
 In general, the two-frequency MTI does not offer any obvious net advantage over  properly designed single-frequency MTI systems for most MT[ radar applications.
 Area MTI.
This form of MTI does not use doppler information directly as do the other MTI  techniques discussed in this chapter.
The early area MTI systems stored a co(\lplete scan of  radar video in a memory, such as a storage tube, and subtracted the stored video scan to scan.
 Instead of subtracting successive scans, the subtraction can be on a pulse-to-pulse basis with  much less memory required, if a short' pulse is used.77 The pulse widths required for aircraft  detection are of the order of nanoseconds.
This technique relies on the fact that the echoes  from moving targets change range from pulse to pulse and those from stationary and slowly  moving targets do not.
The short-pulse area MTI has no blind speeds and can be designed to  have no range ambiguities.
It is more attractive for application at the higher microwave  frequencies where the available bandwidths are large and the normal MTI suffers from exces­ sive blind speeds.
 REFERENCES  1.
Ridenour, L.
N.·: "Radar System Engineering," MIT Radiation Laboratory Series, vol.
I, chap.
16,  McGraw-Hill Book Co., New York, 1947.
 2.
White, W.
D., and A.
E.
Ruvin: Recent Advances in the Synthesis of Comb Filters, IR£ Natl.
Com,.
 Record, vol.
5, pt.
2, pp.
186-199, 1957.
 3.
Capon, J.: Optimum Weighting Functions for the Detection of Sampled Signals in Noise, IEEE  Trans., vol.
JT-10, pp.
152-159, April, 1964.
 4.
Murakami, T., and R.
S.
Johnson: Clutter Suppression by Use of Weighted Pulse Trains, RCA Rev.,  vol.
32, pp.
402-428, September, 1971.
 5.
Emerson, R.
C.: Some Pulsed Doppler MTI and AMTI Techniques, RAND Corp.
Report 110.
R-274,  March, 1954.
 6.
Kretschmer, F.
F.: MTI Weightings, IEEE Trans., vol.
AES-10, pp.
153-155, January, 1974.
 7.
Benning, C., and D.
Hunt: Coefficients for Feed-Forward MTI Radar Filters, Proc.
IEEE, vol.
57,  pp.
1788-1789, October, 1969.
 8.
Shrader, W.W.: MTI Radar, chap.
17 of" Radar Handbook," M.
L Skolnik (ed.), McGraw-Hill Book  Co., New York, 1970.
 9.
Shreve, J.
S.: Digital Signal Processing, chap.
35 of" Radar Handbook," M.
l.
Skolnik (ed.), McGraw­ Hill Book Co., New York, 1970.
 10.
Hill, J.
J.: Design of Nonrecursive Digital Moving-Target-Indicator Radar Filters, Electro11ics 1-etter,  vol.
8, pp.
359-360, July 13, 1972.
 11.
Rabiner, L.
R., and C.
M.
Radar:" Digital Signal Processing," IEEE Press, New York, 1972.
 12.
White, W.
D.: Synthesis of Comb Fiiters, Proc.
Natl.
Conj.
011 Aeronaut.
Electronics, 1958, pp.
279-285.
 13.
U rkowitz, H.: Analysis and Synthesis of Delay Line Periodic Filters, IRE Trans., vol.
CT-4, pp.
41-53,  June, 1957.
 1.4.
Ellis, J.
G.: Digital MTI, A New Tool for the Radar User, Marconi Rev., vol.
36, pp.
237-248, 4th qtr.,  1973.
 15.
Fletcher, R.H., Jr., and D.
W.
Burlage: An Initialization Technique for Improved MTI Performance in  Phased Array Radars, Proc.
IEEE, vol.
60, pp.
1551-1552, December, 1972.
 16.
Hsiao, J.
K.: Comb Filter Design, Naval Research Laboratory, Washington, D.C.
Memorandum Report  2433, May, 1972.
 MT! AND PULSE DOPPLER RADAR (49  17.
Brennan, L.
E., and I.
S.
Reed: Optimum Processing of Unequally Spaced Radar Pulse Trains for  Clutter Rejection.
1 EEE Trans., vol.
AES-4.
pp.
474-477, May, 1968.
 18.
Jacomini, 0.
J.: Weighting Factor and Transmission Time Optimization in Video MTI Radar, IEEE  Trans., vol.
AES-8.
pp.
517-527, July.
1972.
 19.
Prinsen, P.
J.
A.: Elimination of Blind Velocitit";S of MTI Radar by Modulating the Interpulse Period,  IEEE Tra11s ..
vol.
AES-9, pp.
714-724, September, 1973.
 20.
Hsiao.
J.
K .• and F.
f.
Kretschmer, Jr.: Design of a Staggered-prf Moving Target Indication Filter,  Tire Radio and Electro11ic Engi11eer, vol.
43, pp.
689-693, November, 1973.
 21.
Owen.
P.
L.: The Effect of Random PRF Staggering on MTl Performance, IEEE 1975 Jnternatio11al  Radar Co11(ere11ce, pp.
73--78.
IEEE Pub!.
75 CHO 938-l AES.
 22.
Zverev, A.
I.: Digital MTI Radar Filters, IEEE Trans.
vol.
AU-16.
pp.
422-432, September, 1968.
 23.
Taylor.
J.
W.
Jr.
and J.
Mattern: Receivers.
chap.
5 of" Radar Handbook," M.
I.
Skolnik (ed.),  McGraw-Hill Rook Co ..
New York, 1970.
sec.
5.12.
 24.
Sheingold.
D.
ff ..
and R.
A.
Ferrero: Understanding A/D and D/A Converters, IEEE Spectrum, vol.
9.
 pp.
47 56.
Scptcmher, 1972.
 25 Taylor.
J.
W ..
Jr.: Digital MTI Radar System, U.S.
Patent No.
3,797,017, Mar.
12, 1974.
 26.
Houts.
R.
C., and D.
W.
Burlage: Design Procedure for Improving the Usable Bandwidth of an MTI  Radar Signal Processor.
IEEE Co11/'ere11ce Record /976 International Conference 011 Acoustics, Speec/1.
 and Siq11al l'mcessinq.
Apr.
12 -14.
1976.
Phila.
PA.
IEEE Cat.
no.
76 CHI067-8 ASSP.
See also by  same authors: Maximil'ing the Usable Bandwidth of MTI Signal Processors, IEEE 1'rcms., vol.
 AES-13.
pp.
48-55.
January.
1977.
 27.
Brigham, E.
0., and R.
W.
Morrow: The Fast Fourier Transform, IEEE Spectrum, vol.
4, pp.
63-70,  Decemher, 1967.
 2K.
Rahiner.
L.
R., et al.: Terminology in Digital Signal Processing, IEEE Trans., vol.
AU-20,  pp.
322 -337.
December, 1972.
 29.
Cooley.
J.
W ..
and J.
W.
Tukey: An Algorithm for the Machine Computation or Complex Fourier  Series.
Matlt.
Comp ..
vol.
19, pp.
297-301, April, 1965.
 30.
Andrews.
G.
A., Jr.: Performance of Cascaded MTI and Coherent Integration Filters in a Clutter  Environment.
NRL Report 7533, Naval Researclz Laboratory, Washington, D.C., Mar.
27, 1973.
 31.
Andrews.
G.
A ..
Jr.: Optimization of Radar Doppler Filters to Maximize Moving Target Detection,  NAECVN '74 Record, pp.
279-283.
 32.
Andrews, G.
A ..
Jr.: Optimal Radar Doppler Processors, NRL Report 7727, Naval Research Labora­ tory.
Washington.
D.C..
May 29, 1974.
 33.
Arenberg, D.
L.: Ultrasonic Solid Delay Lines, J.
Acous.
Soc.
Am., vol.
20,.pp.
1-28, January, 1948.
 34.
Anonymous: Moving Target Radar Using Storage Tubes, Electronics, vol.
34, no.
33, pp.
30-31,  Aug.
18.
1961.
 .,5.
Lohcnstcin, H ..
and D.
N.
Ludington: A Charge Transfer Device MTI Implementation, IEEE 1975  lm,•rnotional Radar Co11ference Record, pp.
107-110, IEEE Publication 75 CHO 938-1 AES.
 36.
Roherts, J.
8.
G ..
R.
Eames.
and K.
A.
Roche: Moving-Target-Indicator Recursive Radar Filter using  Bucket-Brigade Circuits, Electronics Letters, vol.
9, no.
4, pp.
89-90, Feb.
22, 1973.
 37.
Bounden.
J.
E., and M.
J.
Tomlinson: C.C.D.
Chebyshev Filter for Radar MTI Applications, Elec­ cmnics Lepers, vol.
10, no.
7, pp.
89-90, Apr.
4th, 1974.
 J8.
Barbe, D.
F., and W.
D.
Baker: Signal Processing Devices Using the Charge-Coupled Concept,  Microelectronics, vol.
7.
no.
2, pp.
36-45, 1975.
 39.
Hsiao.
J.
K.: FFT Doppler Filter Performance Computations, NRL Memorandum Report 2744, Naval  Researcf, Laboratory, Washington, D.C., March, 1974.
 40.
Jensen.
A.
S.: The Radechon.
A Barrier Grid Storage Tube, RCA Rev., vol.
16, pp.
197-213, June,  1955.
 41.
McKee.
D.
A.: An FM MTI Cancellation System, MIT Lincoln Lab.
Tech.
Rept.
171, Jan.
8, 1958.
 42.
Meuehe, C.
E.: Digital Signal Processor for Air Traffic Control Radars, IEEE NEREM 74 Record,  Part 4: Radar Systems and Components, pp.
73-82, Oct.
28-31, 1974, IEEE Catalog no.
74 CHO 934-0  NEREM.
 43.
Muehe, C.
E.: Advances in Radar Signal Processing, IEEE Electro '76, Boston, Mass, May 11-14,  1976.
 44.
Drury.
W.
H.: Improved MTI Radar Signal Processor, Report no.
FAA-RD-74-185, MIT Lincoln  LahoratorJ'.
Apr.
3, 1975.
Available from National Technical Information Service.
Catalog  no.
AD-AOlO 478.
 45.
Barton.
D.
K., and W.
W.
Shrader: lnterclutter Visibility in MTI Systems, IEEE EASCON '69  Cm1re11tio11 Record.
pp.
294-297, Oct.
27-29, 1969, IEEE Publication 69 C 31-AES.
 46.
Barton.
D.
K.: "Radar System Analysis," Prentice-Hall, Inc ..
Englewood Cliffs, N.J., 1964.
 150 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  47.
Nathanson, F.
E.: "Radar Design Principles," McGraw-Hill Book Co., New York, 1969.
 48.
Goldstein, H.: The Effect ofCluner Fluctuations on MTl; MIT·Radiacion Lab.
Rept.
700, Dec.
27.
 1945.
 49.
Barlow, E.
J.: Doppler Radar, Proc.
IRE, vol.
37, pp.
340-355, April, 1949.
 50.
Shrader, W.
W.: Moving Target [ndication Radar, IEEE 74 Record NEREM, Pt 4, pp.
18-26.
 Oct.
28-31, 1974, IEEE Catalog no.
74 CHO 934-0 NEREM.
 S 1.
Grisetti, R.
S., M.
M.
Santa, and G.
M.
Kirkpatrick.
Effect of Internal Fluctuations and Scanning on  Clutter Attenuation in MTI Radar, IRE Trans., vol.
ANE-2, pp.
37-41, March, 1955.
 52.
Steinberg, B.
D.: Target Clutter, and Noise Spectra, pt VI, chap.
l of" Modern Radar," R.
S.
Berko­ witz (ed.~ John Wiley and Sons, New York, 1965.
 53.
Ward, H.
R., and W.
W.
Shrader: MTI Performance Caused by Limiting, EASCON '68 Record,  Supplement to IEEE Trans, vol.
AES-4, pp.
168-174, November, 1968.
 54.
Grasso, G.: Improvement Factor of a Nonlinear MTI in Point Clutter, IEEE Trans., vol.
AES-4,  pp.
640-644, July, 1968.
 55.
Grasso, G., and P.
F.
Guarguaglini: Clutter Residues of a Coherent MTl Radar Receiver.
I EE£  Trans., vol.
AES-5, PP~ 195-2041 March, 1969.
,;.
 56.
Shrader, W.
W.: Radar Technology Applied to Air Traffic Control, IEEE Trans., vol.
COM-21,  pp.
591-605, May, 1973.
 57.
Mooney, D.
H., and W.
A.
Skillman:.
Pulse Doppler Radar, chap.
19 of" Radar Handbook," M.
I  Skolnik (ed.), McGraw-Hill Book Co., New York, 1970.
 58.
Staudaher, F.
M.: Airborne MTI, chap.
18 of" Radar Handbook," M.
I.
Skolnik (ed.).
McGraw-Hill  Book Co., New York, 1970.
 59.
Voles, R.: New Approach to MTI Clutter Locking, Proc.
I EE, vol.
120, pp.
1383-1390, November,  1972.
 60.
See sec.
14.5 of ref.
47.
 61.
Andrews, G.
A.: Airborne Radar Motion Compensation Techniques, Evaluation ofTACCAR, NRL  Report 7407, Naval Research Laboratory, Washington, D.C., Apr.
12, 1972.
 62.
Spafford, L.
J.: Optimum Radar Signal Processing in Clutter, IEEE Trans., vol.
IT-14, pp.
734-743.
 September, 1968.
 63.
Andrews, G.
A.: Airborne Radar Motion Compensation Techniques, Evaluation of DPCA, NRL  Report 7426, Naval Research Laboratory, Washington, D.C., July 20, 1972.
 64.
Zeger, A.
E., and L.
R.
Burgess: An Adaptive AMTI Radar Antenna Array.
Proc.
IEEE 197-1 Natl.
 Aerospace and Electronics Conj., May 13-15, 1974, Dayton, Ohio, pp.
126-133.
 65.
Johnson, M.
A., and D.
C.
Stoner: ECCM from the Radar Designer's Viewpoint, paper 30-5, I£££  ELECTR0-76, Boston, Mass., May 11-14, 1976.
Reprinted in Microwave J., vol.
21, pp.
59-63,  March, 1978.
 66.
Anderson, D.
B.: A Microwave Technique to Reduce Platform Motion and Scanning Noise in Air­ borne Moving-Target Radar, IRE WESCON Co11v.
Record, vol.
2, pt.
1.
pp.
202 ·21 l, 1958.
 67.
Brennan, L.
E., J.
D.
Mallett, and I.
S.
Reed: Adaptive Arrays in Airborne MTI Radar, IEEE Trans.,  vol.
AP-24, pp.
607-615, September, 1975.
 68.
Voles, R.: New Techniques for MTI Clutter-Locking, Rtidar ..
-PreSt·11r ,md future.
IEE (London)  Conf.
Publ.
no.
105, pp.
274-279, 1973.
 69.
Kroszczynski, J.: Efficiency of Attenuation of moving Clutter, TIie Radio a11d E/l!ctro11ic £11gr., vol.
34.
 no.
3, pp.
157-159, September, 1967.
 70.
Maguire, W.W.: Application of Pulsed Doppler Radar to Airborne Radar Systems, Proc.
Nari.
Conf  on Aeronaut.
Electronics (Dayton, Ohio), pp.
291-295, 1958.
 71.
Hsiao, J.
K.: MTI Optimization in a Multiple-Clutter Environment, NRL Report 7860, Narnl  Research Laboratory, Washington, D.C., Mar.
20, 1975.
 72.
Hsiao, J.
K.: A Digital Mean-Clutter.:.Doppler Compensation System, N R L M emora11d11m Ri!porc  2772, Naval Research Laboratory, Washington, D.C., April, 1974.
 73.
Hsiao, J.
K.: Analysis of a Dual Frequency Moving Target Indication System, The Radio a11d £/e,·­ tronic Engineer, vol.
45, pp.
351-356, July, 1975.
 74.
Andrews, G.
A.: Radar Antenna Pattern Design for Platform Motion Compensation.
I £EE Trans.,  vol.
AP-26, pp.
566-571, July, 1978.
·  75.
Hadjifotiou, A.: Round-off Error Analysis in Digital MTI Processors for Radar.
The Radio and  Electronic Engineer, vol.
47, pp.
59-65, January/February, 1977.
 76.
Tong, P.
S.: Quantization Requirements in Digital MTI, IEEE Trans .• vol.
AES-13, pp.
512-521.
 September, 1977.
 77.
Cantrell, B.
H.: A Short-Pulse Area MTI, NRL Report 8162, Naval Resean:h Laboratory, Washington,  D.C., Sept.
22, 1977.
 MTI AND PULSE DOPPLER RADAR 151  78.
K ro,;1c1ynski, J.: The Two-Frequency MTI System.
The Radio and Electro11ic Engineer, vol.
39,  pp 172 176, March.
1970.
 79.
K ros1czynsk y.
J.: Efficiency of the Two-Frequency MTI System, Tlte Radio and Electronic Engineer.
 vol.
41.
pp.
77 80, Fchruary, 1971.
 80.
Rahincr.
L.
R ..
and lJ.
Gold: "Theory and Application of Digital Signal Processing," Prentice-Hall.
 Inc ..
Englewood CliITs, N.J., 1975.
 81.
Thomas.
H.
W ..
N.
P.
Lutte, and M.
W.
JelITs: Design of MTI Filters with Staggered PRF: A  Pole-Zero Approach, Proc.
I EE, vol.
121.
pp.
1460-1466, December, 1974.
 82.
Ewell.
G.
W ..
and A.
M.
Bush: Constrained Improvement MTI Radar Processors.
IEEE Tra11s ..
 ml.
AES-I 1, pp.
768 780, September, l975.
 ~.
 CHAPTER  FIVE  TRACKING RADAR  5.1 TRACKING WITH RADAR  A tracking-radar system measures the coordinates of a target and provides data which may be  used to determine the target path and to predict its future position.
All or only part of the  available radar data~range, elevation angle, azimuth angle, and doppkr frequency shift  may be used in predicting future position; that is, a radar might track in range, in angk, in  doppler, or with any combination.
Almost any radar can he considered a tracking radar  provided its output information is processed properly.
But, in general, it is the method by  which angle tracking is accomplished that distinguishes what is normally considered a tracking  radar from any other radar.
It is also necessary to distinguish between a conti1111011s crnd.:i11y  radar and a track-while-scan (TWS) radar.
The former supplies continuous tracking data on a  particular target, while the track-while-scan supplies sampled data on one or more targets.
In  general, the continuous tracking radar and the TWS radar employ different types of  equipment.
 The antenna beam in the continuous tracking radar is positioned in angle by a servomech­ anism actuated by an error signal.
The various methods for generating the error signal may  be classified as seq11ential lobing, conical scan, and sim11/ta11eo11s lobing or mmwp11/se.
The range  and doppler frequency shift can also be continuously tracked, if desired, by a servo-control  loop actuated by an error signal generated in the radar receiver.
The information available  from a tracking radar may be presented on a cathode-ray-tube (CRT) display for action by an  operator, or may be supplied to an automatic computer which determines the target path and  calculates .its probable future course.
 The tracking radar must first find its target before it can track.
Some radars operate in a  search, or acquisition, mode in order to find the target before switching to a tracking modt.
 Although it is possible to use a single radar for both the search and the tracking functions, such  TRACKING RADAR 153  a procedure usually results in certain operational limitations.
Obviously, when the radar is  usc<l in ils tracking mode, it has no knowledge ofolher potential targets.
Also, if the antenna  pattern is a narrow pencil beam and if the search volume is large, a relatively long time might  he required to find the target.
Therefore many radar tracking systems employ a separate search  radar to provide the information necessary to position the tracker on the target.
A search  radar, when used for this purpose, it called an acquistion radar.
The acquisition radar desig­ nates targets to the tracking radar by providing the coordinates where the targets are to be  found.
The tracking radar acquires a target by performing a limited search in the area of the  designated target coordinates.
 The scanning fan-heam search radar can also provide tracking information to determine  the path of the target and rrec.lict its future position.
Each time the radar beam scans past the  target.
its coordinates arc obtained.
If the change in target coordinates from scan to scan is not  (()O large, it is possible to reconstruct the track of the target from the sampled data.
This may  be accomplished by providing the PPI-scope operator with a grease pencil to mark the target  pips on the face of the scope.
A line joining those pips that correspond to the same target  provides the target track.
When the traffic is so dense that operators cannot maintain pace  with the information available from the radar, the target trajectory data may be processed  automatically in a digital computer.
The availability of small, inexpensive minicomputers has  made it practical to obtain target tracks.
not just target detections, from a surveillance radar.
 Such processing is usually called ADT (automatic detection and track), When the outputs  from more than one radar are automatically combined to provide target tracks, the processing  is called A DIT (automatic detection and integrated track) or IADT (integrated ADT).
 A surveillance radar that provides target tracks is sometimes called a track-while-scan  radar.
This terminology is also applied to radars that scan a limited angular sector to provide  tracking information at a high data rate on one or more targets within its field of view.
 Landing radars used for UC/\ (ground control of approach) and some missile control radars  are of this type.
 When the term tracking radar is used in this book.
it generally refers to the continuous  tracker, unless otherwise specified.
 5.2 SEQUENTIAL LOBING  The antenna pattern commonly employed with tracking radars is the symmetrical pencil beatt1  in which the elevation and azimuth beamwidths are approximately equal.
However, a simple  pencil-beam antenna is not suitable for tracking rad_ars unless means are provided for deter­ mining the magnitude and direction of the target's angular position with respect to some  rderence direction, usually the a,cis of the antenna.
The difference between the target position  and the reference direction is the angular error.
The tracking radar attempts to position the  antenna to make the angular error zero.
When the angular error is zero, the target is located  along the reference direction.
 One method of obtaining the direction and the magnitude of the angular error in one  coordinate is by alternately switching the antenna beam between two positions (Fig.
5.1 ).
This  is called lohe switching, sequemial switching, or sequential lobing.
Figure 5.la is a polar rep­ resentation of the antenna beam (minus the sidelobes) in the two switched positions.
A plot in  rectangular coordinates is shown in Fig.
5.lb, and the error signal obtained from a target not  on the switching axis (reference direction) is shown in Fig.
5.
lc.
The_ difference in amplitude  hetween the voltages obtained in the two switched positions is a measure of the angular  displacement of the target from the switching axis.
The sign of the difference determines the  154 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  C\J  C: C:  0 0  :E :E  "' "' 0 0 a..
a..
 (al  t  Q.)  "CJ ::::, ......
 0.
 E  <( I  I  I  I  I  I I ...
·.;:::  I ·;:;; 1·;:;;  0 1£ I Cl.
 I I  I I  I I  Time-+- (cl Angle  (bl ' \  \  I  I  I  I  I  I \  I  \  I  \  \ /-,  J / \  ..
 Figure 5.1 Lobe-switching antenna  patterns and error signal (one dimen­ sion).
(a) Polar representation of  switched antenna patterns; (b) reel·  angular representation; (c) error signal.
 direction the antenna must be moved in order to align the switching axis with the direction or  the target.
When the voltages in the two switched positions are equal, the target is on axis and.
 its position may be determined from the axis direction.
 Two additional switching positions are needed to obtain the angular error in the ortho­ gonal coordinate.
Thus a two-dimensional sequentially lobing radar might consist of a cluster  of four feed horns illuminating a single antenna, arranged so that the right-left, up-down  sectors are covered by successive antenna positions.
Both transmission and reception are  accomplished at each position.
A cluster of five feeds might also be employed, with the central  feed used for transmission while the outer four feeds are used for receiving.
High-power RF  switches are not needed since only the receiving beams, and not the transmitting beam, are  stepped in this five-feed arrangement.
 One of the limitations of a simple unswitched nonscanning pencil-beam antenna is that  the angle accuracy can be no better than the size of the antenna beamwidth.
An important  feature of sequential lobing (as well as the other tracking techniques to be discussed) is that the  target-position accuracy can be far better than that given by the antenna beamwidth.
The  accuracy depends on how well equality of the signals in the switched positions can be  determined.
The fundamental limitation to accuracy is system noise caused either by mechani­ cal or electrical fluctuations.
 Sequential lobing.
or lobe switching, was one of the first tracking-radar techniques to be  employed.
Early applications were in airborne-interception radar, where it provided direc­ tional information for homing on a target, and in ground-based antiaircraft fire-control radars.
 It is not used as often in modern tracking-radar applications as some of the other techniques to  be described.
 TRACKING RADAR (55  5.3 CONICAL SCAN  ;\ logical extension of the simultaneous lobing technique described in the previous section is to  rotate continuously an offset antenna beam rather than discontinuously step the beam be­ tween four discrete positions.
This is known as conical scanning (Fig.
5.2).
The angle between  the axis of rotation (which is usually, but not always, the axis of the antenna reflector) and the  axis of the a111c1111a hca111 is called the squint angle.
Consider a target at position A.
The echo  signal will be modulated at a frequency equal to the rotation frequency of the beam.
The  amplitude of the echo-signal modulation will depend upon the shape of the antenna pattern,  the squint angle, and the angle between the target line of sight and the rotation axis.
The phase  of the modulation depends on the angle between the target and the rotation axis.
The conical­ scan modulation is extracted from the echo signal and applied to a servo-control system which  continually positions the antenna on the target.
(Note that two servos are required because  the tracking problem is two-dimensional.
Both the rectangular (az-el) and polar tracking  coordinates may be used.] When the antenna is on target, as in B of Fig.
5.2, the line of sight  to the target and the rotation axis coincide, and the conical-scan modulation is zero.
 ;\ hlock diagram of the angle-tracking portion of a typical conical-scan tracking radar is  shown in Fig.
5.J.
The antenna is mounted so that it can be positioned in both azimuth and  elevation by separate motors, which might be either electric-or hydraulic-driven.
The antenna  beam is offset by tilting either the feed or the reflector with respect to one another.
 One of the simplest conical-scan antennas is a parabola with an offset rear feed rotated  about the axis of the reflector.
If the feed maintains the plane of polarization fixed as it rotates,  it is called a 1111rati11g feed.
A rotating feed causes the polarization to rotate.
The latter type of  feed requires a rotary joint.
The nutating feed requires a flexible joint.
If the antenna is small, it  may be easier to rotate the dish, which is offset, rather than the feed, thus avoiding the problem  or a rotary or fiexible RF joint in the feed.
A typical conical-scan rotation speed might be  30 r/s.
The same motor that provides the conical-scan rotation of the antenna beam also drives  a t\\ .J-phase reference generator with two outputs 90° apart in phase.
These two outputs serve  as a reference to extract the elevation and azimuth errors.
The received echo signal is fed to the  receiver from the antenna via two rotary joints (not shown in the block diagram).
One rotary  joint permits motion in azimuth; the other, in elevation.
 Target axis  Rodar  Figure 5.2 Conical-scan tracking.
 156 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  Transmitter  Receiver To rotary joint  on antenna ~---1 Duple~er with --- AGC Second deteclor --;-Ronge gale ,..
 sin 27T fst  cos 27T fst  Elevation  servo  amplifier  Azimuth  servo  amplifier  Figure 5.3 Block diagram of conical-scan tracking radar.
Elevation-angle  error detector  Azimuth-angle  error detector Error  signal  The receiver is a conventional supcrheterodyne except for features peculiar to the conical­ scan tracking radar.
One feature not found in other radar receivers is a means of extracting the  conical-scan modulation, or error signal.
This is accomplished after the second detector in the  video portion of the receiver.
The error signal is compared with the elevation and azimuth  reference signals in the angle-error detectors, which are phase-sensitive detectors.
3 7 A phase­ sensitive detector is a nonlinear device in which the input signal (in this case the angle-error  signal) is mixed with the reference signal.
The input and reference signals are of the same  frequency.
The output d-c voltage reverses polarity as the phase of the input signal changes  through 180°.
The magnitude of the d-c output from the angle-error detector is proportional to  the error, and the sign (polarity) is an indication of the direction of the error.
The angle-error­ detector outputs are amp]ified and drive the antenna elevation and azimuth servo motors.
 The angular position of the target may be determined from the elevation and azimuth of  the antenna axis.
The position can be read out by means of standard angle transducers such as  synchros, potentiometers, or analog-to-digital-data converters.
 Boxcar generator.
When extracting the modulation imposed on a repetitive train of narrow  pulses, it is usually convenient to stretch the pulses before low-pass filtering.
This is called  boxcaring, or sample and hold.
Here the device is called the boxcar generator.11 The box.car  generator was also mentioned in the discussion of the MTI receiver using range-gated  filters (Sec.
4.4).
In essence, it clamps or stretches the video pulses of Fig.
5.4a in time so as to  cover the entire pulse-repetition period (Fig.
5.4b).
This is possible only in a range-gatt:d  receiver.
(Tracking radars are normally operated with range gates.) The boxcar generator  consists of an electric circuit that clamps the potential of a storage element, such as a capacitor,  to the video-pulse amplitude each time the pulse is received.
The capacitor maintains the  po ten ti al of the pulse during the en tire repetition period and is altered only when a new video  pulse appears whose amplitude differs from the previous one.
The boxcar generator eliminates  the pulse repetition frequency and reduces its harmonics.
It also has the practical advantage  that the magnitude of the conical-scan modulation is amplified because pulse stretching puts  more of the available energy at the modulation frequency.
The pulse repetition frequency must  be sufficiently large compared with the conical-scan frequency for proper boxcar filtering.
If  /  / /  /  (b) -...
' TRACKING RADAR 157  Figure 5.4 (a) Pulse train with coni­ cal-scan modulation; (h) same pulse  train after passing through boxcar  generator.
 not, it may be necessary to provide additional filtering to attenuate undesired cross­ modulation frequency components.
 Automatic gain control.
9 -1 1 The echo-signal amplitude at the tracking-radar receiver will  not be constant but will vary with time.
The three major causes of variation in amplitude are  ( 1) the inverse-fourth-power relationship between the echo signal and range, (2) the conical­ scan modulation (angle-error signal), and (3) amplitude fluctuations in the target cross  section.
The runction of the automatic gain control (AGC) is to maintain the d-c level of the  receiver output constant and to smooth or eliminate as much of the noiselike amplitude  nuctuations as possible without disturbing the extraction ,of the desired error signal at the  conical-scan frequency.
 One of the purposes of AGC in any receiver is to prevent saturation by large signals.
The  scanning modu)ation and the error signal would be lost if the receiver were to saturate.
In the  conical-scan tracking radar an A<iC that maintains the d-c level constant results in an error  signal that is a true indication of the angular pointing error.
The d-c level of the receiver must  he 1naintained constant if the angular error is to be linearly related to the angle-error signal  voltage.
•.
 An example of the AGC portion of a tracking-radar receiver is shown in Fig.
5.5.
A  portion of the video-amplifier output is passed through a low-pass or smoothing filter and fed  hack to control the gain of the IF amplifier.
The larger the video output, the larger will be the  f r_orn  mixer ··-~-~ IF  amplifier  D-c  amplifier  Delay voltage Vc Range  gate and  boxcar  AGC  filter Conical scan modulation  to angle-error detector  Fi~un' 5.5 Block diagram of lhC' AGC portion of a tracking-radar receiver.
 158 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  reedback signal and the greater will be the gain reduction.
The filter in the AGC loop should  pass all frequencies from direct current to just below the conical-scan-modulation frequency.
 The loop gain of the AGC filter measured at the conical-scan frequency should be low so that  the error signal will not be affected by AGC action.
(H the AGC responds to the conical-scan  frequency, the error signal might be lost.) The phase shirt or this filter must be small ir its phase  characteristic is not to influence the error signal.
A phase change of the error signal is eq uiva­ lent to a rotation of the reference axes and introduces cross coupling, or" cross talk," between  the elevation and azimuth angle-tracking loops.
Cross talk affects the stability of the tracking  and might result in an unwanted nutating motion of the antenna.
[n conventional tracking­ radar applications the phase change introduced by the feedback-loop filter should be less than  10°, and in some applications it should be as little as 2°.1 ° For this reason, a filter with a sharp  attenuation characteristic in the vicinity of the conical-scan frequency might not be desirabk  because of the relatively large amount of phase shift which it would introduce .•  The output of the feedback loop will be zero unless the feedback voltage exceeds a  prespecified minimum value Yc .,In the block diagram the feedback voltage and the voltage Yc  are compared in the d-c amplifier.
If the feedback voltage exceeds Vc, the AGC is operative,  while if it is less, there is no AGC action.
The voltage Yc is called the delay voltage.
The  terminology may be a bit misleading since the delay is not in time but in amplitude.
The  purpose of the delay voltage is to provide a reference for the constant output signal and permit  receiver gain for weak signals.
If the delay voltage were zero, any output which might appear  from the receiver would be due to the failure of the AGC circuit to regulate completely.
 In many applications of AGC the delay voltage is actually zero.
This is called undelayed  AGC.
In such cases the AGC can still perform satisfactorily since the loop gain is usually low  for small signals.
Thus the AGC will not regulate weak signals.
The effect is similar to having a  delay voltage, but the performance will not be as good.
 The required dynamic range of the AGC will depend upon the variation in range over  which targets are tracked and the variations expected in the target cross section.
If the range  variation were 10 to 1, the contribution to the dynamic range would be 40 dB.
The target  cross section might also contribute another 40-dB variation.
Another 10 dB ought to be  allowed to account for variations in the other parameters of the radar equation.
Hence the  dynamic range of operation required of the receiver AGC might be of the order of 90 dB, or  perhaps more.
 It is found 10 in practice that the maximum gain variation which can be obtained with a  single IF stage is of the order of 40 dB.
Therefore two to three stages of the IF amplifier mi.1st  be gain-controlled to accommodate the total dynamic range.
The middle stages are usually the  ones controlled since the first stage gain should remain high so as not to influence the noise  figure of the mixer stage.
It is also best riot to control the last IF stage since the maximum  undistorted output of an amplifying stage is reduced when its gain is reduced by the applica­ tion of a control voltage.
 An alternative AGC filter design would maintain the AGC loop gain up to frequencies  much higher than the conical-scan frequency.
The scan modulation would be effectively sup­ pressed in the output of the receiver, and the output would be used to measure range in the  normal manner.
In this case, the error signal can be recovered from the AGC voltage since it  varies at the conical-scan frequency.
The AGC voltage will also contain any amplitude fluctua­ tions that appear with the echo signal.
The error signal may be recovered from the AGC  voltage with a narrow bandpass filter centered at the scan-modulation frequency.
 Squint angle.
The angle-error-signal voltage is shown in Fig.
5.6 as a function of Or, the  angle between the axis of rotation and the direction to the target.12 The squint angle 09 is the  0.
2 4 .---~-~-~--,----r-----;r---,---.----r---i  0.22 - 0.20  S 0.18  V,  Cl)  > ·-g 0.16  Cl)  L  ~ 0.1 '1 ..
 Cl)  O'  0  ~ 0.12 - >  0 .2' 0.10  V,  I e 0.08  L w  0.06 - 0.04 - 0.02 6q An ten no  6e crossover, dB  0.2 0.5  0.4 1.95  0.6 4.36  0.8 7.
7  O~~-~-~-~-~~-~--~-~~  0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0  0,/08 TRACKING RADAR 159  Figure 5.6 Plot of the relative angle­ error signal from the conical-scan radar  as a function of target angle (Or/88)  and squint angle (0.,108).
08 = half­ power beamwidth.
 angle between the antenna-beam axis and the axis of rotation; and 88 is the half-power  beamwidth.
The antenna beam shape is approximated by a gaussian function in the calcula­ tions leading to Fig.
5.6.
The greater the slope of the error signal, the more accurate will be  the tracking of the target.
The maximum slope occurs for a value (Jq/88 slightly greater than  0.4.
This corresponds to a point on the antenna pattern (the antenna crossover) about 2 dB  down from the peak.
It is the optimum crossover for maximizing the accuracy of angle  tracking.
The accuracy of range tracking, however, is affected by the loss in signal but not by  the slope at the crossover point.
Therefore, as a compromise between the requirements for  accurate range and angle tracking, a crossover nearer the peak of the beam is usually selected  rather than that indicated from Fig.
5.6.
It has been-suggested that the compromise value of  0,/08 be abbut 0.28, corresponding to a point on the antenna pattern about 1.0 dB below the  peak.1.2  Other considerations.
In both the sequential-lobing and conical-scan techniques, the measure­ ment of the angle error in two orthogonal coordinates (azimuth and elevation) requires that a  minimum of three pulses be processed.
In practice, however, the minimum number of pulses in  sequential lobing is usually four-one per quadrant.
Although a conical scan radar can also be  operated with only four pulses per revolution, it is more usual to have ten or more per  revolution.
This allows the modulation due to the angle error to be more that of a continuous  sine wave.
Thus the prf is usually at least an order of magnitude greater than the conical-scan  frequency.
The scan frequency also must be at least an order of magnitude greater than the  tracking bandwidth.
 A conical-scan-on-receive-only (COSRO) tracking radar radjates a nonscanning transmit  beam, but receives with a conical scanning beam to extract the angle error.
The analogous  operation with sequential lobing is called lobe-on-receive-only (LORO).
 160 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  5.4 MONOPUISE TRACKING RADAR1•2•13-18  The conical-scan and sequential-lobing tracking radars require a minimum number of pulses  in order to extract the angle-error signal.
In the time interval during which a measurement is  made with either sequential lobing or conical scan, the train of echo pulses must contain no  amplitude-modulation components other than the modulation produced by scanning.
If the  echo pulse-train did contain additional modulation components, caused, for example, by a  fluctuating target cross section, the tracking accuracy might be degraded, especially if the  frequency components of the fluctuations were at or near the conical-scan frequency or the  sequential-lobing rate.
The effect of the fluctuating echo can be sufficiently serious in some  applications to severely limit the accuracy of those tracking radars which require many pulses  to be processed in extracting the error signal.
 Pulse-to-pulse amplitude fluctuations of the echo signal have no effect on tracking accur­ acy if the angular measurement is made on the basis of one pulse rather th.an many.
There are  several methods by which angle-error information might be obtained with only a single pulse.
 More than one antenna beam is used simultaneously in these methods, in contrast to the  conical-scan or lobe-switching tracker, which utilizes one antenna beam on a time-shared  basis.
The angle of arrival of the echo signal may be determined in a single-pulse system by  measuring the relative phase or the relative amplitude of the echo pulse received in each beam.
 The names simi,ltaneous lobing and monopulse are used to describe those tracking techniques  which derive angle-error information on the basis of a single pulse.
 An example of a simultaneous-lobing technique is amplitude-comparison monopulse, or  more simply, monopulse.
In this technique the RF signals received from two offset antenna  beams are combined so that both the sum and the difference signals are obtained simulta­ neously.
The sum and difference signals are multiplied in a phase-sensitive detector to obtain  both the magnitude and the direction of the error signal.
All the information necessary to  determine the angular error is obtained on the basis of a single pulse; hence the name mono­ pulse is quite appropriate.
 Amplitude-comparison monopulse.
The amplitude-comparison monopulse employs two  overlapping antenna patterns (Fig.
5.7a) to obtain the angular error in one coordinate.
The  two overlapping antenna beams may be generated with a single reflector or with a lens  antenna illuminated by two adjacent feeds.
(A cluster of four feeds may be used if both  elevation- and azimuth-error signals are wanted.) The sum of the two antenna patterns of  Fig.
5.7a is shown in Fig.
5.7b, and the difference in Fig.
5.7c.
The sum patterns is used for  transmission, while both the sum pattern and the difference pattern are used on reception.
The  signal received with the difference pattern provides the magnitude of the angle error.
The sum  signal provides the range measurement and is also used as a reference to extract the sign of the  error signal.
Signals received from the sum and the difference patterns are amplified separately  and combined in a phase~sensitive detector to produce the error-signal characteristic shown in  Fig.
5.7d.
 A block diagram of the amplitude-comparison-monopulse tracking radar for a single  angular coordinate is shown in Fig.
5.8.
The two adjacent antenna feeds are connected to the  two arms of a hybrid junction such as a ..
magic T," a" rat race," or a short-slot coupler.
The  sum and difference signals appear at the two other arms of the hybrid.
On reception,  the outputs of the sum arm and the difference arm are each heterodyned to an intermediate  frequency and amplified as.in any superheterodyne receiver.
The transmitter is connected to  the sum arm.
Range information is also extracted from the sum channel.
A duplexer is included  in the sum arm for the protection of the receiver.
The output of the phase-sensitive detector is  TRACKING RADAR 161  m M  (al (CI  fl  +  Angle  (bl {d)  Figure 5.7 Monopulse antenna patterns and error signal.
Left-hand diagrams in (a-c) are in polar coor­ dinates; right-hand diagrams are in rectangular coordinates.
(a) Overlapping antenna patterns; (b) sum  pattern; {c) difTerence pattern; (d) product (error) signal.
 an error signal whose magnitude is proportional to the angular error and whose sign is  proportional to the direction.
 The output of the monopulse radar is used to perform automatic tracking.
The angular­ error signal actuates a servo-control system to position the antenna, and the range output  from the sum channel feeds into an automatic-range-tracking unit.
 The sign or the difTerence signal (and the direction of the angular error) is determined by  comparing the phase of the difference signal with the phase of the sum signal.
If the sum signal  TR  Hybrid  junction  6 Transmitter  Sum channel  lF ....-~-1 Amplitude amplifier detector  IF  amplifier  Difference channel Phase­ sensitive  detector Angle­ error  signal Ronge  signol  Figure 5.8 Block diagram of amplitude-comparison monopulse radar (one angular coordinate).
 162 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  in the IF portion of the receiver were A1 cos wlFt, the difference signal would be either  Ad cos wlFt or -Ad cos w1Ft (A1 > 0, Ad> 0), depending on which side of center is the target.
 Since -Ad cos WiFt = Ad cos WiF(t + n), the sign of the difference signal may be measured by  determining whether the difference signal is in phase with the sum or 180° out of phase.
 Although a phase comparison is a part of the amplitude-comparison-monopulse radar,  the angular-error signal is basically derived by comparing the echo amplitudes from simulta­ neous offset beams.
The phase relationship between the signals in the offset beams is not used.
 The purpose of the phase-sensitive detector is to conveniently furnish the sign of the error  signal.
 A block diagram of a monopulse radar with provision for extracting error signals in both  elevation and azimuth is shown in Fig.
5.9.
The cluster of four feeds generates four partially  overlapping antenna beams.
The feeds might be used with a parabolic reflector, Cassegrain  antenna, or a lens.
All four feeds generate the sum pattern.
The difference pattern in one plane  is formed by taking the sum of two adjacent feeds and subtracting this from the sum of the  other two adjacent feeds.
The difference pattern in the orthogonal plane is obtained by adding  the differences of the orthogonal adjacent pairs.
A total of four hybrid junctions generate the  sum channel, the azimuth difference channel, and the elevation difference channel.
Three  separate mixers and IF amplifiers are shown, one.
for each channel.
All three mixers operate  from a single local oscillator in order to maintain the phase relationships between the three  channels.
Two phase-sensitive detectors extract the angle-error information, one for azimuth,  the other for elevation.
Range information is extracted from the output of the sum channel  after amplitude detection.
 Since a phase comparison is made between the output of the sum channel and each of the  difference channels, it is important that the phase shifts introduced by each of the channels be  almost identical.
According to Page, 13 the phase difference between channels must be main­ tained to within 25° or better for reasonably proper performance.
The gains of the channels  also must not differ by more than specified amounts.
 An alternative approach to using three identical amplifers in the monopulse receiver is to  use but one IF channel which amplifies the sum signal and the two difference signals on a  time-shared basis.17•19 The sum signal is passed through the single IF amplifier followed by  the two difference signals delayed in time by a suitable amount.
Most of the gain and gain  ELEVATION  DIFFERENCE  CHANNEL  AZIMUTH  DIFFERENCE  CHANNEL IF  AMPLIFIER AGC RANGE 1-1----------;TRACKER  PHASE­ SENSITIVE  DETECTOR  PHASE­ SENSITIVE  DETECTOR VIDEO  AMPLIFIER  ELEVATION­ ANGLE  ERROR  AZIMUTH­ ANGLE  ERROR RANGE  Figure S.9 Block diagram or two-coordinate (azimuth and elevation) amplitude-comparison rnonopulse  tracking radar.
 TRACKING RADAR 163  control take place in the single IF amplifier.
Any variations affect all three signals simulta­ neously.
After amplification, compensating delays are introduced to unscramble the time se­ quence and bring the sum signal and the two difference signals in time coincidence.
Phase  detection occurs as in the conventional monopulse.
Another single-channel system SCAMP  converts the sum and the two difference signals to different IF frequencies and amplifies them  simultaneously in a single, wide-band amplifier.20 The output is hard-limited to provide the  effect of an instantaneous AGC.
The three signals after limiting are separated by narrowband  filters and then converted to the same IF frequency for further processing.
The hard-limiting,  however, causes cross-coupling between the azimuth and the elevation error-signal channels  and can result in significant error.21 Two-channel monopulse receivers have also been used by  combining the sum and the two difference signals in a manner such that they can be again  resolved into three components after amplification.1.22  The purpose in using one-or two-channel monopulse receivers is to ease the problem  associated with maintaining identical phase and amplitude balance among the three channels  oft he conventional receiver.
These techniques provide some advantage in this regard but they  can result in undesired coupling between the azimuth and elevation channels and a loss in  signal-to-noise ratio.
 The monopulse antenna must generate a sum pattern with high erficiency (maximum  boresight gain).
and a difference pattern with a large value of slope at the crossover of the offset  beams.
Furthermore, the sidelobes of both the sum and the difference patterns must be low.
 The antenna must be capable of the desired bandwidth, and the patterns must have the desired  polarization characteristics.
It is not surprising that the achievement of all these properties  cannot always be fully satisfied simultaneously.
Antenna design is an important part of the  successful realization of a good monopulse radar.
 The uniform aperture illumination maximizes the aperture efficiency and, hence, the  directive gain.
The aperture illumination that maximizes the slope of the difference pattern is  the linear illumination function with odd symmetry about the center of the aperture.23 Not  only do both of these aperture illuminations produce patterns with relatively high sidelobes,  but they cannot be readily generated by the simple four-horn feed.
Independent control of the  sum and the difference patterns is required in order to obtain simultaneously the optimum  patterns.
 The approximately "ideal" feed-illuminations for a monopulse radar is shown in  Fig.
5.10.
This has been approximated in some precision tracking radars by a five-horn feed  consisting of one horn generating the sum pattern surrounded by four horns generating the  difference patterns.
1 Other approximations to the ideal designs include a twelve-horn feed24  and a feed consisting of four stacked horns in one plane with each horn generating three  waveguide modes in the other plane.25 Higher-order waveguide modes are used to obtain the  desired sum and difference patterns from a single horn without the necessity of complex  ()  FRONT/ ~  fLEVATION~ I  OlfFERENCE SUM, i-~  AZIMUTH~  DIFFERENCE Figure 5.10 Approximately" ideal" reed-aperture illumi­ nation for monopulse sum and difference channels.
1  164 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  microwave combining circuitry.1•26 These are called multimodefeeds.
The ust: of higher-order  waveguide modes in monopulse feeds to generate the required patterns results in feeds that are  of high efficiency, compact, simple, low loss, light weight, low aperture blockage, and excellent  boresight stability independent of frequency.
 The greater the signal-to-noise ratio and the steeper the slope of the error signal in the  vicinity of zero angular error, the more accurate is the measurement of angle.
The error-signal  slope as a function of the squint angle or beam crossover is shown in Fig.
5.1 l.
The maximum  slope occurs at a beam crossover of about 1.1 dB.
 Automatic gain control (AGC) is required in order to maintain a stable closed-loop servo  system for angle tracking.
1 ·2 The AGC in a monopulse radar is accomplished by employing a  voltage proportional to the sum-channel IF output to control the gain of all three receiver  channels.
The AGC results in a constant angle sensitivity independent of target size and range.
 With AGC the output of the angle-error detector is proportional to the dilTarence signal  normalized (divided) by the sum signal.
The output of the sum channel is constant.
 Hybrid tracking system.
Conopulse86 and "scan with compensation "8 7 are the names given 10  a hybrid tracking system that is a combination of monopulse and conical scan.
Two squinted  beams, similar to those of a single angle-coordinate amplitude-comparison monopulse, are  scanned (rotated or nutated) in space around the boresight axis.
(In the conical scan tracker,  only one squinted beam is scanned.) In conopulse, the sum and difference signals received in  the two squinted beams are extracted in a manner similar to that of the conventional monopulse  system.
Two-coordinate angle information is obtained by scanning the beams about the bore­ sight axis similar to the extraction of azimuth and elevation angle information in the conical·  scan tracker.
Amplitude fluctuations of the target echo signal do not in principle degrade the  tracking accuracy as in the conical-scan tracker because a difference signal is extracted from  the simultaneous outputs of the two squinted beams.
However, the need to scan the two beams  means that a single pulse angle-estimate is not obtained as in a true monopulse.
 An advantage claimed for this hybrid tracking technique is that, like monopulsc, target  amplitude fluctuations do not affect the tracking accuracy.
It is also claimed that the simplicity  of conical scan is retained.
Both claims can be debated.
Although only two receivers are  required instead of the three used in a monopulse tracker, the mechanical rotation of the two  QJ g 4.0 .....
~-0 o II  .~~3.0 .,.- L ~ e >  I....
0  cu "' -s e 2.0  cu u  n.
+-0 0 vi  X LO  ~  O 0.1 0.2 0.3  0 Squint angle Oq / Os  0.4 0.5 0.6  2 3 4  Beam crossover, dB 0.7  5 6 Figure 5.11 Slope of the angular-error  signal at crossover for a monopulse  and conical-scan tracking radar.
08 =  half.power beamwidth.
09 == squint  angle.
 TRACKING RADAR 165  squinted beams is not an easy task.
Nutation, which preserves the plane of polarization, is even  more difficult.
Rotation of the heams causes the plane of polarization to rotate which can  cause undesirahlc target amplitude lluctuations at the scan rate.
Although such fluctuations  are theoretically removed by the monopulse type of processing, in practice the removal is not  complete and angular error can result.R6 With modern solid-stale technology, the need for a  third receiver in the conventional monopulse tra.cker might not be as difficult-to realize in  praclic<: as t lie complexity of properly scanning a pair of squinted beams.
Generally it can he  said that tile amplitude-comparison n1011opulse tracking system is usually preferred over this  hybrid technique.
 Phase-comparison monopulse.
The tracking techniques discussed thus far in this chapter were  hased on a comparison of the m1111lit11des of echo signals received from two or more antenna  posit ions.
The sequential-lobing and conical-scan techniques used a single, time-shared  a11tl'1111a hcam.
while the 111or10pulse technique used two or more simultaneous beams.
The  difference in amplitudes in the several antenna positions was proportional to the angular error.
 The angle of arrival (in one coordinate) may also be determined by comparing the phase  difkrcncc between the signals from two separate antennas.
Unlike the antennas of amplitude­ comparison trackers, those used in phase-comparison systems are not offset from the axis.
The  individual boresight axes of the antennas are parallel, causing the (far-field) radiation to  illuminate the same volume in space.
The amplitudes of the target echo signals are essentially  the same from each antenna hcam, but the phases are different.
 Tile measurement of angle of arrival by comparison of the phase relationships in the  signals from the separated antennas of a radio interferometer has been widely used by the  radio astronomers for precise measurements of the positions of radio stars.
The interferometer  as used by the radio astronomer is a passive instrument, the source !Jf energy being radiated  hy the target itself.
A tracking radar which operates with phase information is similar to an  active interferometer and might be called an interferometer radar.
It has also been called  si11111lta11eo11s-phase-compariso11 radar, or phase-comparison monupulse.
The latter term is the  one which will be used here.
 In Fig.
5.12 two antennas are shown separated by a distanced.
The distance to the target  is R and is assumed large compared with the antenna separation d.
The line of sight to the  Antenna  No.I___.., Target  Figure 5.12 Wavefront phase relationships in phase­ comparison monopulse radar.
 166 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  target makes an angle Oto the perpendicular bisector of the line joining the two antennas.
The  distance from antenna l to the target is  R 1 = R + ~ sin ()  and the distance from antenna 2 to the target is  R2 = R -~ sin 0  The phase difference between the echo signals in the two antennas is approximately  6.<j) = \n d sin 0 ..
( 5.1)  For small angles where sin O:::::: 0, the phase difference is a linear function of the angular error  and may be used to position the antenna via a servo-control loop.
 In the early versions of the phase-comparison monopulse radar, the angular error was  determined by measuring the phase difference between the outputs of receivers connected to  each antenna.
The output from one of the antennas was used for transmission and for provid­ ing the range information.
With such an arrangement it was difficult to obtain the desired  aperture illuminations and to maintain a stable boresight.
A more satisfactory method of  operation is to form the sum and difference patterns in the RF and to process the signals as in a  conventional amplitude-comparison monopulse radar.
 In one embodiment of the phase-comparison principle as applied to missile guidance the  phase difference between the signals in two fixed antennas is measured with a servo-controlled  phase shifter located in one of the arms.27 The servo loop adjusts the phase shifter until the  difference in phase between the two channels is a null.
The amount of phase shift which has to  be introduced to make a null signal is a measure of the angular error.
 The phase-and amplitude-comparison principles can be combined in a single radar to  produce two-dimensional angle tracking with only two, rather than four, antenna beams.28  The angle information in one plane (the azimuth) is obtained by two separate antennas placed  side by side as in a phase-comparison monopulse.
One of the beams is tilted slightly upward,  while the other is tilted slightly downward, to achieve the squint needed for amplitude­ comparison monopulse in elevation.
Therefore the horizontal projection of the antenna pat­ terns is that of a phase-comparison system, while the vertical projection is that of an  amplitude-comparison system.
 Both the amplitude~comparison-monopulse and the phase-comparison-monopulse  trackers employ two antenna beams (for one coordinate tracking).
The measurements made  by the two systems are not the same; consequently, the characteristics of the antenna beams  will also be different.
In the amplitude-comparison monopulse the two beams arc offset, that is,  point in slightly different directions.
This type of pattern may be generated by using one=  reflector dish with two feed horns side by side (four feed horns for two coordinate data).
Since  the feeds may he placed side by side, they could be as close as one-half wavelcnglh.
With such  close spacing the phase difference between the signals received in the two feeds is negligibly  small.
Any difference in the amplitudes between the two antenna outputs in the amplitude­ comparison system is a result of differences in amplitude anq not phase.
The phase­ comparison monopulse, on the other hand, measures phase differences only and is not  concerned with amplitude difference.
Therefore the antenna beams are not offset, but are  directed to illumin~te a common volume in space.
Separate antennas are needed since it is  TRACKING RADAR 167  difficult to illuminate a single rellector with more than one feed and produce independent  antenna patterns which illuminate the same volume in space.
 Although tracking radars based upon the phase-comparison monopulse principle have  been built and operated, this technique has not been as widely used as some of the other  angle-tracking methods.
The sum signal has higher sidelobes because the separation between  the phase centers of the separate antennas is large.
(These high sidelobes are the result of  qratinq lohes.
similar to those produced in phased arrays.) The problem of high sidelobes can  he reduced hy overlapping the antenna apertures.
With reflector antennas.
this results in a loss  of angle sensitivity and antenna gain.
 5.5 TARGET-REFLECTION CHARACTERISTICS ANO ANGULAR  ACCURACY30·41 ·Q5  The angular accuracy of tracking radar will be influenced by such factors as the mechanical  properties of the radar antenna and pedestal, the method by which the angular position of the  antenna is measured, the quality of the s~a systeQ1, the stability of the electronic circuits, the  noise level of the receiver, the antenna beamwidth, atmospheric fluctuations, and the reflection  characteristics of the target.
These factors can degrade the tracking accuracy by causing the  antenna beam to fluctuate in a random manner about the true target path.
These noiselike  fluctuations are sometimes called tracking noise, or jitter.
 A simple radar target such as a smooth sphere will not cause degradation of the angular­ tracking accuracy.
The radar cross section of a sphere is independent of the aspect at which it  is viewed: consequently, its echo will not fluctuate with time.
The same is true, in general, of a  radar beacon if its antenna pattern is omnidirectional.
However, most radar targets are of a  more complex nature than the sphere.
The amplitude of the echo signal from a complex target  may vary over wide limits as the aspect changes with respeci to the radar.
In addition, the  effective center of radar reflection may also change.
Both of these effects-amplitude fluctua­ tions and wandering of the radar center of reflection-as well as the limitation imposed by  receiver noise can limit the tracking accuracy.
These effects are discussed below.
 Amplitude fluctuations.
A complex target such as an aircraft or a ship may be considered as a  number of independent scattering elements.
The echo signal can be represented as the vector  addition of the contributions from the individual scatterers.
If the target aspect changes with  respect lo the radar-as might occur because of motion of the target, or turbulence in the case  of aircraft targets-the relative phase and amplitude relationships of the contributions from  the individual scatterers also change.
Consequently, the vector sum, and therefore the ampli­ tude.
change with changing target aspect.
 Amplitude fluctuations of the echo signal are important in the design of the lobe­ switching radar and the conical-scan radar but are of little consequence to the monopulse  tracker.
Both the conical-scan tracker and the lobe-switching tracker require a finite time to  obtain a measurement of the angle error.
This time corresponds in the conical-scan tracker to  at least one revolution of the antenna beam.
With lobe switching, the minimum time is that  necessary lo obtain echoes at the four successive angular positions.
In either case four pulse­ repetition periods are required to make a measurement; in practice, many more than four are  often used.
If the target cross section were to vary during this observation time, the change  might he erroneously interpreted as an angular-error signal.
The monopulse radar, on the  other hand.
determines thc_ang.ular .
.cr-i:OLon_the_.ba.sl~ of a single pulse.
Its accuracy will  therefore not be affected by changes in amplitude with time.
 168 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  To reduce the effect of amplitude noise on tracking, the conical-scan frequency should be  chosen to correspond toa-low·vafoe·ofamplitude noise.
If considerable amplitude fluctuation  noise were to appear at the conical-scan or lobe-switching frequencies, it could not he readily  eliminated with filters or AGC.
A typical scan frequency might be of the order of 30 Hz.
 Higher frequencies might also be used since target amplitude noise generally decreases with  increasing frequency.
However, this may not always be true.
Propeller-driven aircraft produce  modulation components at the blade frequency and harmonics thereof and can cause a sub­ stantial increase in the spectral energy density at certain frequencies.
It has been found ex per­ imentally that the tracking accuracy of radars operating with pulse repetition frequencies from  1000 to 4000 Hz and a lobing or scan rate one-quarter of the prf are not limited by echo  amplitude fluctuations.
29  The percentage modulation of the echo signal due to cross-section amplitude tluctuations  is independent of range if AGC is used.
Consequently, the angular error as a result of ampli­ tude fluctuations will also be independent of range.
 Angle fluctuations.
29•3° Changes in the target aspect with respect to the radar can cause the  apparent center of radar reflections to wander from one point to another.
(The apparent centa  of radar reflection is the direction of the antenna when the error signal is zero.) In general, the  apparent center of reflection might not correspond to the target center.
In fact, it need not he  confined to the physical extent of the target and may be off the target a significant fraction of  the time.
The random wandering of the apparent radar reflecting center gives rise to noisy or  jittered angle tracking.
This form of tracking noise is called angle noise, angle scitztillations,  angle fluctuations, or target glint.
The angular fluctuations produced by small targets at long  range may be of little consequence in most instances.
However, at short range or with rela­ tively large targets (as might be seen by a radar seeker on a homing missile), angular lluct ua­ tions may be the chief factor limiting tracking accuracy.
Angle fluctuations affect all tracking  radars whether conical-scan, sequential-lobing, or monopulse.
 Consider a rather simplified model of a complex radar target consisting of two indepen­ dent isotropic scatterers separated by an angular distance Ou, as measured from the radar.
 Although such a target may be fictitious and used for reasons of mathematical simplicity, it  might approximate a target such as a small fighter aircraft with wing-tip tanks or two aircraft  targets flying in formation and located within the same radar resolution cell.
It is also a close  approximation to the low-angle tracking problem in which the radar sees the target plus its  image reflected from the surface.
The qualitative effects of target glint may be assessed from  this model.
The relative amplitude of the two scatterers is assumed to be a, and the relative  phase difference is a.
Differences in phase might be due to differences in range or to rclkcting  properties.
The ratio a is defined as a number less than unity.
The angular error l\O as  measured from the larger of the two targets is31  fi() a2 + a cos a  0 0 = 1 + a2 + 2a cos a.
(5.2)  This is plotted in Fig.
5.13.
The position of the larger of the two scatterers corresponds to  ti0/00 = 0, while the smaller-scatterer position is at ti0/00 = + I.
Positive values of MJ corn!­ spond to an apparent radar center which lies between the two scatterers; negative values lie  outside the target.
When the echp signals from both scatterers are in phase (a = 0), the error  reduces to a/(a + 1 ), which corresponds to the so-called "center of gravity" of the two scat­ terers (not to be confused with the mechanical center of gravity).
 Angle fluctuations are due to random changes in the relative distance from radar to the  scatterers, that is, varying values of a.
These changes may result from turbulenct in the aircraft  TRACKING RADAR 169  0.5  0.4 ·  0.2  0 a == 0  t::.B  Bo· --0.2 - ·-04  --0.6  '- -0.8 - -1.0  0 ?O <'10 60 80 100 120 140 160 180  Phase difference Cl'.'  Figure 5.
IJ Plot of Eq.
(5.2).
Apparent radar center t10 of two isotropic scatterers of relative amplitude a  and 1elativc phase shirt rx, separated by an angular extent Ov.
 flight path or from the changing aspect caused by target motion.
In essence, angle fluctuations  are a distortion of the phase front of the echo signal reflected from a complex target and may be  visualized as the apparent tilt of this phase front as it arrives at the tracking system.
 Equation (5.2) indicates that the tracking error 6.0 due to glint for the two-scatterer target  is directly proportional to the angular extent of the target 00.
This is probably a reasonable  approximation to the behavior of real targets, provided the angular extent of the target is not  too large compared with the antenna beamwidth.
Since 00 varies inversely with distance for a  fixed target size, the tracking error due to glint also varies inversely with distance.
 I\ slightly more complex model than the two-scatterer target considered above is one  consisting or many individual scatterers, each of the same cross section, arranged uniformly  along a line or length L perpendicular to the line of sight from the radar.
The resultant cross  section from such a target is assumed to behave according to the Rayleigh probability distribu­ tion.
The prohahility or the apparent radar center lying outside the angular region of L/R  radians (in dne tracking plane) is 0.134, where R is the distance to the target.
32 Thus 13.4 per­ cent of the time the radar will not be directed to a point on the target.
Similar results for a  two-dimensional model consisting or equal-cross-section scatterers uniformly spaced over a  circular area indicate that the probability that the apparent radar center lies outside this target  is 0.20.
 Angle fluctuations in a tracking radar are reduced by increasing the time constant of the  AGC system (reducing the bandwidth).29·33·34 However, this reduction in angle fluctuation is  accompanied by a new component of noise caused by the amplitude fluctuations associated  with the echo signal; that is, narrowing the /\GC bandwidth generates additional noise in the  vicinity of zero frequency, and poorer tracking results.
Amplitude noise modulates the  tracking-error signals and produces a new noise component, proportional to true tracking  errors.
that is enhanced with a slow AGC.
Under practical tracking conditions it seems that a  wide-bandwidth (short-time constant) AGC should be used to minimize the overall tracking  noise.
However, the servo bandwidth should be kept to a minimum consistent with tactical  requirements in order to minimize the noise.
 170 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  Receiver and servo noise.
Another limitation on tracking accuracy is the receiver noise power.
 The accuracy of the angle measurement is inversely proportional to the ·square root of th~  signal-to-noise power ratio.
2 Since the signal-to-noise ratio is proportional to l/ R4 (from the  radar equation), the angular error due to receiver noise is proportional to the square of  the target distance.
 Servo noise is the hunting action of the tracking servomechanism which results from  backlash and compliance in the gears, shafts, and structures of the mount.
The magnitude of  servo noise is essentially independent of the target echo and will therefore be independent of  range.
 Summary of errors.
The contributions of the various factors affecting the tracking error  are summarized in Fig.
5.14.
Angle-fluctuation noise varies inversely with range; receiver  noise varies as the square of the range; and amplitude fluctuations and servo noise are  independent of range.
This is a qualitative plot showing the gross effects of each of the factors.
 Two different resultant curves are shown.
Curve A is the sum of all effects and is representative  of conical-scan and sequential-lobing tracking radars.
Curve B does not include the amplitude  fluctuations and is therefore representative of monopulse radars.
In Fig.
5.1 the amplitude  fluctuations are assumed to be larger than servo noise.
If not, the improvement of monopulse  tracking over conical scan will be negligible.
In general, the tracking accuracy deteriorates at  r~,both short and long target ranges, with the best tracking occurring at some intermediate range.
 \ .JFrequency agility and glint reduction.
35-4o,ss The angular error due to glint, which affects all  tracking radars, results from the radar receiving the vector sum of the echoes contributed by  the individual scattering centers of a complex target, and processing it as if it were the return  from a single scattering center.
If the frequency is changed, the relative phases of the individual  c..
e ...
 ~ 0.1  C  :.ii: u e -c..
 .E  ::>  CJ'  C  0  "' E c..
 ~0.01  :;:  .E  (I)  a::: I I  / 4Receiver noise  ( monopulse)  10 100  Relative radar ronge 1,000  Figure 5.14 Relative contributions to angle tracking error due to amplitude fluctuations, angle Huctua­ tions, receiver noise, and servo noise as a function or range.
(A) Composite error for a conical-scan or  sequential-lobing radar; (B) composite error for monopulse.
 TRACKING RADAR 171  scatterers will change and a new resultant is obtained as well as a new angular measurement.
 Measurements are independent if the frequency is changed by an amount36  C  !!.:fc = "ii5 (5.3)  where c = velocity of propagation and D = target depth.
The glint error can be reduced by  averaging the independent measurements obtained with frequency agility.
(The depth D as  seen by the radar might be less than the geometrical measurement of target depth if the  extremities of the target result in small backscatter.)  The improvement I in the tracking accuracy when the frequency is changed pulse-to-pulse  is approximately37  (5.4)  where B fa= the frequency agility bandwidth, D = target depth, c = velocity of propagation,  B11 = glint bandwidth, and J,.
pulse repetition frequency.
(The approximation holds for large  prf's and for the usual glint bandwidths which are of the order of a few hertz to several tens of  hertz.)36 For example.
with a target depth D of 7 m and a frequency-agile bandwidth of  JOO MHz, the glint error is reduced by a factor of 2.6.
According to the above, the improve­ m~nt in trackin~curacy is proportional to the square root of the frequency agility band­ width.
or I "' ,J B fa .
 A different glint model, based on the assumption that the angular motion of a complex  target can be described by a gaussian random yaw motion of zero mean, yields the result that  the reduction in angle error due to frequency agility asymptotically approaches a value of 3.l  with increasing agility bandwidth.38 The model also gives the variance of the inherent glint lor  a frequency-agile radar as  var= 0.142y5 (5.5)  where ro is the lateral radius of gyration of the collection of scatterers comprising the target.
 The value of }'o for a "typical" twin-jet aircraft in level flight at near head-on or near tail-on  aspect is said38 to be equal to half the separation of the jet engines.
For a ship at broadside, ,o  is approximately 0.15 times the ship length.
 When angle errors due to glint are large, the received signals are small; that is, the  received signal amplitude and the glint error are negatively correlated.
Thus, by transmitting a  number of frequencies and using the angle error corresponding to that frequency with the  largest signal, it is possible to eliminate the large angle ~rrors associated with glint.
39.4° Those  returns of low amplitude and, hence, of high error, are excluded in this technique.
Instead or  selecting only the largest signal for processing, the indicated position of the target at each  frequency can be weighted according to the amplitude of the return.40 Only a small number of  frequencies is needed to reduce substantially the glint error.
The reduction in rms tracking  error by processing only that signal (frequency) with the largest amplitude is approximately40  a" <1 ~ ---rms N 1 s N s 4 (5.6)  where <T1 is the single-frequency glint error and N is the number of frequencies.
The tracking  error will not decrease significantly for more than four pulses.
Each of the frequencies must be  separated by at least lif~, as given by Eq.
(5.3).
 Frequency agility, as described here for the reduction of glint, applies to the monopulse  tracking radar.
It also reduces the glint in a conical scan or a sequentia.1-)obing radar.
but the  172 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  changing frequency can result in amplitude fluctuations which can affect the angle tracking  accuracy if the spectrum -of the fluctuations at the conical scan or the lobing frequencies is  increased.
Thus, frequency agility might cause an increase in the angle error due to amplitude  lluctuations in these systems while decreasing the error due to glint.
The ovc.:rall effect of  frequency agility in conical scan or sequential lobing systems is therefore more complicakd to  analyze than monopulse systems which are unaffected by amplitude fluctuations.
 It has also been suggested54 that polarization agility can reduce the glint error.
Since the  individual echoes from the various scattering centers that make up a complex target are likely  to be sensitive to the polarization of the incident radar signal, a change in the polarization can  possibly result in an independent measure of the apparent target direction.
By observing the  target with a variable polarization producing independent measurements, the angle error due  to glint is averaged and the effect of the large glint errors is reduced.
Experimental measure­ ments with an X-band, conical-scan, pulse doppler radar tracking an M-48 Hink at approxi­ mately 500 m range reduced the angular tracking error by about one-half.
In these tests, the  hest results were obtained when the plane of polarization was switched in small increments  (5.6 to 22.5°) at a rate greater than 500 steps per second, which is more than an order of  magnitude greater than the 40 Hz conical-scan rate.
 ~-angle tracking.41 53•90-94 A radar that tracks a target at a low elevation angle, near the  surface of the earth, can receive two echo signals from the target, Fig.
5.15.
One signal is  retkcted directly from the target, and the other arrives via the earth's surface.
(This is similar to  the description of surface reflections and its effect on the elevation coverage, as in Sec.
12.2.)  The direct and the surface-reflected signals combine at the radar to .J'kld_an angle measure­ ment that differs from the true measurement that would have been made with a single target in  the absence of surface reflections.
The result is an error in the measurement of elevation.
The  surface-reflected signal may be thought of as originating from the image of the target mirrored  by the earth's surface.
Thus, the effect on tracking is similar to the two-target model used to  describe glint, as discussed previously.
The surface-reflected signal is sometimes called a  multipath signal.
 An example of the elevation angle error at low angles is shown in Fig.
5.16 for a target at  constant height.43 At close range the target elevation angle is large and the antenna beam does  not illuminate the surface; hence the tracking is smooth.
At intermediate range, where the  elevation angle is from 0.8 to as much as six beamwidths, the surface-reflected signal enters  the radar by means of the antenna near-in sidelobes.
The surface-reflected signal is small so  that the antenna makes small oscillations about some mean position.
At greater ranges (eleva­ tion angles less than about 0.8 beamwidth), where the an"tenna main beam illuminates the  s~rface, the interference between the direct and the reflected signals can result in large errors in  elevation angle.
The angular excursions can be up (into the air) or down (into the ground).
The  peak errors are severe and can be many times the angular separation between the target and its  Antenna beam  path -----~:~:~ Image  Figure S.15 Low-angle tracking illustrating the surface-reflected signal path and the target image.
 2.0  1.8  1.6  1.4  1.2 :  QB  "' 0.6  IA.I  uJ a: 0.4  "' uJ  0 0.2 ' a: 0 a: Q a:  "" z -0.2 0  ~ ;,--0.4 ..,  ..J  "" -0.6  -a.a  ·!.O  -1.2  .::1.4  -1.6  -1.8  -2.0  TRACK TIME (MINUTES)  Figure 5.16 Example of the measured elevation tracking error using a phased-array radar with 2._7~-beam width.
Aircraft target flew out in range  at a nearly constant altitude.
The numbers along the zero error Iine,indicate the track time in minutes.
(From Linde.46)  174 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  image.
The tracking has been described as "wild" and can be great enough to cause the radar  to break track.
The effect is most pronounced over a smooth water surface where the reflected  signal is strong.
The effect can be so great that it can become impossible to track ta·rgets at low  elevation angles with a conventional tracking radar.
In addition to causing errors in the  elevation-angle tracking, it is also possible for surface-reflected multipath ·10 introduce errors  in the azimuth-angle tracking; either by" cross-talk" in the radar between the azimuth and  elevation error channels, or by the target-image plane departing from the vertical as when over  sloping land or when the radar is on a rolling and pitching ship.
 The surest method for avoiding tracking error due to multipath reflections ,via the surface  of the earth is to use an antenna with such a narrow beamwidth that it doesn't illuminate the  surface.
This requires a large antenna and/or a high frequency.44 Although such a solution  eliminates the problem, there may be compelling reasons in some applications that mitigate  against the large antenna needed for a narrow beamwidth or against operation at high  frequency.
 Prior knowledge of target behavior sometimes can be used to avoid the serious effects of  low-angle multipath without overly complicating the radar.
Since targets of interest will not go  below the surface of the earth, and are limited in their ability to accelerate upward and  downward, radar data indicative of unreasonable behavior can be recognized and rejected.
In  some situations, the target might be flying fast enough and the inertia of the antenna may be  great enough to dampen the angle-error excursions caused by the multipath:'7 Another solu­ tion takes advantage of the fact that large errors are limited to a region of low elevation angles  predictable from the antenna pattern and the terrain.
It is thus possible to determine when the  target is in the low-angle region by sensing large elevation-angle errors and locking the  antenna in elevation at some small positive angle while continuing closed-loop azimuth  tracking.43 This is sometimes called off-axis tracking,45 or o.ff-boresight tracking:P The eleva­ tion angle at which the antenna is fixed depends on the terrain and the antenna pattern.
 Typically it might be about 0.7 to 0.8 beamwidth.
With the beam fixed at a positiv~ elevation  angle, the elevation-angle error may then be determined open-loop from the error-signal  voltage or the elevation measurement may sfrnpJy .
be assumed ~ be h~~ween  the horizon and the antenna boresight.
In the ex-trem~,-the-peak-fo-peak tracking error would  not exceed 0.7 to 0.8 beamwidth and typically the rrns error would be about 0.3 beamwidth.
-~~- These relatively simple methods, combined with heavy smoothing of the error signal, can  allow meaningful, but not necessarily accurate, tracking at low angles.
 The surface-reflected signal travels a longer path than the direct signal so that it may be  possible in some cases to separate the two in time (range).
Tracking on the direct signal avoids  the angle errors introduced by the multipath.
The range-resolution required to separate the  direct from the ground-reflected signal is  !!R = 2hah,  R (5.7)  where ha = radar antenna height, h, = target height, and R = range to the target.
For a radar  height of 30 m, a target height of 100 m and a range of 10 km, the range-resolution must be  0.6 m, corresponding to a pulse width of 4 ns.
This is a much shorter pulse than is commonly  employed in radar.
Although the required range-resolutions for a ground-based radar are  achievable in principle, it is usuaHy not applicaple in practice.
 The use of frequency diversity, as described previously for reducing glint, can also reduce  the multipath tracking error.
As seen in Fig.
5.16, the angle errors due to multipath at low  angle are cyclical.
This is a result of the direct and surface-reflected signals reinforcing and  TRACKING RADAR l 7S  canceling each other as the relative phase between the two paths varies.
A change in frequency  also changes the phase relationship between the two signals.
Thus the angle errors can be  averaged by operating the radar over a wide frequency band or by sweeping the RF frequency  and deducing the angle on the basis of the corresponding behavior of the error signal.46 It  turns out, however, that the bandwidth required to extract the target elevation angle is esesen­ tially the same required of a short pulse for separating the direct and reflected signals.
Thus,  the bandwidths needed to eliminate the multipath error are usually quite large for most  applications.
 The doppler frequency shift of the direct signal dilTers from that of the surface-reflected  signal.
but the difference is too small in most cases to be of use in reducing the errors due to  multipath.
Radar fences.
properly located, can mask the surface-reflected signal from the  near-in elevation sidelobes, but they are of limited utility when the main beam illuminates the  top edge of the fence and creates diffracted energy.53 Vertical polarization, often used in  trackers, reduces the surface-reflected signal in the vicinity of the Brewster angle, but has no  special advantage at low angles (less than l.5° over water and 3° over land).45 For a similar  reason, circular polarization has no inherent advantage in improving multipath below eleva­ tion angles corresponding to the Brewster angle.
 The basic reason for poor tracking at low angle results from the fact that the conventional  tracking radar with a two-horn feed in elevation (or its equivalent for a conical-scan tracker)  provides unambiguous information for only one target.
At low elevation angles two" targets"  are present.
the real one and its.
image.
Thus, the aperture must be provided with more degrees  of freedom than are available from a simple two-element feed.
One approach is to utilize  multiple feeds in the vertical plane.48.
50 A minimum of three feeds (or elements) is necessary  to resolve two targets, but antennas with from four to nine elements in the vertical dimension  have been considered.
Another approach that depends on additional antenna feeds, or degrees  of freedom, employs a monopulse tracker with a difference pattern containing a second null  which is independently steerable.
This null is maintained in the direction of the image, as  computed by Snell's law for the measured target range.
The use of the classical maximum  likelihood solution for the optimum double-null difference pattern results in relatively large  sidelobes at the horizon and at angles below the image.
By slightly sacrificing the accuracy of  angle tracking (due to less slope sensitivity), lower sidelobes can be achieved.
Such a pattern  which sacrifices slope sensitivity for lower sidelobes has been called a tempered double-null  ditference pattern.48  The tempered double-null is more suited to mechanically steered trackers than to ehased­ a~~since it is basically a null balance technique that does not achieve full accuracy  until it goes through a settling process.
A technique that can operate on the basis of a single  pulse.
and therefore is more applicable to the phased array, has been c~lled the~  approach; or more descriptively, the _ _as.y.mme-u:iC-m.at:tQ/lY.1~!·48 Two asymmetrical patterns are  generated and squinted above the horizon to minimize response to the surface-reflected signal.
 The two patterns are constrained so that their rati°' has an even-order symmetry about the  horizon.
Knowing the shape of the antenna patterns, the measurement of the ratio of signals in  the two beams allows the target elevation angle to be deduced.
A similar technique4u1 utilizes  sum (I:) and difference (L\) patterns whose ratio l\q;:Js symmetrical.
Just as in off-axis tracking,  the a·11Tenna boresight · is locked at some elevation angle.
This results in the lower of the two  peaks of the symmetrical L\/E ratio being placed in the direction of the bisector of the target  and image.
Under this condition, the values of L\/E in the direction of the target and its image  are equal.
The estimate of target elt!vaUQt\ is unaffected by the phase and amplitude of the  image.
(The angle of the target/image bisector is approximately given by the ratio of the radar  antenna-height-to-target-range.)  176 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  The normal monopulse radar receiver uses only the in-pbase (or the out-of-phase) com­ ponent of the difference signal.
When there is a multipath signal present along with the direct  signal, a quadrature component of the difference signal exists.
The in-phase and the quadra­ ture components of the error signal define a complex angkenoi:-sign.al.
In the comf)lex plane,  with the in-phase and quadrature components as the axes, the locus or the complex angle with  target elevation as the parameter is a spiral path.
By measuring the complex angle, the target  elevation can be inferred.52 In using the complex-angle technique, the radar antenna is fixed at  some angle above the horizon and the open-loop measurement of complex angle is compared  with a predicted set of values for the particular radar installation, antenna elevation-pointing  angle, and terrain properties.
A given in-phase and quadrature measurement does not give a  unique value of elevation angle since the plot of the complex angle shows multiple, overlap­ ping turns of a spiral with increasing target altitude.
The ambiguities can be res_olved with  frequency diversity or by continuous tracking over an interval long enough w recognize the  ambiguous spirals.
In one simulation of the technique it was found that tracking over a  smooth surface can be improved by at least a factor of two, but over rough surfaces the  improvement was marginal.61  Thus there exist a number of possible techniques for reducing the angle errors found when  tracking a target at low angle.
Some of these require considerable modification to the conven­ tional tracking radar but others require only modification in the processing of the angle-error  signals.
It has been said that these various techniques can avoid the large errors encountered  by conventional trackers when the elevation angle is between 0.25 and 1.0 beamwidth.
The  rms accuracies are between 0.05 and 0.1 beamwidth in these regions.45 The choice of  technique to permit tracking of targets at low altitude with reduced error depends on the  degree of complexity that can be tolerated for the amount of improvement obtained.
 Electro-optical devices such as TV, IR, or lasers can be used in conjunction with radar to  provide tracking at low target altitude when the radar errors are unacceptable.
These devices,  however, are of limited range and are not all-weather.
 5.6 TRACKING IN RANGE3•55-58  In most tracking-radar applications the target is continuously tracked in range as well as in  angle.
Range tracking might be accomplished by an operator who watches an A-scope or  J-scope presentation and manually positions a handwheel in order to maintain a marker over  the desired target pip.
The setting of the hand wheel is a measure of the target range and may be  converted to a voltage that is supplied to a data processor.
 As target speeds increase, it is increasingly difficult for an operator to perform at the  necessary levels of efficiency over a sustained period of time, and automatic tracking becomes  a necessity.
Indeed, there are many tracking applications where an operator has no place, as in  a homing missile or in a small space vehicle.
 The technique for automatically tracking in range is based on the split range gate.
Two  range gates are generated as shown in Fig.
5.17.
One is the early gate, and the other is the late  gate.
The echo pulse is shown in Fig.
5.17a, the relative position of the gates at a particular  instant in Fig.
5.17 b, and the error signal in Fig.
5.17 c.
The portion of the signal energy  contained in the early gate is less than that in the late gate.
If the outputs of the two gates arc  subtracted, an error signal (Fig.
5.17c) will result which may be used to reposition the center of  the gates.
ss The magnitude of the error signal is a measure of the difference between the center  of the pulse and the center of the gates.
The sign of the error signal determines the direction in  (al  ( b)  ( r) Echo I pulse  tor ly  gate  Early gate  signal L otr,  gate  L.ote gate  signal Time - Time -~  Time-+ TRACKING RADAR 177  Figure 5.17 Split-range-gate tracking.
 (a) Echo pulse; (h) early-late range  gates; (c) di!Terence signal between  early and late range gates.
 which the gates must be repositioned by a feedback-control system.
When the error signal is  zero.
the range gates are centered on the pulse.
 The range gating necessary to perform automatic tracking offers several advantages as by­ products.
It isolates one target, excluding targets at other ranges.
This permits the boxcar  generator to be employed.
Also.
range gating improves the signal-to-noise ratio since it elimin­ ates the noise from the other range intervals.
Hence the width of the gate should be sufficiently  narrow to minimize extraneous noise.
On the other hand, it must not be so narrow that an  appreciable fraction of the signal energy is excluded.
A reasonable compromise is to make the  gate width of the order of the pulse width.
 !\ target of finite length can cause noise in range-tracking circuits in an analogous manner  to angle-fluctuation noise (glint) in the angle-tracking circuits.
Range-tracking noise depends  on the length of the target and its shape.
It has been reported29 that therms value of the range  noise is approximately 0.8 of the target length when tracking is accomplished with a video  split-range-gate error detector.
 5.7 ACQUISITION  i\ tracking radar must first find and acquire its target before it can operate as a tracker.
 Therefore it j9.-.usually necessary for the radar to scan an angular sector in which the presence  of the target is suspected.
Most tracking radars employ a narrow pencil-beam antenna.
 Searching a volume in space for an aircraft target with a narrow pencil beam would be  somewhat analogous to searching for a fly in a darkened auditorium with a flashlight.
It must  he done with some care if the entire volume is to be covered uniformly and efficiently.
 Examples of the common types of scanning patterns employed with pencil-beam antennas are  illustrated in Fig.
5.18.
 In the ltelical scan, the antenna is continuously rotated in azimuth while it is simulta­ neously raised or lowered in elevation.
It traces a helix in space.
Helical scanning was employed  for the search mode of the SCR-584 fire-control radar, developed during World War II for the  aiming of antiaircraft-gun batteries.59 The SCR-584 antenna was .rotated at the rate of  6 rpm and covered a 20° elevation angle in 1 min.
The Palmer scan derives its name from  the familiar penmanship exercises of grammar school days.
It consists of a rapid circular scan  (conical scan) about the axis of the antenna, combined with a linear movement of the axis of  rotation.
When the axis of rotation is held stationary.
the Palmer scan reduces to the conical  178 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  (a) ( b)  (d) ( C)  ( e) Figure S.
18 Examples of acquisition  search patterns.
(a) Trace of helical  scanning beam; (b) Palmer scan; (c}  spiral scan; (cl) raster, or TV, scan;  (e) nodding scan.
The raster scan is  sometimes called an n-bar scan, where  n is the number of horizontal rows.
..
 scan.
Because of this property, the Palmer scan is sometimes used with conical-scan tracking  radars which must operate with a search as well as a track mode since the same mechanisms  used to produce conical scanning can also be used for Palmer scanr.ing.60 Some conical-scan  tracking radars increase the squint angle during search in order to reduce the time required to  scan a given volume.
The conical sca·n of the SCR-584 was operated during the search mode  and was actually a Palmer scan in a helix.
In general, conical scan is performed during the  search mode of most tracking radars.
 The Palmer scan is suited to a search area which is larger in one dimension than another.
 The spiral scan covers an angular search volume with circular symmetry.
Both the spiral scan  and the Palmer scan suffer from the disadvantage that all parts of the scan volume do not  receive the same energy unless the scanning speed is varied during the scan cycle.
As a  consequence, the number of hits returned from a target when searching with a constant  scanning rate depends upon the position of the target within the search area.
 The raster, or TV, scan, unlike the Palmer or the spiral scan, paints the search area in a  uniform manner.
The raster scan is a simple and convenient means for searching a limited  sector, rectangular in shape.
Similar to the raster scan is the nodding scan produced by oscillat­ ing the antenna beam rapidly in elevation and slowly in azimuth.
Although it may be  employed to cover a limited sector-as does the raster scan-nodding scan may also be used  to obtain hemispherical coverage, that is, elevation angle extending to 90° and the azimuth  scan angle to 360°.
 The helical scan and the nodding scan can both be used to obtain hemispheric coverage  with a pencil beam.
The nodding scan is also used with height-finding radars.
The Palmer,  spiral, and raster scans are employed in fire-control tracking radars to assist in the acquisition  of the target when the search sector is of limited extent.
 5.8 OTHER TOPICS  Servo system.
The automatic tracking of the target coordinates in angle, range, and doppler  frequency is usually accomplished with a so-called Type I I servo system.1.2·3•67•68 It is also  referred to as a zero velocity error system since in theory no steady-state error exists for a  constant velocity input.
A steady-state error exists, however, for a step-acceleration input.
 Thus, the accelerations the system must handle need to be specified in order to select a suitable  Type II system.
The tracking bandwidth of the servo system is defined as the frequency ·where  its open-loop filter transfer function is of unity gain.
It represents the transition from closed  loop to open loop operation.
One of the functions of the servo system is to reduce the  TRACKING RADAR 179  fluctuations of the input signal by filtering or smoothing.
Therefore, the tracking bandwidth  should be narrow to reduce the effects of noise or jitter, reject unwanted spectral components  such as the conical-scan frequency or engine modulation, and to provide a smoothed output of  the measurement.
On the other hand, a wide tracking bandwidth is required to accurately  follow, with minimum lag, rapid changes in the target trajectory or in the vehicle  carrying the radar antenna.
That is, a wide bandwidth is required for following changes in the  target trajectory and a narrow bandwidth for sensitivity.
A compromise must generally be  made between these conllicting requirements.
A target at long range has low angular rates and  a low signal-to-noise ratio.
A narrow tracking bandwidth is indicated in such a case to increase  sensitivity and yet follow the target with minimum lag.
At short range, however, the angular  rates are likely to be large so that a wide tracking bandwidth is needed in order to follow the  target properly.
The loss in sensitivity due to the greater bandwidth .is offset by the greater  target signal at the shorter ranges.
The bandwidth should be no wider than necessary in order  to keep the angle errors due to target scintillation, or glint, from becoming excessive.
The  tracking bandwidth in some systems might be made variable or even adaptive to conform  automatically to the target conditions.
 Another restriction on the tracking bandwidth is that it should be small compared to the  lowest natural resonant frequency of the antenna and servo system including the structure  foundation, in order to prevent the system from oscillating at the resonant frequency.
The  shaded region in Fig.
5.19 describes the measured bounds of the lowest servo resonant  frequency as a function of antenna size achieved with actual tracking radars.
 N 10  I  I  ;.­ (.)  C:  Q) :,  0  Q) ...
 c  0  C:  ~  Q)  a:: 1 0 Estimated  " //),.
 I I I I/' II/// I I'  I ;II//// <.,I I I / I I ,1 I I/ -'-....
 0-1~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~  1·0 10 100 1000  Antenna diameter -ft  Figure 5.19 Lowest servo resonant-frequency as a function of antenna diameter for hemispherical scan­ ning raraboloid reflector antennas.
(Based 011 measurements compiled by D.
D.
Pidhayny of the Aerospace  Corporation.)  180 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  Precision "on-axis" tracking.62-65 Some of the most precise tracking radars are those asso­ ciated with the instrumentation used at missile-testing ranges.62 One such class of precision  tracking radar has been called on-axis tracking.63 The output of a conventional sl!rvo system  lags its input.
The result of the lag is a tracking error.
The on-axis tracker accounts for this lag,  as well as for other factors that can contribute to tracking error, so as to keep the target being  tracked in the center of the beam or on the null axis of the difference pattern.
On-axis tracking,  as compared with trackers with a target lag, improves the accuracy by reducing the coupling  between the azimuth and elevation angle-tracking channels, by minimizing the generation of  cross polarization and by reducing the effects of system nonlinearities.
 The processes that constitute on-axis tracking include ( 1) the use of adaptive tracking  whose output updates a stored prediction of the target trajectory rather than control the  antenna servo directly, (2) the removal by prior calibration of static and dynamic system  biases and errors, and (3) the use of appropriate coordinate systems for filteriqg (smoothing)  the target data.
 The radar's angle-error signals are smoothed and compared to a predicted measurement  based on a target-trajectory model updated by ·the results of previous measurements.
(Prior  knowledge of the characteristics of the trajectory can be incorporated in the model, as, ror  example, when the trajectory is known to be ballistic.) If the difkrence between the prediction  and the measurement is zero, no adjustment is made and the antenna mount is pointed  according to the stored prediction.
If they do not agree, the target trajectory prediction is  changed until they do.
Thus, the pointing of the antenna is made open-loop based on the  stored target-trajectory prediction updated by the radar measurements.
The servo loop that  points the antenna is made relatively wideband (high data rate) to permit a fast tracking  response against targets with high angular acceleration.
The process of adjusting the predicted  position based on the measured position is performed with a narrow bandwidth.
This error­ signal bandwidth is adaptive and can be made very narrow to obtain good signal-to-noise  ratio, yet the system will continue to point open-loop based on the stored target-trajectory  prediction and the wide tracking-bandwidth of the antenna-pointing servos.
For convenience  the range, azimuth, and elevation (r, 0, </>) coordinates of the radar output are converted to  rectilinear (x, y, z) target coordinates to perform the data smoothing and comparison with  prediction.
In radar coordinates, the track of a target on a straight-line trajectory is curvilinear  and can generate apparent accelerations.
This does not happen when tracking in rectilint.:ar  coordinates.
The rectilinear coordinates of the updated target prediction are converted back to  radar coordinates to drive the antenna.
 Systematic errors are determined by prior measurement and are used to adjust the  encoded antenna position to provide the correct target position.
Systematic errors include  (l) error in the zero reference of the encoders that indicate the orientation of the radar axes,  (2) misalignment of the elevation axis with respect to the azimuth axis (nonorthogonality),  (3) droop or flexing of the antenna and mount caused by gravity, (4) misalignment of the radar  with respect to the elevation axis (skew"), (5) noncoincidence of the azimuth plane of the mount  to the local reference plane (mislevel), (6) dynamic lag in the servo system, (7) finite transit  time that results in the target being at a different position by the time the echo is received by  the radar, and (8) bending and additional time delay of the propagation path due to atmo­ spheric refraction.
 A boresight telescope mounted on the radar antenna permits calibration of the mechani­ cal axis of the antenna with respect to a star field.
This calibration accounts for bias in  azimuth and elevation, mislevel, skew, droop, and nonorthogonality.
Tracking a visible satel­ lite with the radar permits the position of the RF axis relative to the mechanical (optical) axis  to be determined.
The difference between the position measured by the optics and that  TRACKING RADAR 181  measured hy tile radar is ohlained artcr correction is made for the <liffcre11ce in atmospheric  refraction ror optical and RF propagation.
This type of dynamic calibration requires the radar  to be large enough to track satellites.
 There is nothing unique about any of the individual processes that enter into on-axis  tracking.
They can each he applied individually, if desired, to any tracking radar to improve  the accuracy of track.
 High-range-resolution monopulse.66 lt has been noted previously in this chapter that the  presence of multiple scatterers within the range-resolution cell of the radar results in scintilla­ tion.
or glint.
which can introduce a significant error.
The use of a radar with high range- radar location  approx.
radar  I  I  I  I  I  I  I  I  I  I  I  I  \ + I  I  11 _ corresponding zero  angle error voltage WV-2  super conste Ila tion  range video  angle video  time  Figure 5.20 Range and angle video obtained with the NRL High Range Resolution Monopulse {HRRM)  radar.
The target is a Super Constellation aircraft in night.
Note that the angle video indicates to what side  or the radar beam axis are located the individual scatterers which are resolved in range.
The radar  operated at X hand with a 7-ft-diameter antenna and a pulse width of 3 nanoseconds.66  182 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  resolution isolates the individual scattering centers and therefore eliminates the glint problem.
 With aircraft targets an effective pulse width of several nanoseconds (kss than a meter rangc­ resolution) can resolve the individual scatterers.
Once the scatterers are resolvt!d in range, an  angle measurement can be obtained on each one by use of monopulsc.
This provides a  three-dimensional "image" or the target since the azimuth and elevation of each scatterer is  given along with the range.
Figure 5.20 is an example of the type of radar image that might be  obtained with an aircraft.
This technique not only improved significantly the tracking accur­ acy as compared with a longer pulse conventional tracker, hut its unique measurement  properties provide additional capabilities.
For example, it can be used as a means of targd  classification or recognition, as a precision vector miss-distance indicator for uninstrument.ed  targets, as a counter (ECCM) to repeater jammers, as an aid in low-angle tracking, and as a  means for discriminating unwanted clutter or chaff from the desired target.
 ..
 Tracking in doppler.
Tracking radars that are based on CW, pulse-doppler, or MTI principles  can also track the doppler frequency shirt generated by a moving target.
This may be accom­ plished with a frequency discriminator and a tunable oscillator to maintain the received signal  in the center of a narrow-band filter.
It is also possible to use a phase-lock loop, or phase­ sensitive discriminator whose output drives a voltage-controlled oscillator to hold its phase in  step with the input signal.2 Tracking the doppler frequency shift with the equivalent of a  narrow-band filter just wide enough to encompass the frequency spectrum of the received  signal allows an improvement in the signal-to-noise ratio as compared with wideband proces­ sing.
It can also provide resolution of the desired moving target from stationary clutter.
The  doppler tracking filter is sometimes called a speed gate.
 5.9 COMPARISON OF TRACKERS1  Of the four continuous-tracking-radar techniques that have been discussed (sequential lobing,  conical scan, amplitude-comparison monopulse, and phase-comparison monopulse), conical  scan and amplitude-comparison monopulse have seen more application than the other two.
 The phase-comparison monopulse has not been too popular because of the relative awkward­ ness ofits antenna (four separate an;tennas nfr>unted to point their individual beams in the same  direction), and because the sidelob•:"i~vels)nightbe higher than desired.
Although sequential  lobing is similar to conical scan,' the'laiter'..is'preferred in most applications, since it suffers less  loss and the antenna and feed ·systems ~re usually less complex.
In this section, only the  conical-scan radar and the amplitude~c6mparison monopulse will be compared.
(The latter  will be referred to simply as morfopu)se;f  When the target is being tracked, the'signal-to-noi~e ratio available from the monopulse  radar is greater than that of ~;eorticiil;scan· radar, all other things being equal, since the  monopulse radar views the target'ifihi'peak of its sum pattern while the conical-scan radar  views the target at an angle off the ..
peak of the antenna beam.
The difference in signal-to-noise  ratio might be from 2 to 4 dB.
For the samcfsize aperture, the beamwidth of a conical-scan  radar will be slightly greater than that of the monopulse because its feed is offset rrom the  focus.
 The tracking accuracy of a monopulse radar is superior to that of the conical-scan radar  because of the absence or target amplitude-fluctuations and because or its greater signal-to­ noise ratio.
It is the preferred technique for precision tracking.
However, both monopulse and  conical-scan radars are degraded equally by the wandering of the apparent position of the  target (glint).
 TRACKING RADAR 183  The monopulse radar is the more complex of the two.
Three separate receivers are  necessary to derive the error signal in two.orthogonal angular coordinates.
Only one receiver  is needed in the conical-scan radar.
(There are certain monopulse implementations that can  use either one or two receivers.
but at some sacrifice in performance.) Since the monopulse  radar compares the amplitudes of signals received in three separate channels, it is important  that the gain and phase shift through these channels be identical.
The RF circuitry that  generates the sum and difference signals in a mono pulse radar has been steadily improved, and  can be realized without excessive physical bulk.
A popular form of antenna for monopulse is  the Cassegrain.
 With the mono pulse tracker it is possible to obtain a measure of the angular error in two  coordinates 011 the basis of a single pulse.
/\ minimum of four pulses are usually necessary with  the conical-scan radar.
However, a continuous-tracking radar seldom makes a measurement  011 a single pulse.
(Phased-army radars and some surveillance radars, however, might use the  monopulse principle to extract an angle measurement on the basis of a single pulse.) In  practice.
the two radars utilize essentially the same number of pulses to obtain an error signal  if the servo tracking bandwidths and pulse repetition frequencies are the same.
The monopulse  radar first makes its angle measurement and then integrates a number of pulses to obtain  the required signal-to-noise ratio and to smooth the error.
The conical-scan radar, on the  other hand, integrates a number of pulses first and then extracts the angle measurement.
 Because a monopulsc radar is not degraded by amplitude fluctuations, it is less suscep­ tible to hostile electronic countermeasures than is conical scan.
 In hrief.
the monopulse radar is the better tracking technique; but in many applications  where the ultimate in performance is not needed, the conical-scan radar is used because it is  less costly and less complex.
 5.IO TRACKING WITH SURVEILLANCE RADAR  The track of a target can be determined with a surveillan~ radar from the coordinates of the  target as measured from scan to scan.
The quality of such a track will depend on the time  between observations, the location accuracy or each observation, and the number of extra­ neous targets that might he present in the vicinity of the tracked target.
A surveillance radar that  develops tracks on targets it has detected is sometimes called a track-while-scan (TWS) radar.
 One method of obtaining tracks with a surveillance radar is to have an operator manually  mark with gr~ase pencil on the face of the cathode-ray tube the location of the target on each  scan.
The simplicity of such a procedure is offset by the poor accuracy of the track.
The  accuracy of track can be improved by using a computer to determine the trajectory from  inputs supplied by an operator.
A human operator, however, cannot update target tracks at a  rate greater than about once per two seconds.69 Thus, a single operator cannot handle more  than about six target tracks when the radar has a twelve-second scan rate (5 rpm antenna  rotation rate).
Furthermore an operator's effectiveness in detecting new targets decreases  rapidly after about a half hour of operation.
The radar operator's trarfic handling limitation  and the effects of fatigue can be mitigated by automating the target detection and tracking  process with data processing called automatic detection and tracking (ADT).
The availability of  digital data processing technology has made ADT economically feasible.
An ADT system  performs the functions of target detection, track initiation, track association, track update,  track smoothing (filtering) and track termination.
 The automatic detector part or the ADT quantizes the range into intervals equal to the  range resolution.
/\teach range interval the detector integrates n pulses, where n is the number  184 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  of pulses expected to be returned from a target as the antenna scans past.
The integrated pulses  are compared with a threshold to indicate the presence or absence of a target.
An exam pk is  the commonly used moving window detector which examines continuously the Ji!~iJ} ~mples  within each quantized range interval and announces the presence of a target if m out of n of  these samples cross a preset threshoid.
(This and other automatic detectors are described in  Sec.
10.7 and in Ref.
70.) By locating the center of the n puls_es, an estimate of the target's  angular direction can be obtained.
This is called beani sp/itti11g.
 If there is but one target present within the radar's coverage, then detections on two scans  are all that is needed to establish a target track and to estimate its velocity.
However, there are  usually other targets as well as clutter echoes present, so that three or more detections are  needed to reliably establish a track without the generation of false or spurious tracks.
 Although a computer can be programmed to recognize and reject false tracks, too many false  tracks can overload the computer and result in poor information.
It is for this.t,ame reason of  avoiding computer overload that the radar used with A I_?.T should be designed to exclude  unwanted signals, as from clutter and interference.
A good ADT system therefore requires a  radar with a good_MTLand._ag.ood CEAR_.(.c_onstant false alarm rate) receiver.
A clutter map,  generated by the radar, is sometimes used lo reduce the load on the tracking computer hy  blanking clutter areas and removing detections associated with large point clutter sources not  rejected by the MTI.
Slowly moving echoes that are not of interest can also he removed hy the  clutter map.
The availability of some distinctive target characteristic, such as its altitude, might  also prove of help when performing track association.71 Thus, the quality of the ADT will  depend significantly on the ability of the radar to reject unwanted signals.
 When a new detection is received, an attempt is made to associate it with existing  tracks.96 This is aided by establishing for each track a small search region, or gate, within  which a new detection 1s predicted based on the estimate of the target speed and direction.
It is  desired to make the gate as small as possible so as to avoid having more than one echo fall  within it when the traffic density is high or when two tracks are close to one another.
However,  a large gate area is required if the tracker is to follow target turns or maneuvers.
More than  one size gate might therefore be used to overcome this dilemma.
The size of the small gate  would be determined by the accuracy of the track.
When a target does not appear in the small  gate, a larger gate would be used whose search area is determined by the maximum accelera­ tion expected of the target during turns.
 On the basis of the past detections the track-while-scan radar must make a smoothed  estimate of a target's present position and velocity, as well as a predicted position and velocity.
 One method for computing this information is the so-called a-fJ tracker (also called the g-h  tracker84), which computes the present smoothed target position\ x" and velocity I hy the  following equations 72 '  Smoothed position: Xn = Xpn + a(xn -Xpn)  Smoothed velocity: Xn = Xn -1 + ~ (xn -X pn) (5.8)  (5.9)  where xP" = predicted position of the target at the nth scan, x,, = measured position at the nth  scan, a = position smoothing parameter, fJ = velocity smoothing parameter, and Ts = time  between observations.
The predicted position at the n + 1st scan is x,, + x" Ts.
(When accelera­ tion is important a third equation can be added to describe an a.-fJ-y tracker, where  y = acceleration smoothing parameter.)73 For a.
= p = 0, the tracker uses no current informa­ tion, only the smoothed data of prior observations.
If a = p = 1, no smoothing is included at all.
 The classical a-fJ filter is designed to minimize the mean square error in the smoothed (filtered)  TRACKING RADAR 185  position and velocity, assuming small velocity changes between observations, or data samples.
 Benedict72 suggests that to minimize the output noise variance at steady state and the tran­ sient response to a maneuvering target as modeled by a ramp function, the cx.-P coefficients are  related by f1 = cx.2/(2 -a).
The particular choice of ex.
within the range of zero to one depends  upon the system application, in particular the tracking bandwidth.
A compromise usually  must be made between good smoothing of the random measurement errors (requiring narrow  handwidth) and rapid response to maneuvering targets (requiring wide bandwidth).
Another  criterion for selecting the cx.-fJ coefficients is based on the best linear track fitted to the radar  data in a least squares sense.
This gives the values of a and f3 as 74  2(211 -1) a=------- 11(11 + 1) 6  /3= n(n + 1)  where II is the number of the scan or target observation (n > 2).
 The standard a-/1 tracker docs not handle the maneuvering target.
However, an adaptive  'Y.-/1 tracker is one which varies the two smoothing parameters to achieve a variable bandwidth  so as to follow maneuvers.
The value of ex.
can be set by observing the measurement error  x" -x,,".
At the start of tracking the bandwidth is made wide and then it narrows down if the  target moves in a straight-line trajectory.
As the target maneuvers or turns, the bandwidth is  widened to keep the tracking error small.
 The Kalman filter 78 is similar to the classical cx.-{3 tracker except that it inherently pro­ vides for the dynamical or maneuvering target.
In the Kalman filter a model for the measure­ ment error has to be assumed, as well as a model of the target trajectory and the disturbance or  uncertainty of the trajectory.
81 Such disturbances in the trajectory might be due to neglect of  higher-order derivatives in the model of the dynamics, random motions due to atmospheric  turbulence, and deliberate target maneuvers.
The Kalman filter can, in principle, utilize a wide  variety of models for measurement noise and trajectory disturbance; however, it is often  assumed that these are described by white noise with zero mean.75 A maneuvering target does  not always fit such an ideal model, since it is quite likely to produce correlated observations.
 The proper inclusion of realistic dynamical models increases the complexity of the calcula­ tions.
Also, it is difficult to describe a priori the precise nature of the trajectory disturbances.
 Some form of adaptation to maneuvers is required.76 The Kalman filter is sophisticated and  accurate, but is more costly to implement than the several other methods commonly used for  the smoothing and prediction of tracking data.
77 Its chief advantage over the classical a-fi  tracker is its inherent ability lo take account of maneuver statistics.
If, however, the Kalman ..
 filter were restricted to modeling the target trajectory as a straight line and if the measurement  noise and the trajectory disturbance noise were modeled as white, gaussian noise with zero  mean, the Kalman filter equations reduce to the rx-P filter equations with the parameters ex.
and  {1 computed sequentially by the Kalman filter procedure.
 The classical a-P tracking filter is relatively easy to implement.
To handle the maneuver­ ing target, some means may be included to detect maneuvers and change the values of a.
and P  accordingly.
In some radar systems, the -data rate might also be increased during target  maneuvers.
As the means for choosing a and P become more sophisticated, the optimal cx.-P  tracker becomes equivalent to a Kalman filter even for a target trajectory model with error.
In  this sense, the optimal rx-P tracking filter is one in which the values of a.
and P require  knowledge of the statistics of the measurement errors and the prediction errors, and in which a  and p are determined in a recursive manner in that they depend on previous estimates of the  mean square error in the smoothed position and velocity.79  (The above discussion has been in terms of a sampled-data system tracking targets  detected by a surveillance radar.
The concept of the cx.-P tracker or the Kalman filter also can  186 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  be applied to a continuous, single-target tracking radar when the error signal is processed  digitally rather than analog.
Indeed, the equations describing the a-P tracker are equivalent to  the type II servo system widely used to model the continuous tracker.)  If, for some reason, the track-while-scan radar does not receive target information on a  particular scan, the smoothing and prediction operation can be continued by properly  accounting for the missed data.80 However, when data to update a track.
is missing for a  sufficient number of consecutive scans, the track is terminated.
Although the criterion for  terminating a track depends on the application, one example suggests that when three target  reports are used to establish a track, five consecutive misses is a suitable criterion for  termination.
8 2  One of the corollary advantages of ADT is that it effects a bandwidth reduction in the  output of a radar so as to allow the radar data to be transmi!ted to another location via  narrowband phone lines rather than wideband microwave links.
This makes it ..
more conve­ nient to operate the radar at a remote site, and permits the outputs from many radars to be  communicated economically to a central control" point.
 It should be noted that the adaptive thresholding of the automatic detector can cause a  worsening of the range-resolution._B.y analggy_~o the angular.J1!~9Jµti~n the angk  coordinate88 it wo~ seem a priori that tw_o_t;!rgets might be resolved in range if their  separation is abou~)>fthe pulse width.
However, it has-been shown89 tha(--;ith automatic  ;:::,,-::: .......
_____ - detection the probability of resolvmg targets in range does not rise above 0.9 until they are  separated by 2.5 pulse widths.
To achieve this resolution a log-video receiver should be used  and the threshold should be proportional to the smaller of the two means calculated from a  number of reference cells on either side of the test cell.
It also assumes that the shape of the  return pulse is not known.
If it is, it should be possible with the proper processing to resolve  targets within a pulse width:  When more than one radar, covering approximately the same volume in space, are  located within the vicinity of each other, it is sometimes desirable to combine their outputs to  form a single track file rather than form ~eparate tracks.83•97-s.:1 Such an automatic detection  and integrated tracking system (ADIT) has the advantage of a greater data rate than any single  radar operating independently.
The development of a single track file by use of the total  available data from all radars reduces the likelihood of a loss of target detections as might be  caused by antenna lobing, fading, interference, and clutter since integrated processing permits  the favorable weighting of the better data and lesser weighting of the poorer data.
 REFERENCES  1.
Dunn, J.
H., D.
D.
Howard, and K.
B.
Pendleton: Tracking Radar, chap.
21 of" Radar Handbook,"  M.
I.
Skolnik (ed.), McGraw-Hill Book Co., Inc., New York, 1970.
 2.
Barton.
D.
K.
"Radar Systems Analysis," Prentice-Hall, Inc., New Jersey, 1964.
 3.
James, H.
M., N.
B.
Nichols, and R.
S.
Phillips: "Theory of Servomechanisms," MIT Radiation  Laboratory Series, vol.
25, McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York, 1947.
 4.
Schafer, C.R.: Phase-selective Detectors, Electronics, vol.
27, no.
2, pp.
188-190, February, 1954.
 5.
Greenwood, I.
A., Jr., J.
V.
Holdam, Jr., and D.
Macrae, Jr.
(eds.):" Electronic Instruments," MIT  Radiation Laboratory Series, vol.
21, pp.
383-386, McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York, 1948.
 6.
Palma-Vittorelli, M.
M., M.
U.
Palma, and D.
Palumbo: The Behavior of Phase-sensitive Detectors,  Nuovo cimento, vol.
6, pp.
1211-1220, Nov.
1.
1957.
 7.
Krishnan, S.: Diode Phase Detectors, Electronic and Radio Engr., vol.
36, pp.
45-50, February, 1959.
 8.
Lawson, J.
L., and G.
E.
Uhlenbeck (eds.):" Threshold Signals," MIT Radiation Laboratory St:ries,  vol.
24, McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York, 1950.
 9.
Oliver, B.
M.: Automatic Volume Control as a Feedback Problem, Proc.
I RE, vol.
36, pp.
466 473,  April, 1948.
 TRACKING RADAR 187  10.
Field.
J.
C.
G.: The Design of Automatic-gain-control Systems for Auto-tracking Radar Receivers,  Proc.
IEE.
pt.
C.
vol.
105, pp.
93-108, March, 1958.
 11.
Locke, A.
S.: "Guidance," pp.
402--408, D.
Van Nostrand Company, Inc., Princeton, N.J., 1955.
 12.
Damonte, J.
R ..
and D.
J.
Stoddard: An Analysis of Conical Scan Antennas for Tracking, IRE Natl.
 Cmw.
Record, vol.
4.
pt.
I, pp.
39-47, 1956.
 U.
Page, R.
M.: Monopulsc Radar.
IRE Natl.
Conv.
Record, vol.
3, pt.
8, pp.
132-134, 1955.
 14.
Dunn, J.
IL and D.
D.
Howard: Precision Tracking with Monopulse Radar, Electrordcs, vol.
33, no.
 17.
pp.
51-56.
Apr.
22.
1960.
 15.
Barton, D.
K ..
anti S.
M.
Sherman: Pulse Radar for Trajectory lnstrumcnt.:ition, paper prcscnlc<l al  Sixth National Flight Test instrumentation Symposium, Instrument Society of America, San Diego,  Calif ..
May 3.
1960.
 16.
Cohen, W., and C.
M.
Steinmetz: Amplitude and Phase-sensing Monopulse System Parameters, pts I  and II.
Micr()wave J ..
vol.
2.
pp.
27-33.
October, 1959, and pp.
33-38, November, 1959; also discussion  hy F.
J.
Gardiner.
vol.
3, pp.
18, 20, January, 1960.
 17.
Rhodes, D.
R.: "Introduction to Monopulse," McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York, 1959.
 18.
Barton.
D.
K.: "Radars.
vol.
I.
Monopulse Radar," Artech House, Inc., Dedham, Mass., 1974 (a  collection of 26 reprints from the literature of monopulse radar).
 19.
Downey.
E.
J., R.H.
Hardin, and J.
Munishian: A Time Duplexed Monopulse Receiver, Conj.
Proc.
on  Military Electronics C 01111.
(IRE), 1958, p.
405.
 20.
Rubin, W.
L., and S.
K.
Kamen: SCAMP-A New Ratio Computing Technique with Application to  Monopulse, Microwai•e J ..
vol.
7, pp.
83-90, December, 1964.
 21.
Abel, J.
E., S.
F.
George, and 0.
D.
Sledge: The Possibility of Cross Modulation in the SCAMP Signal  Processor, Proc.
IEEE, vol.
53, pp.
317-318, March, 1965  22.
Notilit, R.
S.: Reliability without Redundancy from a Radar Monopulse Receiver, Microwaves, vol.
6,  pp.
56 60.
December, 1967.
 B Kirk pat rick, Ci.
M.: Final Engineering Report on Angular Accuracy Improvement, General Electric  Co.
Report 011 Contract D.A.
36-039-sc-194, Aug.
l., 1952.
(Reprinted in ref.
18.)  24.
Ricardi.
L.
J., and L.
Niro: Design of a Twelve-horn Monopulse Feed, IRE Conv.
Rec., l, pp.
49-56,  1961.
(Reprinted in ref.
18.)  25.
Hannan, P.
W., and P.A.
Loth: A Monopulse Antenna Having Independent Optimization of the Sum  and DilTerence Modes, I RE C01w.
Rec., l, pp.
56-60, 1961.
(Reprinted in ref.
18.)  26.
Howard.
D.
D.: Single Aperture Monopulse Radar Multi-Mode Antenna Feed and Homing Device,  Proc 1964 fnternational Conv.
Military Electronics, Sept.
14-16, pp.
259-263.
 27.
Sommer.
H.
W.: An Improved Simultaneous Phase Compariscru Guidance Radar, IRE Trans., vol.
 ANE-3, pp.
67-70, June, 1956.
 2R.
Haus1., W., and R.
A.
Zachary: Phase-Amplitude Monopulse System, IRE Trans., vol.
MIL-6, pp.
 140-146, April 1972.
(Reprinted in ref.
18.)  29.
Dunn, J.
H., D.
D.
Howard, and A.
M.
King: Phenomena of Scintillation Noise in Radar  Tracking Systems.
Proc.
IRE, vol.
47, pp.
855-863, May, 1959.
 30.
Dunn, J.
H., and D.
0.
Howard: Target Noise, chap.
28 of" Radar Handbook," M.
I.
Skolnik (ed.),  McGraw-Hill Book Co., New York, 1970.
 31.
Locke, A.
,S.: "Guidance," D.
Van Nostrand Company, Inc., Princeton, NJ., 1955, pp.
440-442.
 32.
Delano, R.
H.: A Theory of Target Glint or Angular Scintillation in Radar Tracking, Proc.
I RE, vol.
 41, pp.
1778-1784, December, 1953.
 33.
Delano, R.
H., and I.
Pfeffer: The Effect of AGC on Radar Tracking Noise, Proc.
IRE, vol.
44, pp.
 801-810, June, 1956.
 34.
Dunn, J.
H., and D.
D.
Howard: The Effects of Automatic Gain Control Performance on the Tracking  Accuracy of Monopulse Radar Systems, Proc.
IRE, vol.
47, pp.
430-435, March, 1959.
 35.
Gustafson, B.
G., and B.
0.
As: System Properties of Jumping Frequency Radar.
Philips Telecom.
Rev.,  vol.
25, no.
l, pp.
70-65, July, 1964.
 J6.
Lind, G.: Reduction of Radar Tracking Errors with Frequency Agility, IEEE Trans., vol.
AES-4, pp.
 4IO 416, May, 1968.
 J 7.
Lind, G.: A Simple Approximate Formula for Glint Improvement with Frequency Agility, IEEE Trans.,  vol.
AES-8, pp.
854-855, November, 1972.
 38.
Nicholls, L.A.: Reduction or Radar Glint for Complex Targets by Use of Frequency Agility.
IEEE  Trans., vol.
AES-I I.
pp.
647 649, July, 1975.
(See also comment on p.
325 or ref.
85.)  39.
Sims, R.
J., and E.
R.
Graf: The Reduction of Radar Glint by Diversity Techniques, IEEE Trans., vol.
 AP-19, pp.
462-468, July, 1971.
 40.
Loomis, J.
M., and E.
R.
Graf: Frequency-Agility Processing to Reduce Radar Glint Pointing Error,  IEEE Trans., vol.
AES-10.
pp.
811-820, November, 1974.
 188 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  41.
Barton, D.
K., and H.
R.
Ward:" Handbook of Radar Mcasun:ment," Prl.!nticc.:-llall, Inc, Engkwoo<l  Cliffs, N.J., 1969.
 42.
Barton, D.
K.: "Radars, vol.
4, Radar Resolution and Mullipath Effects," Artech llouse, Inc,  Dcdhum, Mass, 1975.
(collection of 38 reprints.)  43.
Howard, D.
D., J.
Nessmith, and S.
M.
Sherman: Monopulse Tracking Errors Due 10 Multipath,  IEEE EASCON '71 Record, pp.
175-182.
 44.
Kittredge, F., E.
Ornstein, and M.
C.
Licitra, Millimeter Radar for Low-Angle Tracking, IEEE  EASCON '74 Record, pp.
72-75, IEEE Publication 74 CHO 883-1 AES.
 45.
Barton, D.
K.: Low-Angle Radar Tracking, Proc.
IEEE, vol.
62, pp.
687-704, June, 1974.
 46.
Linde, G.
J.: Improved Low-Elevation-Angle Tracking with Use of Frequency Agility, Naval Research  Laboratory Rept.
7378, Washington, D.C., Mar.
17, 1972.
 47.
Dax, P.R.: Keep Track of that Low-Flying Attack, Microwaves, vol.
15, pp.
36-42,47 53, April, 1976.
 48.
White, W.
D.: Low-Angle Radar Tracking in the Presence of Multipath, I £EE Tnms., vol.
AES-10, pp.
 835-852, November, 1974.
 49.
Peebles, P.
Z., Jr.: Multipath Angle Error Reduction Using Multiple-Target Methods, IEEE Trans.,  vol.
AES-7, pp.
1123-1130, November, 1971.
·•  50.
Howard, J.E.: A Low Angle Tracking System for Fire Control Radars, IEEE 1975 illlt!rnmivna/  Radar Co1iference, pp.
412-417.
 51.
Dax, P.
R.: Accurate Tracking of Low Elevation Targets Over the Sea with a Monopulse Radar,  I EE£ Conj.
Publ.
no.
105, "Radar-Present and Future," Oct.
23-25, 1973, pp.
160-165.
 52.
Sherman, S.
M.: Complex Indicated Angles Applied to Unresolved Radar Targets and Multipath.
 IEEE Trans.
vol.
AES-7, pp.
160-170, January, 1971.
 53.
Albersheim, W.
J.: Elevation Tracking Through Clutter Fences, S11pplemelll to I £EE Trw1s .• vol.
 AES-3, pp.
366-373, Nov.
1967.
 54.
Hatcher, J.
L., and C.
Cash: Polarization Agility for Radar Glint Reduction, IEEE Region 3 Co111·e11- tion, Huntsville, Alabama, Nov.
19-21, 1969.
 55.
Locke.
A.
S.: "Guidance," pp.
408-413, D.
Van Nostrand Company, Inc., Princeton, NJ., 1955.
 56.
Cross, D.
C., and l E.
Evans: Target-Generated Range Errors, Naval Research Laborntory Mi:111orw1- dum Report 2719, January, 1974.
 57.
Cross, D.
C.: Low Jitter High Performance Electronic Range Tracker, IEEE 1975 lmenwtiu,wl Radar  Conference, pp.
408-411, IEEE Publication 75 CHO 938-l AES.
 58.
Galati, G.: Range-tracking in Tracking Radars: Analysis and Evaluation of the Accuracy, Ril'ista  Technica Selenia (Rome, Italy), vol.
2, no.
2, pp.
29-41, 1975.
 59.
The SCR-584 Radar, Electronics, pt.
1, vol.
18, pp.
104-109, November, 1945; pt.
2, vol.
\8, pp.
 104-109, December, 1945; pt.
3, vol.
19, pp.
110-117, February, 1946.
 60.
Cady, W.
M., M.
B.
Karelitz, and L.
A.
Turner (eds.):" Radar Scanners and Radomes," MlT Radia­ tion Laboratory Series, vol.
26, p.
66, McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York, 1948.
 61.
Symonds, M.
D., and J.
M.
Smith: Multi-Frequency Complex-Angle Tracking of Low-Level Targets,  Radar-Present and Future, pp.
166-171; Oct.
23-25, 1973, IEE Conference Publication No.
105.
 62.
Nessmith, J.
T.: Range Instrumentation Radars, IEEE ELECTRO '76, Boston, Mass., May l l 14,  1976.
 63.
Schelonka, E.
P.: Adaptive Control Techniques for On-Axis Radars, IEEE 1975 lmernational Radar  Conference, Arlington, Va., April 21-23, 1975, pp.
396-401, IEEE Publication 75 CHO 938-1 AES.
 64.
Clark, B.
L., and J.
A.
Gaston: On-Axis Pointing and the Maneuvering Target, NA ECON '75 Rt'cord,  pp.
163-170.
 65.
Pollock, E.
J.: In Loop Integration Control (ILIC), Technical Memorandum 118, Feb.
I, 1976, Air  Force Special Weapons Center, Kirtland Air Force Base, New Mexico.
 66.
Howard, D.
D.: High Range-Resolution Monopulse Tracking Radar and Applications, EASCON '74  Record, pp.
86-91, IEEE Publication 74 CHO 883-1 AES.
 67.
Provejsil, D.
J., R.
S.
Raven, and P.
Waterman: "Airborne Radar," D.
Van Nostrand Co., Inc.,  Princeton, N.J., 1961.
 68.
Hoare, E., and G.
Hine: Servomechanisms, chap.
11 of" Mechanical Engineering in Radar and  Communications," C.
J.
Richards (ed.), Van Nostrand Reinhold Co., New York, 1969.
 69.
Plowman, J.C.: Automatic Radar Data Extraction by Storage Tube and Delay Line Techniques, J.
 Brit.
IRE, vol.
27, pp.
317-328, October, 1963.
 70.
Caspers, J.
W.: Automatic Detection Theory, chap.
15 of" Radar Handbook," M.
I.
Skolnik (ed.),  McGraw-Hill Book Co., Inc., New York, 1970.
 71.
Oakley, B.
W.: Tracking in an Air Traffic Control Environment, chap.
30 of" Radar Techniques for  Detection, Tracking and Navigation," W.
T.
Blackband {ed.), Gordon and Breach, New York, 1966.
 72.
Benedict, T.
R., and G.
W.
Bordner: Synthesis of an Optimal Set of Radar Track-While-Scan Smooth­ ing Equations, IRE Trans., vol.
AC-7, pp.
2_7-32, July, 1962.
 TRACKING RADAR 189  73.
Simrson.
JI.
R.: Performance Measures and Optimization Condition for a Third-Order Sampled­ Data Tracker.
IF.EE Tra11s ..
vol.
AC-8.
pp.
182 183.
April.
1963.
 74.
Quigley.
A.
L.
C.: Tracking and Associated Problems.
lllcenrarional Con( on Radar----Presenc and  l-11r1ire.
Oct.
23 25.
19D.
London.
pr.
352 359.
IEEE Conference Publication no.
105.
 75.
Hamrton.
R.
L.
T ..
and J.
R.
Cooke: Unsupervised Tracking of Maneuvering Vehicles, IEEE Trans.,  ml.
AES-9.
rr 197 207.
March.
1971  76.
Thorp.
J.
S.: Ortimal Tracking of Maneuvering Targets, IEEE Trans .• vol.
AES-9, pp.
512-519, July,  197J  77 Singer.
R A ..
and K.
W.
lklrnke: Real-Time Tracking Filter Evaluation and Selection for Tactical  Applications.
IEEE T,·<111s ..
vol.
AFS-7.
pp.
100 110, Jan.
1971.
 78.
Kalman.
R F.
· t\ New Aprroach to I .inear Filtering and Prediction Problems.
Trans.
ASM E .
.I.
Basic  T·.111/n/.
vol, 82.
pp ..
l4 4\ March.
1960.
 79.
Schooler.
(' C.: Optimal '!.-// Filters for Systems with Modeling Inaccuracies.
IEEE Trans ..
vol.
 t\FS-11.
pp.
I JOO I ~06.
N0Vc.:111her.
1975.
 XO Kanynck.
t\ J.: Tiansirnt Re,ponse of Tracking Filters with Randomly Interrupted Data.
IEF.E  11011s.
vol t\l:S-6.
pp .
.11.1 .123.
May, 1970.
 XI.
Morgan.() IL A Target Trajectory Noise Model for Kalman Trackers.
IEEE Trans ..
vol.
AES-12, pp.
 405 408.
May.
1976.
 82.
Leth-1:srl'tlsrn.
L.: Fvaluation of Track-While-Scan Computer Logics.
chap.
29 of "Radar  Techniques for Detection.
Tracking.
and Navigation." W.
T.
Blackband (ed.).
Gordon and !Jreach.
 New York.
1966.
 83.
Cantrell.
B.
H., Ci.
Y.
Trunk.
J.
D.
Wilson.
and J.
J.
Alter: Automatic Detection and Integrated  Tracking.
IEEE /975 lntcnwtivnal Radar Co11fi.•re11ce.
pp.
391-395.
Arlington.
Ya., Apr.
21--23.
1975.
 IFFI: Publication 75 CHO 938-1 AES.
 84.
Bhagavan.
B.
K.
and R.
J.
Polge: Performance of the g-h Filter for Tracking Maneuvering Targets,  I F.F.E Tre111., ..
vol.
AFS-10.
pp.
864 866.
November, 1974.
 85.
Barton.
D.
K : "Radars.
vol.
6.
Frequency Agility and Diversity." Artech House.
Inc ..
Dedham.
Mass ..
 1977.
 86.
Sakamoto.
II ..
and P.
Z.
Peebles.
Jr.: Conopulse Radar, IEEE Trans.
vol.
AES-14, pp.
199-208,  January.
1978.
 X 7.
Bak ut.
P.
A ..
and I.
S.
Bol'shakov: "Questions of the Statistical Theory of Radar, vol.
II," chaps 10 and  11.
Sovetskoye Radio.
Moscow, 1963.
Translation available from NTIS, AD 645775, June 28, 1966.
 XX.
Skolnik.
M.
1.:-CQUUJlent or~_tl!c_Angul,u Resolution oUla.d.ar, Proc.
IEEE, vol.
63.
pp.
1354-1355.
 September.
1975.
 89.
Trunk, G.
V.: Range Resolution of Targets Using Automati~ Detectors, Naval Research Laboratory  Rcrc.
8178.
Nov.
28.
1977.
Washington, D.C.
Also.
IEEE Trans., vol.
AES-14, pp.
750-755, September.
 1978.
 90.
Howard.
D.
D., S.
M.
Sherman, D.
N.
Thomson, and J.
J.
Campbell: Experimental Results of the  Complex Indicated Angle Technique for Multipath Correction, IEEE Trans., vol.
AES-10, pp.
 779 787.
Novemher.
1974.
 91.
White.
W.
D.: Double Null Technique for Low Angle Tracking, Microwave J .• vol.
19, pp.
35-38, 60,  December.
1976.
 92.
Bartom D.
K.: Low Angle Tracking.
Microwave J., vol.
19, pp.
19-24, December, 1976.
 93.
Howard, D.
D.: Investigation and Application of Radar Techniques for Low-Altitude Target Track­ ing.
I EE International Radar Conference, RADAR-77, London, Eng., Oct.
25-28, 1977, IEE Confer­ ence Publication No.
105, pp.
313-317, IEEE (New York) Publication No.
77 CH 1271-6 AES.
 94.
Mrstik.
A.
V., and P.
0.
Smith: Multipath Limitations on Low-Angle Radar Tracking, IEEE Trans ..
 vol.
A ES-I 4, pp.
85-102, January.
1978.
 95.
Howard.
D.
D.: Predicting Target-Caused Errors in Radar Measurements, Electronic Warfare Defense  Elecrroriio, vol.
10.
pp.
88-95.
February.
1978.
See also same title and author in IEEE EASCON '76  Record, pp.
30-A to 30-H.
 96.
Trunk.
G.
V ..
and J.
D.
Wilson: Track Initiation in a Dense Detection Environment, Naval Researclr  Lahoratory (Washington, D.C.) Rept 8238, July 28.
1978.
 97.
Flad.
E.
H.: Tracking of Formation Flying Aircraft.
International C01!ference RADAR-77, Oct.
25-28,  1977.
pp.
160-163, IEE (London) Conference Publication No.
155.
 98.
Kossiakolf.
A ..
and J.
R.
Austin: Automated Radar Data Processing System.
U.S.
Patent 4,005,415,  Jan.
25.
1977.
 99.
Casner.
P.
G., and R.
J.
Prengaman: Integration and Automation of Multiple Co-located Radars,  lncernatimwl Conference RADAR-77.
Oct.
25-28.
1977, pp.
145-149, IEE (London) Conference Publi­ cation 110.
155.
 CHAPTER  SIX  RADAR TRANSMITTERS  6.1 INTRODUCTION  The radar system designer has a choice of several different transmitter types, each with its own  distinctive characteristics.
The first successful radars developed prior to World War 11  employed the conventional grid-controlled (triode or tetrode) vacuum tube adapted for opera­ tion at VHF, a relatively high frequency at that time.
The magnetron oscillator, which  triggered the development of microwave radar in World War II, has been one of the most  widely used of radar transmitters, especially for mobile systems.
The klystron amplifier, in­ troduced to radar in the 1950s, offered the system designer higher power at microwaves than  available from the magnetron.
Being an amplifier, the klystron permitted the use of more  sophisticated waveforms than the conventional rectangular pulse train.
The klystron was  followed by the traveling-wave tube, a close cousin with similar properties to the klystron  except for its wider bandwidth.
The 1960s saw the availability of the crossed-field amplifier, a  tube related to the magnetron, There are several variations of crossed-field amplifiers, each  with its special properties; but they are all characterized by wide bandwidth, modest gain, and  a compactness more like that of the magnetron than the klystron or the traveling-wave tube.
 Solid-state devices such as the transistor and the bulk--cffect and avalanche diodes can  also be employed as radar transmitters.
They have some interesting properties as compared to  the microwave vacuum tube, but the individual devices are inherently of low power.
 There is no one universal transmitter best suited for all radar applications.
Each power­ generating device has its own particular advantages and limitations that require the radar  system designer to examine carefully all the available choices when configuring a new radar  design.
·  The transmitter must be of adequate power to obtain the desired radar range, but it must  also satisfy other requirements imposed by the system application.
The special demands of  MTI (moving target indication), pulse doppler, CW radar, phased-array radar, EMC  190  RADAR TRANSMITTERS 191  (electromagnetic compatibility), and ECCM (electronic counter-countermeasures) all  influence the type or transmitter selected and its method of operation.
The choice of transmit­ ter also depends on whether the radar operates from fixed land sites, mobile land vehicles,  ships.
aircraft, or spacecraft.
Other considerations include the size and weight, high-voltage  and X-ray protection.
modulation requirements, and the method of cooling.
A transmitter is a  major part of a radar system; hence, its size, cost, reliability, and maintainability can  significantly affect the size, cost, reliability, and maintainability of the radar system of which it  is a part.
Not only does the transmitter represent a significant fraction of the initial cost of a  radar system, but it can often take a large share of the operating costs because of the prime  power and the needs of maintenance.
The classical radar range equation (Chap.
2) shows that  the transmitter power depends on the fourth power of the radar range.
To double the range of  a radar.
the power has to be increased 16-fold.
Buying radar range with transmitter power  alone can therefore he costly.
 Thus there arc many diverse requirements and system constraints that enter into the  selection and design of a transmitter.
This chapter briefly reviews the various types of transmit­ ter tubes and their characteristics.
More complete descriptions will be found in the Radar  l/a11dhook.1  For the most part, this chapter discusses the tubes used in radar transmitters and not the  transmitters themselves.
A transmitter is far more than the tube alone.
It includes the exciter  and driver amplifiers if a power amplifier, the power supply for generating the necessary  voltages and currents needed by the tube, the modulator, cooling for the tube, heat exchanger  for the cooling system if liquid, protection devices (crowbar) for arc discharges, safety inter­ locks, monitoring devices, isolators, and X-ray shielding.
 The efficiency quoted for most tubes is the RF conversion efficiency, defined as the RF  power output available from the tube to the d-c power input of the electron stream.
This is the  efficiency of interest to the tube designer.
The system engineer, however, is more concerned  with the overall transmitter efficiency, which is the ratio of the RF power available from the  transmitter to the total power needed to operate the transmitter.
If, for example, the RF  efficiency of a microwave tube were 40 to 50 percent, the transmitter efficiency might be 20 to  25 percent.
(The actual number, of course, varies considerably with tube type and application.)  There are two basic radar-transmitter configurations.
One is the self-excited oscillator,  exemplified by the magnetron.
The other is the power amplifier, which utilizes a low power,  stable oscillator whose output is raised to the required power level by one or more amplifie;  stages.
The ~lystron, traveling-wave tube, and the crossed-field amplifier are examples of  microwave power-amplifier tubes.
The choice between the power oscillator and the power  amplifier is governed mainly by the particular radar application.
Transmitters that employ the  magnetron power-oscillator are usually smaller in physical size than transmitters that employ  the power amplifier.
The various amplifier transmitters, however, are generally capable of  higher power than the magnetron oscillator.
Amplifiers are of greater inherent stability, which  is of importance for MTI and other doppler radars, and they can generate more conveniently  than can power oscillators the modulated waveforms needed for pulse-compression radar.
 Power oscillators, therefore, are likely to be found in applications where small size and  portability are important and when the stability and high power of the ·amplifier transmitter  are not required.
 The magnetron power oscillator has probably seen more application in radar than any  other tube.
It is the only power oscillator widely µsed in radar.
The classical magnetron is of  low cost, convenient size and weight, and high efficiency, and has an operating voltage low  enough not to generate dangerous X-rays.
The coaxial magnetron improves on the classical  magnetron by providing greater reliability, longer life, and better stability.
 192 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  The klystron amplifier provides the radar system designer with high power, high gain,  good efficiency, and stability for MTI and pulse-compression applications.
lt is probably the  preferred tube for most high-power radar applications if its high operating voltage and large  size can be tolerated.
The traveling-wave tube is similar to the klystron.
It differs from  the klystron in having wider bandwidth, but at the expense or less gain.
The crossed-field  amplifier is of the same general family as the magnetron and shares some of its properties,  especially small size and weight, high efficiency, and an operating voltage more convenient  than that of the klystron and the traveling-wave tube.
Like the traveling-wave tube, it enjoys a  wide bandwidth; but it is of relatively low gain and therefore requires more than one s1age in  the amplifier chain.
The magnetron and the crossed-field amplifier are devices which utiliLe the  properties of electron streams in crossed electric and magnetic fields.
The klystron and the  traveling wave tube are of a different family known as linear beam tubes.
·~ Radars at VHF and UHF have often employed grid-controlled triode.and tetrode tuhes.
 These have usually been, in the past, competitive in cost to other power generation means at  these frequencies.
Solid-state devices, such as transistors and microwave diode generators,  have also been considered for radar operation.
Their properties differ significantly from  microwave tubes and require major changes in system design philosophy when they are used.
 6.2 THE MAGNETRON OSCILLATOR  More than any other single device, the high-power magnetron oscillator invented in  19392 made possible the successful development of microwave radar during World War II.
 The magnetron is a crossed-field device in that the electric field is perpendicular to a static  magnetic field.
Although the name magnetron has been applied in the past to several different  electron devices,3 it was the application of cavity resonators to the magnetron structure that  permitted a workable microwave oscillator of high power and high efficiency.
 Conventional magnetron.
The basic structure of the classical form of the magnetron is shown  in Fig.
6.1.4 The anode (1) is a large block of copper into which are cut holes (2) and slots (J).
 The holes and slots function as the resonant circuits and serve a purpose similar to that or the  lumped-constant LC resonant circuits used at lower rrequencies.
The holes correspond,  roughly, lo the inductance L, and the slots correspond to the capacity C.
In the desired mode  of operation (the so-called rr mode) the individual C's and L's are in parallel, and the frequency  or the magnetron is approximately that of an individual resonator.
The cathode (4) is a fat  cylinder of oxide-coated material.
The cathode must be rugged to withstand the heating and  disintegration caused by the back-bombardment of electrons.
Back-bombardment increases  the cathode temperature during operation and causes secondary electrons to be emitted.
For  this reason the heater power may be reduced or even turned off once the oscillations have  started.
The relatively fat cathode, required for theoretical reasons, can dissipate more heat  than can a thin cathode.
 In the interaction space (5) the electrons interact with the d-c electric field and the  magnetic field in such a manner that the electrons give up their energy to the RF field.
The  magnetic field, which is perpendicular to the plane of the figure, passes through the interaction  space parallel to the cathode and perpendicular to the d-c electric field.
The crossed electric  and magnetic fields cause the electrons to be completely bunched almost as soon as they are  emitted from the cathode.
After becoming bunched, the electrons move along in a traveling­ wave field.
This traveling-wave field moves at almost the same speed as the electrons, causing  RF power to be delivered to the wave.
The RF power is extracted by placing a coupling  ® RADAR TRANSMITTERS 193  Figure 6.1 Cross-sectional sketch of the classical  cavity magnetron illustrating component parts.
 loop (6) in one or the cavities or by coupling one cavity directly to a waveguide.
Not shown in  Fig.
6.1 arc end-shield disks located at each end of the cathode for the purpose of confining the  electrons to the interaction space.
 The straps (7) are metal rings connected to alternate segments of the anode block.
They  improve the stability and efficiency of the tube.
The preferred mode of magnetron operation  corresponds to an RF field configuration in which the RF phase alternates 180° between  adjacent cavities.
This is called the rr mode.
The presence of N cavities in the magnetron results  in N /2 possible modes of operation.
Each of these N /2 modes corresponds to a different RF  field configuration made up of a standing wave of charge.
All the modes except the 1t mode are  degenerate: that is.
they can oscillate at two different frequencies corresponding to a rotation  of the standing-wave pattern, where the positions of the nodes and antinodes are interchanged.
 Tilus there arc N -I possible frequencies in which the magnetron can oscillate.
The presence  of more than one possible mode of operation means that the magnetron can oscillate in any  one or these'f requencies and can do so in an unpredictable manner.
This is the essence of the  stability problem.
The magnetron must be designed with but one mode dominant.
The rr mode  is usually preferred since it can be more readily separated from the others.
The straps provide  stability since they connect all those segments of the anode which have the same potential in  the rr mode and thus permit the tube more readily to operate in this preferred mode.
 Instead of tile hole and slot resonators of Fig.
6.1, vanes may be used, as in Fig.
6.2a.
Slots  have also been employed.
When large and small slots are alternated, as in the rising-sun  magnetron structure of Fig.
6.2/,, stable oscillation can occur in the rr mode without the need  for straps.
Since there arc no straps, the rising-sun geometry is more suitable for the shorter  wavelengths than are conventional resonators.
 Coaxial ma~netron.
;\ significant improvement in power, efficiency, stability, and life over the  conventional magnetron is obtained when the straps are removed and the 1t mode is controlled  by coupling alternate resonators to a cavity surrounding the anode.
This is known as a coaxial  moo11ctro11 since the stabilizing cavity surrounds the conventional resonators, as sketched in  194 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  (a) (b) Figure 6.2 Magnetron resonators.
 (a) Vane type; (b) rising sun, with  alternate slot lengths.
 Fig.
6.3.
The output power is coupled from the stabilizing coaxial cavity.
The cavity operates  in the TE011 mode with the electric field lines closed on themselves and concentric with the  circular cavity.
The RF current at every point on the circumference of the cavity has the same  phase, so that the alternate slots which couple to the stabilizing cavity are of the same phase as  required for 1t mode operation.
The elimination of the straps allows the resonators to be  designed for optimum efficiency rather than as a compromise between efficiency and mode  control.
 The power handling capability of a magnetron depends on its size.
Increasing the size of a  magnetron, however, requires increasing the number of resonators.
The greater the number of  resonators the more difficult the problem of mode separation.
Since the mode separation in a  coaxial magnetron is controlled in the TE011 stabilizing cavity rather than in the resonator  area, the coaxial magnetron can operate stably with a large number of cavities.
This allows a  larger anode and cathode structure than with the conventional magnetron, and therefore  a coaxial magnetron can operate at higher power levels.
The larger structures permit more  conservative design, with the result that coaxial magnetrons exhibit longer life and better  Electric Field-, __  lines  (TE011 mode) .
Output  waveguide  cooducter Figure 6.3 Cross-sectional sketch of  the coaxial cavity magnetron.
 RADAR TRANSMITTERS 195  Figure 6.4 Photograph of the SFD-341 me­ chanically tuned C-band coaxial magnetron  for shipboard and ground-based radars.
This  tube delivers a peak power of 250 kW with a  0.00 I duty cycle over the frequency range from  5.45 to 5.825 GHz.
The efficiency is 40 to 45  percent.
(Courtesy V aria11 Associates, Inc ..
 Beverly, MA.)  reliability than conventional magnetrons.
It has been said that the operating life of coaxial  tu hes can be between 5000 and 10,000 hours, a five-to twenty-fold improvement compared to  conventional magnetrons.44 Since most of the RF energy is stored in the TE011 cavity rather  than in the resonator region, reliable broadband tuning of thf magnetron may be accom­ plished by a noncontacting plunger in the cavity.
Both the pushing figure (change in frequency  with a change in anode current) and the pulling figure (change in frequency with a change in  phase of th~ load) are much less in the coaxial magnetron than in the conventional  configuration.
 The external appearance of the coaxial magnetron, Fig.
6.4, is similar to that of the  conventional magnetron, and the electron and RF operations that take place in the interaction  space are the same for both types of magnetrons.
The differences between the two are in the  more effective mode control of the coaxial cavity as compared to that offered by conventional  strapping.
 In the inverted coaxial magnetron the cathode surrounds the anode.
The stabilizing TE011  cavity is in the center of the magnetron with a vane-type resonator system arranged on the  outside.
The cathode is built as a ring surrounding the anode.
Power is coupled from the end of  the central stabilizing cavity by a circular waveguide.
The geometry of the inverted coaxial  magnetron makes it suitable for operation at the higher frequencies.
Figure 6.5 is an example.
 Performance chart and Rieke diagram.
Four parameters determine the operation of the  magnetron.
l'hese are ( l) the magnetic field, (2) the anode current, (3) load conductance, and  Figure 6.5 Photograph of the SFD-319 K0- band fixed frequency inverted coaxial magnet­ ron.
This tube delivers a peak power of 100 kW  with a 0.005 duty cycle at a frequency between  34,512 and 35.208 GHz.
The efficiency is  about 25 percent.
( Courtesy Varian Associ- ates, Inc., Beverly, MA.)  196 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  (4) load susceptance.
The first two parameters are related to the input side of the tube, whik  the last two are related to the output side.
In most magnetrons the magnetic field is fixed by the  tube designer and may not be a variable the radar designer has under his control.
The  observed quantities are usually the output power, the wavelength, and the anode voltage.
 The problem of presenting the variation of the three quantities-power, wavelength, voltage­ as a function of the four parameters mentioned above is greatly simplified since the input and  output parameters operate nearly independently of each other.
Thus it is possible to study the  effect of the magnetic field and the anode current at some value of load susceptance and  conductance chosen for convenience.
The results will not be greatly dependent upon the  particular values of susceptance and conductance chosen.
Similarly, the variation of the ob­ served quantities can be studied as a function of the load presented to the magnetron, with the  input parameters-magnetic field and current-likewise chosen for convenience.
The plot of  the observed magnetron quantities as a function of the input circuit parameters,,for some fixed  load, is called the performance chart.
The plot of the observed quantities as a function of the  load conductance and susceptance, for a fixed magnetic field and anode current, is called a  Rieke diagram, or a load diagram.
 An example of the coaxial magnetron performance characteristics is shown in Fig.
6.6a.
 The power output, anode voltage, and efficiency are plotted as a function of the magnetron input  power for a fixed frequency and with the magnetron waveguide-load matched.
The peak  voltage is seen to vary only slightly with a change in input power, but the power output varies  almost linearly.
Figure 6.6h plots the power output and voltage as the tube is tuned through its  frequency range, when the current is held constant and the waveguide load is matched.
The  variation in magnetron efficiency is similar to that of the variation with power.
 The change in the oscillator frequency produced by a change in the anode current for a  fixed load is called the pushing figure.
A plot of frequency vs.
current, as in Fig.
6.6c, is called  the pushing characteristic and the slope of the curve is the pushing figure.
The lower the value  of the pushing figure, the better the frequency stability.
The coaxial magnetron has a lower  pushing figure than a conventional magnetron because of the stabilizing effect (high Q) of it's  relatively large coaxial TE011 cavity.
Pushing effects are more serious with longer pulses since  their spectra are narrow.
A given change in frequency with a narrow-spectrum pulse will be  noticed more than with a wide spectrum pulse.
 The effect of the load on the magnetron characteristics is shown by the Rieke diagram,  whose coordinates are the load conductance and susceptance (or resistance and reactance ).
 Plotted on the Rieke diagram are contours of constant power and constant frequency.
Thus  the Rieke diagram gives the power output and the frequency of oscillation for any specified load  condition.
Although a cartesian set of load coordinates could be used, it is usually more  convenient to plot the power and frequency on a set of load coordinates known as the Smith  chart.
The Smith chart is a form of circle diagram widely used as an aid in transmission-line  calculations.
A point on the Smith chart may be expressed in conductance-susceptance co­ ordinates or by a set of polar coordinates in which the voltage-standing-wave ratio (VSWR)  is plotted as the radius, and the phase of the VSWR is plotted as the angular coordinate.
 The latter is the more usual of the two possible coordinate systems since it is easier for the  microwave engineer to measure the VSWR and the position of the voltage-standing-wave  minimum (or phase) than it is to measure the conductance and susceptance directly.
The  radial coordinate can also be specified by the reflection coefficient r of the load since the  VSWR p and reflection coefficient are related by the equation Ir I = (p - 1 )/(p + 1 ).
The  center of the Smith chart (Rieke diagram) corresponds to unity VSWR, or zero reflection  coefficient.
The circumference of the chart corresponds to infinite VSWR, or unity reflection  coefficient.
Thus the region of low standing-wave ratio is toward the center of the chart.
 30 600,------,------,------..,,--- 25 500 - ~ > 20 '::: 400  ·" ::, - 0.
 <lJ 3 g 15 ~ 300  6 w  > 3!  X 0  ~ 10 a 200  Q ti  <l) [l  5 100  0  I){)( l Peokvolloge  Ellicienc  .
---------- 200 400 600  • Average power input (Watts)  -29  --+----t--+--~--+--;28  Frequency (GHz) 25  24 5.9  +2r---.---,----,--,---,---,---,---,,---,----,  O'  C:  >­u  C  (I.) ::,  C1  ~ -1  tL ----·-------------·  I I -2~~-~~-~-~~-~-~~~  0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20  Peak current {A) (c) ·-----------· ·-·  800 RADAR TRANSMITTERS 197  50  40 ;:e  ~  >- 30 u (a) C  (I)  0  (;;;.
 20 w  "-------10  1000°  Figure 6.6 Performance characteristics of the coaxial magnetron.
(a) Variation of power output,  efficiency, and peak voltage of the SFD-341 as a function of the input average power for a fixed frequency  (5.65 GHz); pulse width= 2.15 µs, duty cycle= 0.0009.
(b) Variation of peak power output and peak  voltage of the SFD-341 with frequency for a fixed current (23.9 A); pulse width = 1.8 µs, and duty  cycle = 0.0009.
(c) Variation of frequency with current for the SFD-377 A X-band coaxial magnetron at a  frequency of 9.373 GHz, with 0.001 duty cycle, and 1.0 µs pulse width (Courtesy Varian Associates, Inc.,  Bet•erly, MA.)  198 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  The standing-wave pattern along a transmission line repeats itself every half wavelength;  therefore, 360° in the diagram is taken as a.
half wavelength.
The reference axis in the Rieke  diagram usually corresponds to the output terminals of the magnetron or the output flange of  the waveguide.
The angle in a clockwise direction from this reference axis is proportional to  the distance (in wavelengths) of the standing-wave-pattern minimum from the reference point.
 An advantage of the Smith chart for plotting the effects of the load on the magnetron parameters  is that the shapes of the curves are practically independent of the position of the reference  point used for measuring the phase of the VSWR.
 An example of a Rieke diagram for a coaxial magnetron is shown in Fig.
6.7.
ll is  obtained by varying the magnitude and phase of the VSWR of the RF load, with the frequency  and the peak current held constant.
The region of highest power on the Rieke diagram is called  the sink and represents the greatest coupling to the magnetron and the highest efficiency.
 Operation in the region of the sink, however, is not always desirable since it.J1as poor fre­ quency stability.
Poor pulse shape and mode changes might result.
The low-power region,  where the magnetron is lightly loaded, is called the antisink or opposice-si11k region.
The  build-up of oscillations in a lightly loaded magnetron is more ideal; however, the magnetron in  this region may perform poorly by showing signs of instability which take the form of arcing  and an increase in the number of missing pulses.
Poor performance is a result of the higher RF  voltages when operating in the antisink region, making RF discharges more likely.
 In a radar with a rotating antenna, the phase and/or magnitude of the VSWR might vary  because the antenna will experience a different load impedance depending on the environment  it views.
The Rieke diagram shows that a change in the VSWR which moves the operating  point of the magnetron into either the sink or antisink regions can cause the magnetron to  operate poorly.
Ferrite isolators are sometimes used to avoid subjecting the magnetron to high  VSWR.
A 10-dB isolator, for example, lowers a VSWR of 1.5 to a value of 1.14.
With a  sufficiently low VSWR, the magnetron operation will not occur in either the sink or the  antisink region, no matter what the phase angle of the load.
 Reference point is ·  waveguide flange Figure 6.7 Rieke, or load, diagram for the  SFD-341 coaxial magnetron.
Duty cycle =  0.0009, peak current = 24 A, pulse width =  2.25 µs, frequency = 5.65 G llz.
(Courtesy  Varian Associates, Inc., Be,,erly, M.4.)  RADAR TRANSMITTERS 199  I\ measure of the effect of the load on the magnetron frequency is the pulling figure,  defined as the <liITcrcnce between the maximum and minimum frequencies when the phase  angle of the load varies through 3600 and the magnitude of the VSWR is fixed at 1.5 (or a  rellcction coefficient of 0.20).
The pulling figure is readily obtained from an inspection of the  Ricke diagram.
For the magnetron whose Rieke diagram is shown in Fig.
6.7, the pulling  figure is approximately 4 M 111.
The pulling figures of coaxial magnetrons are lower by a factor  of .1 to 5 than those of conventional magnetrons.
 Tuning.
The frequency of a conventional magnetron can be changed by mechanically inserting  a tuning clement.
such as a rod.
into the holes of the hole-and-slot resonators to change the  inductance of the resonant circuit.
A tuner that consists of a series of rods inserted into each  cavity resonator so as to alter the inductance is called a crown-of-thorns tuner, or a sprocket  t1111cr.
The amount of mechanical motion of the tuning element need not be large (perhaps a  fraction of an inch at L band) to tune the frequency over a 5 to 10 percent frequency range.
A  frequency change in a conventional magnetron can also be obtained with a change in capacity.
 One example is the cookie cutter, which consists of a metal ring inserted between the two rings  of a double-ring-strapped magnetron, thereby increasing the strap capacitance.
Because of the  mechanical and voltage-breakdown problems associated with this tuner, it is more suited for  use at the longer wavelengths.
Either the cookie cutter or the crown-of-thorns mechanisms can  achieve a 10 percent frequency change.
The two can be used in combination to cover a larger  tuning range than is possible with either one alone.
 A limited tuning range, of the order of 1 percent, can be obtained by a screw inserted in  the side of one of the resonator holes.
This type of adjustment is useful when the normal scatter  of frequencies expected of untuned magnetrons requires the frequency to be fixed to a specified  value.
 In frequency-agile radar systems, the magnetron frequency might be changed pulse-to­ pulse in such a manner that the entire tuning range is covered.
Such radars might be employed  for ECCM, improving the detection of targets with fluctuating cross section and reducing the  effects of glint (Sec.
5.5).
With a high tuning rate, the pulse-to-pulse frequency can be made to  appear pseudorandom, especially if the pulse repetition frequency or the tuning rate is varied  rapidly.
Many of the advantages of frequency agility can be obtained if the radar frequency  shifts pulse-to-pulse the minimum amount required to decorrelate successive echoes.
The  minimum frequency shift is equal to the reciprocal of the pulse width.
Slow tuning rates can be  used.
but the pulse-to-pulse frequency might not appear random.
 One of •the first techniques for achieving frequency-agile magnetrons was known as spin­ tw1i11g.
or rotary tu11ing.
In this device a rotating slotted disk is suspended above the anode  resonators.
Rotation of this disk alternately provides inductive or capacitive loading of the  resonators to raise and lower the frequency.1 The rotating disk is mounted on bearings inside  the vacuum and coupled to a rotating mechanism outside the vacuum.
The Amperex X-band  DX-285 spin-tuned magnetron covers a 500-MHz band in an approximately sinusoidal  manner at rates up to 1000 times per second, equivalent to frequency tuning rates of the order  of I MHz per microsecond.
 i\ coaxial magnetron may be tuned by mechanically positioning in the coaxial cavity a  noncontacting washer-shaped metal ring, or tuning piston, as illustrated in Fig.
6.8.
The  tuning piston can be positioned mechanically from outside the vacuum by means of a vacuum  bellows.
This tuning mechanism may be adapted to provide narrowband frequency agility at a  rapid tuning rate for frequency-agile radar.
The RF frequency of the Varian SFD-354A  X-band coaxial magnetron can be varied sinusoidally over a 60-MHz range at a rate of 70  times per second by this method.
 200 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  Magnetic field lines  Coupling slot  Vane resonator  Cavity mode  attenuator  TE011 mode  Electric field  RF  output  waveguide  \ Output vacuum  window  Vacuum bellows  attenuator  Cathode  Tuning piston ..
 Figure 6.8 Schematic view or a coaxial magnetron showing  the tuning piston mechanically actuated by a vacuum  bellows.
 The rapid tuning over a narrowband for purposes of providing frequency agility is  sometimes called dither tuning.39 In addition to being capable of rapid tuning over a narrow­ band, these tubes also can be tuned to a frequency over a broadband in the normal manner  using a geared drive.
The tuning mechanism may be controlled by a servo motor so as to select  electrically any specific frequency within the operating band either manual.ly or on an automa­ tic, programmed basis.
With servo-motor control, the tube can he tuned from one rrequcncy to  another in under 0.1 second.
 Dither-tuning of a coaxial magnetron may also be obtained by a mechanical tuning  element called a ring tuner.
5•6 This consists of a narrow ring installed in an annular groove cut  into the outer wall of the cavity.
The ring projects slightly into the cavity.
The ring is split, with  the split diametrica11y opposite the output cavity.
The ring is also cut to accommodate the  output coupling slot.
Near the output, on both sides of the output coupling, the ring is firmly  attached to the cavity wall, but is unattached otherwise.
By deforming the ring inward from  mechanical motion applied to the free-hanging ends of the ring, the tuning of the cavity is  changed.
The Raytheon QKH 1763 X-band coaxial magnetron tunes in this manner over a  100-MHz range at rates up to 200 Hz.
Electronic tuning is also possible.49  6.3 KLYSTRON AMPLIFIER  The klystron amplifier is an example of a linear beam tube, or 0-type tube.
The characteristic  feature of a linear beam tube is that the electrons emitted from the cathode are formed into a  long cylindrical beam which receives the full potential energy of the electric field before the  beam enters the RF interaction region.
Transit-time effects, which limit the operation of  conventional grid-controlled tubes at the higher frequencies, are used to good advantage in the  klystron.
As the electron beam of the klystron passes the input resonant cavity, the velocity of  the electrons is modulated by the input signal.
This velocity modulation of the beam electrons  is then converted to density modulation.- A resonant cavity at the output extracts the RF  power from the density-modulated beam and delivers the power to a useful load.
 RADAR TRANSMITTERS 201  The klystron has proven to he quite important for radar application.
It is capable of high  average and peak power.
high gain, good efficiency, stable operation, low interpulse noise, and  it can orerate with the modulated waveforms required of sophisticated pulse-compression  systems.
 Description.
A sketch of the principal parts of the klystron is shown in Fig.
6.9.
At the  left-hand portion of the figure is the cathode, which emits a stream of electrons that is focused  into a narrow cylindrical beam by the electron gun.
The electron gun consists of the cathode.
 modulating anode or control grid.
and the anode.
The electron emission density from the  calhode is generally less than required for the electron beam, so a large-area cathode surface is  used and the cmillcd clcclro11s arc caused to converge to a narrow beam of high electron  density.
Tile rno<lulati11g ano<le, or other beam control electrode, is often included as part ol'  the electron-gun structure to provide a means for pulsing the electron beam on and off.
The  RI· cavities.
which correspond to the LC resonant circuits of lower-frequency amplifiers.
arc at  anode potential.
Electrons arc not intentionally collected by the anode as in other tubes:  instead, the electrons are removed by the collector electrode (shown on the right-hand side of  the diagram) after the beam has given up its RF energy to the output cavity.
 The input signal is applied across the interaction gap of the first cavity.
Low-power tubes  might contain a grid structure at the gap to provide coupling to the beam.
In high-power  tuhes.
however, the gap does not usually contain a grid because a grid cannot accommodate  high power.
(The absence of a grid does not seriously impair the coupling between the gap and  the heam.) Those electrons which arrive at the gap when the input signal voltage is at a  maximum (peak of the sine wave) experience a voltage greater than those electrons which  arrive at the gap when the input signal is at a minimum (trough of the sine wave).
The process  whereby a time variation in velocity is impressed upon the beam of electrons is called velocity  mod11lat ion.
 In the drifi space, those electrons which were speeded up during the peak of one cycle  catch up with those slowed down during the previous cycle.
The result is that the electrons of  the velocity-modulated beam become "bunched," or density modulated, after traveling  through the drift space.
If the interaction gap of the output cavity is placed at the point of  maximum hunching.
power can be extracted from the density-modulated beam.
Most high­ power klystrons for radar application have one or more cavities between the input and output  Electron beam  Cathode -)  Heater~ 0--_  J  Modulating~  onode  E lf'ctron  gun I ......
 I  I RF  in space RF  out '  · RF section-·- ···--------I-collector  I  Figure 6.9 Diagrammatic representation or the principal parts of a three-cavity klystron.
 202 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  cavities to provide additional bunching, and hence, higher gain.
The gain of a klystron can be  typically 15 to 20 dB per stage when synchronously tuned, so that a four-cavity (three-stage)  klystron ca_n provide over 50 dB of gain.
 After the bunched electron beam delivers its RF power to the output cavity, the electrons  are removed by the collector electrode which is at, or slightly below, the potential of the  interaction structure.
From 50 to 80 percent of the d-c input power might be converted to heat  in typical linear-beam tubes, and most of this heat appears at the collector.
Therefore the  majority of the cooling required in the klystron is at the collector.
Power is extracted from  the output cavity and delivered to the load by a coupling loop (as shown in Fig.
6.9) for  low-power tubes, or by waveguide in high-power tubes.
A waveguide ceramic window is  necessary to maintain the vacuum in the tube and yet couple power out efficiently.
Waveguide  arcing or thermal stresses are common causes of window failures.
High-power tubes  sometimes employ an arc detector looking directly at the output window that allows either the  drive power to be removed or the beam to be shut o!T within a few tens of microseconds after  the presence of an.' arc is detected.
 In order to counteract the mutual repulsion of the electrons which constitute the electron  beam, an axial magnetic field (not shown in Fig.
6.9) is generally employed.
The magnetic field  focuses, or confines, the electrons to a relatively long, thin beam, and prevents the bc.:am from  dispersing.
The beam focusing can be provided by a uniform magnetic field generated by a  long solenoid which has iron shielding around the outside diameter.
Cooling might have to be  provided for the electromagnets.
The weight of the magnetic focusing system is a major  portion of the total weight of a klystron.
This weight can restrict the utility of klystrons for  airborne and portable applications.
 Klystrons can sometimes be focused with lightweight permanent magnets.1•8 Permanent  magnets require no power input or cooling, and the various protective circuits needed with  solenoids are eliminated.
A significant reduction in weight can be obtained in some tubes by  replacing the solenoid with a periodic-permanent-magnetic (PPM) focusing system which con­ sists of a series of magnetic lenses.
PPM focusing is not suited to large average-power tubes.
At  X band, the maximum average power is probably under a kilowatt.8 In some klystrons the  electron beam may be confined by electrostatic fields designed into the tube structure so that  external magnets are not required.40  In a high-power klystron, from 2 to 5 percent of the beam power might normally be  intercepted by the interaction structure, or body of the tube.
If the beam were not properly  confined in a high-power klystron, the stray electrons that impinge upon the metal strucll:re of  the tube would cause it to overheat and possibly be destroyed.
Since loss of the focusing  magnetic field could cause the tube to fail, protective circuitry is normally employed to remove  the beam voltage in the event or improper focusing or the complete loss of focusing.
The  collector of most high-power klystrons is insulated from the body (RF interaction circuit) of  the tube so as to allow separate metering and overload protection for the body current and the  collector current.
 Pulse modulation.
The klystron amplifier may be pulsed by turning on and off the beam  accelerating voltage, similar to plate moduiation of a triode or magnetron.
The modulator in  this case must be capable of handling the full power of the beam.
When the tube is modulated  by pulsing the RF input signal, the beam current must be turned on and off; otherwise beam  power will be dissipated to no useful purpose in the collector in the interval between RF  pulses, and the efficiency of the tube will be low.
A common method for pulsing the beam of a  klystron is with an electrode in the electron gun that controls the klystron-beam current.
This  RADAR TRANSMITTERS 203  is the mod11/<1ti11q m1ode.
The advantage of the modulating anode is that it requires little control  power to modulate the beam.
The power necessary is that required lo charge and discharge the  capacitance of the klystron gun and its associated circuitry, and this is independent of the pulse  length.
The cutoff characteristics of the modulating anode permit only a few electrons to  escape from the electron gun during the interpulse period when the beam is turned off.
This  is important in radar application since the receiver sensitivity will be degraded if sufficient  electrons are present during the interpulse period to cause the stray electron-current noise to  exceed receiver noise.
 The high-power klystron may also be pulsed with a grid in the electron gun so designed  that the grid does not intercept the electrons.7•8 Such nonintercepting gridded guns can switch  the lieam with low-power modulators.
This technique actually uses two closely spaced and  aligned grids.
One is near the cathode and is at cathode potential.
(In the so-called Unigrid,42  this grid is physically placed on the cathode but is properly passivated to prevent emission.)  The second grid is the control grid for the beam current.
It is at a positive potential and is  located in the shadow of the 11rst grid.
For this reason the first grid is also known as the shadow  qrid.
The purpose of the shadow grid is to suppress electron emission from those portions of  the cathode which otherwise would be intercepted by the second, or control, grid.
The cathode  surface under each opening of the first grid is dimpled.
Each dimple is aligned with the  openings of the grid so that beam lets are formed within each grid opening.
The beam intercep­ tion on the control grid or practical nonintercepting gridded guns might be less than a few  hundredths of one percent of beam current.8 The shadow grid can also be used in the  traveling-wave tube.
 Bandwidth.
The frequency of a klystron is determined by the resonant cavities.
When all the  cavities are tuned to the same frequency, the gain of the tube is high, but the bandwidth is  narrow, perhaps a fraction of one percent.
This is known as synchronous tuning.
Although  maximum gain is obtained with all cavities tuned to the same frequency, klystrons are often  operated with the next to the last cavity (the penultimate cavity) tuned outside the passband  on the high-frequency side.
The gain is reduced by about 10 dB in so doing, but the improved  electron bunching results in greater efficiency and in 15 to 25 percent more output power.7  Broadbanding of a multicavity klystron may be accomplished in a manner somewhat analo­ gous to the methods used for broadbanding multistage IF amplifiers, that is, by tuning the  individual cavities to different frequencies.
This is known as stagger tuning.
Stagger tuning of a  klystron is not strictly analogous to stagger tuning a conventional IF amplifier because inter­ actions amoQ_g cavities can cause the tuning of one cavity to affect the tuning of the others.
The  S band VA-87, a four-cavity klystron amplifier, has a synchronously tuned half-power band­ width of 20 MHz and a gain of 61 dB.
When tuned for maximum power the bandwidth is  increased to 27 MIiz and the gain reduced to 57.6 dB.9 By stagger tuning the various cavities  the half-power bandwidth can be increased to 77 MHz (about 2.8 percent bandwidth), but  with a concurrent decrease in gain to 44 dB·.
In practice, stagger tuning enables the bandwidth  of the multicavity klystron amplifier to be increased from a synchronously tuned bandwidth of  ! to l percent to values of more than 5 percent.
Multicavity klystrons can be designed with  bandwidths as large as 10 to 12 percent or greater.7•10•41•50  Tuning.
Although conventional klystrons are of narrow bandwidth, they may be tuned over a  wide frequency range.
7 A simple tuning mechanism is a flexible wall in the resonant cavity.
The  tuning range is about 2 or 3 percent, and the tuner life is limited.
Tuning ranges of 10 to 20  percent arc possible with a movable capacitive element (paddle) in the cavity.
Tuner life is no  204 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  problem, but the tuner increases the cavity capacitance and thus decreases the cavity im­ pedance so that there is reduced bandwidth at the low-frequency end of the tuning range.
 Tuning ranges of 10 to 15 percent can be obtained without a compromise in impedance by  using a sliding-contact movable cavity wall, but at the expense of increased mechanical  complexity.
 To simplify the tuning of a klystron it is desirable to have a" gang tuner" by which all the  cavities are controlled by a singleknob when changing frequency.
Gang tuning is complicated,  however, since the resonant cavities do not generally have the same tuning rates.
The channel  tuning mechanism avoids the problem of the frequency tracking of the resonant cavities by  pretuning the cavities (generally at the factory); and the tuning information is stored mechan­ ically within the tuner mechanism.
Thus when a particular frequency channel is desired, the  tuner mechanism provides the correct tuner position for each cavity to achieve the desired  klystron frequency response.
The klystron differs from other tubes in that the higher the peak  power, the greater can be its bandwidth.48•50  Other properties.
The RF conversion efficiency of klystron amplifiers as used for radar might ,  range from 35 to 50 percent.
The less the bandwidth of the klystron, the greater can be its  efficiency.43 However, by use of harmonic bunching of the electron beam, high-power CW  klystrons of wide bandwidth have demonstrated efficiencies as high as 70 to 75 percent.8  The advantage of the klystron over other microwave tubes in producing high power is due  to its geometry.
The regions of beam formation, RF interaction, and beam collection arc  separate and independent in the klystron.
Each region can be designed to best perform its own  particular function independently of the others.
For example, the cathode is outside the RF  field and need not be restricted to sizes small compared with a wavelength.
Large cathode area  and large interelectrode spacings may be used to keep the emission current densities and  voltage gradients to reasonable values.
The only function of the collector electrode in the  klystron is to dissipate heat.
It can be of a shape and size most suited for satisfying the average  or peak power requirements without regard for conducting RF currents, since none arc  present.
 The design flexibility available with the klystron is not present in other tuhe types con­ sidered in this chapter, except for the traveling-wave tuhe.
In most other tubes the functions of  electron emission, RF interaction, and collection of electrons usually occur in the same region.
 The design of such tubes must therefore be a compromise between good RF performance and  good heat dissipation.
Unfortunately, these requirements cannot always be satisfied simulta­ neously.
Good RF performance usually requires the tube electrodes to be small compared with  a wavelength, while good heat dissipation requires large structures.
 The high-power capability of the klystron, like anything else, is not unlimited.
One of the  major factors which has restricted the power available from klystrons has been the problem of  obtaining RF windows capable of coupling the output power from the vacuum envelope to the  load.
Other factors limiting large powers are the difficulty of operating with high voltages, of  dissipating heat in the collector, and of obtaining sufficient cathode emission current.
 Examples.
Klystrons have seen wide application in radar.
Several examples of radar pulse  klystrons will be briefly mentioned.
The VA-87E, shown in Fig.
6.10, is a 6-cavity, S-band  klystron tunable over the range from 2.7 to 2.9 GHz.
It was designed to meet the requirements  for the ASR-8 Airport Surveillance Radar.
It has a peak power of 0.5 to 2.0 MW and an  average power of0.5 to 3.5 kW.
The gain is nominally 50 dB and its efficiency is greater than 45  percent.
Its 1-dB bandwidth is 39 MHz, but it is inherently capable of greater values.
A peak  RADAR TRANSMITTERS 205  Figure 6.lO Photograph of the V A-87E 6-cavity S-band klystron mounted on a dolly.
(Courtesy Varian  Associates, Inc., Palo Alro, CA.)  beam voltage of 65 kV is required and its peak beam current is 34 amperes.
The pulse duration  can be from 0.5 to 6.0 µs.
 The VA-812C is a wideband UHF klystron with a 12 percent bandwidth.
It is capable of  8 MW of peak power and 30 kW of average power, with a pulse width of 6 µs.
Its efficiency is  40 percent and gain is 30 dB.
A peak beam voltage of 145 kV is required.
The VA-812C formed  the basis ror the design of the VA-842, a tube used in the Ballistic Missile Early Warning  System (BMEWS), with a demonstrated life in excess of 50,000 hours.
The VA-812E, which  was also derived from the same family as the VA-812C, has a peak power of 20 MW with an  instantaneous 1-dB bandwidth of 25 MHz and a 40 dB gain.
Its average power rating is  300 kW at a duty of 0.015 and a 40 µs pulse width.
 206 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  6.4 TRAVELING-WA VE-TUBE AMPLIFIER  The traveling wave tube (TWT) is another exam pk of a linear-beam, or 0-type, tuhc.
It Jifkrs  from the klystron amplifier by the continuous interaction of the electron beam and the RF  field over the entire length of the propagating structure of the traveling-wave tuhc rathcr than  the interaction occurring at the gaps of a relatively few resonant cavities.
The chief character­ istic of the TWT of interest to the radar system engineer is its relatively wide bandwidth.
A  wide bandwidth is necessary in applications where goqd range-resolution is required or where  it is desired to avoid deliberate jamming or mutual interference with nearby radars.
Although  low power TWTs are capable of octave bandwidths, bandwidths of the order of 10 to 20  percent are more typical at the power levels required for long-range radar applications.
The  gain, efficiency, and power levels of TWTs are like those of the klystron; but, in general, their  values are usually slightly less than can be obtained with a klystron of comparable design.
 A diagrammatic representation of a traveling-wave tube is shown in Fig.
6.11.
The elec­ tron optics is similar to the klystron.
Both employ the principle of velocity modulation to  density-modulate the electron beam current.
Electrons emitted by the cathode or the traveling­ wave tube are focused into a beam and pass through the RF interaction circuit known as the  slow-wave structure, or periodic delay line.
An axial magnetic field is provided to maintain the  electron-beam focus, just as in the klystron.
A shadow grid to pulse-modulate the beam can  also be included.
After delivering their d-c energy to the RF field, the electrons are removed by  the collector electrode.
The RF signal to be amplified enters via the input coupler and propa·  gates along the slow-wave structure.
A helix is depicted as the slow-wave structure in Fig.
6.11,  but TWTs for radar usually use a structure better suited for high power.
The velocity of  propagation of electromagnetic energy is slowed down by the periodic structure so that it is  nearly equal to the velocity of the electron beam.
It is for this reason that helix and similar  microwave circuits are called slow-wave structures or delay lines.
The synchronism between  the electromagnetic wave propagating along the stow-wave structure and the d-c electron  beam results in a cumulative interaction w~ich transfers energy from the d-c electron beam to  the RF wave, causing the RF wave to be amplified.
 The simple helix was used as the slow-wave structure in the early TWTs and is still  preferred in traveling-wave tubes at power levels up to a few kilowatts.
It is capable or wider  bandwidth than other slow-wave structures, but its power limitations do not make it suitable  for most high-power radar applications.
A modification of the helix known as the ring-bar  circuit has been used in TWTs to achieve higher power and efficiencies between 35 and 50  percent.1u2 The Raytheon QKW-1671A, which utilizes a ring-bar circuit, has a peak power  of 160 kW, a duty cycle of 0.036,''pulse width of 70 µs, gain of 45 dB, and a 200 MHz band­ width at L band.
This tube is suitable for air-se~rch radar.
Similar TWTs have been used in  phased-array radar.
The Air Force Cobra Dane phased-array radar, for examplt.:, uses 96  /Gun Attenuation  Cathode Lade ,@rn, Collecto~  Heater~-~----~-----~ --- ------1· · Helix · •  Elewon gr l t ::::: I I  beam t RF .
RF  input.
output  Figure 6.11 Diagrammatic representation or the traveling-wave tube.
 RADAR TRANSMITTERS 207  QKW-1723 TWTs.
each with a peak power of 175 kW and an average power of 10.5 kW  operating over the frequency band offrom ll7Sto .1375 MHz.
Since this radar is designed to  monitor ballistic-missile reentry vehicles, its pulse width is as great as 2000 µs.
 The ring-loop slow-wave circuit which consists of equally spaced rings and connecting  bars, is also related to the helix and the ring-bar.
It is claimed 14 to be preferred for tubes in the  power range from I to 20 kW, as for lightweight airborne radar or as drivers for high-power  tubes.
The ring-loop circuit is not bothered by the backward-wave oscillations of the ordinary  helix or the "rabbit ear" oscillations which can appear in coupled-cavity circuits.
 The helix has been operated at high average power by passing cooling fluid through a  helix constructed of copper tubing.43 The bandwidth of this type of fluid-cooled helix TWT  can he almost an octave, and it is capable of several tens of kilowatts average power at L band  with a duty cycle suita hie for radar applications.
 t\ popular form of slow-wave structure for high-power TWTs is the coupled-cat'ity  circuit.
7· 11 ft is not derived from the helix as are the ring-bar or ring-loop circuits.
The  individual unit cells of the coupled-cavity circuit resemble the ordinary klystron resonant  cavities.
There is no direct coupling between the cavities of a klystron; but in the traveling­ wave tuhe, coupling is provided by a long slot in the wall of each cavity.
The coupled-cavity  circuit is quite compatible with the use of lightweight PPM focusing, a desired feature in some  airborne applications.
·  Although the TWT and the klystron are similar in many respects, one of the major  differences between the two is that feedback along the slow-wave structure is possible in the  TWT.
but the back coupling of RF energy in the klystron is negligible.
If sufficient energy were  fed back to the input, the TWT would produce undesired oscillations.
Feedback energy might  arise in the TWT from the renection of a portion or the forward wave at the output coupler.
 The feedback must be eliminated if the traveling-wave amplifier is to function satisfactorily.
 Energy traveling in the backward direction may be reduced to an insignificant level in most  tubes by the insertion of attenuation in the slow-wave structure.
The attenuation may be  distributed.
or it may be lumped; but it is usually found within the middle third of the tube.
 Loss introduced to attenuate the backward wave also reduces the power of the forward wave,  which results in a loss of efficiency.
This loss in the forward wave can be avoided by the use of  discontinuities called severs, which are short internal terminations designed to dissipate the  reverse-directed power without seriously afTecting the forward power.13 The number of severs  depends on the gain of the tube; one sever is used for each 15 to 20 dB of gain.
In addition lo  reflection-type oscillations, backward-wave oscillations can occur.
These frequently occur  outside the p~ssband so that they can be reduced by loss that is frequency selective.13  In principle, the traveling-wave tube should be capable of as large a power output as the  klystron.
The cathode, RF interaction region, and the.collector are all separate and each can  he designed to perform their required functions independently of the others.
In practice,  however.
it is found that there are limitations to high power.
The necessity for attenuation or  severs in the structure, as mentioned above, tends to make the traveling-wave tube less efficient  than the klystron.
The slow-wave structure can also provide a limit to TWT capability.
It  seems that those slow-wave structures best suited for broad bandwidth (like the helix) have  poor power capability and poor heat dissipation.
A sacrifice in bandwidth must be made if  high-power is required of a TWT.
If the bandwidth is too small, however, there is little  advantage to be gained with a traveling-wave tube as compared with multicavity klystrons.
 A klystron can be operated over a fairly wide range of beam voltage without a large  change in the gain characteristics.
However, high-power traveling-wave tubes tend to oscillate  at reduced beam voltage.
Therefore the tolerance on the TWT beam voltage must be tighter  with increasing bandwidth.
7 The protection requirements for traveling-wave tubes are similar  208 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  to those of the klystron, but they are generally more difficult than for the klystron.
In some  traveling-wave tubes with coupled-cavity circuits; oscillations appear for an instant during the  turn-on and turn-off portions of the pulse.
1 They are called rabbit-ear oscillations because of  their characteristic appearance when the RF envelope of the pulse waveform is displayed  visually on a CRT.
These can be undesirable in some military applications since they might  provide a distinctive feature for recognizing a particular radar.
 An example of a traveling-wave tube designed for radar applications is the S-hand Varian  VA-125A.
It is a broadband, liquid-cooled TWT which uses a clover leaf coupled-cavity  slow-wave structure.
It is capable of 3 MW of peak power over a 300 MHz bandwidth, with a  0.002 duty cycle, a 2-µs pulse width, and a gain of 33 dB.
This tube is similar in many respects  to the V A-87 klystron amplifier.
It was originally designed to he used interchangeably with the  VA-87 klystron, except that the VA-125 TWT has a broader bandwidth and requires a larger  input power because of its lower gain.
.~  In addition to being used as the power tube for high-power radar systems, the travding­ wave tube has also been employed, at lower power levels, as the driver for high-power tubes  (such as the crossed-field amplifier), and in phased array radars which use many tubes to  achieve the desired high-power levels.
 6.5 HYBRID LINEAR-BEAM AMPLIFIER  By combining the advantages of the· klystron and the traveling-wave tube into a single device it  is possible to obtain a high--power amplifier with a bandwidth, efficiency, and gain flatness  better than can be obtained with either the usual klystron or TWT.7 _One such device is the  Varian Twystron (a trade nam~), which is a hybrid consisting of a multicavity klystron input  section coupled to an extend~d interaction traveling-wave output section.
The limitation to the  bandwidth of a klystron is generally the output cavity.
It cannot be made broadband without a  decrease in efficiency.
The slow-wave circuits of traveling-wave tubes have a broader band­ width than klystron resonant cavities; and when used for the output of a klystron, as in the.!  Twystron, a broad bandwidth cari be achieved with the peak and average power capabilities of  a klystron.
 The C-band Varian VA-146 Twystron family of tubes provides peak power outputs from  200 kW to 9 MW with bandwidths greater than 10 percent.
The VA-146N produces a 2.5 MW  peak power with a 20 µs pulse at a 0:004 duty cycle over a It dB bandwidth of 500 MHz at C  band.
The gain is 31 dB and the efficiency at midband is 40 percent.
 6.6 CROSSED-FIELD AMPLIFIERS  The crossed-field amplifier (CF A), like the magnetron oscillator, is characterized by magnetic  and electric fields that are perpendicular to each other.
Such tubes are of high efficiency (40 to  60 percent), relatively low voltage (compared with a linear-beam tube), and of light weight and  small size so as to make them of interest for mobile applications.
CF As are capable of broad  bandwidth (10 to 20 percent) with high peak power, but the gain is usually modest.
They have  good phase stability, and a number of CF As can be operated in parallel for greater power.
 CF As can be used as a power booster following a magnetron oscillator, as the high-power  stage in master-oscillator power-amplifier (MOPA) transmitters with other CF As or a TWT  as the driver stage, or as t.he individual transmitters of a high-power phased-array radar.
 RADAR TRANSMITTERS 209  The crossed-lick! amplifier is based 011 tile same principle of electronic interaction as tile  magnetron.
Thus, its characteristics resemble those of the magnetron, and many CF As are  even similar in physical appearance to a magnetron.
The CF A also resembles the traveling­ wave tube because the electronic interaction in both is with a traveling-wave.
 There are several different types of crossed-field amplifiers.
They all employ a slow-wave  circuit.
cathode, and input and output ports.
A schematic of a CF A is as shown in Fig.
6.12.
It  rcscmhles the magnetron oscillator except that there arc two external couplings (an input and  output).
Electrons originate from the cylindrical cathode which is coaxial to the RF slow-wave  circuit that acts as the anode.
The cathode in a crossed-field tube is also known as the sole.
 (The term sole.
which means wo1111d plate.
comes from the French.
who did much of the early  work on crossc<l-f1eld devices.) In some crossed-field devices the sole does not emit electrons.
 and a separate emitting cathode is used.
The two words sole and cathode are sometimes used  interchangeably.
The slow-wave structure is designed so that an RF signal propagates at a  velocity near that of the electron beam.
This permits an exchange of energy from the electron  hl'am to Ilic RF ficld lo produce amplification.;\ d-c electric field is applied between the anode  (slow-wave structure) and the cathode.
t\ magnetic field is perpendicular to the plane of the  paper.
The electrons emitted from the cathode.
under the action of the crossed electric and  magnetic fields, form into rotating electron (space-charge) bunches, or spokes.
These bunches  <lrift along the slow-wave circuit in phase with the RF signal and transfer energy to the RF  wave to provide amplification.
Instead of the collector electrode found in the klystron an<l the  T\VT.
the spent electrons terminate in the crossed-field amplifier on the slow-wave anode  s true! u re.
 The CF A.
depicted in Fig.
6.12 is called ree11tra11t, in that the electrons that are not  collected after energy is extracted at the output port are permitted to reenter the RF interac­ tion area at the input.
This improves the efficiency of the tube.
The reentering electrons, however,  might contain modulation which will be amplified in the next pass through the circuit.
To  circumvent this the tube of Fig.
6.12 has a drift space to demodulate the electron stream so as to  remove this RF feedback.
Some crossed-field tubes, such as the Ami-,litron and the forward-wave  magnetron, do not have the drift space and employ the feedback provided by the reentering  electrons.
Ir the drift space in Fig.
6.12 is replaced by a collector electrode which terminates the  electron stream, the CF A is called nonreentrant.
 The traveling-wave interaction of the electron beam and the RF signal may be with either  a forward traveling-wave (as in the TWT) or with a backward traveling-wave.
The type of  interaction is determined by the slow-wave circuit employed.
A forward-wave interaction  takes place when the phase velocity and the group velocity of the propagating signal along the  slow-wave circuit arc in the same direction.
(The group velocity is the velocity with which  energy is propagated along the slow-wave circuit, and the phase velocity is the velocity of the  RF signal on the slow-wave circuit as it appears to the electrons.
To achieve RF  Energy Charging  impedance  ( ___ .,._ __  t  I Energy  storage  element  Load  Figure 6.12 Sim pie representation of a  crossed-field amplifier.
(From Clam­ pitt,6 Electronic Progress, Raytliein.)  210 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  amplification, the phase velocity must be near the velocity of the electron stream.) A backward­ wave interaction takes place when the phase velocity is in the direction opposite that of the  group velocity.
The forward-wave CFA can operate over a broad range of frequency with a  constant anode voltage, with only a small variation in the output power.
On the other hand,  the power output of a backward-wave CFA, with a constant anode voltage, varies with  frequency.
For a typical backward-wave CFA, the power output can vary 100 percent for a 10  percent change in frequency.15 It is possible, however, with conventional modulator  techniques, to operate the backward-wave CFA over a wide band with little change in output  power.
The type of modulators normally used with cathode-pulsed CF As can readily compen­ sate for the power variation with frequency of a backward-wave CF A and hold the variation of  output power within acceptable levels.
This is a result of the nature of the dispersion character­ istics of such tubes.
For example, with a particular X-band Varian backward-wave CF A, 16 a  constant-voltage modulator produces a variation in output power from 505 kW at 9.0 GHz to  240 kW at 9.5 GHz, a change of 3.2 dB.
A constant-current modulator with the same tube  results in a power variation of only 0.3 dB over the same frequency range.
Since most practical  modulators are neither constant-current nor constant-voltage devices, actual performance is  somewhere in between.
A modulator with an internal impedance of t 50 ohms will result in  both current and voltage variations as a function of frequency when used with the above CF A,  but the power output varies only 1 dB.
Thus it does not matter significantly to the modulator  designer whether the CF A is of the backward-wave or the forward-wave type as long as  cathode pulsing is used with either a line-type modulator or a constant-current hard-tube  modulator.
 Electron emission in high-power crossed-field amplifiers can take place by cold-cathode  emission without a thermally heated cathode.
Some of the electrons emitted from the cathode  are not collected by the anode but return to the cathode by the action of the RF field and the  crossed electric and magnetic fields.
When these electrons strike the cathode they produce  secondary electrons that sustain the electron emission process.
Cold-cathode emission requires  the presence of both the RF drive signal applied to the tube as well as the d-c voltage between  cathode and anode.
The buildup of the current by means of this secondary emission process is  very rapid (within nanoseconds).
There is little pulse-to-pulse time jitter in the starting process.
 All hough the name cold-cathode emission is used to describe the action by which electrons arc  produced in the CFA, the cathode might not actually be "cold." The bombardment of the  cathode surface by returning electrons can raise the cathode temperature high enough to  require liquid cooling to prevent its destruction.
 The CF A can be pulse-modulated by turning on and off the high voltage between the  anode (at ground potential) and the cathode (at a large negative potential).
This is called  cathode pulsing.
The RF drive is usually applied to the CF A before the high voltage is applied  since an RF signal is needed to start the emission process in a secondary-emission cathode.
If  high voltage is applied without RF drive, the amplifier appears as an open circuit to the  modulator, causing the modulator voltage to double.
The higher voltage could lead to arcing.
 The d-c high-voltage can be applied before the RF signal if the design is such that voltage  breakdown or arcing does not occur..
This leads to the possibility of modulating the tube  without the need for a high-power modulator as required with cathode pulsing.
Such opera­ tion is possible with the forward-wave CF A using a cold secondary-emission cathode.
The d-c  operating voltage is applied continuously between cathode and anode.
The tube remains  inactive until the application of the RF input pulse starts the emission process, causing  amplification to take place.
At the end of the RF drive-pulse the electrons remaining in the  tube must be cleared from the interaction area to avoid feedback which generates oscillations  or noise.
In reentrant CF As, the electron stream can be collected after the removal of the RF  RADAR TRANSMITTERS 211  drive-pulse by mounting an electrode in the cathode, but insulated from it, in the region of the  drift space between the RF input and output ports.
This is known as a cutoff, or co11trol,  electrode.
A positive potential is applied to this cutoff electrode at the termination of the pulse  to collect, or q11e11clr, the remaining electron current.
The positive potential need be applied for  only a short time; hence the energy requirements are low.
This method of modulation in which  the d-c anode-cathode voltage is applied continuously and the tube is turned on by the start of  the Rf-' drive-pulse and turned off at tile end or the pulse by the aid or a cut-off electrode to  remove I lie electrons, has hee11 called d-c operation.
It is applicable to forward-wave CF As, but  ii is not usually used with back ward-wave CF As since the variation or output power with  frequency at a constant d-c voltage that is characteristic of backward-wave tubes would limit  tile bandwidth to but a few percent.
 It is also possible to turn the CFA on and off with the RF drive-pulse, without the need for  a positive pulse applied to the cutoff electrode at the end of the drive pulse.
The cutoff  electrode can be designed to operate with an appropriate constant positive-bias that allows  sufficient reentrance of the electrons when the RF drive is on but be unable to maintain the  electron stream with the RF drive orT.17 This is called RF keying, or self-keying.
In principle, it  is the simplest way to modulate the CF A.
 Although RF keying and d-c operation are simpler pulse-modulating methods than cath­ ode pulsing, they have not been as widely used in the past as has the cathode pulser.
Usually  there have been factors other than modulator size that determine the method of modulation  best used in practice.15  Unlike tubes that employ thermonic cathode emission for their supply of electrons, a tube  with a cold secondary-electron cathode does not experience a droop, or decay, of the pulse  amplitude with time.
In addition to the insensitivity of electron emission with pulse duration,  there is also an insensitivity to duty cycle if the cathode is cooled sufficiently so that the  secondary emission properties of the cathode do not change with temperature.17 Thus high and  low duty-cycles can be employed interchangeably if the cathode temperature is maintained cool  enough, usually below about 400 or 500°C.
 The noise and spurious signals generated by a CF A can be quite low when the tube is  locked in and controlled by an RF drive signal.17 Measurements of noise made with the  voltages applied but with the tube inactive because of no RF drive-signal, indicate the noise to  approach what would be expected from its thermal level.
Intrapulse noise is generally much  higher.
Spurious signals can also arise during the flat part of the pulse.
The greater the RF  drive the less will be the in-band noise.
Thus the lower the gain the less will be the noise.
 Pedestals can a'ppear at the leading and trailing edges of the pulse, somewhat like the" rabbit  ears" found in traveling-wave tubes.
They can be caused by the feedthrough of the RF  drive-pulse when it is wider than the d-c modulator pulse, or they can be due to spurious  oscillations, called band-edge oscillations, that occur just outside the normal tube­ bandwidth.16· 17  The insertion loss of a CF A is low and might be less than 0.5 dB.
The RF drive will thus  appear at the output of the tube with little attenuation.
In a low-gain amplifier the input power  which appears at the output can be a sizable fraction of the total.
The conversion efficiency of  a CF J\ is defined as  Erfi .
RF power output -RF drive power 1c1ency = .
d-c power input (6.
l)  This is a conservative definition since the RF drive power is not lost but appears as part of the  output.
 212 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  The low insertion loss of a CFA can be of advantagc in systems that require more than  one radiating power level.-By omitting the-application of d-c voltage to the final stage, the  lower level RF drive-power can be fed through the final stagi.: with littlc atti.:nua1ion.
This  allows two power levels, depending on whether the final CF A stage has d-c voltage applied or  not.
The low insertion loss also means that an RF signal traveling in the reverse direction from  output to input suffers little attenuation.
A high-power circulator or other isolation device may  be required between the CF A and its driver to prevent the power reflected from the output of  the CF A building up into oscillations or interfering with the driver stage.
 The gain of conventional pulsed crossed-field amplifiers is typically between 10 and  17 dB.
By designing the cold cathode as a slow-wave circuit and introducing the RF drive al  the cathode emitting surface itself, it has been possible to achieve about 30 dB of gain in a  high-power pulse CF A with power, bandwidth, and efficiency commensurate with conven­ tional designs.43 The RF output is taken from the anode slow-wave circuit.
Thi6 type of device  has been called a cathode-driven CF A 6 or a high-gain CF A.
19  The type of crossed-field amplifier principally considered in this section can be described  as a distributed emission, or emitting sole, amplifier with a reentrant, circular format utilizing  a forward-wave interaction without feedback.
(The dectron stream is debunched to remove  the modulation before reentering the interaction space.) There are other typt:s of CF As,  however.
The Amplitron, one of the first successful CF As, is similar to the above except it  employs a backward-wave interaction with feedback.
The circular reentrant CF A can hc  designed with or without feedback and with either forward- or backward-wavc intcraction.
 The nonreentrant tube can have either a linear or a circular format, with choice of forward- or  backward-wave interaction.
CF As can also be built with an injected electron beam and a  nonemitting sole, but these have not found much application in radar.
 The crossed-field amplifier is capable of peak powers comparable to those of linear-beam  tubes, and average powers only slightly less than those achieved with linear-beam tubes.10  Efficiencies greater than 50 percent are common.
The bandwidths are similar to those obtained  with the traveling-wave tube.
Forward-wave Cf As generally have bandwidths from 10 to 25  percent; backward-wave CFAs, less than 10 percent.
The gains are low or modest, but the  potential exists for higher gains, especially if trade-offs with other properties are permitted.
 Reasonably long life has been demonstrated with CF As.
Operation for greater than 10,000  hours is not unusual in some tubes.17 The good phase stability and short electrical length of  CF As make it possible to operate tubes in parallel to achieve greater power than available  from a single tube, as well as provide redundancy in the event of a single tube failure.
The CF A  behaves as a saturated amplifier rather than as a linear amplifier.
The characteristic of a  saturated amplifier is that, above a certain level,_the RF opt put is independent of the RF input.
 A saturated amplifier is compatible with frequency and phase-modulated pulse compression  waveforms.
 When used in an amplifier chain, the CF A is generally found in only the one or two  highest-power stages.
It is often preceded by a medium-power traveling-wave tube.
This  combination takes advantage of the best qualities of both tube types.
The TWT provides high  gain, and the CFA allows high power to be obtained with high efficiency, good phase stability,  and low voltage.
20  The characteristics of a CFA are illustrated by the Varian SFD-257, a forward-wave tube  used in the final high-power amplifier stage or the transmitter chain in the AN/MPS-36  C-band range-instrumentation tracking radar.18 The SFD-257 operates over the frequency  range 5.4 to 5.7 GHz with a peak power of 1 MW, 0.001 duty cycle, and an efficiency of over 50  percent.
The tube is d-c operated in that the RF pulse turns the tube on and a control electrode  turns it off.
In this radar application the pulse widths arc 0.25, 0.5, or 1.0 ,,s, but the tube can  deliver a pulse as wide as 5 µs.
A coded group, or burst, of five 0.25 JtS pulses is also utilized.
It ' .....
~/,,l  RADAR TRANSMITI"ERS 2 (J  requires 50 kW of drive power an<l operates with 30 kV anode voltage and 70 A of peak anode  current.
Liquid cooling is employed for both the anode and cathode.
Approximately one  gallon of water per minute with a pressure drop of 9 psi is required.
The tube is housed in a  magnetically shielded package that stands approximately 2 ft high with a diameter of 1 ft and  weighs 210 lb.
J\ Yac-lon vacuum pump is included within the magnetically shielded package  to monitor the vacuum and to provide continuous pumping action during operation.
ln the  J\ N/M PS-36 transmitter chain the SFD-257 is preceded by an SFD-244 cathode-pulsed CF A  with 11 dB gain, which is driven by a 904Tl cathode-pulsed TWT with 49 dB gain.
The drive  power to the T.WT is 50 mW.
 6.7 c;1u1>-CONTROLLEI> TUBES  The early radars developed during the 1930s used conventional grid-controlled vacuum tubes  since there existed 110 other source of large RF power.
This limited the development of the  early radars to the VHF and the lower UHF bands.
These tubes were triodes or tetrodes  designed lo minimize the transit-time effects and other problems of operating at VHF and  UHF.
21 The potential applied to the control grid of the tube acts as a gate, or valve, to control  the number of electrons traveling from the cathode to the anode, or plate.
The variation of  potential applied to the grid is imparted to the current traveling to the anode.
The process by  which the electron stream is modulated in a grid-controlled tube to produce amplification is  called density modulation.
 When the discovery of the cavity magnetron led to the successful development of micro­ wave radar early in World War II, interest in lower frequency radars waned.
However, improve­ ments in high-power, grid-controlled tubes continued to be made due to the needs of  UHF-TY, tropospheric-scatter communications, and particle accelerators as well as radar.
At  VHF and UHF, grid-controlled power tubes have been widely used in high-power radar  systems.
They are capable of operation at frequencies as high as 1000 to 2000 MHz, but they  do not seem to be competitive to the linear-beam and crossed-field microwave tubes at radar  frequencies much above 450 MHz.
At low-power levels, gridded tubes must compete with the  solid-stale transistor.
 The grid-controlled tube is characterized as being capable of high power, broadband, low  or moderate gain, good efficiency, and inherent long life.
Unlike other microwave tubes, the  grid-controlled tube can operate, if desired, with a linear rather than a saturated gain charac­ teristic.
In atldition to being used in high-power amplifier chains, the grid-controlled tube has  also seen service in large phased-array radars that operate in the lower radar-frequency bands.
 An example of a grid-controlled tube that could be suitable for high-power radar applica­ tion at UHF is the Coaxitron.22 It has wider bandwidth and better performance than conven­ tional UHF grid-control tubes because it integrates the complete RF input and output circuits  and the electrical interaction system within the vacuum envelope.
The RCA A15193, for  example.
operates from 406 to 450 MHz with 1.5 MW peak power, a duty cycle of 0.0039, 47  percent plate efficiency, and 13 dB gain.
It requires a plate voltage of 17.5 kV, plate current of  183 A.
1.57 V filament voltage and 890 A filament current.
The tube is 76 cm long, 42 cm in  diameter and weighs 63.5 kg.
 Low-power grid-control tubes have been used in phased array radars at UHF and have  proven to be an economical and reliable source of power.
In the AN/FPS-85 satellite­ surveillance radar built by Bendix Corporation for the U.S.
Air Force, the transmit array con­ tains 5184 identical modules using the Eimac 4CPX250K ceramic tetrode.23 Each module has  a peak power or l Ok Wand is 7 by 9 by 31 inches with a weight ornearly 50 lb.
The array operates  with a 10 MHz bandwidth centered at 442 MHz.
 214 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  6.8 MODULATORS  The function of the modulator is to turn the transmitting tube on and off to generate the  desired waveform.
When the transmitted waveform is a pulse, the modulator is sometimes  called a pulser.
Each RF power tube has its own peculiar characteristics which determine the  particular type of modulator to be used.
The magnetron modulator, for instance, must be  designed to handle the full pulse power.
On the other hand, the full power of the klystron and  the traveling-wave tube can be switched by a modulator handling only a small fraction of the  total beam power, if the tubes are designed with a modulating anode or a shadow grid.
The  crossed-field amplifier (CFA) is often cathode-pulsed, requiring a full-power modulator.
Some  CF As are d-c operated, which means they can be turned on by the start of the RF pulse and  turned off by a short, low-energy pulse applied to a cutoff electrode.
Some CF As can be turned  on and off by the start and stop of the RF pulse, thus requiring no modulator at.all.
Triode and  tetrode grid-controlled tubes may be modulated by applying a low-power pulse to the grid.
 Plate modulation is also used when the radar application cannot tolerate the interpulse noise  that results from those few electrons that escape the cutoff action of the grid.
 The basic elements of one type of radar modulator are shown in Fig.
6.13.
Energy from an  external source is accumulated in the energy-storage element at a slow rate during the inter­ pulse period.
The charging impedence limits the rate at which energy can be delivered to the  storage element.
At the proper time, the switch is closed and the stored energy is quickly  discharged through the load, or RF tube, to form the pulse.
During the discharge part of the  cycle, the charging impedance prevents energy from the storage element from being dissipated  in the source.
 Line-type modulator.
A delay line, or pulse-forming network (PFN), is sometimes used as the  storage element since it can produce a rectangular pulse and can be operated by a gas-tube  switch.
This combination of delay-line storage element and gas-tube switch is called a line-type  modulator.
It has seen wide application in radar because 0f its simplicity, compact size, and its  ability to tolerate abnormal load conditions such as caused by magnetron sparking.1·24·25 A  diagram of a line-type pulse modulator is shown in Fig.
6.14.
The charging impedance is  shown as an inductance.
The pulse-forming network is usually a lumped-constant delay line.
It  might consist of an air-core inductance with taps along its length to which are attached  capacitance to ground.
A transformer is used to match the impedance of the delay line to that  of the load.
A perfect match is not always possible because of the nonlinear impeJanct!  characteristic of microwave tubes.
 The switch shown in Fig.
6.14 is a hydrogen thyratron, but it can also be a mercury  ignitron, spark gap, silicon-controlled rectifier (SCR), or a saturable reactor.
A gas tube such  Energy  source Charging  impedance  f------ 1  l  I Switch  I.__ --- Charging path Energy  storage  element  ------) (-----i I  t r t  I I I '-____ _) __ _)  Discharge path load  Fi1ure 6.13 Basic elements of one type  of radar pulse modulator.
 Charging  impedance  frnn·-o- LcH  Energy Trigger  in sourse --~  Hydrogf!n  lhyralron Charging  d,ode  Bypass  diode pulse -forming network ~"ITrl  Le  De spiking  cicuit Pulse  transformer  (]?"""  Damping  network  Figure 6.14 Diagram of a line-type modulator.
RADAR TRANSMITTERS 215  as a thyratron or ignitron is capable of handling high power and presents a low impedance  when conducting.
However, a gas tube cannot be turned off once it has been turned on unless  the plate current is reduced to a small value.
The switch initiates the start of the modulator  pulse by discharging the pulse-forming network, and the shape and duration of the pulse are  determined by the passive circuit elements of the pulse-forming network.
Since the trailing  edge of the pulse depends on how the pulse-forming network discharges into the nonlinear  load, the trailing edge is usually not sharp ahd it may be difficult to achieve the desired pulse  shape.
 The charging inductance Leh and the capacitance C or the pulse-forming network form a  resonant circuit, whose frequency of oscillation approaches Jo= (2nt 1(Lch Ct 112• (The  inductance of the pulse-forming network and the load are assumed small.) With a d-c energy  source the pulse repetition frequency JP will be twice the resonant frequency if the thyratron is  switched at the peak of maximum voltage.
This method of operation, ignoring the effect of the  charging diode, is called d-c resonant charging.
A disadvantage of d-c resonant charging is that  the pulse repetition frequency is fixed once the values of the charging inductance and the  pulse-forming-network delay-line capacitance are fixed.
Rowever, the charging, or hold-off,  diode inserted in series with the charging inductance permits the modulator to be operated at  any pulse repetition frequency less than that determined by the resonant frequency Jo.
The  function of the diode is to hold the maximum voltage and keep the delay line from discharging  until the thyratron is triggered.26 Although the series diode is a convenient method for varying  the prf, it is more difficult to change the pulse width since high-voltage switches in the ..
 pulse-forming network are required.
 The bypass diode and the inductance L8 connected in parallel with the thyratron serve to  dissipate any charge remaining in the capacitance due to tube mismatch.
If this charge were  allowed to remain, the peak voltage on the network would increase with each cycle and build  up to a high value with the possibility of exceeding the permissible operating voltage of the  thyratron.
The mismatch of the pulse-forming network to the nonlinear impedance of the tube  might also cause a spike to appear at the leading edge of the pulse.
The despiking circuit helps  minimize this effect.
The damping network reduces the trailing edge of the pulse and prevents  post-pulse oscillations which could intrQduce noise or false targets.
 Hard-tube modulator.1 The hard-tube modulator is essentially a high-power video pulse  amplifier.
It derives its name from the fact that the switching is accomplished with "hard­ vacuum" tubes rather than gas tubes.
Semiconductor devices such as the SCR (silicon­ controlled rectifiers) can also be used in this application.
1 Therefore, the name active-switch  modulator is sometimes used to reflect the fact that the function of a hard-tube modulator can  216 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  be obtained without vacuum tubes.
Active-switch pulse modulators can be cathode p11lsers that  control the full power of the RF tube, mod-anode p11lsers that are required to switch at the full  hcam voltage of the RF tuhe but with little current, or grid pulsas that opcralc at a far smaller  voltage than that of the RF beam.
 The chief functional difference between a hard-tube modulator and a line-type modulator  is that the switching device in the hard-tube modulator controls both the beginning and the  end of the pulse.
In the line-type modulator, the switch controls only the beginning of the  pulse.
The energy-storage element is a capacitor.
To prevent droop in the pulse shape due to  the exponential nature of a capacitor discharge, only a small fraction of the stored energy is  extracted for the pulse delivered to the tube.
In high-power transmitters with long pulses the  capacitor must be very large.
It is usually a collection of capacitors known as a capacitor bank.
 The hard-tube modulator permits more flexibility and precision than the line-type modu­ lator.
It is readily capable of operating at various pulse widths and various p~lse repetition  frequencies, and it can generate closely spaced pulses.
The hard-tube modulator, however, is  generally of greater complexity and weight than· a line-type modulator.
 Tube protection.1•27 Power tubes can develop internal flash arcs with little warning even  though they are of good design.
When a flash arc occurs in an unprotected tube, the capacitor­ bank discharges large currents through the arc and the tube can be damaged.
One method for  · protecting the tube is to direct the arc-discharge currents with a device called an electro11ic  crowbar.
It places a virtual short circuit across the capacitor bank to transfer the stored energy  by means of a switch which is not damaged by the momentary short-circuit conditions.
The  name .is derived from the analogous action of placing a heavy conductor, like a crowbar,  directly across the capacitor bank.
Hydrogen thyratrons, ignitrons, and spark-gaps have been  used as switches.
The sudden surge of current due to a fault in a protected power tube is sensed  and the crowbar switching is actuated within a few microseconds.
The current surge also  causes the circuit breaker to open and deenergize the primary source of power.
Crowbars arc  usually required for high-power, hard-tube modulators because of the large amounts of stored  energy.
They are also used with d-c operated crossed-field amplifiers and mod~anode pulsed  linear-beam tubes which are connected.directly across a capacitor bank.
The line-type modu­ lator does not usually require a crowbar since it stores less energy than the hard-tube modula­ tor and it is designed to discharge safely all the stored energy each time it is triggered.
 6.9 SOLID-STA TE TRANSMITTERS  There have been two general classes of solid-state devices considered as _potential sources of  microwave power for radar applications.
One is the transistor amplifier and the other is the  single-port microwave diode that can o·perate as either an oscillator or as a negative-resistance  amplifier.
The silicon bipolar transistor has, in the past, been of interest at the lower micro­ wave frequencies (L band or below)~ and the diodes have been of interest at the higher micro­ wave frequencies.
Gallium arsenide field-effect transistors (GaAs FET) have alsq been  considered at the higher microwave frequencies.
Both the transistor and the diode microwave  generators are characterized by low power, as compared with the power capabilities of the  microwave tubes discussed previously in this chapter.
The low power, as wdl as other charac­ teristics, make the application of solid-staie devices to radar systems quite different from  high-power microwave tubes.The almost total replacement of receiver-type vacuum tu hes by  solid-state devices in ~lectronic systems has offered encouragement for replacing the power  vacuum tube with· an all solid-state't"ransmitter to obtain the advantages offered by that  ~ ' I  RADAR TRANSMITTERS 217  technology.
Although there have been significant advances in microwave solid-state devices  and although they possess properties that differ from other microwave sources, the degree of  application or these devices to radar systems has been limited.
 Microwave transistor.28 · 35·46 At L band the CW power that can be obtained from a single  microwave transistor might be several tens of watts.
Unlike vacuum tubes, the peak power that  can he achieved with narrow pulse widths is only ahout twice the CW power.
28 This results in  the microwave transistor being operated with relatively long pulse-widths and high duty  cycles.
For air-surveillance radar application.
pulse widths might be many tens of  microseconds or more.
Duty cycles of tile order of 0.1 arc not unusual, which is significantly  greater than the duty cycles typical of microwave tubes.
The high duty cycles present special  constraints on the radar system designer so that solid-state transmitters are not inter­ cliangeable with tube transmitters.
A different system design philosophy usually must be  employed with solid state.
 To increase the power output, transistors may be operated in parallel.
From 2 to 8 devices  arc usually combined into a single power module.
Too large a number cannot be profitably  paralleled because of losses that occur on combining.
The gain of a transistor is only of the  order of 10 dB, so that several stages or amplification are necessary to achieve a reasonable  total gain.
t\n L-band module using eight transistors (four paralleled in the final stage, two  paralleled in the penultimate stage, and t.wo series driver stages) might have a peak power  greater than 200 W, 0.1 duty cycle, 200 MHz bandwidth, a gain of 30 dB, and an efficiency  better than 30 percent.31 (When examining the claims of power from solid-state devices, it  should be kept in mind that the greater the junction temperature the less the life of the device.
 Since long life is a featured characteristic of such power sources, they should be operated  conscrvat ively.)  The power output of a microwave transistor theoretically decreases inversely as the  square of the frequency, or 6 dB per octave.29 For this reason the silicon bipolar transistor is  unattractive for radar application at S band or above, especially when appreciable power is  desired.
Varactor frequency multipliers, however, generally have attenuation less than their  frequency-multiplication ratio so that a transistor at some lower frequency followed by a  varactor multiplier has sometimes been employed to obtain power at the higher microwave  frequencies.
In oneexperimentaldesign,30 X-band power was obtained by an S-band transistor  followed by a four-times multiplier to obtain l watt or peak power at X band with a 0.05 duty  cycle.
 Bulk-effect and avalanche diodes.
The Gunn and LSA bulk-effect diodes and the Trapatt and  lmpatt al'ala11che diodes can be operated as oscillators or single-port negative-resistance  amplifiers.29·45 They have been considered for use at the higher microwave frequencies where  the transistor amplifier has reduced capability, but they can also operate at L band or below.
 Unfortunately, the peak and average powers of such devices are low, as is the erficiency and the  gain.
An S-band Trapatt amplifier, for example, might have a peak power of 150 W, 1 µs pulse  width, 100 Hz pulse repetition frequency, 20 percent efficiency, 9 dB gain, and a 1 dB band­ width of 6.25 percent.36·37 LSA diodes may be capable of somewhat greater peak power, but  their average power and efficiency are low.
The performance of these diode microwave sources  worsens with increasing frequency.
 Electron-bombarded semiconductor device.47 The EBS, or eiectron-bombarded semiconduc­ tor.
is a hybrid device that combines semiconductor and vacuum-tube technology.
It contains  a heated cathode that generates an electron beam which strikes a semiconductor diode at high  218 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  energy (typically 10 to 15 keV).
On striking the diode, which is reverse biased well below the  avalanche threshold, each impacting electron gives rise to thousands of additional carrier pairs  to provide a current amplification of 2000 or more.
A control grid is inserted between the  cathode and the diode to density-modulate the electron beam.
(The basic geometry is similar  to that of the classic triode vacuum tube, but with a semiconductor diode as the plate.)  The EBS can also be deflection-modulated by varying the position of the beam relative to two  or more separated semiconductor targets whose outputs are combined.
The EBS is claimed to  be broadband and to have high gain (25 to 35 dB), high efficiency (50 percent), and long life.
At  1 GHz, an EBS amplifier might be capable of a peak power of 2 to 3 kW, and an average  power of about 200 W.
The EBS has decreasing capability at the higher frequencies.
A limita­ tion of the EBS, not found with other semiconductor devices, is that it requires a power supply  of 10 to 15 kV as well as a cathode heater supply.
 ,;.
 Methods for employing solid-state transmitters.
There are at least three methods for employing  solid-state devices as radar transmitters: (1) direct replacement of a vacuum tube, (2) multiple  modules in an electronically steered phased-array radar with the power combined in space,  and (3) multiple modules in a mechanically scanned array with the power combined in space.
 A significant restriction in attempting to utilize solid-state devices as a direct replacement  for the conventional microwave-tube transmitter is the relatively low power available from a  single solid-state device or even a single power module.
The solid-state device or module finds  application in those radars where high power is not needed, such as aircraft altimeters, CW  police speedmeters, and short-range intrusion detectors.
Higher power can be obtained by  combining the outputs of a large number of individual devices.
Unfortunately.
for many radar  applications hundreds or thousands of devices would have to be employed in order to achieve  the requisite power levels.
The resultant loss with the combining of a large number of devices  in some microwavedrcuits can sometimes negate the advantage achieved by combining.
Thus  as a direct replacement for convention?} microwave tubes, solid-state devices have been  limited to low or moderate power applications.
 A phased-array transmitting- antenna combines in space the power from each of many  transmitting sources.
Solid-state sources at each radiating element of a large phased-array  antenna can produce the total power required for many radar applications.
The radiated beam  is steered by electronic phase shifters .
at each element, usually on the input side of the  individual power amplifiers.
The transmitter, receiver, duplexer, and phase shifters for each  element of the array antenna can be incorporated into a single integrated package, or module.
 Although there has been much development work in solid-state phased arrays with each  element fed by its own integrated module, this approach usually results in a costly and  complex system.
This has tended, in the past, to weigh against the widespread use of such  phased-array radars when the number of elements is large.
 The combining of the power from a large number of individual solid-state devices is  attractive when using an array antenna since the power is" combined in space," rather than by  a lossy microwave network.
A fixed phased array requires electronic beam steering that  complicates the radar.
If the flexibility of an electronically steered array is not needed, the  advantages of an array antenna for combining the rad1ated power from many individual  sources can be had by mechanically sc~nning the entire antenna.
A separate solid-state source  can be used at each element of the antenna, or a number of sources can be combined to feed  each row (or each column) as in the AN{fPS-59, Fig.
6.15.38 The mechanically rotating array  antenna with solid-state transmitters has some special problems of its own that must be  overcome.
One such problem is the need to convey large power to the solid-state devices on  the rotating ~ntenna.
Another is that the weight of the transmitter is now added to that of the  RADAR TRANSMITTERS 219  ,.,./,:,•.·.- ', I ,\ ,,,,,,'  2-~j) ~·)-; >1 :-~~.u.;t~-:·- } f.·, ;~·.~ 1).t~)r.~~:.~--·,; H:  ' < .:.
ii,, •.
,;,·;·: ,:v~;J.:i:,};H~t:it'!F,  Figure 6.15 AN/TPS-59 L-hand radar.
The 30 ft by 15 ft antenna consists of 54 rows of24 elements each.
 Fach of the 54 rows contains ils own transceiver with twenty-two 50-W modules along with phase shifter.
 low-noise amrliftcr.
oulrut filler.
circulal<H.
and 28-V power supply.
The antenna rotates mechanically in  ,11irnuth and scans cleclronically in elevation.
 a11te1111a.
Even if the solid-state transmitter were lighter than a conventional tube transmitter,  the weight is found at a had place, on the antenna itself.
This is especially important for  shipboard application where weight high on the mast must be minimized.
 SJ·stem considerations.
The potential advantages claimed for solid-state sources in radar may  be summarized as ( l) long, failure-free life, (2) low transmitter voltage, which eliminates the  risk of X-rays and electric shock.
(3) amplitude control of the transmitted waveform by selec­ tively switching modules or individual devices 011 or off, (4) wide bandwidth, (5) low projected  volume-production costs.
and (6) air cooling.
There are some problems, however, in the use of  solid-state devices for radar systems other than cost.
 220 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  As mentioned, the solid-state transmitter has some significant differences as compared to  the conventional tube transmitter.
The basic power-generating unit comes in a relatively small  size; hence, many units have to be combined_ in some manner to achieve the power levels  required for radar.
The higher the frequency, the less the power available from an individual  solid-state device and the more difficult will be the combining problem because of the larger  number of devices required.
At the lower microwave frequencies, the transistor is one oft he  better available solid-state sources.
Since the transistor cannot operate efficiently with the low  duty-cycles characteristic of 'conventional radars, radars using transistors must operate with  long pulses or high pulse repetition frequency.
Neither is desirable except in special cases (as in  pulse-<ioppler radar or CW radar).
Long pulses result in a long minimum radar-range since  the receiver cannot be turned on until the transmitted pulse is turned oil To see targets al  ranges closer than that determined by the long pulse, a short pulse of lower energy and at a  different frequency can be used in addition to the long pulse.
This adds to the syst,em complex­ ity, however.
Long pulses can be a disadvantage in military radars since they reduce the  effectiveness of pulse-to-pulse frequency agility.
A jammer can determine the radar frequency  at the beginning of the long pulse and quickly tune a jammer to the correct frequency within  the duration of the pulse.
To achieve improved range-resolution with the long pulse, pulse  compression is needed.
This further complicates the radar.
(Pulse compression does not rdieve  the minimum-range problem of long pulses.)  Although the solid-state transmitter does not require high voltage, it does require large  current, perhaps several thousands of amperes in some applications.
Wide bandwidth is one of  the more favorable properties of such devices; but the overall transmitter efficiency, especially  at the higher microwave frequencies, is not always as great as might be desired.
Solid-state  devices also are less "forgiving" than microwave.
tubes of transients due to lightning and  nearby radars.
The advantage of long life claimed for solid-state transmitters seems matched  by the long life obtained with linear beam tube transmitters.
 The transistor amplifier, and the bulk-effect and avalanche diodes have important appli­ cations in radar; butin the form in which they have been known, it is not likely that they will  cause the high-power microwave tubes to disappear in the way their lower frequency counter­ parts have displaced the receiver vacuum tube.
 REFERENCES  J.
Weil, Thomas A.: Transmitters, Chap.
7 of the" Radar Handbook," M.
I.
Skolnik (ed.).
McGraw-llill  Book Co., New York, 1970.
 2.
Boot, H.
A.
H., and J.
T.
Randall: The Cavity Magnetron, J.
lnsc.
Elect.
Eng., vol.
93, pt.
IIIA,  pp.
928-938, 1946.
 3.
Wathen, R.
L.: Genesis or a Generator: The Early History of the Magnetron, J.
Fra11kli11 lflst.,  vol.
255, pp.
271-288, April, 1953.
 4.
Collins, G.
B.
(ed.):" Microwave Magnetrons," MIT Radiation Laboratory Series, vol.
6, McGraw­ Hill Book Co., New York, 1948.
 5.
Smith, W.
A.: Ring-Tuned Agile Magnetron Improves Radar Performance, Microwave System News,  vol.
3, pp.
97-102, February, 1974.
 6.
Clampitt, L.
L.: Microwave Radar Tubes at Raytheon, Electronic Progress, vol.
17, no.
2, pp.
6--13,  Summer, 1975.
 7.
Staprans, A., E.W.
McCune, and J.
A.
Ruetz: High-Power Linear-Beam Tubes, Proc.
IEEE, vol.
61,  pp.
299-330, March, 1973.
 8.
Lien, E.
L.: Advances in Klystron Amplifiers, Microwave J., vol.
16, pp.
33-36, 39, December, 1973.
 9.
Dodds, W.
J., T.
Moreno, and W.
J.
McBride, Jr.: Methods of Increasing Bandwidth of High Power  Microwave Amplifiers, IRE WESCON Coriv.
Record, vol.
1, pt.
3, pp.
101-110, 19S7.
 RADAR TRANSMITTERS 221  10.
Beaver.
W ..
(i Caryotakis.
A.
Staprans.
and R.
Symons: Wide Band High Power Klystrons, IRE  WESCON Con,,.
lfrcord, vol.
.1.
pt.
.1.
pp.
\OJ 111.
1959.
 11.
Mendel.
J.
T.: Helix and Coupled-Cavity Traveling-Wave Tubes, Proc.
IEEE.
vol.
61, pp.
280-298,  March.
1973.
 12.
Pittack, U ..
and R.
A.
Handy: Progress in Helix Traveling-wave Tubes ror Radar Systems, Microwm•e  System News.
vol.
5.
pp.
69 75.
February/March, 1975.
ll Nnlos.
r:.
J.: Present State of ;\rt in High Power Traveling-Wave Tuhes, pt.
I.
Micrmvar·e J., vol.
2.
 pp 31 38, Deccm her, 1959; pt.
II l\f icrowm•e J ..
vol.
3, pp.
46 52.
January, 1960.
 14.
Phillips.
R.
M.: High Power Ring-Loop Traveling-Wave Tubes for Advanced Radar, Microwal'e  Srsr ,.,,, N 1'1\·s, vol.
5.
pp.
4 7 49.
February/March.
197 5.
 l:i.
Weil.
T.
A.: Comparison of CFA's for Pulsed-Radar Transmitters, Microwarw J., vol.
16, pp.
51 54.
 72.
June.
1971  16.
A 11011 ymous: Introduction to Pulsed Crossed-Field Amplifiers, brochure published by Varian.
 Beverly.
Mass ..
no date.
 17.
Skowron.
J.
F.: The Continuous-Cathode (Emitting.-Sole) Crossed-Field Amplifier, Proc.
IEEE,  vol 61.
pp 330 356, March.
1971  I 8.
Smith.
W ..
and A.
Wilczek: CF A Tube Enables New-Generation Coherent Radar, Microwave J.,  ml.
16.
pp.
39 42.
74.
April.
1973.
 19 llill.
R.
T.: Shipboard Radar Systems.
Research and Development, EASCON-77 RECORD.
pp.
4 IA  to 4 I I.
Sept.
2<i 28.
1977.
Arlington.
Va, IEEE Publication 77CH 1255-9 EASCON.
 20 Barker.
Ci.
(j_: CFA or TWT? Which Valve Will Best Meet Your Transmitter Output Stage Require­ ments; I EF.
Con( 1'11hl.
No.
105.
"Radar -Present and Future," London, Oct.
23-25.
1973,  pp.
I X9 194.
 21 Spangenberg, K.
R.: "Vacuum Tubes," McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York, 1948.
 22.
Ying<;!, T F ..
D.
R.
Carter, J.
A.
Eshleman, and J.
M.
Pawlikowski: High-Power Gridded  Tubes 1972.
!'roe.
IF.EE.
vol.
61, pp.
357 381, March, 1973.
 2.l.
Reed, J.E.: The AN/FPS-85 Radar System, Proc.
IEEE, vol.
57, pp.
324-335, March, 1969.
 24.
(ilasoe.
G.
N ..
and J.
V.
Lehacqz: "Pulse Generators," MIT Radiation Laboratory Series, vol.
5,  McGraw-Hill Book Company.
New York, 1948.
 25.
Weil.
T.
i\.: Survey of Raytheon Pulsed Radar Transmitters.
Electronic Progress, vol.
17, no.
2,  pp.
14 24, Summer.
1975.
 26.
Reintjes, J.
F ..
and G.
T.
Coate:" Principles of Radar," Chap.
J, McGraw-Hill Book Company, New  York.
1952.
 27.
Parker.
W.
N.
and M.
V.
Hoover: Gas Tuhes Protect High-Power Transmitters, Electronics, vol.
29,  pp.
144 147.
January, 1956.
 28.
Hoft.
D.
J ..
and L.
R.
Lavallee: Solid-State Transmitters, Electronic Progress, vol.
17, no.
2, pp.
25-33,  Summer.
1975.
 29.
Hyltin.
T.
M.: Solid-state Radar, Chap.
30 of" Radar Handbook," M.
I.
Skolnik (ed.), McGraw-Hill  Book Company.
New York.
1970.
 30.
Collins.
J.
R ..
and T.
F.
Harwell: RASSR Array Comes or Age, Microwaves, vol.
11, pp.
36-42, August,  1972.
 3 I.
Anonymous: Phased-1\rray Power Amplifier, Microwave J., vol.
17, p.
28, February, 1974.
 32.
Harper,· A.
Y.: General Considerations in the Selection of an All Solid State or Power Tube Approach  for a Phased Array Radar Application.
I EE Con{ Pub/.
110'.
/05, "Radar-Present and Future," Oct.
n 25.
t973.
pp.
112 111.
·  .1.l <,clnovatch.
V.
(i.: ;\ Review or Microwave Transistors for Radar Application, NEREM Rec., 1974,  pt.
4.
pp.
116 125.
 34.
Ronconi, R.: L-band Solid-state Power Amplifier, Revista Tecnica Se/enia, vol.
2, no.
3, pp.
21-32,  1975.
 35.
Davis, M.
E., J.
K.
Smith, and C.
E.
Grove: L-band T/R Module for Airborne Phased Array,  J\ficroware J ..
vol.
20.
pp.
54-61.
February, 1977.
 36.
Kawamoto, H ..
H.J.
Prager.
E.
L.
Allen, Jr..
and V.
A.
Mikenas: Advances in High Power, S-Band  Trapatt-Diode Amplifier Design, l\ficrowave J., vol.
17, pp.
41-44, February, 1974.
 37.
Cohen, E.
D.: Trapalis and lmpatts: Current Status and Future Impact on Military Systems, IEEE  EASCVN'75, pp.
130-A to 130-G.
 38.
Lain, C.
M., and E.
J.
Gersten: AN/TPS-59 System, IEEE 1975 International Radar Conj., April 21-23,  1975.
pp.
527.
532.
IEEE Puhlication 75 CHO 938-1 AES.
 39.
Gerard, W.
A.: Frequency-Agile Coaxial Magnetrons, Microwave J., vol.
16, pp.
29-33, March, 1973.
 40.
Day.
W.
R ..
Jr ..
and T.
H.
Luchsinger: New Developments in Electrostatically Focused Klystrons,  J\1icrmrn1·e J ..
vol.
13, pp.
59 63, April.
1970.
 222 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  41.
Metivier, R.
L.: Broadband Klystrons for Multirnegawatt Radars, Microwave J., vol.
14, pp.
29-32,  April, 1971.
 42.
Acker, A.: Selecting Tubes for Airborne Radars, Microwai,e Syscem News, vol.
7, pp.
55-60, May,  1977.
 43.
Kaisel, S.
F.: Microwave Tube Technology Review, Microwave J., vol.
20, pp.
23-42, July, 1977.
 44.
Butler, N.: The Microwave Tubes Reliability Problem, Microwave J., vol.
16, pp.
41-42, March, 1973.
 45.
Cohen, E.
D.: Trapatts and Irnpatts-State of the Art and Applications, Microwave J., vol.
20,  pp.
22-28, February, 1977.
 46.
Dilorenzo, J.
V.: GaAs FET Development-Low Noise and High Power, Microwave J., vol.
21,  pp.
39-44, February, 1978.
 47.
Bates, D.
J., R.
I.
Knight, and S.
Spinella: Electron-Bombarded Semiconductor Devices, "Advances in  Electronics and Electron Physics, vol.
44," Academic Press, Inc., New York, 1977.
 48.
Staprans, A.: High-Power Microwave Tubes, IEEE International Electron Devices Meeting Technical  Digest 1976, Washington, D.C., pp.
245-248, IEEE Pub.
no.
76 CH 1151-0ED.
 49.
Pickering, A.
H.: Electronic Tuning of Magnetrons, Microwave J., vol.
22, pp.
73-78, July, 1979.
 50.
Staprans, A.: Linear Beam Tubes, chap.
22 of" Radar Technology," E.
Brookner (ed.), ~rtech House,  Inc., Dedham, Mass., 1977.
 CHAPTER  SEVEN  RADAR ANTENNAS  7.1 ANTENNA PARAMETERSt.2  The purpose of the radar antenna is to act as a transducer between free-space propagation and  guided-wave (transmission-line) propagation.
The function of the antenna during transmission  is to concentrate the radiated energy into a shaped beam which points in the desired direction  in space.
On reception the antenna collects the energy contained in the echo signal and delivers  it to the receiver.
Thus the radar antenna is called upon to fulfill reciprocal but related roles.
In  the radar equation derived in Chap.
1 [Eq.
(1.7)] these two roles were expressed by the trans­ mitting gain and the effective receiving aperture.
The two parameters are proportional to one  another.
An antenna with a large effective receiving aperture implies a large transmitting gain.
 The lai:ge apertures required for long-range detection result in narrow beamwidths, one of  the prime characteristics of radar.
Narrow beamwidths are important if accurate angular  measurements are to be made or if targets close to one another are to be resolved.
The  advantage of microwave frequencies for radar application is that with apertures of relatively  small physical size.
but large in terms of wavelengths, narrow beamwidths can be obtained  conveniently.
 Radar antennas are characterized by directive beams which are scanned, usually rapidly.
 The parabolic reflector, well known in optics, has been extensively employed in radar.
The vast  majority of radar antennas use the parabolic reflector in one form or another.
Microwave  lenses have also found some radar application, as have mechanically rotated array antennas.
 The electronically scanned phased array, described in Chap.
8, is an antenna with unique  properties that has been of particular interest for radar application.
 In this chapter, the radar antenna will be considered either as a transmitting or a receiving  device, depending on which is more convenient for the particular discussion.
Results obtained  for one may be readily applied to the other because of the reciprocity theorem of antenna  theory.1  224 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  Directive gain.
A measure of the ability of an antenna to concentrate energy in a particular  direction is called the gain.
Two different, but related definitions of antenna gain are the  directive gain and the power gain.
The former is sometimes called the directivity, while the latter  is often simply called the gain.
Both definitions are of interest to the radar systems engineer.
 The directive gain is descriptive of the antenna pattern, but the power gain is more appropriate  for use in the radar equation.
 The directive gain of a transmitting antenna may be defined as  maximum radiation intensity G0 = --:--·-i------.-··--------:·· -average rad1at1on intensity (7.l)  where the radiation intensity is the power per unit solid angle radiated in the direction (0, ¢)  and is denoted P(O, ¢).
A plot oft he radiation as a function of the angular coordinates is called  a radiation-intensity pattern.
The power density, or power per unit area, plotted as·~ function of  angle is called a power pattern.
The power pattern and the radiation-intensity pattern are  identical when plotted on a relative basis, that is, when the maximum is normalized to a value  of unity.
When plotted on a relative basis both are called the a11te1111a radiation pattern.
 An example of an antenna radiation pattern for a paraboloid antenna is shown plotted in  Fig.
7.l.3 The main lobe is at zero degrees.
The first irregularity in this particular radiation  pattern is the vestigial lobe, or" shoulder," on the side of the main beam.
The vestigial lobe  does not always appear in antenna radiation patterns.
It can result from an error in the  aperture illumination and is generally undesired.
In most antennas the first sidelobe appears  instead.
The first sidelobe is smeared into a vestigial lobe as in Fig.
7.1 if the phase distribution  across the aperture is not constant.
Following the first side\obe are a series of minor lobes  which decrease in intensity with increasing angular distance from the main lobe.
In the vicinity  of broadside (in this example 100 to 115°), spillover radiation from the feed causes the sidelobe  level to rise.
This is due to energy radiated from the feed which is not intercepted by the  reflector.
The radiation pattern also has a pronounced lobe in the backward direction ( 180°)  due to diffraction effects of the reflector and to direct leakage through the mesh reflector  surface.
 C ,2  0 'u 20  f -30 ...
> ·.;:  0  41>  a:: -40 Main lobe  ~ Vestigial lobe or shoulder  ~1st side lobe  20 40 60 80 100 120  Degrees off axis 140 160 180  Fipre 7.1 Radiation pattern for a particular paraboloid reflector antenna illustrating the main beam and  the sidelobe radiation.
(After Cutler et al.,3 Proc.
IRE.)  RADAR ANTENNAS 225  The radiation pattern shown in Fig.
7.1 is plotted as a function of one angular coordinate,  but the actual pattern is a plot of the radiation intensity P(O, cp) as a function of the two angles  0 and ¢.
The two angle coordinates commonly employed with ground-based antennas are  azimuth and elevation, but any other convenient set of angles can be used.
 A complete three-dimensional plot of the radiation pattern is not always necessary.
For  example, an antenna with a symmetrical pencil-beam pattern can be represented by a plot in  one angular coordinate.
The radiation-intensity pattern for rectangular apertures can often be  written as the product of the radiation-intensity patterns in the two coordinate planes; for  instance,  P(U, </>) = P(O, O)P(O, </>)  The complete radiation pattern can be specified from the two single-coordinate radiation  patterns in the O plane and the q, plane.
 Since the average radiation intensity over a solid angle of 4n radians is equal to the total  rower radiated divided by 4n, the directive gain as defined by Eq.
(7.1) can be written as  G O = 4n(maximum power radiated/unit solid angle)  total power radiated by the antenna {7.2)  This equation indicates the procedure whereby the directive gain may be found from the  radiation pattern.
The maximum power per unit solid angle is obtained simply by inspection,  and the total power radiated is found by integrating the volume contained under the radiation  pattern.
Equation (7.2) can be written as  4nP(O, </>)max 4n  Gv = JJ P(O, </>) dO d</> -B  where B is defined as the beam area:  B = H P(O, </>) dB d</>  P(O, </> )max (7.3)  (7.4)  The beam area is the solid angle through which all the radiated power would pass if the power  per unit solid angle were equal to P(O, cp kax over the beam area.
It defines, in effect, an equivalent  antenna pattern.
If OB and 'PB are the beamwidths in the two orthogonal planes, the beam area  B is approxiinately equal to tJ8 cp8.
Substituting into Eq.
(7.3) gives  4n .
 Gv ~ OB<J>B (7.Sa)  Another expression for the gain sometimes used is  (7.5b)  This was derived assuming a gaussian beamshape and with 08, </>8 defined as t~e half.power  beamwidths.13 7  Power gailL The definition of directive gain is based primarily on the shape of the radiation  pattern.
It does not take account of dissipative losses.
The power gain, which will be denoted  by G, includes the antenna dissipative losses, but does not involve system losses arising from  mismatch of impedance or of polarization.
It can be defined similarly to the definition of  226 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  directive gain in Eq.
(7.2), except that the denominator is the net power accepted by the  antenna from the connected transmittert or  G = 4n(maximum power radiated/unit solid angle)  net power accepted by the antenna  An equivalent definition is (7.6a)  G = maximum radiation intensity from subject antenna ________ _  radiation intensity from (lossless) isotropic source with same power input (7-6b)  The power gain should be used in the radar equation since it includes the losses in­ troduced by the antenna.
The directive gain, which is always greater than the power gain, is of  importance for coverage, accuracy, or resolution considerations and is more closely related to  the antenna beamwidth.
The difference between the two antenna gains is usually small.
The  power gain and the directive gain may be related by the radiation efficiency factor p, as follows:  (7.7)  The radiation efficiency is also the ratio of the total power radiated by the antenna to the net  power accepted by the antenna at its terminals.
The difference between the total power  radiated and the net power accepted is the power dissipated within the antenna.
The radiation  efficiency is an inherent property of an antenna and is not dependent on such factors as  impedance or polarization match.
 The relationship between the gain and the beamwidth of an antenna depends on the  distribution of current across the aperture.
For a ..
typical" reflector antenna the following  expression is sometimes used:  G ~ 20,000  OB<PB (7.8)  where 08 and <J>8 are the half-power beamwidths, in degrees, measured in the two principal  planes.
This is a rough rule of thumb that can be used when no other information is available,  but it should not be a substitute for more exact expressions that acount for the actual aperture  illumination.
 The definitions of the directive and the power gains have been in terms of the maximum  radiation intensity.
Thus, the gains so defined describe the maximum concentration of radi­ ated energy.
It is also common to speak of the gain as a function of angle.
Quite often the  ordinate of a radiation pattern is given as the gain normalizi;;d to unity and called relative gain.
 Unfortunately the term gain is used to denote both the peak gain and the gain as a function of  angle.
Confusion as to which meaning is correct can usually be resolved from the context.
 The definitions of power gain and directive gain were described above in terms of a  transmitting antenna.
One of the fundamental theorems of antenna theory concerns reci­ procity.
It states that under certain conditions (usually satisfied in radar practice) the transmit­ ting and receiving patterns of an antenna are the same.1 Thus the gain definitions apply equally  well whether the antenna is used for transmission or for reception.
The only practical distinc­ tion which must be made between transmitting and receiving antennas is that the transmitting  antenna must be capable of withstanding greater power.
 Effective aperture.
Another useful antenna parameter related to the gain is the effective receiv­ ing aperture, or effective area.
It may be regarded as a measure of the effective area presented  RADAR ANTENNAS 227  by the antenna to the incident wave.
The gain G and the effective area !1,.
of a lossless antenna  are related by  where ,l = wavelength  A = physical area of antenna .
4rrA,.
 (i = ---.z-­,l  fla = antenna aperture efficiency (7.9)  Polarization.
The direction of polarization is defined as the direction of the electric field  vector.
Most radar antennas are linearly polarized; that is, the direction of the electric field  vector is either vertical or horizontal.
The polarization may also be elliptical or circular.
 Elliptical polarization may be considered as the combination of two linearly polarized waves  of the same frequency, traveling in the same direction, which are perpendicular to each other in  space.
The relative amplitudes of the two waves and the phase relationship between them can  assume any values.
If the amplitudes of the two waves are equal, and if they are 90° out of  (time) phase, the polarization is circular.
Circular polarization and linear polarization are  special cases of elliptical polarization.
The degree of elliptical polarization is often described by  the axial ratio, which is the ratio of the major axis to the minor axis of the polarization ellipse.
 Linear polarization is most often used in conventional radar antennas since it is the  easiest to achieve.
The choice between horizontal and vertical linear polarization is often left to  the discretion of the antenna designer, although the radar systems engineer might sometimes  want to specify one or the other, depending upon the importance of ground reflections.
For  ex.ample, horizontal polarization might be employed with long range air-search radars operat­ ing at VHF or UHF so as to obtain longer range because of the reinforcement of the direct  radiation by the ground-reflected radiation, Sec.
12.2.
Circular polarization is often desirable  in radars which must "see" through weather disturbances.
 Sidelobe radiation.
An ex.ample of sidelobe radiation from a typical antenna was shown in  Fig.
7.1.
Low sidelobes are generally desired for radar applications.
If too large a portion of the  radiated energy were contained in the sidelobes, there would be a reduction in the main-beam  energy, with a consequent lowering of the maximum gain.
 No g~1eral rule can be given for specifying the optimum sidelobe level.
This depends  upon the application and how difficult it is for the antenna designer to achieve low sidelobes.
If  the sidelobes are too high, strong echo signals can enter the receiver and appear as false  targets.
A high sidelobe level makes jamming of the radar easier.
Also, the radar is more  subject to interference from nearby friendly transmitters.
 The first sidelobe nearest the main beam is generally the highest.
A typical parabolic  reflector antenna fed from a waveguide horn might have a first sidelobe 23 to 28 dB below the  main beam.
Lower first sidelobes require a highly tapered aperture illumination, one with the  illumination at the edge of the aperture considerably less than that at the center.
It is not easy to  obtain with a reflector antenna the precisely tapered aperture illuminations necessary for low  sidelobe radiation.
Because of its many radiating elements, an array antenna is better suited for  achieving the low-sidelobe aperture illumination than is a reflector.
First sidelobes of from 40  to 50 dB below the main beam may be possible with the proper aperture illuminations and the  proper care in implementation.
A high-gain antenna is usually necessary to achieve such low  sidelobes.
(When referred to the radiation from an isotropic antenna, the peak sidelobes from a  low-sidelobe antenna might be approximately 10 to 15 dB below the isotropic level.) The  228 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  achievement of extremely low sidelobes requires the antenna to be well constructed so as to  maintain the necessary mechanical and electrical tolerances.
It takes only a small deviation of  the antenna surface to have an increase of the peak sidclobc of a very low sidelobe antenna.
 Furthermore, there must be no obstructions in the vicinity of the antenna that can divert  energy to the sidelobe regions and appear as high sidelohes.
A low sidelohe antenna might  have to be 20 to 30 percent larger than a conventional antenna to achieve the same beam width.
 Aperture efficiency.
The aperture efficiency is the ratio of the actual antenna directivity to the  maximum possible directivity.
Maximum directivity is achieved wilh a unirorm apnture  illumination.1 Although it might seem that the higher the aperture efficiency the better, aper­ ture efficiency is seldom a suitable measure of the quality of a radar antenna.
Other factors are  usually more important.
For instance, the high sidelobes that accompany a uniform illumina­ tion are seldom desired, and the aperture efficiency is usually willingly sacrificed for lower  sidelobes.
When a shaped beam is desired in a surveillance radar, such as a cosecant-squared  pattern, again it is more important to achieve the overall pattern required rather than simply  max'imize the directivity at the peak of the beam.
 Aperture efficiency is a measure of the radiation intensity only at the center of the beam.
 In a search radar, however, the radiation intensity throughout the entire beam is of interest,  not just that at the beam center.
A number of hits are received as the antenna scans by each  target.
The detection decision is based on the energy from all the hits received and not just on  the energy received when the center of the beam· illuminates the target.
Thus it is not the  maximum directivity which is important, but the total directivity integrated over the number  of hits processed by the radar.
A better criterion for selecting the aperture illumination might  be one which maximizes the radiated energy within-a specified angular region.5 Such illumina­ tions are more typical of radar antenna practice than the uniformly illuminated aperture.
 In a monopulse tracking antenna, uniform illumination might be desirable to maximize  directivity when the target is being tracked by the center of the beam.
However, a monopulse  antenna with a uniform illumination for the sum-pattern will have a poor difference-pattern,  even if the high sidelobes can be tolerated.
A compromise must be made, and something other  than a uniform illumination is generally selected.
 Thus the parameter of aperture efficiency, whic~ sometimes is held sacred by the antenna  designer and to some who write antenna specifications, is often of secondary importance to the  systems engineer wishing to optimize total radar performance.
It can usually be traded for  some more important characteristic.
 7.2 ANTENNA RADIATION PA ITERN AND APERTURE DISTRIBUTION  The electric-field intensity E(cp) p'roc:iuced by the radiation emitted from the antenna is a  function of the amplitude and the phase of the current distribution across the aperture.
1.4,5 E( cf>)  may be found by adding vectorially; Jhe contribution from the various current elements con­ stituting the aperture.
The mathematical summation of all the contributions from the current  elements contained within the aperture gives· the field intensity in terms of an integral.
This  integral cannot be readily evaluated in the g~neral case.
However, approximations to the solu­ tion may be had by dividing.the area about the antenna aperture into three regions as deter­ mined by the mathematical approximations that must be made.
The demarcations among these  three regions are not sharp and blend· one into the other.
 The region in the immediate n~ighborhood of the aperture is the near Jield.
It extends  RADAR ANTENNAS 229  several antenna diameters from the aperture and, for this reason, is usually of little importance  to the radar engineer.
 The near field is followed by the Fresnel regio11.
In the Fresnel region, rays from the  radiating aperture to the observation point (or target) are not parallel and the antenna  radiation pattern is not constant with distance.
Little application is made of the Fresnel region  in radar.
The 11ecff field and the fl'es11el regio11 have sometimes been called by antenna engin­ eers the rcactir·c 11car-jield region and the radiating near-field region, respectively.6  The farthest region from the aperture is the Fraunhofer, or far-field, region.
In the Fraun­ hofer region.
the radiating source and the observation point are at a sufficiently large distance  from each other so that the rays originating from the aperture may be considered parallel to  one another at the target (observation point).
Radar antennas operate in· the Fraunhofer  region.
 The" boundary" RF between Fresnel and Fraunhofer regions is usually taken to be either  RF= D2/).
or the distance RF= 2D2/A, where D is the size of the aperture and )._ is the  wavelength, D and).
being measured in the same units.
At a distance given by D2/J.., the gain of  a uniformly illuminated antenna is 0.94 that of the Fraunhofer gain at infinity.
At a distance of  2D2 / l.
the gain is 0.99 that at infinity.
 The plot of the electric field intensity I E(O, 1>) I is called the field-intensity pattern of the  antenna.
The plot of the square of the field intensity I E(O, 1>) 12 is the power radiation pattern  I'(O.
<I>), defined in the previous section.
 In the Fraunhofer region, the integral for electric field intensity in terms of current  distrihution across the aperture is given by a Fourier transform.
Consider the rectangular  aperture and coordinate system shown in Fig.
7.2.
The width of the aperture in the z dimension  is a, and the angle in the y: plane as measured from they axis is¢.
The far-field electric field  intensity, assuming a ~ ,t is  E(</>)= J A(z)exp j2rr,sin</J dz · a/2 ( z )  • a/2 A (7.10)  where A(:)= current at distance z, assumed to be flowing in x direction.
A(z), the aperture  distrih11tio11.
or ill11111i11atio11, may be written as a complex quantity, including both the ampli­ tude and phase.
or  A(z) = I A(z) I exp j'l'(z)  ..
 X (7.11)  Figure 7.2 Rectangular aperture and  coordinate system ror illustrating the  relationship between the aperture dis­ tribution and the far-field electric-field­ intensity pattern.
 230 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  where I A(z) I = amplitude distribution and 'P(z) = phase distribution.
[Equation (7.
lO)  applies to a one-dimensional line source lying along the z axis.
For the two-dimensional  aperture of Fig.
7.2, A(z) is the integral of A(x, z) over the variable x.]  Equation (7.10) represents the summation, or integration, of the ind ivi<lual contributions  from the current distribution across the aperture according to Huygens' principle.
At an angk  <J>, the contribution from a particular point on the aperture will be advanced or retarded in  phase by 21r(z/l) sin</> radians.
Each of these contributions is weighted by the factor A(z).
The  field intensity is the integral of these individual contributions across the face of the aperture.
 The aperture distribution has been defined in terms of the current ix.
It may also be  defined in terms of the magnetic field component Hz for polarization in the x direction, or in  terms of the electric field component Ez for polarization in the z direction, provided these field  components are confined to the aperture.7  The expression for the electric field intensity [Eq.
(7.10)] is mathematically s.iJnilar to the  inverse Fourier transform.
Therefore the theory of Fourier transforms can be applied to the  calculation of the radiation or field-intensity patterns if the aperture distribution is known.
 The Fourier transform of a function f (t) is defined as  F(f) = I 00  f(t) exp (-j2nft) dt (7.12)  • -00  and the inverse Fourier transform is  f (t) = r 00  f(f) exp (j2nji) df  ·-oo (7.13)  The limits of Eq.
(7.10) can be extended over the infinite interval from -oo to + oo since the  aperture distribution is zero beyond z = ± a/2.
 The Fourier transform permits the aperture distribution A (z) to be found for a given  field-intensity pattern E(</> ), since  (7.14)  This may be used as a basis for synthesizing an antenna pattern, that is, finding the aperture  distribution A(z) which yields a dec;ired antenna pattern E(q,).
 In the remainder of this section, the antenna radiation pattern will be examined for  various aperture distributions using Eq.
(7.10).
It will be assumed that the phase distribution  across the aperture is constant and only the effects of the amplitude distribution need be  considered.
 The inverse Fourier transform gives the electric field intensity when the phase and ampli­ tude of the distribution across the aperture are known.
The aperture is defined as the projec­ tion of the antenna on a plane perpendicular to the direction of propagation.
It does not  matter whether the distribution is produced by a reflector antenna, a lens, or an array.
 One-dimemional aperture distributiolL Perhaps the simplest aperture distrihution to conceive  is the uniform, or rectangular, distribution.
The uniform distribution is constant over the  aperture extending from -a/2 to +a/2 and zero outside.
For present purposes it will be  assumed that the aperture extends in one dimension only.
This might represent the distribution  across a line source or the distribution in one plane of a rectangular aperture.
If the constant  RADAR ANTENNAS 231  value of the apertured istribution is equal to A0 and ir the phase distribution across the aperture  is constant, the antenna pattern as computed from Eq.
(7.10) is  fa/'}.
( z ) E(cp) = A0.
_ 01/XP j 2rr .,l sin q> dz  N,.Jrmalizing to make E(O) A~_~i~J1_ti~l.,ll_~in ~J = Aoa [sin n(a/.,l) sin 4>]  (rr/l) sin tp n(a/,1.) sin q>  results in A0 = 1/a; therefore  E(q,) = sin [n(a/.,l) sin 4>]  n:(a/,l) sin tp (7.15)  (7.16)  This pattern, which is of the form (sin x)/x, is shown by the solid curve in Fig.
7.3.
The  intensity of the first side lobe is 13.2 dB below that of the peak.
The angular distance between  the nulls adjacent to the peak is 2)/a rad, and the beamwidth as measured between the half­ power points is 0.88.,l/a rad, or 5 U./a deg.
The voltage pattern of Eq.
(7.16) is positive over the  entire main lobe, but changes sign in passing through the first zero, returning to a positive  value in passing through the second zero, and so on.
The odd-numbered sidelobes are  therefore out of phase with the main lobe, and the even-numbered ones are in phase.
Also  shown in Fig.
7.3 is the radiation pattern for the cosine aperture distribution.
 I  I ,  t  I  I \ ,  \ I  I ,  I I I  I I I  -41T -3rr -21T /.
 I  I  I  I 5  I  I  I  I -10  I  I  I -15  -20  -25  -30  -rr 0 nz A(z) = cos a  \  \  \  \  \  \  \  \  C I 0 .: I a \ "O a I L  (JJ  ~ l +-a I w I L  N • I  I  -a I ' \  ~ I I  I I  t I  I I I  I  I  1T 2rr  1r(a/AI sin¢ 371" 47r  Figure 7.3 The solid curve is the antenna radiation pattern produced by a uniform aperture distribution;  the dashed curve represents the antenna radiation pattern of an aperture distribution proportional to the  cosine function.
 232 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  The normalized radiation pattern is  E(¢) =~[sin (I/I + n/2) + sin (I/I -n/2)1  4 1/1 + n/2 1/1 -n/2 (7.17)  where ljl = n(a/..l) sin ¢.
In Fig.
7.3 the gains of both patterns are normalized.
However, the  maximum gain of the pattern resulting from the cosine distribution is 0.9 dB less than the gain  of a uniform distribution.
 Table 7.1 lists some of the properties of the radiation patterns produced by various  aperture distributions.1 The aperture distributions are those which can be readily expressed in  analytic form and for which the solution of the inverse Fourier transform of Eq.
(7.
to) can be  conveniently carried out.
Although these may not be the distributions employed with practical  radar antennas, they serve to illustrate how the aperture distribution affects the antenna  pattern.
More complicated distributions which cannot be readily found from available tables  of Fourier transforms or which cannot be expressed in analytical form may be determined by  numerical computation methods or machine computation.
(The Taylor distribution, men­ tioned in Sec.
7.6, is a more popular model for antenna design than the analytical models of  Table 7.1.)  An examination of the information presented in this table reveals that the gain of the  uniform distribution is greater than the gain of any other distribution.
It is shown by Silver1  that the uniform distribution is indeed the most efficient aperture distribution, that is, the one  which maximizes the antenna gain.
Therefore the relative-gain column may be considered as  the efficiency of a particular aperture distribution as compared with the uniform, or most  efficient, aperture distribution.
The relative gain is also called the aperture efficiency [Eq.
(7.9)].
 The aperture efficiency times the physical area of the aperture is the effective aperture.
 Table 7.1.
Radiation-pattern characteristics produced by various aperture distributions  A.= wavelength; a= aperture width  Half-power  Relative beamwiqth, Intensity of first sidclohc,  Type of distribution, I z I < 1 gain deg dB below maximum intensity  Uniform; A(z) = 1 5 U/a 13.2  Cosine; A(z) = cos" (nz/2):  »=0 1 5 U/(l 13.2  II= 1 0.810 69.A./a 23  n = 2 0.667 83.A./a 32  n = 3 0.575 95.A./a 40  n = 4 0.515 llU/a 48  Parabolic; A(z) = 1 -(1 -A)z2:  A= 1.0 1 51.A./a 13.2  A= 0.8 0.994 53.A./a 15.8  A= 0.5 0.970 56)./a 17.
l  A= 0 0.833 66)./a 20.6  Triangular; A(z) = 1 -l z I 0.75 73)./a 26.4  Circular; A(z) = Jl=----:? 0.865 58.5)./a 17.6  Cosine-squared plus pedestal;  0.33 + 0.66 cos2(nz/2) 0.88 63)./a 25.7  0.08 + 0.92 cos2(nz/2), Hamming 0.74 16.5)./a 42.8 \ /  RADAR ANTENNAS 233  Another property of the radiation patterns illustrated by Table 7.
l is that the antennas  with the lowest sidelobcs (adjacent to the main beam) are those with aperture distributions in  which the amplitude tapers to a small value at the edges.
The greater the amplitude taper, the  lower the sidclobc level but the less the relative gain and the broader the bcamwidth.
Thus low  sidelobes and good aperture efficiency run counter to one another.
 A word of caution should he given concerning the ability to achieve in practice low  sidelohe levels with extremely tapered illuminations.
It was assumed in the computation of  these radiation patterns that the distribution of the phase across the aperture was constant.
In  a practical antenna this will not necessarily be true since there will always be some unavoid­ a hie phase variations caused by the inability to fabricate the antenna as desired.
Any practical  device is never perfect: it will always be constructed with some error, albeit small.
The phase  variations due to the unavoidable errors can cause the sidelobe level to be raised and the gain  to he lowered.
There is a practical limit beyond which it becomes increasingly difficult to  achieve low sidelobcs even if a considerable amplitude taper is used.
 Circular aperture.
5 • 8 The exam pies of aperture distribution presented previously in this sec­ t ion applied to distributions in one dimension.
We shall consider here the antenna pattern  produced hy a two-dimensional distribution across a circular aperture.
The polar coordinates  {r.
0) are used to describe the aperture distribution A(r, 0), where r is the radial distance from  the center of the circular aperture, and O is the angle measured in the plane of the aperture with  respect to a reference.
Huygens' principle may be applied in the far field by dividing the plane  wave across the circular aperture into a great many spherical wavelets, all or the same phase  but of different amplitude.
To find the field intensity at a point a distance R from the antenna,  the amplitudes of all the waves are added at the point, taking account or the proper phase  relationships due to the difference in path lengths.
The field intensity at a distance R is thus  proportional to  2,r ro ( 2n:R) E(R) = ( dO ( A(r, 0) exp jT r dr (7.18)  where r0 is the radius of the aperture.
For a circular aperture with uniform distribution, the  field intensity is proportional to  E(4>) = ("do (0 exp (j2rc ~ sin tp cos o)r dr = 1r.r52J 1(~)/~ (7.19}  where c; = 2tr(r0/,l.) sin tp and J 1(~) first-order Bessel function.
A plot of the normalized  radiation pattern is shown in Fig.
7.4.
The 'first sidelobe is 17.5 dB below the main lobe, and  the heamwidth is 58.5,l./D.
 The e!Tect of tapering the amplitude distribution of a circular aperture is similar to  tapering the distrihution of a linear aperture.
The sidelobes may be reduced, but at the expense  of broader beamwidth and less antenna gain.
One aperture distribution which has been  considered in the past1 is [I -(r/r0)2)P, where p = 0, 1, 2, ....
The radiation pattern is of the  form Jr+ ,(e)/eP+ 1.
When p 0, the distribution is uniform and the radiation pattern reduces  to that given above.
For p 1, the gain is reduced 75 percent, the half-power beamwidth is  72.61/D, and the first sidelobe is 24.6 dB below the maximum.
The sidelobe level is 30.6 dB  down for p = 2, but the gain relative to a uniform distribution is 56 percent.
Additional  properties of this distribution can be found in Ref.
1, table 6.2, and in Ref.
5, table 1.
 Aperture blocking.
9-12 An obstacle in front of an antenna can alter the aperture illumination  and the radiated pattern.
This is called aperture blocking or shadowing.
The chief example is  234 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  -5 ,;.
-·;;;  C:  -10 Q) -C:  C  0  -15 0  -0  0  L  -20 Q)  > ·..=  .!?  Q)  L -25 N ~,'v •• -30 '-5'  -35  -10 -8 -6 -4 -2 0 2 4 6 8 10  ( = 21r (r0/>.) sin cp  Figure 7.4 Radiation pattern for a uniformly illuminated circular aperture.
 the blocking caused by the feed and its supports in reflector-type antennas.
Aperture blocking  degrades the performance of an antenna by lowering the gain, raising the sidelobes, and filling  in the nulls.
The effect of aperture blocking can be approximated by subtracting the antenna  pattern produced by the obstacle from the antenna pattern of the undisturbed aperture.
This  procedure is possible because of the linearity of the Fourier-transform that relates the aperture  illumination and the radiated patternt An example9 of the effect of aperture blocking caused by  the feed in a paraboloid-reflector antenna is shown in Fig.
7.5.
Buildings in the vicinity of  ground-based radar, and masts and other obstructions in the vicinity of shipboard antennas  can also degrade the radiation pattern because of aperture blocking.
131  -20 C  0  -20 E !ij-e  Q)  ,,...
-25 ~ ,.,  I \ 0 I \  I \ Gi I \  -I I -30 a:: I \  I \ I I I I  / \ I I _35 11 I  -15 -10 -5 0 5  Degrees oft axis 15 20 Figure 7.5 Effect of aperture block·  ing caused by the feed in ~ para­ bolic-reflector antenna.
(From C.
 Cutler,9 Proc.
IRE.)  RADAR ANTENNAS 235  Broadband signals.
The Fourier-integral-transform relationship between the radiation pattern  E(<J,) and the aperture distribution A(z) as expressed in Eqs.
(7.11) and (7.14) applies only  when the signal is a CW sine wave.
If the signal were a pulse or some other radar waveform  with a spectrum of noninfinitesimal width, the simple Fourier integral which applies to a CW  sine wave would not give the correct radiation pattern nor would it predict the transient  behavior.
In most cases of practical interest the spectral width of the signal is relatively small,  with the consequence that the pattern is not affected appreciably and the Fourier-integral  relationships arc satisfactory approximations.
However, when the reciprocal of the signal  bandwidth is comparable with the time taken by a radar wave to transverse the antenna  aperture, bandwidth cfTccts can be important and signal distortion may result.
 7.3 PARABOLIC-REFLECTOR ANTENNAS  One of the most widely used microwave antennas is the parabolic reflector (Fig.
7.6).
The  parabola is illuminated by a source of energy called the feed, placed at the focus of the  parabola and directed toward the reflector surface.
The parabola is well suited for microwave  antennas because (I) any ray from the focus is reflected in a direction parallel to the axis of  the parabola and (2) the distance traveled by any ray from the focus to the parabola and by  reflection to a plane perpendicular to the parabola axis is independent of its path.
Therefore a  point source of energy located at the focus is converted into a plane wavefront of uniform  phase.
 The basic parabolic contour has been used in a variety of configurations.
Rotating the para­ bolic curve shown in Fig.
7.6 about its axis produces a parabola of revolution called a circular  parabola, or a paraboloid.
When properly illuminated by a point source at the focus, the  paraboloid generates a nearly symmetrical pencil-beam antenna pattern.
Its chief application  has been for tracking-radar antennas.
 An asymmetrical beam shape can be obtained by using only a part of the paraboloid.
This  type of antenna, an example of which is shown in Fig.
7.25, is widely used when ran beams are  desired.
 Another means of producing either a symmetrical or an asymmetrical antenna pattern is  with the parabolic cylinder.1 · 7• 13 The parabolic cylinder is generated by moving the parabolic  contour parallel to itself.
A line source such as a linear array, rather than a point source, must  be used to feed the parabolic cylinder.
The beam width in the plane containing the linear feed is  Parabolic  surface ,.
 Vertex 1-----------"----+----­ or  apex _.,,,,,.-· Focus 1  --------~  I  I  I Beam axis  Figure 7.6 Parabolic-reflector antenna.
 236 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  determined hy the illumination of the line source, while the bcamwidth in the perpendicular  plane is determined by the illumination across the parabolic profile.
The reflector is made  longer than the linear feed to avoid spillover and diffraction effects.
One of the advantages of  the parabolic cylinder is that it can readily generate an asymmetrical fan beam with a much  larger aspect ratio {length to width) than can a section of a paraboloid.
It is not practical to use  a paraboloidal reflector with a single horn feed for aspect ratios greater than about 8: l,  although it is practical to use the parabolic cylinder for aspect ratios of this magnitude or  larger.
Another advantage of the parabolic cylinder antenna is that the line feed allows better  control of the aperture illumination than does a single point source feeding a paraboloid.
The  patterns in the two orthogonal planes can be controlled separately, which is of importance for  generating shaped beams.
Also there is usually less depolarization in a parabolic cylinder than  in a paraboloid fed from a point source.
Since a directive feed is used with a parabolic cylinder,  leakage through a mesh reAector will cause a higher backlobe than would a poirit-source feed.
 Thercrore, solid reAector-surfaces are generally employed.
When the feed must be pressurized  in order to sustain high power it is often easier to do so with a paraboloid fed by a single  point-source than with the larger line feed of a parabolic cylinder.
 Still another variation of the parabola is the parabolic torus shown in Fig.
7 .16 and  discussed in Sec.
7.4.
It is generated by moving the parabolic contour over an arc of a circle  whose center is on the axis of the parabola.
It is useful where a scan angle less than 120° is  required and where it is not convenient to scan the reflector itself.
Scanning is accomplished in  the parabolic torus by moving the feed.
 There are other variations of parabolic reflectors such as cheeses, pillboxes, and hoghorns,  descriptions of which may be found in the literature.1•7  Feeds for paraboloids.
1•9• 130 The ideal feed for a paraboloid consists of a point source of  illumination with a pattern of proper shape to achieve the desired aperture distribution.
It is  important in a paraboloid that the phase of the radiation emitted by the feed be independent of  the angle.
The radiation pattern produced by the feed is called the primary pattern; the  radiation pattern of the aperture when illuminated by the feed is called the second,iry pattern.
 A simple half-wave dipole or a dipole with a parasitic reAector can be used as the feed for  a paraboloid.
A dipole is of limited utility, however, because it is difficult to achieve the desired  aperture illuminations, it has poor polarization properties in that some of the energy incident  on the reflector is converted to the orthogonal polarization, and it is limited in power.
The  open-ended waveguide as the feed for a paraboloid directs the energy better than a dipole, and  the phase characteristic is usually good if radiating in the proper mode.
A circular paraboloid  might be fed by a circular, open-ended waveguide operating in the TE 11 mode.
A rectangular  guide operating in the TE10 mode does not give a circularly symmetric radiation pattern since  the dimensions in the E and H planes, as well as the current distributions in these two planes,  are different.
As this is generally true of most waveguide feeds, a perfectly symmetrical antenna  pattern is difficult to achieve in practice.
The rectangular guide may be used, however, for  feeding an asymmetrical section of a paraboloid that generates a fan beam wider in the JI  plane than in the E plane.
 When more directivity is required than can be obtained with a simple open-ended  waveguide, some form of waveguide horn may be used.
The waveguide horn is probably the  most popular method of feeding a paraboloid for radar application.
 Optimum feed illumination angle.
If the radiation pattern of the feed is known, the illumina­ tion of the aperture can be determined and the resulting secondary beam pattern can be found  by evaluating a Fourier integral or performing a numerical calculation.
The radiation pattern  (I) 0  D  >- V, -5 C  OJ ...
 C  C  -~ ~10 - 0  D  0  L  ';; -15 -...
 0  OJ RADAR ANTENNAS 237  rr ·· ?U _l __ __L __ L_~ __ ..___~-~-~~- -100 -BO -60 --40 -20 0 20 40 60 80 100  8.
degrees off axis  FiJ?ure 7.7 Radiation pattern of 0.84,l-diameter circular-waveguide aperture.
(From C.
Cutler,Q /'roe.
 I RE.)  of a 0.84A-diameter circular waveguide is shown in Fig.
7.7.
If one wished to obtain relatively  uniform illumination across a paraboloid aperture with a feed of this type, only a small  angular portion of the pattern should be used.
An antenna with a large ratio of focal distance  to antenna diameter would be necessary to achieve a relatively uniform illumination across the  aperture.
Also.
a significant portion of the energy radiated by the feed would not intercept the  paraboloid and would be lost.
The lost" spillover" energy results in a lowering of the overall  efficiency and defeats the purpose of the uniform illumination (maximum aperture efficiency).
 On the other hand, if the angle subtended by the paraboloid at the focus is large, more of  the radiation from the feed will be intercepted by the reflector.
The less the spillover, the higher  the efficiency.
However, the illumination is more tapered, causing a reduction in the aperture  efficiency.
Therefore.
there will be some angle at which these two counteracting effects result in  maximum efficiency.
This is illustrated in Fig.
7.8 for the circular-waveguide feed whose pat­ tern is shown in Fig.
7.7.
The maximum of the curve is relatively broad, so that the optimum  angle subtended by the antenna at the focus is not critical.
The greatest efficiency is obtained  with a reflector in which the radiation from the feed in the direction of the edges is between 8  and 12 dB below that at the center.
As a rough rule of thumb, the intensity of the energy  ;;.!? 80 - OJ  L  :::, ...
 !;; 60 - a.
 0  0  G 40  C  OJ  u -w 20  o.___~--~-~~--~-~  0 20 40 60 80 100  Holl angle subtended by paraboloid of focus Figure 7.8 Efficiency of a paraboloid as a function of  the half angle subtended by the paraboloid at the focus.
 (From C.
Cut/er,9 Proc.
IRE.)  238 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  radiated toward the edge of the reflector should usually be about one-tenth the maximum  intensity.
The aperture distribution at the edges will be even less than one-tenth the maximum  because of the longer path from the feed to the edge of the reflector than from the feed to the  center of the dish.
When the primary feed pattern is 10 dB down at the edges, the first minor  lobe in the secondary pattern is in the vicinity of 22 to 25 dB.
 Calculations of the antenna efficiency based on the aperture distribution set up by the  primary pattern as well as the spillover indicate theoretical efficiencies of about 80 percent for  paraboloidal antennas when compared with an ideal, uniformly illuminated aperture.
In prac­ tice, phase variations across the aperture, poor polarization characteristics, and antenna mis­ match reduce the efficiency to the order of 55 to 65 percent for ordinary paraboloidal-reflector  antennas.
 Feed support.
The resonant half-wave dipole and the waveguide horn can be attanged to feed  the paraboloid as shown in Fig.
7.9a and b.
These two arrangements are examples of rear  feeds.
The waveguide rear feed shown in Fig.
7.9b produces an asymmetrical pattern since the  transmission line is not in the center of the dish.
A rear feed not shown is the Cutler feed,9 a  dual-aperture rear feed in which the waveguide is in the center of the dish and the energy is  made to bend 180° at the end of the waveguide by a properly designed reflecting plate.
The rear  feed has the advantage of compactness and utilizes a minimum length of transmission line.
 The antenna may also be fed in the manner shown in Fig; 7.9c.
This is an example of a  front feed.
It is well suited for supporting horn feeds, but it obstructs the aperture.
 Two basic limitations to any of the feed configurations mentioned above are aperture  blocking and impedance mismatch in _the feed.
The feed, transmission line, and supporting  structure intercept a portion of the.
radiated energy and alter the effective antenna pattern.
 Some of the energy reflected by the paraboloid enters the feed and acts as any other wave  traveling in the reverse direction in the transmission line.
Standing waves are produced along  the line, causing an impedance mismatch and a degradation of the transmitter performance.
 The mismatch can be corrected by an impedance-matching device, but this remedy is effective  only over a relatively narrow frequency band.
Another technique for reducing the effect of the  reflected radiation intercepted by the feed is to raise a portion of the reflecting surface at the .
.
 center (apex) of the paraboloid.
The qtised surface is made of such a size and distance from  the original reflector contour as to produce at the focus a reflected signal equal in amplitude  but opposite in phase to the signal reflected from the remainder or the reflector.
The two  reflected signals cancel at the feed, so that there is no mismatch.
The raised portion of the  Dipole\  (a) Parasitic  reflector  ~  (b) (cl  Figure 7.9 Examples or the placement of the feeds in parabolic reflectors.
(a) Rear feed using half-wave  dipole; (b) rear feed using horn; (c) front-feed using horn.
 RADAR ANTENNAS 239  reflector is called an apex-marcl1ing plate.
Although the apex-matching plate has a broader  bandwidth than matching devices inside the transmission line, it causes a slight reduction in  the gain and increases the minor-lobe level of the radiation pattern.
 Offset feed.1 Both the aperture blocking and the mismatch at the feed are eliminated with the  offset-feed parabolic antenna shown in Fig.
7.10.
The center of the feed is placed at the focus of  the parabola, but the horn is tipped with respect to the parabola's axis.
The major portion of  the lower half of the parabola is removed, leaving that portion shown by the solid curve in  Fig.
7.10.
For all practical purposes the feed is out of the path of the reflected energy, so that  there is no pattern deterioration due to aperture blocl~ing nor is there any significant amount  of energy intercepted by the feed to produce an impedance mismatch.
 It should be noted that the antenna aperture of an offset parabola (or any parabolic  reflector) is the area projected on a plane perpendicular to its axis and is not the surface area.
 The offset parabola eliminates two of the major limitations of rear or front feeds.
 However, it introduces problems of its own.
Cross-polarization lobes are produced by the  offset geometry, which may seriously deteriorate the radar system performance.1• 17 Also, it is  usually more difficult to properly support and to scan an offset-feed antenna than a circular  paraboloid with rear feed.
 f/D ratio.
An important design parameter for reflector antennas is the ratio of the focal length  _(to the antenna diameter D, or f/D ratio.
The selection of the properf/D ratio is based on both  mechanical and electrical considerations.
A smallf/D ratio requires a deep-dish reflector, while  a large JID ratio requires a shallow reflector.
The shallow reflector is easier to support and  move mechanically since its center of gravity is closer to the vertex, but the feed must be  supported farther from the reflector.
The farther from the reflector the feed is placed, the  narrower must be the primary-pattern beamwidth and the larger must be the feed.
On the  other hand, it is difficult to obtain a feed with uniform phase over the wide angle necessary to  properly illuminate a reflector with smallf;'D.
Most parabolic-reflector antennas seem to have  f /D ratios ranging from 0.3 to 0.5.
 Reflector surfaces.
The reflecting surface may be made of a solid sheet material, but it is often  preferable to use a wire screen, metal grating, perforated metal, or expanded metal mesh.
The  expanded metal mesh made from aluminum is a popular form.
A nonsolid surface such as a  mesh offers low wind resistance, light weig~t, low cost, ease of fabrication and assembly, and  the ability t~,conform to variously shaped reflector surfaces.14 However, a nonsolid surface  -----+  I  I  I  I --y-----+  \ I  \ I  \ I  \ I ------,,-----+  ----~Feed Figure 7.10 Parabolic reflector with offset feed.
 240 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  may permit energy to leak through, with the result that the backlobe will increase and the  antenna gain decrease.
 Solid sheet surfaces may be of either aluminum or steel.
15· 16 Steel is a popular choice,  particularly where weight is not a controlling factor.
It is cheap and strong but is relatively  difficult to form.
Stainless steel or plastic coated galvanized steel are used when the surface  must be resistant to corrosion.
Aluminum is light in weight but is more expensive than steel.
 Aluminum honeycomb with aluminum skin in a sandwich construction has been employed  where highly accurate surfaces are required.
Reflector surfaces may also be formed from  fiberglass and asbestos resinated laminates with the reflecting surface made of embedded mesh  or metal spray.
Plastic structures have the advantage of being light, rigid, and capable of being  made with highly accurate surfaces.
Their thermal properties, however, require care in design  and construction.
 The presence of ice on the reflector surface is an important consideratio,n for both the  electrical and the mechanical design of the antenna.
Ice adds to the weight of the antenna and  makes it more difficult to rotate.
In addition, if the ice were to close the holes of a mesh  antenna so that a solid rather than an open surface is presented to the wind, bigger motors  would be needed to operate the antenna.
The structure also would have to be stronger.
 The effect of ice on the electrical characteristics of a mesh reflecting surface is twofold.
1 ij  On the one hand, ice which fills a part of the space between the mesh conductors may he  considered a dielectric.
A dielectric around the wires is equivalent to a shortening of the  wavelength incident on the mesh.
The spacing between wires appears wider, ekctrica\ly,  causing the transmission coefficient of the surface to increase.
On the other hand, the total  reflecting surface is increased by the presence of ice, reducing the transmission through the  mesh.
The relative importance of these two effects determines whether there is a net increase or  a net decrease in transmission.
In unfavorable cases, even strongly relkcting meshes can lose  their reflecting properties almost completely.
 Cassegrain antenna.19-23 This is an adaptation to the microwave region of an optical technique  invented in the seventeenth century by William Cassegrain, a contemporary of Isaac Newton.
 The Cassegrain principle is widely used in telescope design to obtain high magnification with a  physically short telescope and allow a convenient rear location for the observer.
Its application  to microwave reflector antennas permits a reduction in the axial dimension of the antenna.just  as in optics.
But more importantly it eliminates the need for long transmission lines and allows  greater flexibility in what can be placed at the focus of the antenna.
 The principle of the Cassegrain antenna is shown in Fig.
7.11.
It is a two-reflector system  with the larger (primary) reflector having a parabolic contour and a (secondary) subreflector  with a hyperbolic contour.
One of the two foci of the hyperbola is the real focal point of the  system.
The Feed is located at this point, which can be at the vertex or the parabola or in front  of it.
The other focus of the hyperbola is a virtual focal point and is located at the rocus of the  parabolic surface.
Parallel rays coming from a target are reflected by the parabola as a  convergent beam and are re-reflected by the hyperbolic subreflector, converging at the pos­ ition of the feed.
There exists a family of hyperbolic surfaces which can serve as the subreflector.
 The larger the subreflector, the nearer will it be to the main reflector and the shorter will be the  axial dimension of the antenna assembly: However, a large subre(lcctor results in large aper­ ture blocking, which may be undesirable.
A small subreflector reduces aperture blocking, but it  has to he supported at a greater distance from the main reflector.
 The geometry of the Cassegrain antenna is especially attractive for monopulse tracking  radar since the RF plumbing can be placed behind the reflector to avoid blocking of the  aperture.
Also, the long runs of transmission line out to the feed at the focus of a conventional  parabolid are avoided.
 Parabolic  reflector  ·· ·-·· .
.(.·Hyperbolic  ___ \ ,ubrefl ec !or  _ __,' // ...
 (a) Parabola--,  neol focul  point \  I \  \  I  I \  I RADAR ANTENNAS 241  \  \  \  \  I  I  I (\ fl;perbolo  ; f\Virtuol  focal  / point  (b)  Figure 7.11 (a) Cassegrain antenna showing the hyperbolic subreflector and the feed at the vertex of the  main parabolic reflector; (h) geometry of the Cassegrain antenna.
 The Cassegrain antenna can, if desired, be designed to have a lower antenna noise tempera­ ture than the conventional parabolid.
This is due to the elimination of the long transmission  lines rrom the feed to the receiver and by the fact that the spillover-sidelobes from the feed see the  cold sky rather than the warm earth.
Low antenna noise temperature is important in radio  astronomy or space communications.
but generally is of little interest in radar since extremely  low noise receivers are not always desirable.
 Still another advantage of the Cassegrain antenna is the flexibility with which different  transmitters and receivers can be substituted because of-the avai\abi\ity of the antenna feed  system at the back of the reflector rather than out front at the normal focus.
The Haystack  microwave research system,24 for example, is a fully steerable Cassegrain antenna 120 ft in  diameter.
enclosed by a 150-ft diameter metal space-frame randome.
It was designed to oper­ ate at freque.pcies from 2 to 10 GHz for radar, radio astronomy, and space communications.
 To facilitate multifunction use, the RF components are installed in a number of plug-in  modules, 8 by 8 by 12 feet in size, which mount directly behind the Cassegrain reflector.
 The presence of the subreflector in front of the main reflector in the Cassegrain  configuration causes aperture blocking.
Part of the energy is removed, resulting in a reduction  of the main-beam gain and an increase in the sidelobes.
If the main reflector is circular and  assumed to have a completely tapered parabolic illumination, a small circular obstacle in the  center of the aperture will reduce the (power) gain by approximately [1 -2(Db/D)2]2, where  D,, is the diameter of the obstacle (hyperbolic subreflector) and Dis the diameter of the main  aperture.19 The relative (voltage) level of the first sidelobe is increased by (2D,./D)2.
For  example if D,,/D = 0.122.
the gain would be lowered by about 0.3 dB and a -20 dB sidelobe  would he increased to about -l 8 dB.
 Aperture blocking may be reduced by decreasing the size of the subreflector.
By making  the feed more directive or by moving it closer to the subreflector, the size of the subreOector  may he reduced without incurring a spillover Joss.
However, the feed cannot be made too large  (too directive) since it partially shadows the energy reflected from the main parabolic reflector.
 242 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  r  ~ V 'I  ? ~  f  f ~ Main reflector with  .y polarization twister  V'{I' (twistreflector)  Subreflector with  polarization - dependent surface ••  Figure 7.12 Polarization-twisting Cassegrain antenna.
 Aperture blocking by the subreflector is reduced with  this design.
 Minimum total aperture blocking occurs when the shadows produced by the subrdlector and  the feed are of equal area.19 Aperture blocking is less serious with narrow beamwidths and  small fl D ratios.
 If operation with a single polarization is permissible, the technique diagramed in Fig.
7.
12  can reduce aperture blocking.
The subreflector consists of a horizontal grating of wires, called  a transrejlector, which passes vertically polarized waves with negligible attenuation but rctlects  the horizontally polarized wave radiated by the feed.
The horizontally polarized wave reflected  by the subreflector is rotated 90° by the twist reflector at the surface of the main reflector.
 The twist reflector consists of a grating of wires oriented 45° to the incident polarization and  placed one-quarter wavelength from the· reflector's surface.132 (Modifications to this simple  design can provide a 90° twist of the incident polarization over a broad frequency band and a  wide range of incident angles.25•133) The \Yave reflected from the main reflector is vertically  polarized and passes through the subreflector· with negligible degradation.
The subreflector is  transparent to vertically polarized.
waves.
and does not block the aperture.
Some aperture  blocking by the feed does occur, but this 'can be made small.
In one airborne monopulse radar  antenna23 using the polarization twisting technique, good performance was obtained over a 12  percent bandwidth.
The subreflector was supported by a transparent (dielectric) cone, with  resistive-card absorbers embedded in the ·support cone and oriented so as to reduce the  I .
 cross-polarized wide-angle radiation by more t'1an 20 dB.
 l •• '  Mechanical beam-scanning with planar twist-reflector.
The antenna configuration shown in  Fig.
7.13 may be employed to·rapidly scan a beam over a relatively wide angle by mechanical  motion of the plarnir mirror.
This configuration has been called a mirror scan antenna (by the  Naval Research Laboratory), polarization twist Cassegrain and flat plate Cassegrain (by  Westinghouse Electric), and a parabolic: reflector with planar auxiliary mirror (by Russian  authors138).
The parabolic reflector is made up of parallel wires spaced less than a half- Fixed porobol,c  reflector  with porollel  \  ?.8  \  flay polh ...
~ Axis of m11ror movement  Movable  ..
--plonor  twist reflector RADAR ANTENNAS 243  Figure 7.13 Geometry of the polarization­ twist mirror-scan antenna, using a polar­ ization-sensitive parabolic reflector and a  planar polarization-rotating twist reflector.
 Scanning of the beam is accomplished by  mechanical motion of the planar twist­ reflector.
 wavelength apart which are usually supported by low-loss dielectric material.
The construc­ tion of the parabolic reflector with thin parallel wires makes it polarization sensitive.
That is, it  will completely reflect one sense of linear polarization and be transparent to the orthogonal  sense of polarization.
The sense of the linear polarization of the energy radiated by the feed is  made the same as the orientation of the wires of the parabolic reflector.
The feed in the center  of the figure illuminates the parabolic reflector· and the reflected energy is incident on a planar  mirror constructed as a twist reflector.
As mentioned previously a twist reflector reflect<; the  incident energy with a 90" rotation of the plane of polarization.
The reflected energy therefore  will have a polarization perpendicular to the wires of the parabolic reflector and will pass  through with negligible attenuation.
The twist reflector can be made relatively broadband.
An  attractive feature of this antenna configuration is that the beam can be readily scanned over a  wide angle by mechanical motion of the low inertia planar reflector.
Another advantage is that  a deflection of the planar mirror by an angle O results in the beam scanning through an angle  20.
 A similar principle is used in the configuration shown in Fig.
7.14 to obtain a 360°  rotating-beam antenna without the need for RF rotary joints.
In this cutaway sketch, four  polarization sensitive parabolic reflectors surround a rotating twist-reflector mirror.
For  convenience, tb.e entire structure is shown enclosed within a radome.
Fixed feeds illuminate  each reflector.
A single radar transmitter and receiver is switched among the four sets of feeds  on a time-shared basis every 90° rotation of the mirror.
As in the antenna of Fig.
7.13, the  parabolas consist of closely spaced parallel wires that reflect the polarization radiated by the  feed, but pass the orthogonal polarization.
The planar mirror rotates the plane of polarization  90° on reflection.
The beam will illuminate the target twice for every revolution of the planar  mirror.
However, the scanning is not continuous in angle, and the time between observations  alternates between two values.
With a single-sided planar mirror, the two time intervals  between observations correspond to the time· it takes for the planar mirror to rotate !th and  Jth of a revolution.
If the mirror is double-sided, the times between observations correspond to  ijlh and ith of a revolution.
 Three renectors can be used instead of four to produce a uniform target observation rate.
 if the mirror is double-sided.
Two target observations per rotation of the mirror are obtained,  'Jut the scanning is not continuous.
That is, if the region from Oto 120° is scanned first, the next  region to be scanned is from 240 to 360°, followed by the region from 120 to 240°.
 244 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  Twist reflector  (90° polarization-rotation  mirror)  ·,.
 ta .;1c  Rado me  Figure 7.14 Configuration of the mirror-scan antenna for obtaining 360° scanning without RF rotating  joints.
(From B.
Lewis.139)  7.4 SCANNING-FEED REFLECTOR ANTENNAS  Large antennas are sometimes difficult to scan mechaniGally with as much llexibility as one  might like.
Some technique for scanning the beam of a large antenna must often be used other  than the hrute-force technique of mechanically positioning the entire structure.
Phased array  antennas and lens antennas offer the possibility of scanning the beam without the necessity for  moving large mechanical masses.
The present section considers the possibility of scanning the  beam over a limited angle with a fixed reflector and a movable feed.
It is much easier to  mechanically position the feed than it is to position the entire antenna structure.
In addition,  large fixed reflectors are usually cheaper and easier to manufacture than antennas which must  be moved about.
 The beam produced by a simple paraboloid reflector can be scanned over a limited angle  by positioning the feed.1•26-29 However, the beam cannot be scanned too far without encoun­ tering serious deterioration of the antenna radiation pattern because of increasing coma and  astigmatism.
The gain of a paraboloid with J/D = 0.25 (.f = focal distance, D = antenna  RADAR ANTENNAS 245  diameter) is reduced to 80 percent of its maximum value when the beam is scanned ± 3  beamwidths off axis.
A paraboloid withf/D= 0.50 can be scanned ±6.5 beamswidths off axis  before the gain is reduced to 80 percent of maximum (Ref.
l, p.
488).
The antenna impedance  also changes with a change in feed position.
Hence scanning a simple paraboloid antenna by  scanning the feed is possible, but is generally limited in angle because o( the deterioration in  the antenna pattern after scanning but a few beamwidths ofT axis.
 Spherical reflectors.
Ir the paraboloid renector is replaced by a spherical-rencctor surface, it is  possible to achieve a wide scanning angle because of the symmetry of the sphere.
However, a  simple spherical renector does not produce an equiphase radiation pattern (plane wave), and the  pattern is generally poor.
The term spherical aberration is used to describe the fact that the  phase front of the wave radiated by a spherical reflector is not plane as it is with a wave  1 a<liatcd by an ideal parabolic reflector.
There arc at least three techniques which might he  used to minimize the effect of spherical aberration.
One is to employ a reflector of sufficiently  large radius so that the portion of the sphere is a reasonable approximation to a  paraboloid.
30 32 The second approach is to compensate for the spherical aberration with  special feeds or correcting lenses.33·34 These techniques yield only slightly larger scan angles  than the single paraboloid renector with movable feed.
 !\.
third technique to approximate the spherical surface and minimize the effects of spheri­ cal aberration is to step a parabolic reflector as shown in Fig.
7.15.7•35•36 The focal length is  reduced in half-wavelength steps, making a family of confocal paraboloids.
It is possible to  scan the stepped reflector to slightly wider angles than a simple paraboloid, but not as wide as  with some other scanning techniques.
Disadvantages of this reflector are'the scattered radia­ tion from the stepped portions and the narrow bandwidth.
 If only a portion of the spherical reflector is illuminated at any one time, much wider scan  angles are possible than if the entire aperture were illuminated.
Li32 has described experiments  using a 10-ft-diameter spherical reflector at a frequency of 11.2 GHz.
The focal length was  29.5 in.
If the phase error from the sphere is to differ from that of a paraboloid by no more  than J/16, the maximum permissible diameter of the illuminated surface should be 3.56 ft.
The  heamwidth required of the primary feed pattern is determined by the illuminated portion of  the aperture.
Li used a square-aperture horn with diagonal polarization in order to obtain the  required primary beamwidth and low primary-pattern sidelobes (better than 25 dB).
The  Center of  sphere  Figure 7.15 Stepped parabolic reflector.
 246 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  resulting secondary beamwidth from the sphere was about l.8° (39.4 dB gain) with a relative  sidelobe level of 20 dB.
A total useful scan angle of 140° was demonstrated.
This type of  antenna is similar in many respects to the torus antenna described below.
 Parabolic Torus.
Wide scan angles in one dimension can be obtained with a parabolic-torus  configuration, 3 7-41 the principle of which is shown in Fig.
7.16.
The parabolic torus is gen­ erated by rotating a section of a parabolic arc about an axis parallel to the latus rectum of the  parabola.
The cross section in one plane (the vertical plane in Fig.
7.16) is parabolic, while the  cross section in the orthogonal plane is circular.
The beam angle may be scanned by moving  the feed along a circle whose radius is approximately half the radius of the torus circk.
 The radius of the torus is made large enough so that the portion of the circular cross section  illuminated by the feed will not differ appreciably from the surface of a true parabola.
Because  of the circular symmetry of the reflector surface in the horizontal plane, th~ beam can be  readily scanned in the plane without any deterioration in the pattern.
 The wave reflected from the surface of the parabolic torus is not perfectly plane, but it can  be made to approach a plane wave by proper choice of the ratio of focal length! to the radius  of the torus R.
The optimum ratio of fl R lies between 0.43 and 0.45.
39  Good radiation patterns are possible in the principal planes with sidelobes only slightly  worse than those of a conventional paraboloid.
The larger the ratio of f/D, the better the  radiation pattern.
(The diameter D in the parabolic torus is the diameter of the illuminated  area rather than the diameter of the torus itsetr.) The highest sidelobes produced by the  parabolic torus do not lie within the principal planes.
The inherent phase errors of  the parabolic-torus surface due to its deviation from a true parabola can cause sidelobes on  the order of 15 dB in intermediate planes.38 These sidelobes usually lie in the 45° plane and are  called eyes, because of their characteristic appearance on a contour plot of the radiation  pattern.
 In principle the parabolic torus can be scanned 180°, but because of beam spillover near  the end of the scan and self-blocking by the opposite edge of the reflector, the maximum scan  angle is usually limited to the vicinity· of 120°.
 Only a portion of the parabolic-torus is illuminated by the feed at any particular time.
 This may appear to result in low aperture utilization or poor efficiency since the total physical  area is not related in a simple manner.
to the gain as it is in a fully illuminated antenna.
 However, the cost of the fixed reflector of the parabolic torus is relatively cheap compared with  antennas which must be mechanically scanned.
Nonutilization of the entire aperture is  probably not too important a consideration when overall cost and feasibility are taken into  account.
 Center of  torus \ _l_i  .....
' \  ('"' of teed  positions Generoting  porobolo  Figure 7.16 Principle of the parabolic-torus antenna.
 RADAR ANTENNAS 247  The advantage of the parabolic torus is that it provides an economical method for rapidly  scanning the beam of a physically large antenna aperture over.a relatively wide scan angle with  110 deterioration of the pattern over this angle of scan.
Its disadvantages are its relatively large  physical size when compared with other means for scanning and the large sidelobes obtained  in intermediate planes.
 Organ-pipe scanner.
Scanning tile beam in the parabolic torus is accomplished by moving a  single feed or by switching the transmitter between many fixed feeds.
A single moving feed may  be rotated about the center of the torus on an arm of length approximately one-half the radius  of the torus.
For example, a 120° torus antenna might be scanned by continuously rotating  three feeds spaced 120° apart on the spokes of a wheel so that one feed is always illuminating  the reflector.
Although this may be practical in small-size antennas, it becomes a difficult  mechanical problem if the radius of the rotating arm is large.
 Scanning may also be accomplished by arranging a series of feeds on the locus of the focal  points of the torus and switching the transmitter power from one feed to the next with an  organ-pipe scanner.128·129 The principle of the organ-pipe scanner is shown in Fig.
7.17.
The  transmission lines from the feeds are arranged to terminate on the periphery of a circle.
A feed  horn is rotated within this circle, transferring power from the transmitter to each reed or group  of feeds in turn.
The rotary horn may be flared to illuminate more than one elementary feed of  the row of feeds.
All the transmission lines in the organ-pipe scanner must be of equal length.
 The radiation pattern from a torus with a well-designed organ-pipe scanner changes but  little until the beam reaches one end of the scanning aperture.
At this point the energy appears  at both ends of the aperture and two beams are found in the secondary pattern.
The antenna  /f Equal lengths of  ( \ ~,oveguide  ~------ Figure 7.17 Principle or the organ-pipe  scanner.
 248 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  cannot be used during this period of ambiguity, called the dead time.
In one model of the  organ-pipe scanner, 36 elements were fed, three at a time.
128 The dead time for this model is  equivalent to rotation past two of the 36 elements; consequently it was inoperative about 6  percent of the time.
 In Fig.
7.17 the feeds are shown on a straight line, but in the parabolic torus they would  lie on the arc of a circle.
 The many feed horns plus all the transmission lines of the organ-pipe scanner result in a  relatively large structure with significant aperture blocking.
Aperture blocking can he min­ imized by designing the parabolic portion of the torus as an offset parabola.just as in the cast.:  of a paraboloid.
 Other feed-motion scanners.
There exist a number of antennas in which the beam is rapidly  scanned over a limited sector by the mechanical motion of the feed.
The motion of the feed is  generally circular.
The electromagnetic path within the antenna structure is designed to con­ vert the circular motion of the feed to a linear motion of the antenna beam.
In some designs the  beam sweeps across a plane and then returns by the same route.
In other designs the scan is  saw-tooth with the beam sweeping across the plane of scan and then stepping back almost  instantaneously to its starting point.
The saw-tooth scan is generally preferred in radar applica­ tions.
Such antennas would be used where a small angular sector needs to be covered with a  rapid scan rate.
These antennas can cover a sector of from 10 to 20 degrees or more, at a ·rate of  10 to 20 scans per second or greater.
This is a rapid enough rate to permit essentially contin­ uous observation of the target.
A radar which uses such a sector-scanning antenna to track the  path of airborne targets is sometimes called a track-while-scan radar.
 The details of feed-motion scanners may be found in the literature.1 ·42•43 Many of these,  such as the Robinson, Foster,44•134 Lewis, and Schwarzchild, were developed during World  War II.
Various types of lenses, pillboxes, and trough waveguides have also been used for  mechanically scanning a beam over an angular sector.
Another mechanical scanner is a coaxial  line with radiating slots cut in its side.1 The inner conductor is corrugated and eccentric with  respect to the outer conductor.
As the inner conductor rotates the wavelength in the line  varies, causing the beam to scan.
 7.5 LENS ANTENNAS  The most common type of radar antenna is the parabolic reflector in one of its various forms.
 The microwave paraboloid reflector is analogous to an automobile headlight or to a search­ light mirror.
The analogy of an optical lens is also found in radar.
Three types of microwave  lenses applicable to radar are (1) dielectric lenses, (2) metal-plate lenses, and (3) lenses with  nonuniform index of refraction.
 Dielectric lenses.
The homogeneous, solid, dielectric-lens antenna of Fig.
7.18a is similar to  the conventional optical lens.
A point at the focus of the lens produces a plane wave on the  opposite side of the lens.
Focusing action is a result of the difference in the velocity of  propagation inside the dielectric as compared with the velocity of propagation in air.
The  index of refraction 17 of a dielectric is defined as the speed of light in free space to the speed of  light in the dielectric medium.
It is equal to the square root of the dielectric constant.
Matc.:rials  such as polyethylene, polystyrene, Plexiglas, and Teflon are suitable for small microwave  lenses.
They have low loss and may be easily shaped to the desired contour.
Since the velocity  of propagation is greater in air than in the dielectric medium, a converging lens is thicker in the  middle than at the outer edges, just as in the optical case.
 RADAR ANTENNAS 249  Focus  .
//.
 (a) (b)  Figur<' 7.IR (a) Convrrging-kns antenna constructed of homogeneous solid dielectric.
Direct microwave  analogy of the optical lens.
(h) Zoned dielectric lens.
 One of the limitations of the solid homogcncous·dielcctric lens is its thick size and large  weight.
Both the thickness and the weight may be reduced considerably by stepping or zoning  the lens (Fig.
7.
t 811).
Zoning is hasc<l on the fact that a 360" change of phase at the aperture has  no effect on the aperture phase distribution.
Starting with zero thickness at the edge of the lens,  the thickness or the dielectric is progressively increased toward the lens axis as in the design of  a normal lens.
However, when the path length introduced by the dielectric is equal to a  wavelength.
the path in the dielectric can be reduced to zero without altering the phase across  the aperture.
The thickness of the lens is again increased in the direction of the axis according  to the lens design until the path length in the dielectric is once more 360", at which time  another step may be made.
The optical path length through each or the zones is one  wavelength less than the next outer zone.
 Although zoning reduces the size and weight of a lens, it is not without disadvantages.
 Dielectric lenses are normally wideband; however, zoning results in a frequency-sensitive  device.
Another limitation is the loss in energy and increase in sidelobe level caused by the  shadowing produced by the steps.
The effect of the steps may be minimized by using a design  with large/ID, on the or<ler of 1 or more.
Even with these limitations, a stepped lens is usually  to be preferred because of the significant reduction in weight.
 The larger the dielectric constant (or index of refraction) of a solid dielectric lens, the  thinner it win be.
However.
the larger the dielectric constant, the greater will be the mismatch  between the lens and free space and the greater the loss in energy due to renections at the  surface of the lens.
Compromise values of the index of refraction lie between 1.5 and 1.6.
Lens  reflections may also be reduced with transition surfaces as in optics.
These surfaces should be a  quarter wave thick and have a dielectric constant which is the square root of the dielectric  constant of the lens material.
 Artificial dielectrics.
45 4 7 Instead of using ordinary dielectric materials for lens antennas, it is  possible to construct them of artificial dielectrics.
The ordinary dielectric consists of molecular  particles of microscopic size, but the artificial dielectric consists of discrete metallic or dielec­ tric particles or macroscopic size.
The particles may be spheres, disks, strips, or rods imbedded  in a material of low dielectric constant such as polystyrene foam.
The particles are arranged in  some particular configuration in a three-dimensional lattice.
The dimension of the particles in  the direction parallel to the electric field as well as the spacing between particles should be  small compared with a wavelength.
H these conditions are met, the lens will be insensitive to  frequency.
 250 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  When the particles are metallic spheres of radius a and sracing s between centers, the  dielectric constant of the artificial dielectric is approximately  t = 1 + 4nt s  assuming no interaction between the spheres.47 (7.20)  An artificial dielectric may also be constructed by using a solid dielectric material with a  controlled pattern of voids.
This is a form of Babinet inverse of the more usual artificial  dielectric composed of particles imbedded in a low-dielectric-constant material.48 The voids  may be either spheres or cylinders, but the latter are easier to machine.
 Lenses made from artificial dielectrics are generally of less weight than those from solid  dielectrics.
For this reason, artificial dielectrics are often preferred when the size of the antenna is  large, as, for example, at the lower radar frequencies.
Artificial-dielectric lenses may he  designed in the same manner as other dielectric lenses.
 Metal-plate lens.49-5 2 An artificial dielectric may be constructed with parallel-plate wave­ guides as snown in Fig.
7.19.
The phase velocity in parallel-plate waveguide is greater than that  in free space; hence the index of refraction is less than unity.
This is opposite to the usual  optical refracting medium.
A converging metal-plate lens is therefore thinner at the center than  at the edges, as opposed to a converging dielectric lens which is thinner at the edges.
The  metal-plate lens shown in Fig.
7.19 is an £-plane lens since the electric-field vector is parallel to  the plates.
Snell's law is obeyed in an £-plane lens, and the direction of the rays through the  lens is governed by the usual optical laws involving the idex of refraction.
 The surface contour of a metal-plate lens is, in general, not parabolic as in the case of the  reflector.
7 For example, the surface closest to the feed is an ellipsoid of revolution if the surface  at the opposite face of the lens is plane.
 The spacings between the plates of the metal-plate lens must lie between )../2 and ),_ if only  the dominant mode is to be propagated.
The index of refraction for this type of metal-plate  lens is  1111111111111111  E H 0 ,  E [ ( J.)2] 1/2 11= 1--2s  E L,  Direction of pro po gotion (7 .21)  Figure 7.19 Plan, elevation, and end  views or a converging lens antenna  constructed from parallel-plate wave­ guide.
(£-plane metal-plate lens.)  RADAR ANTENNAS 251  where) is the wavelength in air.
Equation (7.21) is always less than unity.
At the upper limit of  spacing.
s = ).
tl1c i11dex of refraction is equal to 0.866.
The closer the spacing, the less will be  the index of refractio11 and the thi1111er will be the Jens.
However, the spacing, and therefore the  index of refractio11.
cannot be made arbitrarily small since the reflection from the interface  between the lens and air will increase just as in the case of the solid-dielectric lenses.
For a  value of s = ,1./2.
the i11dex of rcfractio11 is zero and the waveguide is beyond cutoff The wave  i11cide111 011 the le11s will be completely reflected.
In practice, a compromise value of tt between  0.5 and 0.6 is often selected, corresponding to plate spacings of0.557) and 0.625,1.
and to power  rcllectio11s at normal i11cidence of 11 and 6.25 percent, respectively (Ref.
1, p.
410).
 Fven with an index of refraction in the vicinity of 0.5 to 0.6, the thickness of the metal­ plate lens becomes large unless inconveniently long focal lengths are used.
The thickness may  he reduced by zoning just as with a dielectric lens.
The bandwidth of a zoned metal-plate lens  is larger than that of an u11zoned lens, but the steps in the lens contour scatter the incident  energy in undesired directions, reduce the gain, and increase the sidelobe level.
An example of  an X-band metal-plate zoned lens is shown in Fig.
7.20.
 Another class of metal-plate lens is the constrained lens, or path-length lens, in which the  rays arc guided or constrained by the metal plates.
In the H-plane metal-plate constrained  le11s.
tile electric field is perpendicular to the plates (H field parallel}; thus the velocity of the  wave which propagates through the plates is relatively unaffected provided the plate spacing is  Figure 7.20 X -hand mclal-plale zoned Jens.
 252 INTIWDUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  great a than )./2.
The direction of the rays is not affected by the refractive index, and Snell's law  does not apply.
Focusing action is obtained -by constraining the waves 10 pass between the  plates in such a manner that the path length can be increased above that in free space.
In one  type of cylindrical constrained lens with the E field parallel to the plates, a IO beam couid bt:  scanned over a 100° sector by positioning the line fced.52 The kns was 72 wavelengths in si1e,  had an .flD = 1.5, and operated at a wavelength of 1.25 cm.
 Luneburg lens.
Workers in the field of optics have from time to time devised lenses in which  the index of refraction varied in some prescribed manner within the lens.
Although such lenses  had interesting properties, they were only of academic interest since optical materials with the  required variation of index of refraction were not practical.
However, at microwave frequen­ cies it is possible to control the index of refraction of materials (r, is the square root of the  dielectric constant <), and lenses with a nonuniform index of refraction are practical.
 One of the most important of the variable-index-of-refraction lenses in the field of radar is  that due to Luneburg.53 The Luneburg lens is spherically symmetric and has the property that  a plane wave incident on the sphere is focused to a point on the surface al the diametrically  opposite side.
Likewise, a transmitting point source on the surface of the sphere is converted to  a plane wave on passing through the Jens (Fig.
7.21 ).
Because of the spherical symmetry of l he  lens, the focusing property does not depend upon the direction of the incident wave.
The beam  may be scanned by positioning a single feed anywhere on the surface of the lens or by locating  many feeds along the surface of the sphere and switching the radar transmitter or receiver from  one horn to another.
The Luneberg lens can also generate a number of fixed beams.
 The index of refraction r, or the dielectric constant £ varies with the radial distance in a  Lune burg lens of radius r0, according to the relationship  ~ -,;" -[2 -(;J] 1/2 (7.22)  The i;idex of refraction is a maximum at the center, where it equals fi, and decreases to a  value of l on the periphery.
 Practical three-dimensional Luneburg lenses have been constructed of a large number of  spherical shells, each of constant index of refraction.
Discrete changes in index of refraction  approximate a continuous variation.
In one example of a Luneburg lens 10 concentric spheri­ cal shells are arranged one within the other.54•55 The dielectric constant of the individual shells  varies from 1.1 to 2.0 in increments of 0.1.
 Point  source tlE--------1>-------+-~--- Figure 7.21 Luneburg-lens geometry showing rays from  a point source radiated as a plane wave after passage  through the lens.
 RADAR ANTENNAS 253  The dielectric materials must not be loo heavy, yet they must be strong enough to support  their own weight without collapsing.
They should have low dielectric loss and not be affected  by the weather or by changes in temperature.
They should be easily manufactured with  uniform properties and must he homogeneous and isotropic if the performance characteristics  are to be independent of position.
 The antenna rat tern of a Luneburg lens has a slightly narrower beam width than that of a  paraboloidal rellcctor of the same circular cross section, but the sidelobe level is greater.56 60  This is due to the fact that the paths followed by the rays in a Luneburg lens tend to  concentrate energy toward the edge of the aperture.
This makes it difficult to achieve extremely  low sidclobes.
In practice.
the sidelobe level of a Luneburg lens seems to be in the vicinity of20  to22<lB.
 When the full 4rc radians 0f solid coverage is not required, a smaller portion of the lens can  be used, with a saving in size and weight.61•62 The Luneburg-lens principle can also be applied as  a passive reflector in a manner analogous to a corner reflector.61 If a reflecting cap is placed  over a portion of the spherical lens, an incident wave emerges in the same direction from which  it entered.
The cap may be made to cover a sector as large as a hemisphere.
 One of the limitations of a dielectric lens is the problem of removing heat dissipated  within the interior.
Dielectrics are generally poor conductors of heat.
Unless materials are of  low loss and can operate at elevated temperatures,63 dielectric lenses such as the Luneburg  lens are more suited to receiving, rather than transmitting, applications.
 The Luneburg principle may also be applied to a two-dimensional lens which generates a  fan beam in one plane.
In the geodesic analog of a two-dimensional Luneburg lens the  variation in dielectric constant is obtained by the increased path length for the RF energy  traveling in the TEM mode between parallel plates.64--67 The result is a dome-shaped parallel­ plate region as shown in Fig.
7.22.
 Other types of lenses based on the principle of nonuniform index of refraction have been  <lcscrihed.43·60·6R Homogeneous spherical lenses with uniform dielectric constant are also of  interest69 71 if the index of refraction is not too high and if the diameter is not greater than  about 30k They can be competitive to the Luneburg lens, especially for high-power  applications.
71  Lens tolerances.1 ·2 In general, the mechanical tolerances for a lens antenna are less severe than  for a reflector.
A given error in the contour or a mechanical reflector contributes twice to the  error in the wavefront because of the two-way path on reflection.
Mechanical errors in the lens  contour, However, contribute but once to the phase-front error.
Although the theoretical  tolerance of a lens may be less than required of a reflector, in practice it might be more difficult  to achieve a given level of performance in a lens.
A reflector can be readily supported mechan­ ically from the back.
This is not available in a lens where the mechanical support is from the  periphery of the lens and from the mechanical properties of the lens material itself.
Another  source of error in the lens not found in reflector antenna is the variation in the properties of  the lens material.
Both real and artificial dielectrics are not always perfectly uniform from  sample to sample or even within the same sample.
 Figure 7.22 The "tin-hat" geodesic analog or a two­ dimensional Luneburg lens.
 254 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  Evaluation of lenses as antennas.
One of the advantages of a lens over a relkctor antenna is the  absence of aperture blocking.
Considerable equipme_nt can be placed at the focus of the lens  without interfering with the resultant antenna pattern.
The first monopulsc radars used lenses  for this purpose, but with time the monopulse RF circuitry was reduced in size and the  reflector antenna came to be preferred over the lens.
The lens is capable of scanning the beam  over a wide angle.
Theoretically the Luneburg lens or the homogeneous sphere can cover  41t steradians.
Constrained metal-plate lenses are capable of wide scan angles as compared to  the limited scanning possible by moving the feed in a paraboloid reflector.
 The lens is usually less efficient than comparable reflector antennas because of loss when  propagating through the lens medium and the reflections from the two lens surfaces.
In a  zoned lens there will be additional, undesired scattering from the steps.
Although it is danger­ ous to generalize, the additional losses from the sources in a stepped lens might be 1 or 2 dB.
7 2  The lack of suitable solid or artificial dielectric materials has limited the de.yelopment of  lenses.
The problem of dissipating heat from large dielectric lenses can sometimes restrict their  use to moderate-power or to receiver applications.
Conventional lenses are usually large and  heavy, unless zoned.
To reduce the loss caused by scattering from the steps in a zoned lens,  the ratio of the focal length f to the antenna diameter D must be made large (of the order of  unity).
Lenses which must scan by positfoning the feed should also have largef/D ratio.
A large  f/D requires a greater mechanical structure because the feeds are bigger and must be supported  farther from the lens.
The mechanical support of a lens is usually more of a problem than with  a reflector.
 The wide-angle scanning capability of a lens would be of interest in radar as a competitor  for a phased array if there were available a practical means for electronically switching the  transmitter and receiver among fixed feeds so as to achieve a rapidly scanning beam.
 7.6 PATIERN SYNTHESIS  The problem of pattern synthesis in antenna design is to find the proper distribution of current  across a finite-width aperture so as to produce a radiation pattern which approximates the  desired pattern under some condition of optimization.
Pattern-synthesis methods may be  divided into two classes, depending upon whether the aperture is continuous or an array.
The  current distributions derived for continuous apertures may sometimes be used to approximate  the array-aperture distributions, and vice versa, when the number of elements of the array­ antenna is large.
The discussion in this section applies, for the most part, to linear one­ dimensional apertures or to rectangular apertures where the distribution is separable, that is,  where A(x, z) = A(x)A(z).
 The synthesis techniques which apply to array antennas usually assume uniformly spaced  isotropic elements.
The element spacing is generally taken to he a half wave-length.
If the  elemerlts were not isotropic but had a pattern Ee(O), and if the desired overall pattern were  denoted Ei8), the pattern to be found by synthesis using techniques derived for.
isotropic  elements would be given by Ei8)/Ee(8).
 Fourier-integral synthesis.
The Fourier-integral relationship between the field-intensity pat­ tern and the aperture distribution was discussed in Sec.
7.2.
The distribution A(z) across a  continuous aperture was given by Eq.
(7.14).
 A(z) = { J_'xi~ E(q,) exp (-j2n I sin q,) d(sin </>) (7.14)  RADAR ANTENNAS 255  where z = distance along the aperture and E(</>) = field-intensity pattern.
If only that portion of  the aperture distribution which extends over the finite-aperture dimension d were used.
the  resulting antenna pattern would be  Ea(¢)= ( A(z)exp j2rr,sin¢ dz • d,' 2 ( z )  · -d/2 11.
(7.23)  Substituting Eq.
(7.14) into the a hove and changing the variable of integration rrom </>to~ to  avoid confusion.
the antenna pattern becomes  I .
d/2 .
r,:, I z I E"(¢) = 1 _I .r E((} exr j2rr 1 (sin <I> -sin(} d(sin O dz  A d,1 ,,, ll (7.24)  Interchanging the order of integration, the approximate antenna pattern is  En(</>)= ct r OO E(c) sin [rr(d/,l)~sin </> -.
sin OJ d(sin ~)  ,l.
00 • rr(d/,l)(srn </> -sm 0 (7.25)  where £0(</>) is the Fourier-integral pattern which approximates the desired pattern E(</>) when  A(::) is restricted to a finite aperture or dimension d.
 Ruze 7 3 has shown that the approximation to the antenna pattern derived on the basis of  the Fourier integral for continuous antennas (or the Fourier-series method for discrete arrays)  has the property that the mean-square deviation between the desired and the approximate  patterns is a minimum.
lt is in this sense (least mean square) that the Fourier method is  optimum.
The larger the aperture (or the greater the number of elements in the array), the  better will be the approximation.
 The Fourier series may be used to synthesize the pattern of a discrete array, just as the  Fourier integral may be used to synthesize the pattern of a continuous aperture.74 Similar  conclusions apply.
The Fourier-series method is restricted in practice to arrays with element  spacing in the vicinity of a hair wavelength.
Closer spacing results in supergrain arrays which  are not practical.75·76 Spacings larger than a wavelength produce undesired grating lobes.
 Woodward-Levinson method.
Another method of approximating the desired antenna pattern  with a finite aperture distribution consists in reconstructing the antenna pattern from a finite  number of s,pnpled values.
The principle is analogous to the sampling theorem of circuit theory  in which a time waveform of limited bandwidth may be reconstructed from a finite number of  samples.
The antenna-synthesis technique based on sampled values was introduced by Levin­ son at the MIT Radiation Laboratory in the early forties and was apparently developed  independently by Woodward in England.7•77-79  The classical sampling theorem of information theory states: If a functionf(t)contains no  frequencies higher than W Hz, it is completely determined by giving its ordinates at a series of  points spaced 1/2 W seconds apart.
The analogous sampling process applied to an antenna  pattern is that the radiation pattern Ea(</>) from an antenna with a finite apertured is com­ pletely determined by a series of values spaced l/d radians apart, that is, by the sample values  E,(11,l/d), where 11 is an integer.
7 3 In Fig.
7.23a is shown the pattern E(tj,) and the sampled  points spaced A./d radians apart.
The sampled values E,(nl/d), which determine the antenna  pattern, are shown in b.
 The antenna pattern Ea(tj,) can be constructed from the sample values Ei11l/d) with a  pattern of the form (sin iJ, )N about each of the sampled values, where iJ, = rr(d/l) sin tj,.
The  (sin if, )/tit function is called the composing frmction and is the same as that used in information  256 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  0  I  3>-_2X >.
0 d d d  0 >-2>-3>-.1l ~  d d d d d  (a)  E5(n>-/d)  I I  >-2>-3>-4>-5>- d d d d d  (b)  >-2>-3>-4>.
5>- d d d d d  ( cl sin ¢  sin ¢  sin¢ ..
 Figure 7.23 (a) Radiation pattern  £(</>) with sampled values A.jd radians  apart, where d = aperture dimen­ sion; (b) sampled values E,(n).Jd),  which specify the antenna pattern of  (a); (c) reconstructed paltern Ea(ef>)  using (sin i/J)N composing function  to approximate the desired radiation ·  pattern £( 4> ).
 theory to construct the time waveform from the sampled values.
The antenna pattern 1s  given by ·· ..
/  E (</>) = f E (";_) sin [n(d/,l)(sin </> -n!H)J  a n=-co 3 d rc(d/J)(sin</>-tlA./d) (7.26)  that is, the antenna pattern from a finite aperture is reconstructed from a sum of (sin t/f )N  composing functions spaced J,./d rad apart, each weighted according to the sample values  £5(11)./d), as illustrated in Fig.
7.23c.
 The (sin t/l)N composing function is well suited for reconstructing the pattern.
Its value at  a particular sample point is unity, but it is zero at all other sample points.
In addition, the  (sin t/l)N function can be readily generated with a uniform aperture distribution.
The  Woodward-Levinson synthesis technique consists in determining the amplitude and phase of  the uniform aperture distribution corresponding to each of the sample values and performing  a summation to obtain the required overall aperture distribution.
 The aperture distribution may be found by substituting the antenna pattern of Eq.
(7.26)  into the Fourier-transform relationship given by Eq.
(7.14).
The aperture distribution becomes  1 00 ("A.) ( j2rcnz) As(z) = d n=~oo Es d exp --d- (7.27)  RADAR ANTENNAS 257  Therefore the aperture distribution which generates the 11th (sin t/J)N composing pattern has  uniform amplitude and is proportional to the sampled value £5(11)./d).
The phase across the  aperture is such that the individual composing patterns are displaced from one another by a  half a beamwidth (where the beamwidth is here defined as the distance between the two nulls  which surround the main beam).
The phase is given by the exponential term of ~q.
(7.27) and  represents a linear pliase change of 111r radians across the aperture.
The number of samples  required to approximate the radiation pattern from a finite aperture of width dis 2d/X  The essential difference between Fourier-integral synthesis and the Woodward-Levinsr,;,  method is that the former gives a radiation pattern whose mean-square deviation from tlh.
 desired pattern is a minimum.
and the Woodward-Levinson method gives an antenna pattern  which exactly fits the desired pattern at a finite number of points.
 Dolph-( 'lwhyslH.'\' arrays.
Ro R ·1 This pattern produces the narrowest beamwidt h for a spcci lied  sidelohe le\'el.
The beamwidth is measured by the distance between the first nulls that straddle  the main beam.
The sidelobes arc all of equal magnitude.
Dolph80 derived the aperture  illumination with this property by forcing a correspondence between the Chebyshev poly­ nomial and the polynomial describing the pattern of an array antenna.
Although a radiation  pattern with the narrowest beam width for a given sidelobe level seems a reasonable choice for  radar.
it is seldom employed since it cannot be readily achieved with practical antennas where  high gain and low sidelobes are desired.
As the antenna size increases, the currents at the end  of the aperture become large compared with the currents along the rest of the aperture, and the  radiation pattern becomes sensitive to the edge excitation.
This sets a practical upper limit to  the size of an antenna that can have a Dolph-Chebyshev pattern and therefore sets a lower  limit to the width of the main beam which can be achieved.
 Ta~ lor aperture illumination.
The Taylor aperture illumination is a r ~alizable approximation to  the Dolph-Chcbyshev illumination.84 It produces a pattern with uniform sidelobes of a  specified value.
but only in the vicinity of the main beam.
Unlike the theoretical Dolph­ Chehyshcv pattern.
the sidelobes of the Taylor pattern decrease outside a specified angular  region.
The side lobe level is uniform within the region defined by I (d/'1.) sin¢ I < ii and  decreases with increasing angle¢ for i(d/'1.) sin ¢I> n, and where n is an integer, dis the  antenna dimension and A is the wavelength.
Hence 11 divides the radiation pattern into a  uniform sidclobc region straddling the main beam and a decreasing sidelobe region.
The  numher of~cqual sidelobes on each side of the main beam is 11 -l.
 The bcamwidth of a Taylor pattern will be broader than that of the Dolph-Chebyshev.
If  the design side lobe level is 25 dB.
a Taylor pattern with 11 = 5 gives a beamwidth 7.7 percent  greater than the Dolph-Chchyshev.
and with,,= 8 it is 5.5 percent greater.
 The Taylor pattern is specified by two parameters: the design sidelobe level and,,, which  defines the boundary between uniform sidelobes and decreasing sidelobes.
The integer 11  cannot be too small.
Taylor states that,, must be at least 3 for a design-sidelobe ratio of 25 dB  and at least 6 for a design-sidelobe ratio of 40 dB.
The larger,, is, the sharper will be the beam.
 However, if,, is too large, the same difficulties as arise with the Dolph-Chebyshev pattern will  occur.
The aperture illuminations for high values of n are peaked at the center and at the edge  of the aperture.
and might be difficult to achieve in practice.
 Care must be exercised in the selection of the sidelobe level of a Taylor pattern.
Large  antennas with narrow beamwidths can exhibit a severe degradation in gain because of  the large energy contained within the sidelobes as compared with that within the main beam.
 The value of,, must be properly chosen consistent with the beamwidth and sidelobe Jevel.85  258 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  Although the Taylor pattern was developed as a realizable approximation to the Dolph­ Chebyshev, it does not resemble the theoretical equal-sidelobe pattern.
Values of ,1 are not  large so that a Taylor pattern exhibits decreasing sidelobes over most of its range.
Decreasing  sidelobes are not undesired in radar application.
If the radar designer has a choice, it is  preferred that the high sidelobes be near the main beam, where they are easier to recognize,  rather than to have isolated high sidelobes elsewhere.
This is one time nature is cooperative  since it is natural for the sidelobes to be large in the vicinity of the main beam.
 The Taylor aperture illumination has also been applied to synthesizing the patterns of  circular, two-dimensional antennas.86·87 It has been widely used as a guide for selecting  antenna aperture illuminations.
 When the difference pattern of a monopulse antenna can be selected independently oft he  sum pattern, as in a phased array, the criterion for a good difference pattern is to obtain  maximum angle sensitivity commensurate with a given sidelobe level.
Bayliss811 txis described  a method for obtaining suitable monopulse difference patterns on this basis.
It parallels  Taylor's approach to the sum pattern.
 7.7 COSECANT-SQUARED ANTENNA PATfERN  It was shown in Sec.
2.11 that a search radar with an antenna pattern proportional to csc20,  where 8 is the elevation angle, produces a constant echo-signal power for a target !lying at  constant altitude, if certain assumptions are satisfied.
Many fan-beam air-sea~ch radars  employ this type of pattern.
A constant echo signal with range, however, is probably not as  important an application of the cosecant-squared pattern as is achieving the desired elevation  coverage in an efficient manner.
Shaping of the beam is desirable since the needed range at  high angles is less that at low angles; hence, the antenna gain as a function of elevation angle  can be tailored accordingly.
Shaped patterns like the cosecant-squared pattern are also used in  airborne radars that map the surface of the earth.
89  Antenna design.
The design of a cosecant-squared antenna pattern is an application of th'c  synthesis techniques discussed in the preceding section.
Examples of cosecant-squared-pattern  synthesis are given in the literature.7•73•77•90  The cosecant-squared pattern may be approximated with a reflector antenna by shaping  the surface or by using more than one feed.
The pattern produced in this manner may not be as  accurate as might be produced by a well-designed array antenna, but operationally, it is not  necessary to approximate the cosecant-squared pattern very precisely.
A common method of  producing the cosecant-squared pattern is shown in Fig.
7.24.
The upper half of the reflector is  a parabola and reflects energy from the feed in a di.rection parallel to the axis, as in any other  parabolic antenna.
The lower half, however, is distorted from the parabolic contour so as to  direct a portion of the energy in the upward direction.
 A cosecant-squared antenna pattern can also be produced by feeding the parabolic  reflector with two or more horns or with a linear array.
If the horns are spaced and fed  properly, the combination of the secondary beams will give a smooth cosecant-squared pat­ tern over some range of angle.
A reasonable approximation to the cosecant-squared pattern  can be obtained with but two horns.
A single horn, combined with a properly located ground  plane, can also generate a cosecant-squared pattern with a parabolic reflector.91 The feed  horn, plus its image in the ground plane, has the same effect as two horns.
The traveling-wave  slot antenna92 and the surface-wave antenna93 can also he designed to produce a cosecant­ squared antenna pattern.
 The shaping of the beam is generally in one plane, with a narrow pattern of conventional  Parabolic  reflector  ~  \  \  \  Displaced \  from original /1(  porobolic ./ \  con lour _ __- \ RADAR ANTENNAS 259  Figure 7.24 Cosecant-squared antenna  produced by displacing the reflector  surface from the original parabolic  shape.
 design in the orthogonal plane.
The parabolic cylinder antenna fed from a line source is  convenient for obtaining independent control of the patterns in the two orthogonal planes.
 This type of antenna, however, is generally bulkier and heavier than a reflector fed from a  single point source.
The line feed is more difficult to pressurize than a point feed.
The antenna  with a point-source feed requires a reflector surface with double curvature, as compared to the  single curvature of the cylindrical antenna, in order to obtain a shaped beam.
The double  curvature reflector is designed to provide both the desired shaping of the beam in one plane  and focusing in transverse planes.1•94-96 The surface is formed by the envelope of a system of  paraboloids whose axes all lie in the plane of the shaped beam, but at varying angles of  inclination to each other and to a fixed line.
 The antenna of the S-band Airport Surveillance Radar (ASR) or the AN{f PN-19 landing  system is shown in Fig.
7.25.
The 14 ft (4.3 m) by 8 ft (2.4 m) reflector is an offset paraboloid  fed from a 12-element vertical line-source.
The uppermost feedhorn is located at the focal point  of the paraboloid.
The azimuth beamwidth is l.6° and the vertical beamwidth is 4° with  cosecant-squared shaping from 6° to 30°.
Being a transportable equipment, the antenna is  self-erecting and is stowed inside the shelter through a roof hatch.
The radar system provides  coverage to 60 nmi and 40,000 feet with a 15 rpm rotation rate.
 f•  Loss in gain.
An antenna with a cosecant-squared pattern will have less gain than a normal  fan-beam pattern generated from the same aperture.
To obtain an approximate estimate of the  loss in gain incurred by beam shaping, the idealized patterns in Fig.
7.26 will be assumed.
The  normal antenna pattern is depicted in Fig.
7.26a as a square beam extending from (J = 0 to  0 = 00.
The cosecant-squared pattern in Fig.
7.26b is shown as a uniform beam over the  range O s O s 00 and decreases as csc2 0/csc2 00 over the range 00 < (J s Om.
The gain G of the  square beam in Fig.
7.26a divided by the gain G, of the cosecant-squared antenna beam in  Fig.
7.26/, i:  G 00 + [ l/(csc2 00)] csc2 0 dO  (7.28)  For small values of 00,  G G ~ 2 -Oo cot Om  C (7.29)  260 JNTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  Figure 7.25 Cosecant-squared antenna of the AN(TPN-19 landing system.
(Courtesy Raytheon Compm1,1.)  C  0  CJ>  QJ  >  a  QJ n::  0  (al QJ  >  0  OJ a::  0  ( D) Figure 7.26 Idealized anlcnna pat­ tern assumed in the com put.ti ion of  the loss in gain incurred with a  cosecant-squared antenna pattern.
 (a) Normal antenna pattern; (b)  cosecant-squared pattern.
 RADAR ANTENNAS 261  where all angles in the above formulas are measured in radians.
For example, if 00 = 6° and  Om= 20°, the gain is reduced by 2.2 dB compared with a fan beam 6° wide.
If em is made 40°,  the loss is 2.75 dB.
In the limit of large Om and small 00, the loss approaches a maximum of  3 dB.
 Shaped beams and STC.
A radar that can detect a 1 m2 target at 200 nmi can detect a 10-4 m2  target at 20 nmi because of the inverse fourth power variation of signal strength with range.
 Therefore.
small nearby targets such as birds and insects can clutter the output of a radar.
To  avoid this, the receiver gain can be reduced at short range and increased during the period  between pulses so that the received signal from a target of constant cross section remains  unchanged with range.
The programmed control of the receiver gain to maintain a constant  echo signal strcnglh is called sensiti11it_v time comrol (STC).
It is an effective method for  eliminating radar echoes due to unwanted birds and_ insects.
 STC makes use of the inverse fourth power variation of signal strength with range.
The  cosccant-squared shaping of the antenna also utilizes the inverse fourth power variation with  range (Sec.
2.1 I).
Thus, when STC is used with a cosecant-squared antenna pattern, the  high-angle coverage of the radar is reduced.
Targets that are seen at long range and at a  particular height with a cosecant-squared antenna, will be missed at shorter ranges when STC  b used.
To incorporate both beam shaping and STC, the pattern must have higher gain at  higher-elevation angles than would a cosecant-squared pattern.
Figure 7.27a illustrates the  antenna elevation pattern for an air-search radar which is desired to compensate for STC and  yet provide a signal independent of range, as does the cosecant-squared pattern.97 Figure 7.27b  shows the coverage or a long-range radar with such an antenna pattern.
 Beam shaping may also be employed to increase the target-to-clutter ratio in some cases.
 A target at high elevation angles competes with surface clutter at low angles.
Increasing the  antenna gain at high angles hut not at low angles will therefore improve the target echo with  respect to the cluttcr.9R  r cq (.4~r so ,a£l1 ~ ta~, 1 c••  •··· "(j ..
....
 IOI  Hgurt> 7.27 Antenna elevation pattern ror a long-range air-search radar to achieve high-angle coverage  when STC is employed.
(a) Comparison with the cosecant-squared pattern; (b) free-space coverage  diagram.
{From Sl,rader,91 co11rtesy McGraw-Hill Book Company.)  262 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  7.8 EFFECT OF ERRORS ON RADIATION PATTERNS73·99 101  Antenna-pattern synthesis techniques such as those discussed in Sec.
7.6 permit the antenna  designer to compute the aperture illumination required to achieve a specified radiation  pattern.
However, when the antenna is constructed, it is usually found that the experimentally  measured radiation pattern deviates from the theoretical one, especially in the region of the  sidelobes.
Generally, the fault lies not with the theory, but in the fact that ii is· not possible 10  reproduce precisely in practice the necessary aperture illumination specified by synthesis  theory.
Small, but ever-present, errors occur in the fabrication of an antenna.
These contribute  unavoidable perturbations to the aperture illumination and resu It in a pattern different in  detail from the one anticipated.
 Errors in the aperture illumination may be classed as either systematic or random.
The  former are predictable, but the latter are not and can only be described in statistical terms .
...
 Examples of systematic errors include (1) mutual coupling between the elements of an array,  (2) aperture blocking in reflector antennas due to the feed and its supports, (3) diffraction at  the steps in a zoned-lens antenna, and (4) periodicities included in the construction of the  antenna.
Random errors include ( 1) errors in the machining or manufacture of the antenna as  a consequence of the finite precision of construction techniques, (2) RF measurement errors  incurred in adjusting an array, (3) wall-spacing errors in metal-plate lenses, (4) random distor­ tion of the antenna surface, and (5) mechanical or electrical phase variations caused by  temperature or wind gradients across the antenna.
Although random errors may be relatively  small, their effect on the sidelobe radiation can be large.
Systematic errors are usually the same  from antenna to antenna in any particular design constructed by similar techniques.
On the  other hand, random errors differ from one antenna t(? the next even though they be of the same  design and constructed similarly.
Therefore the effect of random errors on the antenna pattern  can be discussed only in terms of the average performance of many such antennas or in terms  of statistics.
 The effect of errors on the radiation pattern has long bee"'\ recognized by the practical  antenna designer.
The usual rule-of-thumb criterion employed in antenna practice is that the.
 phase of the actual wavefront must not differ from the phase of the desired wavefront by more  than ± 1/16 in order to ensure satisfactory performance.
The application of this criterion to a  reflector antenna requires the mechanical tolerance of the surface to be within ± l/32.
It is  possible, however, to obtain more precise criteria for specifying the maximum errors which  may be tolerated in the aperture illumination.
 Systematic errors.
The effe~t of systematic errors on the radiation pattern may he found by  properly modifying the aperture distribution to take account of the known errors.
For exam­ ple, a linear phase error across the antenna aperture causes the beam position to tilt in angle.
A  quadratic, or square-law, variation in phase is equivalent to defocusing the antenna.
A period it:  error with fundamental period pf)., where pis measured in the same units as is the wavelength  1, will produce spurious beams displaced at angles <Pn from the origin, according to the relation  sin <Pn n}../p, where n is an integer.
The patterns or the spurious beams are of similar shapc as  the original pattern but are displaced in angle and reduced in amplitude.
 Random errors in reOectors.
The· classical work on the effects of random errors on antenna  radiation patterns is due to Ruze.73•99•101 He pointed out that in a reflector antenna, only the  phase error in the aperture distribution need be considered.
Such a phase error, for example,  might be caused by a deformation of the surface from its true value.Ruze101 showed in a simple  derivation that the gain of a circular aperture with arbitrary phase error is approximately  G = G0(1 -P) (7.30)  RADAR ANTENNAS 263  where G0 is the gain of the antenna in the absence of errors, and 1J is the phase error, in radians,  calculated from the mean phase plane.
This simple expression is valid for any aperture illumin­ ation and renector deformation.
provided that the latter is small compared to the wavelength.
 It indicates that therms phase variation about the mean phase plane must be less than l/14 for  a one dB loss of gain.
For shallow reflectors, the two-way path of propagation means that the  surface error must be one-half this amount, or J/28.
 Errors do more than reduce the peak gain of an antenna.
They affect the entire pattern.
 Using a model of an antenna in which the reflector is distorted by a large number of random  gaussian-shapcd humps.
Ruze showed that the radiation pattern can be expressed as  (7.31)  where G0(0.
q,) is the no-error radiation pattern whose axial value (at O = 0, </J = 0) is  110(n:IJ/A)2• {) is the antenna diameter, Pa is the aperture efficiency, C is the correlation interval  of the error, and II equals sin 0.
The mean square phase error Pis assumed to be gaussian.
The  angles 0, </J are those usually employed in classical antenna theory and are defined in Fig.
7.28.
 They are not to be confused with the usual elevation and azimuth angles.
The antenna lies in  the x-y plane of Fig.
7.28.
The error current in one region or the antenna is assumed independ­ ent of the error currents in adjacent regions.
The size of the regions in which the error  currents cannot be considered independent is the correlation interval, C.
The size or the  correlation interval affects both the magnitude and the directional characteristic of the spuri­ ous radiation that results from the presence of errors.
 The first term of Eq.
(7.31) represents the no-error radiation pattern reduced by the  factor, exp -P".
The second term describes the disturbing pattern and represents a source of  sidelobe energy which depends on the mean-square phase error and the square or the correla­ tion interval.
For small phase errors, when only the first term of the series (n = 1) need be  considered.
Eq.
(7.31) becomes  (7.32)  From Eq.
(7.31 ), the reduction in gain on axis can be written as  Beam direction  r  ---¢-~ (7.33)  Figure 7.28 Coordinate system defining the angles 0, </J of Eq.
 (7.31 ).
 264 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  When the second term can be neglected (as when the correlation interval is small compared to  the diameter of the antenna and the phase error is not too large), the gain can he written  G - G -c12 -(rrD) i -<4rt£/,q2 -oe -Pa T e (7.34)  where £ is the effective reflector tolerance measured in the same units as 11.; Le., it is the rms  surface tolerance of a shallow reflector (large focal-length-to-diameter ratio) which will pro­ duce the phase-front variance c52• For a given reflector size D, the gain increases as the square  of the frequency until the exponential term becomes significant.
Differentiation of Eq.
(7.34)  shows that the maximum gain corresponds to a wavelength  (7.35)  At this wavelength the gain will be 4.3 dB below what it would be in.
the absence df errors.
The  maximum gain is then  Pa (D) 2  Gmax = 43 £ (7.36)  The gain of an antenna is thus limited by the mechanical tolerance to which the surface can be  constructed and maintained.102 The most precise reflector antennas seem to be limited to a  precision of not much greater than about one part in 20,000, which from Eq.
(7.36) corre­ sponds to a diameter of about 1600 wavelengths for maximum gain.
The beam width of such an  antenna would be about 0.04° with a gain of about 68 dB.
 In practice, the construction tolerance of an antenna is often described by the" peak"  error, rather than the rms error.
The ratio of the peak to therms error is found experimentally  to be about 3: 1.
This truncation or errors occurs since large errors usually are corrected in  manufacture.
 The effect of errors in array antennas and further discussion of errors in continuous  apertures is given in Sec.
8.8.
 7.9 RADOMES14,103,11s.122-124  Antennas for ground-based radars are often subjected to high winds, icing, and/or temperature  extremes.
They must be sheltered if they are to continue to survive and perform under ad vase  weather conditions.
Antennas which must be operated in severe weather are usually enclosed  for protection in a sheltering structure called a radome.
Radomes must be mechanically strong  if they are to provide the necessary protection, yet they must not interfere with the normal  operation of the antenna.
Antennas mounted on aircraft must also be housed within a radome  to offer protection from large aerodynamic loads and to avoid disturbance to the control of the  aircraft and minimize drag.
 The design of radomes for antennas may be divided into two separate and relatively  distinct classes, depending upon whether the antenna is for airborne or ground-based (or  ship-based) application.
The airborne raoome is characterized by smaller size than ground­ based radomes since the antennas that can be carried in an aircraft are generally smaller.
The  airborne radome must be strong enough to form a part or the aircraft structure and usually  must be designed to conform to the aerodynamic shape or the aircraft, missile, or space vehicle  in which it is to operate.
 A properly designed radome should distort the antenna pattern as little as possible.
The  presence of a radome can affect the gain, beamwidth, sidelobe level, and the direction of the  RADAR ANTENNAS 265  horesight (pointing direction), as well as change the VSWR and the antenna noise tempera­ ture.
Sometimes in tracking radars, the rate ofchange of the boresight shift can be important.
 (,enerally, an antenna situated within a large ground-based radome sees the same approxi­ mate radome environment no matter where the beam points within its normal coverage.
 Radar antennas located in the nose of aircraft, however, generally require an ogive-shaped  radome which docs not present the same environment for all beam posit-ions.
When  the antenna is directed forward (energy propagating parallel to the radome axis) the angle of  incidence on the radome surface can be in excess of 80°.
ln other look directions the incidence  angle might be zero degrees.
Since the transmission properties of radome materials varies with  angle of incidence and polarization, the design of an airborne radome to achieve uniform  scanning properties might not be easy.
The design is further complicated by the need for  structural strength, lightning protection, and protection from erosion by rain, hail, and dust.
It  is not surprising therefore that the electrical performance of a radome must sometimes be  sacrificed lo accommodate these other factors.
 A radome permits a ground-based radar antenna to operate in the presence of high winds.
 It also prevents ice formation on the antenna.
Although it is possible to design antennas strong  enough to survive extreme weather conditions and to provide sufficiently large motors to  rotate them in high winds, it is often more economical to design lighter antennas with modest  drive power and operate them inside radomes.
 The shape or a radome for a ground-based antenna is usually a portion of a sphere.
The  sphere is a good mechanical structure and offers aerodynamic advantage in high winds.
 Precipitation particles blow around a sphere rather than impinge upon it.
Hence snow or  other frozen precipitation is not readily deposited.
 The first large radomes (50-ft diameter or more) for ground-based radar antennas ap­ peared shortly after World War II.
They were constructed of a strong, flexible rubberized  airtight material and were supported by air pressure from within.103 Since the material of  air-supported radomes can be relatively thin and uniform, they approximate the electrically  ideal thin shell which provides good electrical properties.
Such radomes can operate with high  transmission efficiency at almost all radar frequencies.
Materials include single-ply neoprene­ coated tcrylene or nylon fabric, Hypalon-coated Dacron, and Teflon-coated fiberglass.
 lnnation pressures are in the vicinity of0.5 lb/in2 gauge.
Air-supported radomes can be folded  into a small package which make them suitable for transportable radars requiring mobility  and quick erection times.
Typically, a 50-ft radome can be installed at a prepared site in about  one or two hours.1 35 They are also of interest on static sites where wideband frequency  operation is desired.
One of the largest examples o( an air-supported radome was the 210 ft  diameter radome for the Bell Telephone System Telstar satellite communication antenna at  Andover, Maine.
 Air-supported radomes have a number of disadvantages.
Their life is limited by exposure  to ultraviolet light.
surface erosion, and the constant flexing of the material in the wind.
In high  winds the material can he damaged by flying debris and the rotation of the antenna might have  to cease to prevent the fabric from being blown against the antenna and torn.
Maintenance of  the internal pressure in high winds can sometimes be difficult.
Another problem is that costly  maintenance is requirccJ at frequent intervals.
 The limitations of air-supported radomes are overcome by the use of rigid seir-supporting  radomes.
The most common is the rigid space-frame, Fig.
7.29, which consists of a three­ dimensional lattice of primary load-bearing members enclosed with thin dielectric panels.
The  panels can be very thin, even for large-diameter radomes, since they are not required to carry  main loads or stresses.
This type of construction, whereby a spherical structure is constructed  from flat plastic panels of simple geometrical shapes, is sometimes called a geodesic dome.
The  266 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  Figure 7.29 Rigid radome for ground-based antenna.
(From Davis and Cohen, 125 courteS}' Electronics a,ul  MIT Lincoln Laboratory.) ·  55-ft-diameter radome shown in Fig.
7.29 is designed so that the plastic flanges between  the panels take the load while the plastic panels act as thin diaphragms which merely transmit  wind-pressure loads to the framework to which they are attached.
The supporting framework  can also be of steel or aluminum members rather than plastic.
Metal space-frame radomes can  be of large size, 150-ft diameter being quite practical.
Designs up to 500-ft diameter have been  considered.
The cross section of metallic members can be smaller than that of dielectric  members of equivalent strength; hence, t~e effect of aperture blocking is less.
Metal members  are not only superior in electrical performance to the equivalent dielectric members but metal  space-frame radomes are generally cheaper and easier to fabricate, transport, and assemble,  and can be used for larger diameter configurations.
 Aluminum structural members, which might be larger than steel of equivalent strength,  are of light weight, noncorrosive, and require no maintenance.
The load-bearing framework is  covered with low-loss fiberglass-reinforced plastic panels.
The panels should be non-erosive,  water repellent, and designed to reject much of the incident solar radiation.
In some radomcs,  the exterior surface is coated with a white radar-transparent paint, such as Hypalon, to reduce  the interior temperature rise caused by solar radiation.
 A metal space-frame radorne might consist of individual triangular pands madc up of a  frame of aluminum extrusions encapsulating a low-loss dielectric reinforced plastics laminate  membrane.
Instead of the uniform panel sizes of Fig.
7.29, the space-frame radome can use a  quasi-random selection of different panel sizes to minimize periodic errors in the aperture  distribution which can give rise to spurious sidelobes.
It also tends to make the ~adome  insensitive to polarization.
A typical metal space-frame radome of this type might have  RADAR ANTENNAS 267  a transmission loss of 0.5 dB and cause the antenna side!obes to increase an average of 1 dB at  the 25 dB level.
The boresight might be shifted less than 0.1 mrad and the antenna noise  temperature might increase less than 5 K.136 Approximate formulas are available for predict­ ing the electrical eITects (gain.
beamwidth, sidelobes, and boresight error) of a metal space­ frame radome.
assuming a uniform or nearly uniform distribution of space-frame elements  over the surface of the radome.104  The ruhheri1cd air-supported radome is an example of a tliin wall radome in which the  thickness of the wall is small compared to a wavelength.
A thin-wall ratlomc can also he  constructed of plastic with low dielectric constant and low loss tangent This type of radome  apprnximarcs a rhi11 shell where the loads and stresses are carried in the shell membrane itself.
 Unfortunately.
the thin skin required for good electrical properties is not consistent with good  mechanical properties.
This limits the size and the frequency of operation of thin-wall rigid  rad om cs.
 Ground-based radomes may utilize roam materi.als, such as polyester polyurethane.
of  low dielectric constant and low loss tangent in a relatively thick-wall construction to meet  structural requirements with excellent electrical performance over a wide frequency band.
This  is known as a/fwm shell radome.
The individual panels may be joined together by application  of an epoxy adhesive to the panel edges or by "welding" together with the same material to  form a homogeneous shell.
105  The structural limitation of the thin wall radome can be overcome by the half-wave wall  radome which utilizes a homogeneous dielectric with an electrical thickness of half  wavelength.
or a multiple thereof, at the appropriate incidence angle.
The half-wave thickness  is nonreflecting if ohmic losses are negligible.
The bandwidth of such a radome is limited, as is  the range of incidence angles over which the energy is transmitted with minimal reflection.
 The A sandwich is a three-layer wall consisting of a core of low-dielectric-constant mater­ ial with a thickness of approximately one-quarter wavelength.
This inner core is sandwiched  between two thin outer layers, or skins, of a high-dielectric-constant material relative to that of  the core.
The skins might typically have a dielectric constant of about 4, and the core might  have a value of about 1.2.
The skins are thin compared to a wavelength.
The core might be a  honeycomb or fluted construction.
The strength-to-weight ratio of the A sandwich is greater  than that of a solid-wall radome.
It is also capable of broader bandwidth.
However, it is more  sensitive lo variations in polarization and angle of incidence.
The electrical characteristics of  the adhesive used for bonding the skins to the core must be taken into account in the design  since it can make the skin look (electrically) thicker than its physical length.
The structure  must be pro\i,erly sealed against moisture absorption.
 The B sandwich is the "inverse" of the A sandwich.
It is a three layer structure whose  quarter-wave-thick skins have a dielectric constant lower than that of the core material.
The B  sandwich is the microwave analog of matqhing coatings used in optical lenses.
Although it is  superior electrically to the A sandwich, it is heavier and is not generally suited to the environ­ mental conditions encountered in aircraft.
It is not commonly used.
 The C sandwiclr can be thought of as two back-to-back A sandwiches.
It consists of five  layers.
There are two outer skins, a center skin, and two intermediate cores.
It is used when the  ordinary A sandwich does not provide sufficient strength.
 When extreme structural rigidity or broadband capabilities are required with relatively  light weight, multiple-layer sandwiches of seven, nine, eleven, or more layers may be con­ sidered.
 Aircraft radomes, especially those used at supersonic speeds, are subject to mechanical  stress and aerodynamic heating so severe that the electrical requirements or radomes made or  dielectric materials must be sacrificed to obtain sufficient mechanical strength.
The radome  268 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  wall configurations described ahov1..: arc applicabk to airborne radars, but another approach is  based on the fact that a metal sheet with periodically spaced slots exhibits a bandpass charac­ teristic.
Thus thin metallic radomes, pierced with many openings (slots) to make it transpan.:nt  to microwaves, offer the possibility of overcoming the mechanical limitations of diekctric  radomes, yet result in good electrical properties.106 1 Oil A metallic structure not only has th<.:  potential for greater mechanical strength than dielectric radomes and to helter distribute  frictionally-induced heating, but it should be able to better withstand the stresses caused by  rain, hail, dust, and lightning.
Static buildup of charge and subsequent dischargt.! to thi..:  airframe, encountered with dielectric radomes, can be eliminated with metallic radomes.
In  one experimental design of a conical-shape radome, periodic resonant slots were cut into the  metallic surface so that approximately 90 percent of the radome surface was metal.
Within its  design band (8.8-9.0 GHz) the transmission properties were nearly ideal and accommodakd  scanning antennas transmitting arbitrary polarized signals.
The reduced response outside the  design band reduces the effects of out-of-band interference and can reduce the nose-on radar  cross section of the aircraft at frequencies other than that for which the antenna is designed.
 In conventional application, the radome is fixed and the antenna is scanned.
It is sometimes  of advantage to construct the antenna and radome to rotate together as a unit.
This i:.
 called a rotodome.
They have been used in ground-based systems as well as in airborne  aircraft-surveillance radars such as the 24-ft-diamctcr radome in the U.S.
Navy's E-2C  (Fig.
7.30) or the JO-ft-diameter radome of AW ACS.
The E-2C radome weighs just over  2000 lb.
The entire unit rotates at a 6 rpm rate.
It houses a broadside array of Yagi-type  endfire elements.
 l .
:,J .
, ..
, .
.
.
t  · ..
,-\·'.{,\~ ,)t;j1/,.
"' · ,., , ,  Figure 7.30 E-2C AEW aircraft with rotodome antenna.
 RADAR ANTENNAS 269  Weather efTecls.
A ground-based radar that operates without benefit of a radome must be  designed to withstand wind loads.
109 i 13 Surveillance radars must not only be able to operate  in strong winds, but must rotate uniformly.
Rotating antennas outside or radomes cannot be  operated at winds that are too great.
They sometimes have to be shut down and securely fastened  in strong gale winds.
Even ir extreme winds are not encountered, a radome-enclosed antenna has  the advantage that it can be rotated with a much smaller motor than if it were outside the  radome exposed to even normal winds.
 Solid reflector surfaces require more drive power in wind than do lattice or tubular  surfaces.
If the exposed antenna is subject to icing that can close the holes of a mesh reflector,  the mechanical design might have to be made on the basis of a solid surface anyway.
Since the  toniue on an antenna depends on the wind direction, it will vary as the antenna rotates.
ft is  often possible to reduce the wind torques by selecting the optimum position for the axis of  rotation and by adding fins to the structure.114 The torque on the fins can be made to be in the  opposite direction to the torque on the antenna so as to cause a net reduction.
 One of the attractions or the rigid radome is its ability to withstand the rigors of severe  climate.
Rime ice, I.he prevalent type or icing found in the Arctic region, has little or no effect  on most radomes.
Although it tends to collect on many types of structures and can obtain large  thicknesses.
both theory and ex·periment show a lack of rime-ice formation on a spherical  radome.
1 1 5 The trajectories of water droplets in the air stre~m flowing around large spheres do  not result in much impingement.
Collection efficiencies might be only a few percent.
The  droplet sizes of freezing rain, however, are large and the collection efficiency can approach 100  percent.
Dry snow does not stick to cold surfaces and is generally no problem.
Snow might  collect on the top portion of the radome but will be quickly removed by any following wind.
 Also.
the effect of snow on electromagnetic propagation is less than with water.
Wet snow can  stick to the radome and its high liquid-water content can adversely affect propagation.
The  removal of snow by thermal means (heaters) is generally quite expensive; In some of the  smaller rigid radomes, snow can be removed mechanically by tying a rope at the top and  having someone walk the rope around the radome to knock ofT the snow.
 Liquid water can collect on a radome due to condensation or rainfall.
In some cases, the  impingement of rain on a radome can have a more serious effect on the system performance  than the rainfall along the propagation path.
The losses due to water layers on radomes have  been calculated by Blevis.116• 117  Theory predicts that a ~lh--Fain will produce a layer of water 0.142 mm thick on a  55-ft diameter radome.
The theoretical loss through such a water layer is 1.5 dB at 4.2 GHz  and 4.4 dB at 9.36 GHz.
Ruze118 confirmed Blevis's calculations and noted that a nonuni­ formly wet radome can cause significant phase perturbations in the aperture illumination, as  well as a transmission loss.
 If the radome surface absorbs moisture it can seriously degrade its performance in rain.
 Cohen and Smolski 119 attribute most of the measured loss in the Bell Telephone air-inflated  radome at Andover, Maine to this effect.
In immersion tests, the Hypalon-coated Dacron  fabric of the Andover air-inflated radome was found to absorb 13.2 percent water while the  fibrous glass-reinforced laminate of rigid radomes absorbed less than 0.5 percent.
Furthermore  the fibrous-glass-reinforced laminate took about two minutes to dry but the air-inflated  radome material required about 30 to 45 min.
 The losses due to rain can be reduced significantly by treating the radome surface to make  it non wetting, or water repellent.119 121 Experiments at 4.2 GHz with a 55-ft rigid metal  space-frame radome at a simulated rain rate of 40 mm/h (a very high rate) had a measured loss  of from 1.0 to l.7 dB.119 When treated to decrease its wettability the loss was less than 0.3 dB.
 The theoretical loss calculated by the method described by Blevis was 3.4 dB.
The experimen- 270 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  tal values were 1~.ss tha~ predicted by theory since t~e water was not a uniform film, but  formed many small streaks that rapidly ran off the radome in narrow rivulets.
 The performance of a reflector without the protection of a radome can also be degraded  by rain.
The effect is small, however, at frequencies below X band.
Water impinging on the  antenna feed can have serious effects.
The wetting of surfaces through which signals are  transmitted should be avoided.
Also, adequate drainage should be provided to prevent the  accumulation of water in the reflector.
Ice coating a reflector surface does not usually cause a  problem.
When ice is in the process of melting, however, the water surface can distort the  pattern and in some instances can completely destroy the main beam.
 7.10 STABILIZATION OF ANTENNAS14  ·~  If the radar platform is unsteady, as when it is located on a ship or an aircraft, the antenna  pointing must be properly compensated for this undesired motion.
Stabilization is the use of a  servomechanism to control the angular position of an antenna so as to compensate automati­ cally for changes in the angular position or the vehicle carrying the antenna.
An antenna not  compensated for the angular motion of the platform will have degraded coverage.
On a ship,  for example, an unstabilized antenna with its beam parallel to the deck plane will have its  coverage shortened for surface targets since the beam will be looking into the water or up in  the air as the ship rolls or pitches.
In addition to degraded coverage, the measurement of the  angular position with an unstabilized antenna can be in error unless the tilting of the platform  is properly taken into account.
 Stabilization of the antenna adds to the weight and size of the radar, but it is necessary in  many applications of radar on ships and aircraft.
The requirements for stabilization depend in  part on the nature of the application.
Requirements differ whether the radar is used for surface  search, air search, tracking, or height finding.
 There are three kinds of platform motion that can affect the location of the antenna beam.
 Roll is the side-to-side angular motion around the longitudinal (fore-and-aft) axis of the ship or  aircraft.
Pitch is the alternating motion of the fore and aft (bow and stern) parts of the vehicle.
 Yaw is the motion of the platform around the vertical axis.
 Stabilization requires that the vehicle be equipped with a device, such as gyroscope, which  is sensitive to directions in space and which measures the deviation of the platform from its  level position.
The gyroscope device used as the reference from which to stabilize the antenna  is called a stable element or a stable vertical.
 The direct approach to stabilization would be to provide a stable base that maintains the  level no matter what the tilt of the ship or aircraft.
The stable base compensates for roll and  pitch.
Yaw can usually be taken into account by a correction to the angle read-out.
 In some applications, the pitch is small so ,that little harm results from omitting the  stabilization of the pitch axis, leaving only the roll axis stabilized.
This results in a simpler  system compared to providing a stable base.
This is called roll stabilization.
 A different approach to the problem is line-of-sight, or tilt, stabilization.
Instead of mount­ ing the antenna on a level platform, the antenna is tilted about the elevation axis so as  to automatically maintain the beam pointed at the horizontal.
(The beam direction can also be  maintained constant at whatever angle above or below the horizon is desired.) The line of sight  is thereby stabilized.
.
 The unsteady motions or the platform can cause errors in the angular measurement and  distortion of the data on indicators like the PPL Corrections can be applied in some cases to  account for these distortions.
This is called data stabilization.
Correction of the data may still  RADAR ANTENNAS 271  be required even with some form of mechanically stabilized mounts.
Data stabilization is  usually used with pencil-beam tracking antennas.
A computer can readily calculate the angu­ lar corrections to the output data to account for platform tilt.
 An example of the data stabilization is the correction applied for yaw.
If a PPI were to  display relative bearing (azimuth) the apparent bearing would change as the platform yawed.
 With the aid of a horizontal gyroscope to provide a north reference, a correction signal can be  obtained which can be applied to the indicator to permit the display of the target in its true  bearing rather than the bearing relative to the platform heading.
Generally the top of the  display corresponds to north.
This true bearing display eliminates the blurring of a persistent  screen display caused by the natural random changes in heading of the vehicle.
It also elimin­ ates the confusion sometimes found in a relative-bearing display caused by the entire display  rotating as the course of the vehicle is altered.
 Correction of the data is also needed with line-of-sight stabilization using a two-axis  mount.
Data stabilization is not necessary if a three-axis mount is used, such as e or f of  Fig.
7.3 l.
 Nine possible arrangements for mounting antennas are shown in Fig.
7.31.
The one-axis  mount is the simplest.
Most commercial marine shipboard radars used for navigation employ  such a mount.
The elevation beamwidth is made broad enough (typically 20°) so that the  surface of the sea remains illuminated during the roll of the ship.
A correction can be applied  to the indicator (data stabilization) to account for the error.
 The two-axis mount of Fig.
7.3 lh, sometimes called an az-el mount, enables the beam to  be maintained at the horizontal or at any angle above or below the horizon (line-of-sight  stabilization).
The beam can be directed to any point by the proper combination of azimuth  (train) and elevation angles.
For targets overhead, the angular accelerations required are quite  high.
It is not practical to use such a mount, therefore, for tracking targets through the zenith,  as in the tracking of satellites.
The rearrangement of the two axes as in (c) takes care of this  problem.
Tracking through the zenith is possible without encountering impractical drive  accelerations.
Such a mount, however, transfers the problem of excessive accelerations to some  other direction; in this case, in the direction of the elevation axis.
A three-axis mount avoids  the problem of excessive acceleration.
 The two-axis mount of (d) is similar to (c) except that it is arranged to provide roll  stabilization.
The roll data from a stable vertical can be applied to the basic roll axis without  the need for computer orders as required in the other two.axis mounts.
The antenna is then  stabilized about the azimuth axis if the pitch angle is small.
 The three-axis mount of (e) can provide full hemispheric coverage.
The mount in (!)  might be desired where antenna elevation is not required.
The arrangement in (g) can be  trained on target with minimum rate or acceleration requirements on all axes, irrespective of  the position of the target or motion of the platform.
In the three-axis arrangement or (h) a  stable base is provided in which a roll axis lies in a fixed position parallel to the fore.and-aft  line of the vehicle.
This axis carries the pitch axis that supports the train axis.
Pitch and roll  signals from a stable vertical are applied as inputs to the corresponding axes.
The result is that  the azimuth (or train) axis is stabilized in the vertical and may receive a direct order or relative  azimuth.
Computations are not required as in other mounts.
The antenna may be rotated at  constant rates higher than would be practical with other mounts requiring application or a  correction for a variable platform-lilt.
This three-axis stable base antenna has no elevation  angle and is limited to applications which scan the horizon or a fixed angle or elevation with  respect to the horizon.
If elevation scanning at high rates is required, as in height finders or  3-D radar.
a fourth axis can be supplied as in (i).
This configuration, although it requires no  computer.
is relatively massive and heavy because it has four servo systems for controlling  272 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  Train  axis  (a) One-axis mount  Train /axis  (d) Two-axis mount  Type 3 Roll  al'.iS  Elevation  axis  Cross­ ~+4--1----eleva!ion  axis  (g) Three-a)(is mount  Type 3 Train  axis Train  axis  (bl Two-axis mounl  Type 1  Cross­ level  axis  -....._ Elevation  ----OXIS  (level)  Train  axis  (e) Three-axis mount  Type 1  (II) Three-axis mount  Type 4 Roll  axis (cl Two-ol'.is mount  Type 2  Cross- Ele1101ton  axis  axis  (/) Three-axis mount  Type 2  Train  oxis  __ El~va!ion  Ol(IS  -Pilch  \axis  Roll  axis  ( i) Four-axis mount  Figure 7.31 Arrangements of axes for stabilized antenna mounts.
(From Cady, Karelitz, and Turner,14  chap.
4, courtesy McGraw-Hill Book Company.)  rotation about each of the four axes.
The three-axis mount of (h) is simpler, but also has similar  disadvantages because of weight and size.
 In the above, the stabilization of the mount was assumed to be by some form of mechanical  compensation.
Radars which electronically scan a beam in elevation (usually a pencil beam)  by either phase shifters or frequency scan can stabilize the beam in elevation as a correction to  the elevation scan orders, thus permitting a reduction in the size of the mount.
The stabiliza-/  RADAR ANTENNAS 27.J  tion of a rhased array antenna capable of electronically scanning the beam is accomplished in  the computer that generates the steering orders.
 Sometimes the terms /cr·d and cross IC'l'el are used to refer to the angles in a stabilized  system.
14 The /ere/ angle is the angle between the horizontal plane and the deck plane,  measured in the vertical plane through the line of sight.
The cross-level angle is the angle,  measured about the line of sight.
between the vertical plane through the line of sight and the  plane perpendicular to the deck through I.he line of sight.
 :\ntmna drhcs.11 <,·111 Mechanical tracking radars and nodding-beam height finders require  \':triable drive power.
The choice has been between electrical and hydraulic systems.
Electrical  drives arc Ilic Wan! Leonard type or thyristor bridges driving de motors.
Hydraulic drives arc  tiftcn chearcr than electric drives and in the larger sizes (above 50 hp) they are more compact  and often lighter.
It has hcc11 said that hydraulics arc less trouble to maintain.
llowcvcr, they  tend to exhibit a slow but predictable deterioration with respect to internal leakage as a result  of mechanical wear.
 Both electric and hydraulic drives are used in surveillance radars.
Surveillance antennas  operate at constant rotation rate.
but some variation can be tolerated so long as it is not  sufficient to produce uneven illumination oft he cathode-ray tube display or degradation of the  MTI.
 REFERENCES  l.
Sil\'er.
S.
(ed.): "Microwave Antenna Theory and Design," MIT Radiation Laboratory Series.
 vol.
12, McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York, 1949.
 2.
Kraus.
J.
D.: "Antennas." McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York, 1950 .
 .
l Cutler.
C.
C..
A.
P.
King.
and W.
E.
Kock: Microwave Antenna Measurements, Proc.
I RE.
vol.
35.
 rp.
1462 14 71.
Decernher, 194 7.
 4.
Strallon.
J.
A.:" Electromagnetic Theory," McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York.
1941.
 5.
Sherman.
J.
W.: Aperture-antenna Analysis, chap.
9 of" Radar Handbook," M.
I.
Skolnik (ed.).
 McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York, 1970.
 6.
IEEF Test Procedures for Antennas.
IEEE Trans ..
vol.
AP-13, pp.
437-466, May, 1965.
 7.
Fry.
D.
W ..
and F.
K.
Goward: "Aerials for Centimetre Wavelengths," Cambridge University Press.
 New York, 1950.
 X.
Sciamhi.
A.
F.: The Effect of the Aperture Illumination on the Circular Aperture Antenna Pattern  Characteristics, 1\1 icro\\'al'e J ., vol.
8, pp.
79-84, August, 1965.
 9.
Cutler.
C.
C.: Parabolic-antenna Design for Microwaves, Proc.
/RE, vol.
35, pp.
1284-1294.
Novem­ ber.
1947.
f·  10.
Gray.
C.
L.: Estimating the Effect of Feed Support Member Blocking on Antenna Gain and Side  Lobe Level.
Microwai·e J., vol.
7, pp.
88-91, March, 1964.
 11.
Ru1e.
J.: Feed Support Blockage Loss in Parabolic Antennas, Microwave J., vol.
11.
pp.
76-80.
 December.
1968.
 12.
Moore.
R.
L.: Passive ECM Applied to False Target Elimination, Record of tire I £EE 1975 lnt1.1ma­ tio11al Radar Co11/ere11ce, pp.
458-462.
IEEE Publication 75 CHO 938-1 AES.
 13.
Foster, K.: Parabolic Cylinder Aerials, Wireless Engr., vol.
33, pp.
59-65, March, 1956.
 14.
Cady.
W.
M., M.
8.
Karelitz, and L.A.
Turner (eds.): "Radar Scanners and Radomes," MIT  Radiation Laboratory Series.
vol.
26.
McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York, 1948.
 15.
Pugh, S., and D.
E.
Walker: Reflector Surfaces for Communications and Radar Aerials," Design and  Construction of Large Steerable Aerials," / 11stit11tion of Electrical Engineers (London) I EE C 01!ference  P11hlicatim1 no.
21.
pp.
369-373, 1966.
 16.
Richards, C.
J ..
and M.
Marchant: Structural Aspects: pt L Elementary Design Considerations.
 chap.
7 of "Mechanical Engineering in Radar and Communications," C.
J.
Richards (ed.), Van  Nostrand Reinhold Co., New York, 1969.
 17.
Chu.
T.
S ..
and R.H.
Turrin: Depolarization Properties of Offset Reflector Antennas,/£££ Trans ..
 vol.
/\P-21.
pp.
339-345.
May, 1973.
 274 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  18.
Paramonov, A.
A.: Influence of Precipitation on the Electrical Properties of Wire Mesh Surfaces,  Radiotekhnika, vol.
11, no.
9, pp.
12-20, 1956.
 19.
Hannan, P.
W.: Microwave Antennas Derived from the Cassegrain Telescope, I RE Tru11s., vol.
AP-9,  pp.
140-153, March, 1961.
 20.
Morgan, S.
P.: Some Examples of Generalized Cassegrainian and Gregorian Antennas, IEEE Tru11s.,  vol.
AP-12, pp.
685-691, November, 1964.
 21.
Collins, G.
W.: Shaping of Subreflectors in Cassegrain Antennas for Maximum Aperture Efficiency,  IEEE Trans., vol.
AP-21, pp.
309-313, May, 1973.
 22.
Graham, R.: The Polarisation Characteristics of Offset Cassegrain Aerials, "Radar -Presi.:nt and  Future," Oct.
23-25, 1973, IEE Cm!{ P11h/.
no.
105, pp.
134-139.
 23.
Dahlsjo, 0.: A Low Side Lobe Cassegrain Anti.:nna," Radar- Present and Future," Oct.
23 25, 1973,  IEE Cm!{ P11bl.
110.
105, pp.
408-413.
 24.
Weiss, H.
G.: The Haystack Microwave Research Facility, Spectn1111, vol.
2, pp.
50 -59, Fi.:bruary,  1965.
 25.
Josefsson, L.
G.: A Broad-band Twist Reflector, IEEE Trans., vol.
AP-19, pp.
552-554, July, 1971.
 26.
Lo, Y.
T.: On the Beam Deviation Factor of a Parabolic Reflector, IRE T,a11s., vol.
AP-8,  pp.
347-349, May, 1960.
 27.
Sandler, S.S.: Paraboloidal Reflector Patterns of Off-axis Feed, I RE Tra11s., vol.
AP-8, pp.
368-379,  July, 1960.
 28.
Ruze, J.: Lateral Feed Displacement in a Paraboloid, IEEE Trans., vol.
AP-13.
pp.
660 665, St.:pti.:m­ ber, 1965.
 29.
Imbriale, W.
A., P.
G.
Ingerson, and W.
C.
Wong: Large Lateral Feed Displacements in a Parabolic  Reflector, IEEE Trans., vol.
AP-22, pp.
742-745, November, 1974.
 30.
Ashmead, J., and A.
B.
Pippard: The Use of Spherical Reflectors as Microwave Scanning Aerials, J.
 IEEE (London), vol.
93, pt.
IIIA, p.
627, 1946.
 31.
Ramsey, J.
F., and J.
A.
C.
Jackson: Wide-angle Scanning Performance of Mirror Antennas, M arco11i  Rev., vol.
19, 3d qtr., pp.
119-140, 1956.
 32.
Li, T.: A Study of Spherical Reflectors as Wide-angle Scanning Antennas, IRE Tru11s., vol.
AP-7,  pp.
223-226, July, 1959.
 33.
Spencer, R.
C., and G.
Hyde: Studies of the Focal-Region ofa Spherical Reflector: Gcomdric Optics,  IEEE Trans., vol.
AP-16, pp.
317-324, May, 1968.
 34.
Love, A.
W.: Scale Model Development of a High Efficiency Dual Polarized Feed for the Arecibo  Spherical Reflector, IEEE Trans., vol.
AP-21, pp.
628-639, September, 1973.
 35.
Ranchi, L., and G.
Toraldo di Francia: An Application of Parageometrical Optics to the Design of a  Microwave Mirror, IRE Trans., vol.
AP-6, pp.
129-133, January, 1958.
 36.
Provencher, J.
H.: Experimental Study of a Diffraction Reflector, IRE Trw1s., vol.
AP-8.
 pp.
331-336, May, 1960.
 37.
Kelleher, K.
S.: A New Microwave Reflector, IRE Natl.
Com,.
Record, vol.
I, pt.
2, pp.
56--58, 1953.
 38.
Peeler, G.
D.
M., and D.
H.
Archer: A Toroidal Microwave Reflector, I RE N,itl.
Conr.
Record, vol.
-t,  pt.
l, pp.
242-247, 1956.
 39.
Kelleher, K.
S., and H.
H.
Hibbs: A New Microwave Reflector, Nal'al Research Lah.
Rept.
4141, 1953.
 40.
Jackson, J., and E.
Goodall: A 360° Scanning Microwave Reflector, Marconi Rel'., vol.
21.
ist qtr.,  pp.
30-38, 1958.
 41.
Barab, J.
D., J.
G.
Marangoni, and W.
G.
Scott: The Parabolic Dome Antenna: A Large Aperture,  360 Degree, Rapid Scan Antenna, IRE WESCON Co11v.
Record, vol.
2, pt.
I, pp.
272-293, 1958.
 42.
Jasik.
H.: "Antenna Engineering Handbook," McGraw-Hill Book Co., New York, 1961, sec.
15.6.
 43.
Johnson, R.
C.: Optical Scanners, chap.
3 of" Microwave Scanning Antennas, vol.
I," R.
C.
Hansen  (ed.), Academic Press, New York, 1964.
 44.
Foster, J.
S.: A Microwave Antenna with Rapid Saw-Tooth Scan, Cmwdiw1 J.
of Ph}'s ..
vol.
36,  pp.
1652-1660, 1958.
 45.
Martindale, J.P.
A.: Lens Aerials at Centimetric Wavelengths, J.
Brit.
IRE.
vol.
13, pp.
243-259,  May, 1953.
 46.
Stuetzer, 0.
M.: Development of Artificial Microwave Optics in Cierrnany, Proc.
I RE, vol.
38.
 pp.
1053-1056, September, 1950.
 47.
Harvey, A.
F.: Optical Techniques at Microwave Frequencies.
Proc.
IEE, vol.
!06, pt.
8,  pp.
141--157, March, 1959.
Contains an extensive bibliography.
 48.
Kelleher, K.
S., and C.
Goatley: Dielectric Lens for Microwaves, Electro11ics, vol.
28, pp.
142-145,  August, 1955.
 49.
Kock, W.
E.: Metallic Delay Lens, Bell System Tech.
J., vol.
27, pp.
58 82, January, 1948.
 50.
Kock, W.
E.: Metal Lens Antennas, Proc.
IRE, vol.
34, pp.
828 836, November, 1946.
 RADAR ANTENNAS 275  51.
Kock.
W.
E.: Path-length Microwave Lenses, Proc.
IRE, vol.
37, pp.
852-855, August, 1949.
 52.
Ruze, J.: Wide-angle Metal-plate Optics, Proc.
I RE, vol.JS, pp.
53-59, January, 1950.
 SJ.
Luncburg.
R.
K.: "Mathematical Theory or Optics" (mimeographed lecture notes), pp.
212--213.
 Brown University Graduale School.
Providence, R.I., 1944.
Published by University of California  Press.
Berkeley.
1964.
 54.
Peeler.
G.
D.
M ..
and II.
P.
Coleman: Microwave Stepped-index Luneburg Lenses, I RE Trans .•  vol.
A P-6.
pp.
202 207.
April.
1958.
 55.
Buckley.
F.
F.: Stepped-index Lu11ehurg Lenses, Electro11ic Design, vol.
8, pp.
86-89, Apr.
D, 1960.
 56.
Jasik.
fl.: The Electromagnetic Theory of the Lunclmrg Lens, AFCRC Rept.
TR-54-121.
November.
 1954.
 57.
Braun, i: JI.: Radiation Characteristics or the Spherical Luneburg Lens, I RE Trans ..
vol.
AP-4.
 rr l J2 DX.
April.
1956.
 58.
Morgan.
S.
P : General Solution of the Luneburg Lens Problem, J.
Appl..
Phys., vol.
29.
 pp 1358 · 1368.
September.
1958.
 59.
Webster.
R.
E.: Radiation Patterns of a Spherical Luneburg Lens with Simple Feeds, IRE Tra11s.,  vol.
AP-6.
pp.
301-302, July, 1958.
 60.
Kelleher.
K.
S.: Designing Dielectric Microwave Lenses, Electronics, vol.
29, pp.
138-142,June, 1956.
 61.
Bohnert.
J.
I..
and H.
P.
Coleman: Applications of the Luneburg Lens, Naval Research Lab.
Rept.
 4888.
Mar.
7.
1957.
 62.
Peeler.
G.
D.
M ..
K.
S.
Kelleher.
and H.
P.
Coleman: Virtual Source Luneburg Lenses, Symposium 011  Micrmrnre Optics, McGill University, Montreal.
AFCRC-TR-59-118(1), ASTIA Document 211499.
 rr 18-21.
April, 1959.
 63.
Gunderson.
L.
C.
and J.
F.
Kauffman: A High Temperature Luneburg Lens, Proc.
IEEE.
vol.
56.
 pp.
883 884.
May.
1968.
 64.
Hollis.
J.
S ..
and M.
W.
Long: A Luneburg Lens Scanning Systt:m, I RE Trans., vol.
AP-5, pp.
21 25,  January.
1957.
 65.
Rinehart, R.
F.: A Solution to the Problem of Rapid Scanning for Radar Antennas, J.
Appl.
Pli_vs ..
 vol.
19.
pp.
860 862, September.
1948.
 66.
Johnson.
R.
C.: The Geodesic Luneburg Lens.
Microwave J., vol.
5, pp.
76-85, August, 1962.
 67.
Johnson.
R.
C, and R.
M.
Goodman: Geodesic Lenses for Radar Antennas, EASCON Rec ..
1968.
 rr.
64 69.
 68.
Huynen.
J.
R.: Theory and Design of a Class of Luneburg Lenses, IRE WESCON Co,w.
Record,  vol.
2, pt.
1.
pp.
219·230, 1958.
 69.
Oekcfi.
G ..
and G.
W.
Farnell: A Homogeneous Dielectric Sphere as a Microwave Lens, Can.
J.
 Pliys., vol.
34.
pp.
790 803.
August, 1956.
 70.
ap Rhys.
T.
L.: The Design of Radially Symmetric Lenses, IEEE Trans .• vol.
AP-18, pp.
497-506.
 July.
1970.
 71.
Free.
W.R ..
F.
L.
Cain.
C.
E.
Ryan, C.
P.
Burns, and E.
M.
Turner: High-Power Constant-Index Lens  Antennas, IEEE Trans ..
vol.
AP-22, pp.
582-584, July, 1974.
 72.
Cheston, T.
C.: Microwave Lenses, Srmposi11m on Microwave Optics, McGill University, Montreal.
 AFCRC-TR-59-118(1), ASTIA Document 2ll499, pp.
8-17, April, 1959.
 7 3.
R tl7e.
J.: P.hysical Limitations on Antennas.MIT Research Lab.
Electronics Tecli.
Rept.
248, Oct.
20,  1952.
.
 74.
WolfT.
I.: Determination of the Radiating System Which Will Produce a Specified Directional  Characteristic, Proc.
1 RE, vol.
25.
pp.
630-643, May, 1937.
 75.
Block.
A ..
R.
C.
Medhurst, and S.
D.
Pool: Superdirectivity, Proc.
IRE, vol.
48, p.
1164, June, 1960.
 76.
Jordan.
E.
C.: "Electromagnetic Waves and Radiating Systems," sec.
12.17.
Prentice-Hall.
Inc.,  Englewood Cliffs, N.
J..
1950.
 77.
Woodward, P.
M.: A Method of Calculating the Field over a Plane Aperture Required to Produce a  Given Polar Diagram, J.
IEE.
vol.
93.
pt.
IIIA, pp.
1554-1558, 1946.
 78.
Woodward.
P.
M., and J.
D.
Lawson: The Theoretical Precision with Which an Arbitrary Radiation  Pattern May Re Ohtained with a Source of Finite Size, J.
I EE, vol.
95, pt.
IIIA, pp.
362-HO.
 September, 1948.
 79.
Rhodes.
D.
R.: "Synthesis of Planar Antenna Sources," Oxford University Press, London, 1974.
 RO.
llnlph, C.
L: A Current Distribution for Rrnadside · Arrays Which Optimizes the Relationship  between Beamwidth and Side Lobe Level, /'roe.
I RE.
vol.
34, pp.
335-348, June, 1946; also discus­ sion by II.
J.
Riblet, vol.
35, pp.
489 ·492.
 8 t.
Drane, C.
J.: Dolph-Chebyshev Excitation Coefficient Approximation.
l EEE Trans., vol.
AP-12.
 pp.
781 782.
November, 1964.
 82.
Stegcn.
R.
J.: Gain of Tchcbycheff Arrays, IEEE Trans ..
vol.
AP-8.
pp.
629-631.
November, 1960.
 276 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  83.
van der Maas, G.
J.: A Simplified Calculation for Dolph·TschcbyschdT Arrays, J.
Appl.
Phys., vol.
:!5,  pp.
121-124, January, 1954.
 84.
Taylor, T.
T.: Design of Line•source Antennas for Narrow Bcamwidth and Low Side 1.ohcs, I RE  Trans., vol.
AP-3, pp.
16-28, January, 1955.
 85.
Hansen, R.
C.: Gain Limitations of Large Antennas, I RE Trans., vol.
AP-8, pp.
490-495, September,  1960.
 86.
Taylor, T.
T.: Design of Circular Apertures for Narrow Beam width and Low Side!obes, IRE Trans.,  vol.
AP-8, pp.
17-22, January, 1960.
 87.
Hansen, R.
C.: Tables of Taylor Distributions for Circular Aperture Antennas, I RE Trans.,  vol.
AP-8, pp.
23-26, January, 1960.
 88.
Bayliss, E.T.: Design of Monopulse Antenna Di/Terence Patterns with Low Sidelobcs.
Bell S}•stem  Tech.
J., vol.
47, pp.
623-650, May-June, 1968.
 89.
Levine, D.: "Radargrammetry," McGraw-Hill Book Co., New York, 1960.
 90.
Shanks, H.
E.: A Geometrical Optics Method of Pattern Synthesis for Linear Arrays, IRE Tra11s ..
 vol.
AP-8, pp.
485-490, September, 1960.
 91.
Hutchison, P.
T.: The Image Method of Beam Shaping, I RE Trans., vol.
A P-4.
pp.
60, 609, October,  1956.
 92.
Hines, J.
N., V.
H.
Rumsey, and C.
H.
Walter: Traveling-wave Slot Antennas, Proc.
IRE, vol 41.
 pp.
1624-1631, November, 1953.
 93.
Hougardy, R.
W., and R.
C.
Hansen: Scanning Surface Wave Antennas: Oblique Surface Waves over  a Corrugated Conductor, IRE Trans., vol.
AP-6, pp.
370 376, October, 1958.
 94.
Dunbar, A.
S.: Calculation of Doubly Curved Reflectors for Shaped Beams, Proc.
I RE, vol.
36.
 pp.
1289-1296, October, 1948.
 95.
Carberry, T.
F.: Analysis Theory for the Shaped-Beam Doubly Curved Rctlector Antenna, I £EE  Trans., vol.
AP-17, pp.
131-138, March, 1969.
 96.
Brunner, A.: Possibilities of Dimensioning Doubly Curved Reflectors ror Azimuth-Search Radar  Antennas, IEEE Trans., vol.
AP-19, pp.
52-57, January, 1971.
 97.
Shrad!;!r, W.W.: MTI Radar," Radar Handbook," M.
I.
Skolnik (ed.), McGraw-Hill Book Co., Nc.:w  York, 1970, sec.
17.20.
 98.
Shrader, W.
W.: Antenna Considerations for Surveillance Radar Systems, Sevemh Annual East Coast  Conference 011 Aeronautical and Navigational Electronics, Baltimore, Md., October, 1960.
 99.
Ruze, J.: The Effect of Aperture Errors on the Antenna Radiation Pattern, Suppl.
al Num,o cimento,  vol.
9, no.
3, pp.
364-380, 1952; also reprinted in Proc.
Symposium on Communication Theory and  Antenna Design, AFCRC Tech.
Rept.
57-105, ASTIA Document 117067, January, 1957.
 100.
Bracewell, R.
N.: Tolerance Theory of Large Antennas, IRE Trans., vol.
AP-9, pp.
49-58, January,  1961.
 IOI.
Ruze, J.: Antenna Tolerance Theory-A Review, Proc.
IEEE, vol.
54, pp.
633 640, April, 1966.
 l02.
Skolnik, M.
I.: Large Antenna Systems, chap.
28 of "Antenna Theory, pt.
2," R.
E.
Collin and f.
l  Zucker (eds.), McGraw-Hill Book Co., New York, 1969.
 l 03.
Simpson, P.
J.: Mechanical Aspects or Ground-Based Radomes, Chap.
12 or ..
Mechanical Enginet:r­ ing in Radar and Communications," C.
J.
Richards (ed.), Van Nostrand Reinhold Co., New York,  1969.
 104.
Kay, A.
F.: Electrical Design of Metal Space Frame Rado mes, IEEE Trans., vol.
A P-13, pp.
188-202,  March, 1965.
 105.
Larrench, W.: A Homogeneous, Rigid, Ground Radome, Proc.
IEE, vol.
1098, pp.
445 446, Novem­ ber, 1962.
 106.
Oh, L L., C.
D.
Lunden, and C.
Chiou: Fenestrated Metal Radome, Microwave J., vol.
7, pp.
62 65,  April, 1964.
 107.
Oh, L.
L., and C.
D.
Lunden: A Slotted Radome Cap for Rain, Hail, and Lightning Protection,  Microwave J., vol.
11, pp.
105-108, March, 1968.
 108.
Pelton, E.
L., and B.
A.
Munk: A Streamlined Metallic Radome, IEEE Trans., vol.
AP-22, pp.
799 803,  November, 1974.
 109.
Brown, J.
S., and K.
E.
McKee: Wind Loads on Antenna Systems, Microwave J., vol.
7, pp.
41--46,  September, 1964.
 llO.
Thorn, H.: Distribution or Extreme Winds in the United States, ASCE Trans., vol.
126, pt.
II, paper  3191, 1961.
 111.
Wind Forces on Structures, ASCE Trans., vol.
126, pt.
II, paper 3269, 1961.
 112.
Hirst, H., and K.
E.
McKee; Wind Forces on Parabolic Antennas, Microwave J., vol.
8, pp.
43-47,  November, 1965.
 RADAR ANTENNAS 277  113.
Scruton, C., and P.
Sachs: Wind Effects on Microwave Reflectors, "Design and Construction  of Large Steerable Aerials," IEEE (London) Con( P11hlicatio11 no.
21, pp.
29-38, 1966.
 114.
Webster.
A.
J.: Wind Torques on Rotating Radar Aerials, Marconi Rev., vol.
28, pp.
147-170, 2d qtr..
 1965.
 115.
Vitale.
J.
A.: Large Radomes, chap.
5 of" Microwave Scanning Antennas, vol.
1," R.
C.
Hansen (ed.),  Academic Press.
N.Y ..
1964.
 116.
Blevis.
8.
C.: Rain Effects on Radomes and Antenna Reflectors," Design and Construction of Large  Steerable Aerials," IEE (London) Conference Pul,/icatio11110.
21, pp.
148-151, 1966.
 117.
Hlcvis.
R.
C.: Losses Due to Rain on Radomes and Antenna Reflecting Surfaces, IEEE Trans ..
 vol.
AP-IJ.
rr 175 176.
January.
1965.
 1 IH Run·.
J.C.: Mort: on Wet Radomes.
IEEE 'f'rans ..
vol.
AP-13, pp.
823 824, September, 1965.
 119.
Cohen, A., and A.
Smolski: The Effect of Rain on Satellite Communications Earth Terminal Rigid  Radomcs.
J\ticrm1·ar·c J., vol.
9.
pp.
111-121.
September, 1966.
 120.
Weigand.
R.
M.: Per f'ormance of a Water-Repellent Radome Coating in an Airport Surveillance  Radar.
!'roe.
IEEE, vol.
61.
pp.
1167 1168, August, 1973.
 121 Anderson, I.: Measurements or 20-Cillz Transmission Through a Radomc in Rain, IEEE Trans ..
 rnl.
A P-23, pp.
619 622.
September, 1975.
 122.
Kay, A.
F.: Radomes and Absorbers, chap.
32 of "Antenna Engineering Handbook," H.
Jasik (ed.),  Mc(iraw-Hill Book Company.
New York, 1961.
 123.
Oicaudo, V.
J.: Radomes, Chap.
14 of" Radar Handbook," M.
I.
Skolnik (ed.), McGraw-Hill Book  Co., New York, 1970.
 124.
Walton.
J.
R ..
Jr.:" Radome Engineering Handbook," Marcel Dekker, Inc., New York, 1970.
 125.
Oavis.
P., and A.
Cohen: Rigid Radome Design Considerations, Electronics, vol.
32, no.
16, pp.
66,  68 69.
Apr 17.
1959.
 126.
!lastings, K.
N., and J.
ti.
Chaplin: Drives for Steerable Antennas.
Hydraulics versus Elcctro­ Mechanics, "Oesign and Construction of Large Steera.ble Aerials," I EE (London) Conference P11hli­ catio11110.
21, pp.
314-318.
1966.
 127.
Selby.
R.
P.: Power Drives, chap.
9 of" Mechanical Engineering in Radar and Communications," C.
 J.
Richards (ed.).
Van Nostrand Reinhold Co., New York, 1969.
 128.
Kelleher, K.
S ..
and H.
H.
Hibbs: Organ-pipe Radar Scanner, Electronics, vol.
25, pp.
126-127, May,  1952.
 129.
Peeler, G.
D.
M ..
K.
S.
Kelleher, and H.
H.
Hibbs: An Organ Pipe Scanner, IRE Trans., no.
PGAP-1,  pp.
l 13-122, February, 1952.
 130.
Clarricoates, P.
J.B., and G.
T.
Poulton: High-Efficiency Microwave Reflector Antennas-A Review,  Proc.
IEEE.
vol.
65, pp.
1470-1504, October, 1977.
 131.
Green, T.
J.: The Influence of Masts on Ship-Borne Radar Performance, RADAR-77, Oct.
25-28,  1977.
London, TEE Conference Publication no.
105, pp.
405-408, available from IEEE, New York,  77CHl271-6 AES.
 1 32.
See Sec.
12.10 of rd.
I.
 !33.
Mattingly, R.
L.: Radar Antennas, chap.
25 of "Antenna Engineering Handbook," H.
Jasik, (ed.),  McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York, 1961, sec.
25.2.
 134.
Nichollsr R.
B.: Advances in the Design of Foster Scanners, RADAR-77, Oct.
25-28, 1977, London,  IEE Conference Publication no.
105, pp.
401-404, available from IEEE, New York, 77CH1271-6.
 AES.
 135.
Pun nett, M.
S.: Developments in Ground Mounted Air Supported Radomes, I £EE 1977 Mechanical  Engineering in Radar Sj•mposiw11, Nov.
8-10, 1977, Arlington, Va., pp.
40-45, IEEE Publication  77CM 1250-0 AES.
 136.
Sangiolo, J.
B., and A.
B.
Rohwer: Structural Design Improvements of ESSCO Radomes and  Antennas, IEEE 1977 Meclranical Engi11eering in Radar Symposium, Nov.
8-10, 1977, Arlington, Va,  pp.
46-51.
IEEE Publication 77CH1250-0 AES.
 137.
Probert-Jones, J.
R.: The Radar Equation in Meteorology, Quart.
J.
Roy.
Meteor.
Soc., vol.
88,  pp.
485-495, 1962.
 138.
Zhuk, M.
S ..
and Yu.
B.
Molochkov: "Proektirovanie Linzovykx, Skaniruyushchikx, Shirokodiapa­ zommykx Antenn i Fidernykx Ustroistv" (Design of Lenses, Scanning Antennas, Wideband  Antennas, and Transmission Lines.) Energiya, Moscow, 1973, pp.
81-82.
 139.
Lewis, B.
L.: 360° Azimuth Scanning · Antenna Without Rotating RF Joints, U.S.
Patent  no.
3,916,416, Oct.
28, 1975.
 CHAPTER  EIGHT  THE ELECTRO NI CALLY STEERED  PHASED ARRAY ANTENNA IN RADAR  8.1 INTRODUCTION  The phased array is a directive antenna made up of individual radiating antennas, or elements,  which generate a radiation pattern whose shape and direction is determined by the relative  phases and amplitudes of the currents at the individual elements.
By properly varying the  relative P, it is possible to steer the direction of the radiation.
The radiating elements  might b ~ipoles pen-ended waveguides, slots cut in waveguide, or any other type of antenna.
 The inherent flexibility offered by the phased-array antenna in steering the beam by means of  electronic control is what has made it of interest for radar.
It has been considered in those  radar applications where it is necessary to shift the beam rapidly rrom one posi1ion in spaci: to  another, or where it is required to obtain information about many targets at a flexible, rapid  data rate.
The full potential of a phased-array antenna requires the use of a computer that can  determine in real time, on the basis of the actual operational situation, how hest to use the  i.:apabilities offered by the array.
 The concept of directive radiation from fixed (nonsteered) phased-array antennas was  known during World War 1.1 The first use of the phased-array antenna in commercial broad­ casting transmission was in the early thirties2 and the first large steered directive array for the  reception of transatlantic short-wave communication was developed and installed by the Bell  Telephone Laboratories in the late thirties.3 In World War II, the United States, Great  Britain, and Germany all used radar with fixed phased-array antennas in which the beam  was scanned by mechanically actuated phase shifters.
In the United States, this was an azimuth  scanning S-band fire control radar,· the Mark 8, that was widely used on cruisers and  battleships,4 and the AN/APQ-7 (Eagle) high-resolution navigation and bombing radar at  X band that scanned a 0.5° fan beam over a 60° sector in lt seconds.5 The British used the  phased array in two height-finder radars, one at VHF and the other at S band.
6 The Germans  employed VHF radars with fixed planar phased arrays in significant numbers.' One of these,  278  1111' l'I IT IIU>Nl<"AI IY S IITRl'I> l'IIASH> ARRAY AN ll'NNA IN RADAR 279  .
called the Ma111111ut.
was 100 .ft wi<le and 36 ft high and scanned a I0° beam over a 120° sector.
 ;\ major advance in phased-array technology was made in the early 1950s with the  replacement of mechanically actuated phase shifters by electronic phase shifters.
Frequency  scanning in one angular coordinate was the first successful electronic scanning technique to be  applied.
In tcr111s of numbers of operational radars, frequency scanning has probably seen  more application than any other electronic scanning method.
The first major electronically  scanned phased arrays that performed beam steering without frequency scan employed the  I lug.gins phase shifter (Sec.
8.4) which.
in a sense, used the principle of frequency scan without  the necessity of changing the radiated frequency.
The introduction of digitally switched phase  shifters employing either ferrites or diodes in the early 1960s made a significant improvement  in the practicality of phased arrays that could he electronically steered in two orthogonal  angular coordinates.
 8.2 BASIC CONCEPTS  ;\11 array antenna consists of a number of individual radiating elements suitably spac":d with  respect to one another.
·1~ampl_itud(!an<l e_~J-1.he-.signals..apP.Jied to each of the  elements arc controlled to obtain the desired radiation pattern from the combined action of all  the elements.
Two common geometrical forms of array antennas of interest in radar are the  linear array and the planar array.
A linear array consists of elements arranged in a straight line  in one dimension.
A planar array is a two-dimensional configuration of elements arranged to  lie in a plane.
The planar array may be thought of as a linear array of linear arrays.
A broadside  arrar is one in which the direction of maximum radiation is perpendicular, or almost perpen­ dicular.
to the line (or plane) of the array.
An endfire array has its maximum radiation parallel  to the array.
 The linear array generates a fan beam when the phase relationships are such that the  radiation is perpendicular to the array.
When the radiation is at some angle other than ,.
 broadside.
the radiation pattern is a conical-shaped beam.
The broadside linear-array antenna  may be used where broad coverage in one plane and narrow beamwidth in the orthogonal  plane are desired.
The linear array can also act as a feed for a parabolic-cylinder antenna.
The  combination or the linear-array feed and the parabolic cylinder generates a more controlled  fan beam than is possible with either a simple linear array or with a section of a parabola.
 The combi111,tion of a linear array and parabolic cylinder can also generate a pencil beam.
 The endfire array is a special case of the linear or the planar array when the beam is  directed along the array.
Endfire linear arrays have not been widely used in radar applications.
 They are usually limiled to low or medium gains since an endfire linear antenna or high gain  ret.1uires an excessively long array.
Small en<lfire arrays are sometimes used as the radiating  clements of a broadside array if directive elements are required.
Linear arrays of endfire  elements are also employed as low-silhouette antennas.
 The two-dimensional planar array is probably the array of most interest in radar applica­ tions since it is fundamentally the most versatile of all radar antennas.
A rectangular aperture  can produce a fan-shaped beam.
A square or a circular aperture produces a pencil beam.
The  array can he made to simultaneously generate many search and/or tracking beams with the  same aperture.
 Other types of array antennas are possible than the linear or the planar arrangements.
 For example, the elements might be arranged on the surface of a cylinder to obtain 360°  coverage (360° coverage may also be obtained with a number of planar arrays).
The radiating  elements might also be mounted on the surface of a sphere, or indeed on an object or any  280 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  shape, provided the_phase at each element .is that ..
needed to give a plane wave when the  radiation from all the.
elements is summed in space.
An array whose elements are distributed  on a nonplanar surface is called a conformal array.
 An array in which the relative phase shift between elements is controlled by electronic  devices is called an electronically scanned array.
ln an electronically scanned array the antenna  elements, the transmitters, the receivers, and the data-processing portions of the radar are  often designed as a unit.
A given radar might work equally well with a mechanically positioned  array, a lens, or a reflector antenna if they each had the same radiation pattern, but such a  radar could not be converted efficiently to an electronically scanned array by simple replace­ ment of the antenna alone because of the interdependence of the array and the other  portions of the radar.
 Radiation pattern.
8 11 Consider a linear array made up of N elements eqllally spaced a  distance d apart (Fig.
8.1 ).
The elements are assumed to be isotropic point sources radiating  uniformly in all directions with equal amplitude and phase.
Although isotropic elements are  not realizable in practice, they are a useful concept in array theory, especially for the computa­ tion of radiation patterns.
The effect of practical elements with nonisotropic patterns will be  considered later.
The array is shown as a receiving antenna for convenience, but because of the  reciprocity principle, the results obtained apply equaHy well to a transmitting antenna.
The  outputs of all the elements are summed via lines of equal length to give a sum output voltage  E0• Element l will be taken as the reference signal with zero phase.
The difference in the phase  of the signals in adjacent elements is ijJ = 2n(d/l) sin 0, where O is the direction of the incoming  radiation.
It is further assumed that the amplitudes and phases of the signals at each element  are weighted uniformly.
Therefore the amplitudes of the voltages in each element are the same  and, for convenience, will be taken to be unity.
The sum of all the voltages from the individual  elements, when the phase difference between adjacent elements is t/J, can be written  Ea= sin wt+ sin (wt+ 1/1) + sin (wr + 2tjJ) +···+sin [wt+ (N -l)t/11 (8.1)  where w is the angular frequency of the signal.
The sum can be written  E = sm wt + (N l) ·· ····· · · · .
[ · t/11 sin (Ni/J/2)  " 2 sin (t/1/2) (8.2)  Incoming signal  -d----d ---d r  Figure 8.1 N-element linear array.
 1111' t:11:CIRONl('Al.l.Y STEERED PIIASl'D ARRAY ANTENNA IN RADAR 281  The first factor is a sine wave.
of frequency w with a phase shift (N -I )lj;/2 (if the phase  reference were taken at the center of the array, the phase shift would be zero), while the second  term represents an amplitude factor of the form sin (Nlj;/2)/sin (tj,/2).
The field intensity pat­ tern is the magnitude of Eq.
(8.2), or  Ir (0) I = I sin [~~!<'i~2_~in_O] I  'a sin [rr(d/J) sin OJ (8 ..
1)  The pattern has nulls (zeros) when the numerator is zero.
The latter occurs when  Nn(d/).) sin O = 0, ± rr, ± 2rr, ...
, ± nn, where 11 =integer.The denominator, however, is zero  when rr(d/J) sin 0, = 0, ± rr, ± 2rr, ...
, ± 11n.
Note that when the denominator is zero, the  numerator is also zero.
The value of the field intensity pattern is indeterminate when both the  denominator and numerator are zero.
However, by applying L'Hopital's rule (differentiating  numerator and denominator separately) it is found that I E0 I is a maximum whenever sin O =  ± 11J/d.
These maxima all have the same value and are equal to N.
The maximum at sin O = 0  defines the main heam.
The other maxima are called grating lobes.
They are generally undesir- able and are to be avoided.
If the spacing between elements is a half-wavelength (d/J = 0.5),  the first grating lobe (11 = ± l) does not appear in real space since sin O > l, which cannot be.
 Grating lobes appear at ± 90° when d = X For a nonscanning array (which is what is con­ sidered here) this condition (d = J) is usually satisfactory for the prevention of grating lobes.
 Equation 8.3 applies to isotropic radiating elements, but practical antenna elements that are  designed to maximize the radiation at O = 0°, generally have negligible radiation in the direc­ tion O = ± 90°.
Thus the effect of a realistic element patt~rn is to suppress the grating lobes at  ± 90',.
It is for this reason that an element spacing equal to one wavelength can be tolerated for  a nonscanning array.
 From Eq.
(8.3), E0(0) = E0(1t -0).
Therefore an antenna of isotropic elements has a  similar pattern in the rear of the antenna as in the front.
The same would be true for an array of  dipoles.
To avoid ambiguities, the backward radiation is usually eliminated by placing a  renecting screen behind the array.
Thus only the radiation O'ler the forward half of the antenna  ( -90° s O s 90°) need be considered.
 The radiation pattern is equal to the normalized square of the amplitude, or  G (O) = J~_a_l~ = sin2 [Nrr(d/J) sin OJ  a N2 N2 sin2 [rr(d/J) sin OJ (8.4)  If the spacink' between antenna elements is J/2 and if the sine in the denominator of Eq.
(8.4)  is replaced by its argument, the half-power beamwidth is approximately equal to  102 OB= ----­N (8.5)  The first side lobe, for N sufficiently large, is 13.2 dB below the main beam.
The pattern of a  uniformly illuminated array with elements spaced ).../2 apart is similar to the pattern produced  hy a continuously illuminated uniform aperture [Eq._ (7.16)].
 When directive elements are used, the resultant array antenna radiation pattern is  G(O) = G (0).
si!.12 (1}'~(d~~L~i-~_qL = G (O)G (0)  e N2 sin2 [rr(cl/J) sin O] e a (8.6)  where Gr(O) is the radial ion pattern of an individual element.
The resultant radiation pattern  is the product of the element factor Ge(O) and the array factor G0(0), the latter being the pattern  of an array composed of isotropic elements.
The array factor has also been called the space  282 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  factor.
Grating lobes caused by a widely spaced array may therefore be eliminated with  ..
directive elements whkh radiate.little or no energy in the directions of the undesired lobes.
For  example, when the element spacing d = 2,1,, grating lobes occur at O :;;; ± 30° and ± 90" in  addition to the main beam at O = 0°.
If the individual elements have a beamwidth somewhat  less than 60°, the grating lobes of the array factor will be suppressed.
 Equation (8.6) is only an approximation, which may be seriously inadequate for many  problems of array design.
It should be used with caution.
It ignores mutual coupling, and it  does not take account of the scattering or diffraction of radiation by the adjacent array  elements or of the outward-traveling-wave coupling.
12 14 These effects cause the element  radiation pattern to be different when located within the array in the presence of the other  elements than when isolated in free space.
 In order to obtain an exact computation of the array radiation pattern, the pattern of each  element must be measured in the presence of all the others.
The array pattern may be found by  summing the contributions of each element, taking into account the proper amplitude and  phase.
 1 n a two-dimensional, rectangular planar array, the radiation pattern may sometimes be  written as the product of the radiation patterns in the two planes which contain the principal  axes of the antenna.
If the radiation patterns in the two principal planes are G 1(0.,) and G2(0.,.),  the two-dimensional antenna pattern is  (8.
7)  Note that the angles Oe and Oa are not necessarily the elevation and azimuth angles normally  associated with radar.15· 16 The normalized radiation pattern of a uniformly illuminated rec­ tangular array is  G(O O) = sin2 [Nn(d/J) sin Oa] sin2 [Mn(d/J) sin O,.t  e, a N2 sin2 [n(d/..l) sin Ba] M2 sin2 [n(d/...l) sin OJ (8.8)  where N = number of radiating elements in 0,.
dimension with spacing d and M = number in  0,, dimension.
 Beam steering.
The beam of an array antenna may be steered rapidly in space without moving  large mechanical masses by properly varying the phase of the signals applied to each element.
 Consider an array of equally spaced elements.
The spacing between adjacent elements is d, and  the signals at each element are assumed of equal amplitude.
If the same phase is applied to all  elements, the relatire phase difference between adjacent elements is zero and the position of the  main beam will be broadside to the array at an angle O = 0.
The main beam will point in a  direction other than broadside if the relative phase difference between elernents is other than  zero.
The direction of the main beam is at an angle 00 when the phase difforcncc is  </J 2rr(d/2) sin 00.
The phase at each element is therefore <Pc+ 111¢, where m = 0, I, 2, ...
,  {N -I), and </J, is any constant phase applied to all elements.
The normalized radiation  pattern of the array when the phase difference between adjacent elements is </J is given by  G(8) sin2 [Nn(d/).)(sin f}  N2 sin2 [n(d/..l)(sin 0 sin 00)]  sin 00)]  The maximum of the radiation pattern occurs when sin O sin 00.
(8.
9)  Equation (8.9) states that the main beam of the antenna pattern may be positioned to an  angle 00 by the insertion of the proper phase shift </> at each element of the array.
If variable,  rather than fixed, phase shifters are used, the beam may be steered as the relative phase  between elements is changed (Fig.
8.2).
 Tltr' EI.ITTRONICAI.LY STEERED PHASED ARRAY ANTENNA IN RADAR 283  Figure 8.2 Steering of an antenna beam with  variable phase shifters ( parallel-fed array).
 Using an argument similar to the nonscanning array described previously, grating lobes  a ppcar at a11 angle (}q whe11cvcr the de110111inator is zero, or whe11  n: ~ (si11 09 -sin Ou) = ± /Ill: (8.10a)  lsin09-sin0 0j = ).
 (8.IOh) or + II -d  If a grating lobe is permitted to appear at -90° when the main beam is steered to + 90°, it is  found from the above that d = )./2.
Thus the element spacing must not be larger than a  half wavelength if the beam is to be steered over a wide angle without having undesirable  grating lobes appear.
Practical array antennas do not scan ± 90°.
If the scan is limited to  ·t 60°.
Eq.
(8.10) states that the element spacing should be less than 0.54,t Note that antenna  elements used in arrays are generally comparable to a half wavelength in physical size.
 Change of beamwidth with steering angle.
The half-power beamwidth in the plane of scan  increases as the beam is scanned off the broadside direction.
The beamwidth is approximately  inversely proportional to cos 00, where 00 is the angle measured from the normal to the  antenna.
This may be proved by assuming that the sine in tile denominator of Eq.
(8.9) can be  replaced by its argument, so that the radiation pattern is of the form (sin2 u)/u2, where  11 = Nn:(d/..l.)(sin O -sin 00).
The (sin2 u)/u2 antenna pattern is reduced to half its maximum  value when 11 = :t 0.443n:.
Denote by O + the angle corresponding to the half-power point when  0 > Ou, and () _ , the angle corresponding to the half-power point when O < 00; that is, 0.
 corresponds to 11 = + 0.443n: and {) _ lo 11 = -0.443n.
The sin O -sin 00 term in the expres­ sion for 11 can be written 1 7  sin O -sin 00 = sin (0 -00) cos 00 -[1 -cos (0 -00)) sin 00 (8.11)  The second term on the right-hand side of Eq.
(8.11) can be neglected when 00 is small (beam  is near broad side), so that  sin O -sin 00 ~ sin (0 -00) cos 00 (8.12)  Using the above approximation, the two angles corresponding lo the 3-dB points of the  antenna pattern are  .
_ I · 0.443A.
0.443A.
o + -00 = sm Nicos--0~ :::::: Nd cos Oo  -0.443J -0.443J (}_ -00 = sin-• ··------::::::------------Nd cos 00 Nd cos 00  284 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  The half-power beamwidth is  B _ B _ B "' ~-~86A _  B -+ - ....., Nd cos 00 (8.13)  Therefore, when the beam is positioned an angle 00 otT broadside, the beamwidth in the plane  of scan increases as (cos Bot 1• The change in beam width with angle B0 as derived above is not  valid when the antenna beam is too far removed from broadside.
It certainly does not apply  when the energy is radiated in the endfire direction.
 Equation 8.13 applies for a uniform aperture· illumination.
With a cosine-on-a-pedestal  aperture illumination of the form An= a0 + 2a1 cos 2rrn/ N, the beamwidth is 18  0.886A [ ( )2] 08 :::::: --------1 + 0.636 1a 1 /a0 Nd cos 00 (8.1..t)  The parameter n in the aperture illumination represents the position of the element.
Since the  illumination is assumed symmetrical about the center element, the parameter II takes on values  of 11 = 0, ± I, ± 2, ...
, ± (N -1 )/2.
The range of interest is O ::; 2a 1 ::; a0 which covers the span  from uniform illuminations to a taper so severe that the illumination drops to zero at the ends  of the array.
(The array is assumed to extend a distance d/2 beyond each end element.)  The above applies to a linear array.
Similar results apply to a planar aperture; 17•18 that is,  the beamwidth in the plane of the scan varies approximately inversely as cos 00, provided  certain assumptions are fulfilled.
 An interesting technique for graphically portraying the variation of the beam shape with  scan angle has been described by Von Au lock, 15 an example of which is shown in Fig.
8.3.
The  antenna radiation pattern is plotted in spherical coordinates as a function of the two direction  cosines, cos ax and cos a}., of the radius vector specifying the point of observation.
The angle 4>  is measured from the cos ax axis, and () is measured from the axis perpendicular to the cos ax  a:1d cos ay axes.
In Fig.
8.3, </> is taken to be a constant value of 90° and the beam is scanned in  Figure 8.3 Beamwidth and eccentricity of the scanned beam.
(From Von Aulock1S, Courtesy Proc.
IRE.)  1111' HITIHONICAI.I.Y SIHRED PIIASl'D ARRAY ANTENNA I~ RADAR 285  Ilic O coordinate.
At (J O (beam hroadskle lo Ilic army) a symmclrkal pencil beam of  half-power width B0 is assumed.
The shape of the beam at the other angular positions is the  projection of the circular beam shape 011 the surface of the unit sphere.
It can be seen that as  the hcam is scanned in the O direction, it broadens in that direction, but is constant in the¢,  direction.
For O '# O.
the beam shape is not symmetrical about the center of the beam, but is  eccentric.
Thus the beam direction is slightly different from that computed by standard for­ mulas.
In addition to the changes in the shape of the main beam, the sidelobes also change in  a ppca ranee and posit ion.
 Series l'S.
parallel feeds.
The relative phase shift between adjacent elements of the array must  be </> 2rr(d/J) sin 00 in order to position the main beam of the radiation pattern at an angle  00.
The necessary phase relationships between the elements may be obtained with either a  series-fed or a parallel-fed arrangement.
In the series-fed arrangement, the energy may be  transmitted from one end of the line (Fig.
8.4a), or it may be fed from the center out to each  end (Fig.
8.4/J).
The adjac~nt elements are connected by a phase shifter with phase shift <f,.
All  the phase shifters are identical and introduce the same amount of phase shift, which is less than  2n radians.
In !he series arrangement of Fig.
8.4a where the signal is fed from one end, the  position of the beam will vary with frequency (Sec.
8.4).
Thus it will be more limited in  hand width than most array feeds.
The center-red feed of Fig.
8.4b does not have this problem.
 In the parallel-fed array of Fig.
8.2, the energy to be radiated is divided between the  elements by a power splitter.
When a series of power splitters are used to create a tree-like  structure, as in Fig.
8.2, it is called a corporate feed, since it resembles (when turned upside  down) the organization chart of a corporation.
Equal lengths of line transmit the energy to  each element so that no unwanted phase differences are introduced by the lines themselves.
(If  the lines are not of equal length.
a compensation in the phase shift must be made.) The proper  phase change for beam steering is introduced by the phase shifters in each of the lines feeding  the elements.
When the phase of the first element is taken as the reference, the phase shifts  required in the succeeding elements are <f,, 2<f,, 3<f,, ...
, (N '.'...
I)¢.
 The maximum phase change required of each phase shifter in the parallel-fed array is  many times 2rr radians.
Since phase shift is periodic with period 2rr, it is possible in many  applications to use a phase shifter with a maximum of 2rr radians.
However, if the pulse width  is short compared with the antenna response time (if the signal bandwidth is large compared  with the antenna bandwidth), the system response may be degraded.
For example, if the energy  (a)  ( b) Figure 8.4 Series arrangements for  applying phase relationships in an  array.
(a) fed from one end;  (b) center-fed.
 286 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  were to arrive in a direction other than broadside, the entire array would not be excited  simultaneously.
The combined outputs from the parallel-fed elements will fail to coincide or  overlap, and the received pulse will be smeared.
This situation may he relieved hy replacing the  2rr modulo phase shifters with delay lines.
 A similar phenomenon occurs in the series-fed array when the energy is radiated or  received at or near the broadside direction.
If a short pulse is applied at one end of a series-fed  transmitting array, radiation of energy by the first element might be completed before the  remainder of the energy reaches the last element.
On reception, the effect is to smear or distort  the echo pulse.
It is possible to compensate for the delay in the series-fed array and avoid  distortion of the main beam when the signal spectrum is wide by the insertion of individual  delay Jines of the proper length in series with the radiating elements.19  In a series-fed array containing N phase shifters, the signal suffers the insertion loss of a  single phase shifter N times.
In a parallel-fed array the insertion loss of the pltase shifter is  introduced effectively but once.
Hence the phase shifter in a series-fed array must be of lower  loss compared with that in a parallel-fed array.
If the series pJ1ase shifters are too lossy,  amplifiers can be inserted in each element to compensate for the signal attenuation.
 Since each phase shifter in the series-fed linear array of Fig.
8.4a has the same value of  phase shift, only a single control signal is needed to steer the beam.
The N-element parallel-fed  linear array similar to that of Fig.
8.2 requires a separate control signal for each phase shifter  or N -1 total ( one phase shifter is always zero).
A two-dimensional parallel-fed array of MN  elements requires M + N -2 separate control signals.
The two-dimensional series-fed array  requires but two control signals.
 8.3 PHASE SHIFTERS  The difference in phase <P experienced by an electromagnetic wave of frequency f propagating  with a velocity r through a transmission line of length I is  <P = 2rrf 1/v (8.
l S)  The velocity u of an electromagnetic wave is a function of the permeability 11 and the dielectric  constant< of the medium in which it propagates.
Therefore, a change in phase can be had by a  change in the frequency,· length of line, velocity of propagation, permeability, or dielectric  constant.
The use of frequency to effect a change of phase is a relatively simple technique for  electronically scanning a beam.
It was one of the first practical examples of electronic scanning  and has been widely employed.
It is discussed separately in the next section.
One of the more  popular forms of phase shifters is one that varies the physical length of line to obtain a change  in phase, especially when the lengths of line are quantized digitally.
Varying the velocity of  propagation by varying the permeability is the basis of ferrite phase shifters.
Gas discharge and  ferroelectric phase shifters are examples of devices that depend on changes in dielectric con­ stant to vary the velocity of propagation, and hence the phase.
The velocity of propagation  may itso be varied in a more direct manner as in the Eagle, or delta-a, scanner where the  narrow wall of a waveguide is moved mechanically to produce a change in phase and a  scanning beam.
20  Many phase-shifting devices are reciprocal in that the phase change does not depend on  the direction of propagation.
Some important phase shifters, however, are nonreciprocal.
These  must have different control settings for reception and transmission.
A phase shifter should he  able to change its phase rapidly, be capable of handling high power, require control signals of  little power, be of low Joss, light weight, small size, have long life, and be of reasonable cost.
 TIIE FLl'CTRONICAI.I.Y STFERED PHASED ARRAY ANTENNA IN RADAR 287  The various phase shifting techniques possess these properties in varying degree.
No one  device seems to be sufficiently universal t_o meet the requirements of all applications.
 In this text a device for ohlaining a change of phase is called a rhasesh(fier, but they have  also been kn own as plwscrs.
 I>i~itall~· switch{'() phase shifters.
;\ change in phase can be obtained by utilizing one of a  number of lengths of transmission line to approximate the desired value of phase.
The various  lengths of line arc inserted and removed by high-speed electronic switching.
Semiconductor  diodes and ferrites arc the devices commonly employed in digital phase shifters.
 There are at least two methods for switching lengths of transmission lines.
In one, the  proper line length is selected from among many available lengths.
This has been called a  raral/el-li11e configuration.
In the other, the proper length of line is made up of the series  comhination of a relatively few selected lengths of line.
This is a series-line, or a cascaded,  configuration.
Although the discrete nature of the digitally switched phase shifter means that  the exact value of required phase shift cannot be achieved without a quantization error, the  error can be made as small as desired.
(Even analog phase shifters, which are continuously  variable.
cannot be conveniently set to a precise value of phase without special care in calibra­ tion over the desired range of temperature and frequency.)  Figure 8.5 illustrates the parallel-line configuration of the digitally switched phase shifter  in which the desired length is obtained by means of a pair of one-by-N switches.
Each of the  boxes labeled S represents a SPST switch.
The N ports of each one-by-N switch are connected  to N 1 ines of d irf eren t lengths / 1, / 2, ...
, IN .
The number of I ines depends on the degree of phase  quantization that can be tolerated.
The number is limited by the quality of the switches, as  measured by the difference between their impedance in the "off" and "on" positions.
With  many switches in parallel, the "off" impedance of each must be high if the combined im­ pedance is to be large compared to the "on" impedance of a single switch.
A parallel-line  configuration with 16 lengths of line provides a phase quantization of 22.5° ( ± 11.25°), assum­ ing the nth line is of length 11.A./16.
A suitable form of switch is the semiconductor diode.
The  diodes attached to the ends or the particular line selected are operated with forward bias to  present a low impedance.
The remaining diodes attached to the unwanted lines are operated  with hack-hias to present a high impedance.
The switched lines can be any standard RF  transmission line.
Stripline has been used successfully, ~specially at the lower microwave  frequencies.
An advantage of the parallel-line configuration is that the signal passes through  but two switches and, in principle, should have a lower insertion loss than the cascaded  digitally swfiched phase shifter described below.
A disadvantage is the relatively large number  Une-by-N switch One-by-N switch  Figure R.5 Digitally switched parallel-line phase shifter with N switchable lines.
 288 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  {~ <>-0 (}-<'  D u A/16  >..18 \/4  lnd1v1duol  phase bit u  >.12 '  Figure 8.6 Cascaded four-hit digitally  switched phase shifler with A/ 16 quantiza­ tion.
Particular arrangement shown gives  135° of phase shift (A wavelength).
 of lines and switches required when it is necessary to minimize the quantization error.
The  parallel-line configuration has also been used when phase shifts greater than 2n radians are  needed, as in broadband devices which require true time delays rather than phase shift which is  limited to 2rc radians.
.,  The cascaded digitally switched phase shifter (Fig.
8.6) has seen more application than the  parallel-line configuration.
A cascaded digitally switched phase shifter with four phase bits  capable of switching in or out lengths ofline equal to ..l/16, ..l/8 .
..l/4, and ..l/2 yields a phase shift  with a quantization of l/16.
just as the parallel line shifter with 16 lengths of line described  above.
The binary quantization of line lengths makes it convenient to apply digital tcchniqu~s  for actuating the shifter.
 Figure 8.6 shows the schematic of a four-bit digital phase shifter consisting of four  cascaded modules.
Each module contains a switch that inserts either" zero" phase changi: or a  phase change of 360/2n degrees, where n = I, 2, 3, 4.
When the upper two switches are open, the  lower two are closed, and vice versa.
Note that in the ..
zero" phase state, the phase shift is  generally not zero, but is some residual amount ¢0.
Thus the two states provide a phase of 4>0  and ¢0 + A<f>.
The difference Aef; between the two states is the desired phase shift required of  the module.
 The arrangements of Figs.
8.5 and 8.6 lend themselves to the use of semiconductor diodes.
 Ferrite phase shifters are also operated digitally, but in a slightly different manner, as described  later.
 Diode phase shifters.22 26·155 The property of a semiconductor diode that is of interest in  microwave phase shifters is that its impedance can be varied with a change in bias control  voltage.
This allows the diode to act as a switch.
Phase shifters based on diode devices can be  of relatively high power and low loss, and can be switched rapidly from one phase state to  another.
They are relatively insensitive to changes in temperature.
they can operate with low  control power, and are compact in size.
They lend themselves well to microwave integrated  circuit construction, and are capable of being used over the entire range of frequencies of  interest to radar although their losses are generally less and their power handling is generally  higher at the lower frequencies.
 There are three basic methods for employing semiconductor diodes in digital phase  shifters, depending on the circuit used to obtain an individual phase bit.
These are: (I) the  switched-line, (2) the hybrid-coupled, and (3) the loaded-line.
The switched line was shown in  Fig.
8.6.
Each phase bit consists of two lengths of line that provide the differential phase shift,  and two single-pole, double-throw switches utilizing four diodes.
 The hybrid-coupled phase bit, as shown in Fig.
8.7, uses a 3-dB hybrid junction with  balanced reflecting terminations connected to the coupled arms.
Two switches (diodes) control  the phase change.
The 3-dB hybrid has the property that a signal input at port 1 is divided  equally in power between ports 2 and 3.
No energy appears at port 4.
The diodes act to either  pass or reflect the signals.
When the impedance of the diodes is such as to pass the signals,  TIIE l'U:CTRONICALLY STEEREO PHASED ARRAY ANTENNA IN RADAR 289  CD  X Output --- 3-dB  hybrid  junction  (?) CT)  j -~~-] --¥-] [)iorJP ,wilchPS  ~I _l 1 Shod rnc,;ts Figure 8.7 Hybrid-coupled phase bit.
 the signals will he reflected by the short circuits located farther down the transmission lines.
 The signals at ports 2 and 3, arter reflection from either the diode switches or the short  circuits.
combine at port 4.
None of the reflected energy appears at port 1.
The difference in  path length with the diode switches open and closed is D./.
The two-way path D./ is chosen to  correspond to the desired increment of digitized phase shift.
An N-bit phase shifter can be  obtained by cascading N such hybrids.
 The loaded-line phase shifter, Fig.
8.8, consists of a transmission line periodically loaded  with spaced, switched impedances, or susceptances.
Diodes are used to switch between the two  stales of susceptance.
The spacing between diodes is approximately one-quarter wavelength al  the operating frequency.
Adjacent quarter-wavelength-spaced loading-susceptances are equal  and take either of two values.
If the magnitude of the normalized susceptance is small, the  reflection from any pair of symmetrical susceptances can be made to cancel so that matched  transmission will result for either of the two susceptance conditions.
Each pair of diodes  spaced a quarter-wavelength apart produces an increment of the desired phase.
The number of  pairs that are cascaded determines the value of the transmission phase shift.
To achieve  high-power capacity, many such sections with small phase increments can be used so that  there are many diodes· to share the power.
The ability to operate with high power is the  advantage claimed for this type of diode phase shifter.
If the largest practical phase shift per  diode pair is )/16, or 22.5°, 32 diodes are required to shift the phase 360°.
 The hybrid-coupled phase shifter generally has less loss than the other two, and uses the  least number of diodes.
It can be made lo operate over a wide band.
The switched-line phase  shifter uses more diodes than the other types and has an undesirable phase-frequency response  which can !:re corrected at the expense of a higher insertion loss.
This configuration is generally  restricted to true-lime-delay circuits and to low-power, miniaturized phase shifters where loss  is not a major consideration.
For a four-bit phase shifter, covering 360°, the minimum number  of diodes needed in the periodically loaded line is 32, the switched line requires 16, and the  hybrid-coupled circuit needs only 8.
The theoretical peak power capability of the switched line  is twice that of the hybrid-coupled circuit since voltage doubling is produced by the reflection  ,-!' ·I f..
!' • :-~ •i  ~t~ ~--4-----~•---0  Input Oulput  Susceptonces Diode  swilches Figure 8.8 Periodically loaded-line phase shifter.
 290 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  in the hybrid circuit.
The switched-line phase shifter has the greatest insertion loss, but its loss  does not vary with theamount of phase shift as it does in the other two types of circuits.
 Diode phase shifters have been built in practically all transmission line media, including  waveguide, coax and stripline.
Microstrip is useful for medium-power devices because of the  ease of manufacture, circuit reproducibility and its reduced size, weight, and production costs.
 The diode chips may be mounted directly on the substrate without the parasitic reactances of  the diode packages.
A multiple-bit diode phase shifter need not be constructed with all of the  same types of phase bits.
The loaded-line circuit is often preferred for small phase increments  because of its compact size.
It is not as suitable for large phase steps because it is difficult to  match in both states under this condition.
For example, in one particular design of a four-bit  microstrip X-band phase shifter, using a sapphire substrate, it proved expedient to use the  loaded-line construction for the 22.5 and 45° bits, and to use the hybrid coupled circuit for the  90 and 180" bits to obtain minimum insertion loss with reasonable bandwid~Jt and power  handling capability.
21 The switching times of phase shifters utilizing PIN diodes can be as low  as 50 ns.
Typically, switching of the order of one microsecond is suitable for most applications.
 The PIN diode, Fig.
8.9, has been frequently used in high-power digital phase shifters.
It  consists of a thin slice of high-resistivity intrinsic semiconductor material sandwiched between  heavily doped low-resistivity p+ and N+ regions.
The intrinsic region acts as a slightly lossy  dielectric at microwave frequencies and the heavily doped regions are good conductors.
 When biased in the reverse (nonconducting) state, the PIN diode resembles a low-loss capaci­ tor.
It is essentially an insulator situated between two conductors and exhibits the parallel­ plate capacitance determined by the dielectric of the intrinsic region.
At microwaves, the  small-signal equivalent circuit of the PIN diode may be represented as a series RC circuit with  the capacitance determined by the area, thickness, and dielectric constant of the intrinsic  region.
The capacitance is independent of the reverse-bias voltage.
The series resistance is  determined by the resistivity and geometry of the meta1Jic-like P and N regions.
In the  forward-bias (conducting) state, when appreciable current is passed, the injection of holes and  electrons from the P and N regions respectively, creates an electron-hole plasma in what was  formerly the dielectric region.
The slightly lossy dielectric is changed to a fairly good conduc­ tor with the application of forward bias.
The capacitive component of the circuit disappears  and the equivalent circuit becomes a small resistance which decreases in value with increasing  forward current.
The resistance can vary from thousands of ohms at zero bias to a fraction of  +  forward slole  Forward -bias  resislance  Package  inductance +  Reverse state  MJunclion  capacitance  ~ig~~ff~nce  Bock-bios  resistance .
Figure 8.9 PIN diodes and simplified equivalent  circuits for forward and reverse states.
 TIIE RFCTRONICALI.Y STFfRl:D PIIASED ARRAY ANTENNA IN RADAR 291  an ohm with tens of milliamperes bias current.
Thus with forward bias the diode resembles a  low-value resistor.
If the diode is housed in a package, the parasitic elements introduced by the  package degrade the switching action and influence the voltage breakdown and thermal  characteristics.
 The variable capacitance semiconductor element, or l'Gractor diode, also can be used as  the switch in a diode phase shifter.
lt is capable of very rapid switching, of the order of a  nanosecond, but can handle only low power.
Since the capacitance of a varactor varies with  the applied negative bias voltage, it may be employed as an analog (continuously variable)  phase shirter using either the loaded line or the hybrid coupled configurations.
Power levels  are limited to a few milliwatts by the generation or harmonics and other nonlinear effects.
 Ferri magnetic phase shirlers.
A ferrite is a magnetizable metal-oxide insulator which contains  magnetic ions arranged to produce spontaneous magnetization while maintaining good dielec­ tric properties.
2 7 •29 In contrast to ferromagnetic metals, rerrites are insulators and have a high  resistivity which allows electromagnetic waves to penetrate the material so that the magnetic  field component or the wave can interact with the magnetic moment of the ferrite.
This  interaction results in a change or the microwave permeability of the ferrite.
The termferrimag­ netism was introduced to describe the novel magnetic properties of these materials that are  now known as ferrites.
 Ferrites have been derived principally from two basic metal-oxide families: the ferrimag­ netic spinets and the garnets.
Both have been used for microwave phase shifters.
A typical  spinel ferrite is NiFe204• In addition to nickel, compositions of magnesium-manganese and  lithium have been used.
A common garnet is Y 3Fe5012, yttrium iron garnet (YIG).
The  characteristics of materials suitable for microwave devices are given by Ince and Temme.
30  The physics or propagation of electromagnetic energy in ferrites is not easy to describe in  simple terms.
31 The magnetic permeability of a ferrite is anisotropic (that is, it depends on the  direction), and must be represented by a complex tensor rather than a scalar.
For present  purposes.
it suffices to state that a change in the applied d-c magnetic field produces a change  in the propagation properties because of a change in permeability, which results in a phase  shift.
 A ferrite phase shifter is a two-port device that permits variation of the phase shirt between  input and output by changing the magnetic properties of the ferrite.
They may be analog or  digital with either reciprocal or nonreciprocal characteristics.
Several types of ferrite pha:;e  shifters have been developed, but those that have been of interest in applications are the  Reggia-Speftcer, toroidal latching, flux drive, and dual-mode phase shifters.
 Reggia-Spencer phase shifter.
This was one of the first ferrite phase shifters to be applied  successfully to radar.
It consists of a rod or a bar offerrimagnetic material located at the center  of a section of waveguide.
A solenoid is wound around the waveguide to provide a longitudinal  magnetic field.
A change in phase is obtained by a change of the applied magnetic field that  results from a change of the current passing through the coil.
This is called an analog phase  shifter since a continuous phase change is obtained as a function of the current through the  solenoid.
It is a reciprocal device in that the phase shift is the same for both directions of  propagation.
When it was introduced, the Reggia-Spencer phase shifter had a higher figure of  merit (defined as the degrees or phase shift per dB ofloss) than previous analog ferrite phase  shifters, and was more compact.
Since the rod of ferrite is located at the center of the guide out  of contact with the walls, there is no means for dissipation of heat other than by radiation.
This  lack or a convenient thermal path to dissipate heat limits its power handling capability.
 However, in one design, 31•32 the heat transfer problem was overcome by having the axially  292 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  located garnet bar directly cooled by a low-loss liquid dielectric that was allowed to flow along  the surface of the garnet material.
The flow was confined by completely encapsulating the  garnet in a tefton jacket.
Thus the cooling liquid was in direct contact with the garnet for  efficient transfer of dissipated heat.
Some of the highest power phase shifters have been  obtained with this design.
For example, a C-band phase shifter, operating over an 8 percent  bandwidth was capable of handling 100 kW of peak power at an average power of600 W.
The  insertion loss was 0.9 dB with a maximum VSWR of 1.25.
However, it required 125 ,,s to  switch the phase.
At a 300-Hz switching rate, 16 W of switching power was needed.
The phase  shifter was 2.4 by 2.1 by 8.2 inches in size and weighed less than 1.5 lb.
 The relatively Jong time to switch the phase of the Reggia-Spencer phase shifter from one  value to another has limited its application.
Switching times are measured in hundreds of  microseconds rather than a few microseconds as is common with other microwave phase  shifters.
The long time is due to the large inductance or the solenoid and by th,~ fact that the  waveguide around which the solenoid is wrapped acts as a shorted turn.
The resulting eddy  currents generated by the shorted turn limit the speed with which the magnetic field can be  changed.
The shorted-turn effect may be minimized by a waveguide made of plastic which is  coated with a thin copper plating.
Sometimes a slit is cut in the side wall of the waveguide to  reduce the eddy currents.
Another factor that complicates operation is hysteresis which causes  the value of permeability to differ for increasing and decreasing current.
To eliminate hyster­ esis errors a current pulse must be applied to the phase shifter solenoid to drive the ferrite to  Ferrite  toroid /  (a)  Dielectric D,electric  matching spacers  transformer  Latching Fer rite  conductor toroid  (Drive wire)  (b)  Figure 8.10 (a) Single bit of a latching ferrite phase-shifter mounted in waveguide; (b) sketch or five-bit  latching ferrite phase-shifter.
(From Whicker and Jones,156 courtesy IEEE.)  THE ELE(TRONIC'ALLY STEERED PHASED ARRAY ANTENNA IN RADAR 293  saturation before a new value of phase shift can be applied.
The phase shift of a ferrite device is  especially sensitive to temperature.
A change of l °C might result in a 1 ° phase change.
Hence.
 they usually must be operated in a temperature-controlled environment.
Although the Reggia­ Spencer phase shifter has been successfully' applied in operational radar and was one of the  first practical phase shifters suitable for radar.
in its present form it has been largely superseded  hy other devices.
 Latching ferrite phase shifters.°' 1 · B The use of a ferrite in the form o[ a toroid centered within a  waveguide as in Fig.
H.
10, results in a phase shifter with a fast switching time and with less  drive power than required of a Reggia-Spencer device.
Furthermore, it is not as temperature  sensitive.
and there is less of a problem caused by hysteresis in the ferrite.
The toroid ferrite  phase shifter.
although not perfect by any means, has been in the past a popular choice for  phased array application.
 Consider the hysteresis loop, or B-H curve, of Fig.
8.11.
This is a plot or the magnetization  (gauss) as a function of the applied magnetic field (oersted) for a toroid-shaped section of  ferrirnagnetic material.
The applied magnetic field is proportional to the current in the drive  wire which can be considered a solenoid with one turn.
When a sufficiently large current is  passed through the drive wire threading the center of the toroid, the magnetization is driven to  saturation.
When the current is reduced to zero, there exists a remanent magnetization B,.
If a  current of opposite polarity is passed through the drive wire, the ferrite is saturated with the  opposite polarity of remanent magnetization.
Thus a toroidal ferrite may take on two values of  magnetization.
± B,, obtained by pulsing the drive wire with either a positive or negative  current pulse.
The difference in the two states of magnetization produces the differential phase  Remonen!  mognelizohon ·· C  9  0  ':::!  0,/  C f  Saturation  Applied magnetic field (H) •·············· -•-~-+~~~~- Figure 8.11 Hysteresis loop, or B-H curve, of a ferrite toroid.
 29-' INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  shift.
Th is is called a lat chiny plum! shift er.
Th us a single, short-du rat ion current pulse sets l he  phase.
Continuous application of drive power is not needed as in other phase shifters.
A  ··square" hysteresis loop is desired for such a phase shifter.
The squareness is measured hy the  ratio of the remanent magnetization to the saturation magnetization, which with practical  ferrite materials might typically be about 0.7.
 The amount of differential phase shift depends on the ferrite material and the length of the  toroid.
A digital latching phase shifter is obtained by placing in cascade a nuinber of separate  toroids of varying length.
The lengths of each toroid are selected to provide a differential phase  shift of 180°, 90°, 45°, 22.5°, and so forth, depending on the number of bit<-required.
A separate  pair of drive wires is used for each section of toroid.
Impedance matching is provided at the  input and output toroids.
By filling the center slot of the toroid with high dielectric-constant  material a better figure of merit and lower switching power are obtained, but the peak power  capability is decreased.
The individual toroids are usually separated by thin diet~ctric spacers  to avoid magnetic interaction (Fig.
8:IOh).
The drive wire is oriented for minimum RF  coupling.
It is also important to have proper mechanical contact between the toroid and the  waveguide wall since an air gap can give rise to the generation of higher-order modes that can  result in relatively large narrow-frequency-banJ, insertion-loss spikes.
Cardul allention must  be paid to eliminating these gaps without excessive mechanical pressure that coulJ cause  magnetostriction which changes the magnetic properties of the material.
especially if garnets  are used.
This type of latching phase shifter is also called a twin-slah toroiilal plwse -'l,ifier since  the major action is due to the two vertical branches of the toroids.
The function of the  horizontal branches is to complete the magnetic circuit.
 By introducing the applied magnetic field from within the waveguide via the single-turn  drive wire.
the shorted-turn effect that limits the switching speed of the Reggia-Spencer phase  shifter is eliminated.
This permits switching times of the order of microseconds.
Whereas  hysteresis was a nuisance to be tolerated in the Reggia-Spencer device, the latching phase  shifter takes advantage of the hysteresis loop to produce the two discrete values of phase shift  without the need for continuous drive power.
 The toroid phase shifter is 11011reciproca/ in that the phase shift depends on the direction of  propagation.
In most applications this inconvenience is usually accepted in order to achieve  the other advantages offered by the latching ferrite phase shifter.
When used for both transmit  and receive, the phase shift must be changed between the two modes of operation.
With  switching speeds of the order of microseconds, it is practical to reset the phase shifters just after  transmission in order to receive.
They are then reset just before transmitting the next pulse.
 The phase shift for proper operation when propagating in the reverse Jirection is obtained by  simply reversing the polarity of the drive pulses.
This reverses the direction of magnetization of  the ferrite toroid, which is equivalent to reversing the direction of propagation.
Nomcciprocal  phase shifters cannot be t1-;cd in reflectarrays (Sec.
8.6), since the electromagnetic energy must  travel in both directions.
Their use is also not practical in short-range radar or with high-duty  cyde waveforms like those used in some pulse-doppler radars, since the switching between the  two states is too slow.
 The value of remanent magnetization is affected by temperature.
Temperature changes  may be due to microwave dissipation in the ferrite as well as ambient-temperature variations.
 Some materials are more temperature-sensitive than others, but the material cannot always be  selected on this basis alone.
Garnets are generally more temperature-stable and can handle  higher power than other ferrimagnetic materials.
A reduction in temperature sensitivity can  be obtained with a composite magnetic circuit30·31 in which the microwave ferrimagnetic  material is internal to the waveguide, but a temperature-insensitive, magnetic-flux-limiting  ferrimagnetic material is external to the waveguide.
The latter limits and maintains the mag­ netic flux, and hence the phase shift, at an almost constant level over the stabilization range.
 1111' MH'IRONICAII Y SIFl:RH) l'IIASl:D ARRAY ANTl'NNA IN RADAR 295  Flux drhe.
H The toroid.
or twin-slab.
ferrite phase shiner may be operated in an analog  fashion hy varying the current of the drive pulse so as to provide different values of remanent  magnetization.
This is called .f/11.x drirc.
It has the further advantage of having reduced  temperature sensith'ily.
Instead of using a number of individual toroids of different lengths in  cascade.
a single long section of toroid is used that is capable of providing the total dilTerenlial  phase shift of 360".
The required digital phase increment is obtained by operating on a minor  hysteresis loop.
as in Fig.
8.12.
If B,( 1 ).
for example, were the remanent magnetization needed  to produce a phase change of 180° relative to the rem anent magnetization -B,.
the amplitude  and width of the driving pulse would be selected so as to rise up to point l on the hysteresis  curve.
When the current pulse decays to zero, the magnetization falls back to the remanent  value 8,( I) along the indicated curve.
The difference in phase between -Br( I) and the value  U,( I) determines the phase increment.
With a different value of current pulse, a different value  of remanent magnetization can be obtained and therefore a different phase shift.
In this  manner.
the ferrite toroid is basically an analog device that can provide any phase increment.
 It acts as a Jigital phase shifter if the <.!rive currents are digital.
A digital-to-analog conversion  is required to translate the digital control-signal generated by the array computer to a form  that can set the llux-<lrivc phase shifter.
The length of the toroid is generally made 15 to 20  percent greater than normal to allow for some shrinkage of the total available increment of  magnetization due to temperature changes.
Analysis shows that when the drive output im­ pedance is small, the effect of temperature-caused variations in the increment of magnetization  will he small.
 Dual-mode ferrite phase shifters.
There are some applications which require a reciprocal phase  shifter.
!\s mentioned previously the Reggia-Spencer phase shirter is reciprocal but has limita­ tions 5ud1 a5 .slow switching speed.
temperature sensitivity, and a not particularly good figure  8,(2)  8, (3)  -B, --------,.,(i)  Figure 8.12 Hysteresis loop showing the  principle of flux drive.
where a single  ferrite toroid is excited by discrete  current pulses to produce digital phase­ shirt increments from what is basically  an analog device.
 296 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  Waveguide.
Matching  transformer Nonreciprocal Phase element with-7  polarizers coil and yokes 1  ) Output Figure 8.13 Oual-modl! rl!Cl­ procal phase shifter configura­ l ion.
( From W hick a a11d  }' 01111/).
ltd)  of merit.
A more suitable reciprocal device that overcomes the limitations of previous recipro­ cal ferrite phase shifters in the d11al-mode phase shifter based on the principle of the Faraday  rotor.25·33·35-37 It is competitive with the toroid phase shifter, especially at the higher micro- wave frequencies.
,~  In the dual-mode phase shifter the linearly polarized signal in rectangular waveguide at  the left-hand port in Fig.
8.13 is converted to circular polarization hy a nonreciprocal circular  polarizer (a ferrite quarter-wave plate).
In the Faraday rotator portion, the applied longitu­ dinal magnetic field rotates the circular polarization, imparting the desired phase shift.
The  circular polarization is converted to linear by a second nonreciprocal polarizer.
A signal  incident from the right is converted to circular polarization of the opposite sense by the  nonreciprocal quarter-wave plate.
However, since both the sense of polarization and  the direction of propagation are reversed, the phase shift for a signal traveling from right to left  is the same as that from left to right.
The ferrite rod of the Faraday rotator is metallized to  form a fully loaded waveguide and is accessible for heat sinking.
The magnetic circuit is  completed externally with a temperature-stable ferrite yoke.
Flux drive is generally used to  control the remanent magnetization.
 The dual-mode phase shifter is of light weight and is ca pa hie of high average powa.
It also  has a good figure of merit.
Its chieflimitation relative to the nonreciprocal toroid phase shifter is  its longer switching time, being of the order of IO to 20 Jts.
The switching speed is limited hy the  shorted-turn elTect of the thin metallic film covering the ferrite rod.
 Other ferrite phase shifters.
There have heen other kinds of ferrite phase shifters develop<.:d  over the years based on different principles or on variations of those descrih<.:d above.
 Although the above phase shifters were discussed primarily as waveguide devices, some of  them may he implemented in coax, helical line, and striplinc.
33  The ferrite Faraday rotator, which was mentioned above as being a part of the dual-mode  phase shifter, also has been applied as an electronic phase shifter.33·38 It is the equivalent of the  mechanical Fox phase shifter.39 Other examples of phase shifters are a helical slow-wave  structure either surrounded by or surrounding a ferrite toroid,40·41 a transversely magnetized  slah of ferrite in rectangular waveguide,42·43 a bucking rotator phase shifter,44 circular polari­ zation between quarter-wave plates,44 a reciprocal, polarization-insensitive phase shifter for  reflectarrays,45 wideband phase shifters,46 and phase shifters that operate at UHF.47 Ferrites  have also been used in continuous aperture scanning where a phase change is provided across  an aperture without subdividing it into separate elements.
In one experimental design,48 ten  discrete phase-shifter elements were replaced with a single ferrite-loaded aperture whose  properties were externally controlled to scan the beam radiated by a five-wavelength, X -band  antenna.
 Other electronic phase shifters.
In addition to the ferrite and diode devices, there have been  other techniques suggested for electronically varying the phase shift.
The traveling-wave tube  TIIF FI.FCTRONICAI.I Y STFFRED PHASED ARRAY ANTENNA IN RADAR 297  can provide a rast.
electronically controlled phase shift by variation of the helix voltage.50 The  phase shirt is large enough to allow several taps on a single tube to control the phase of several  nntenna clements simultaneously.
51 Gaseous discharge, or plasma, phase shifters are based on  the variation of the dielectric constant of the gaseous medium as a function of the number of  free electrons, which depends on the current through the device.51 53 Although they can  handle about I kW of power and can be adapted to a wide range of frequencies, it is difficult to  obtain stable operating characteristics with long life in sealed-off tubes.
The switching proper­ ties of a ferrite circulator can also be used for constructing a digitally switched, nonreciprocal  phase shifter.
54 It is not often used, however, because of its higher loss, lower peak power, and  higher cost as compared with digitally switched diode phase shifters.
Ferroelectric phase  shifters.
in which the dielectric of a ferroelectric material is a function of the applied electric  field.
arc also possihle.49 They seem better suited for VHF and UHF than for higher frequencies.
 Electromechanical phase-shifting del'ices.
In addition to electronic phase shifters, electrome­ chanical devices for changing phase have been used in phased-array radars, especially in the  early models.
Although electromechanical shifters are not now widely used, they are described  here to illustrate the variety of devices that might be employed in array antennas.
 One or the earliest and simplest forms of electromechanical phase shifters is a transmis­ sion line whose length is varied mechanically, as with a telescopic section.
This is called a line  srretclicr.
The telescoping section might be in the form of a "U ", and the length of the line  changed in a manner similar lo that of a slide trombone.
The line stretcher is often imple­ mented in coaxial line.
A mechanical line stretcher that gives more phase shift for a given  amount of motion than a conventional line stretcher is the helical-line phase shifter due to  Stark.51·55 The phase velocity on the helical transmission line is considerably less than the  velocity of light.
For this reason a given mechanical motion produces more phase change than  would a line stretcher in conventional transmission line.
Thus a shorter phase shifter can be  had.
which is especially advantageous at VHF or UHF frequencies.
The reduction in length is  essentially equal to the wind-up factor of the helix, which is the ratio of the circumference to  the pitch.
Wind-up factors may range from 10 to 20 in practical designs.
 Both the coax and the helical line-stretchers are not well suited for the higher microwave  frequencies.
A waveguide device, suitable for the higher frequencies, that is analogous to the  line stretcher is the hybrid junction such as the magic T, short-slot hybrid coupler (sometimes  called the short-slot trombone phase shifter), or the equivalent in stripline.51 A change in line  length, with a corresponding change in phase, is obtained in the magic T with adjustable short  circuits in the' collinear arms.
56 The use of adjustable short circuits in the short~lot hybrid is  somewhat more convenient to configure mechanically.
 Another electromechanical phase shifter which has been used in array radar is the  rotating-arm mechanical phase shifter.11.S us It consists of a number of concentric transmis­ sion lines.
Each line is a three-sided square trough with an insulated conductor passing down  the middle.
A moving arm makes contact with each circular assembly.
The arms are rotated to  produce a continuous and uniform variation of phase across the elements of the array.
When  the phase at one end or the concentric line is increasing, the phase at the other end is  decreasing.
Hence one line can supply the necessary phase variation to two elements, one on  either side or array center.
A total or N/2 concentric rings are required for a linear array of  N + I elements.
 There are several methods for generating phase shift that utilize the properties or circular  polarization.
One or the first devices to employ circularly polarized waves propagating in  round waveguide was the Fox phase shirter.39 This rotary-waveguide phase shifter was applied  in World War II by the Bell Telephone Laboratories in the FH MUSA, or Mk 8, scanning  298 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  radar.4·59 This was the first US radar to use a phased-array antenna with phase shifters to steer  the beam.
The 42-element S-band array scanned a ± 9 degree sector at a rate of 10 per second.
 Related devices that obtain phase change by relative rotation of crossed dipoles in a circular  guide or cavity are described by Kummer.
51  A different form of mechanical beam steering is used in an array with spiral antenna  elements.
60·61 The linearly polarized beam radiated by a ftat, two-dimensional array of spirals  may be scanned by rotating the individual spiral antenna elements.
One degree of mechanical  rotation corresponds to a phase change of one electrical degree.
No additional phase-shifting  devices are required.
An array of spiral elements makes a simple scanning antenna.
It is  primarily w;eful in those applications where a broadband element is required and the power is  not too high.
The entire assembly, including the spiral radiators and feed networks, but  possibly excluding the rotary joint, can be manufactured with printed circuit techniques.
 Helical radiating elements have also been used in arrays to obtain phase shift~ by rotation of  the elements.62  A change in phase in the waveguide transmission may be obtained by mechanically  changing the dimensions of the guide.20•59 One such device that has been applied to practical  radars is the Eagle scanner, or delta-a scanner.
The latter term is descriptive of the fact that the  velocity of propagation, and therefore the phase, of a signal propagated through a waveguide  depends on the width of the guide, or its "a" dimension.
This phase shifting technique has  been used for GCA (ground control approach) radars to mechanically scan fan beams in  azimuth and elevation.
 Mechanically actuated phase shifters are, of course, not capable of being actuated as  rapidly as electronic devices, nor are they as flexible in being able to select any random value of  phase.
It is possible, however, with several electromechanical devices to scan a beam over its  coverage at rates as fast as 10 times per second (0.1 s switching time), which is sufficiently rapid  for many applications.
 \_.j~FREQUENCY-SCAN ARRA YS63-65  A change in frequency of an electromagnetic signal propagating along a transmission line  produces a change in phase, as was indicated by Eq.
(8.15).
This provides a relatively simple  means for obtaining electronic phase shift.
Although parallel feeding of a frequency-scan array  is possible, it is usually simpler to employ series feeding, as in Fig.
8.14.
Since the attenuation  in the transmission line connecting adjacent elements is small compared with that of conven­ tional phase shifters, the series-fed arrangement can be used in frequency-scan arrays without  excessive loss.
 -d- Input 0 Direction of  main beam  dieting elements  Termination  Snoke feed/ Figure 8.14 Series-fed, frequency-scan linear array.
 THE ELECTRONICALLY STEERED PHASED ARRAY ANTENNA IN RADAR 299  The phase difference between two adjacent elements in the series fed arra) of Fig.
8.14 is  <P = 2rrf l/v = 2rr//).
(8.16)  where f = frequency of the electromagnetic signal  I= length of line connecting adjacent elements (generally greater than the distance  between elements)  r· =-:: velocity of propagation in the transmission line  )_ = wavelength  For convenience of analysis, the velocity of propagation is taken to be equal to c, the velocity  of light.
This is applicable to coaxial lines or similar structures which propagate the TEM mode.
 If the beam is to point in a direction 00, the phase difference between elements should be  2rr(d/).) sin 00.
In a frequency-scan array it is usually necessary to add an integral numbe_!:_~  2rr radians of relative phase difference.
This permits a given scan angle to be obtained with a  smaller frequency change.
Denote by the integer m the n':!!Jlber of 2n radians added.
By equating  this phase difference to the phase shift obtained from a line of length/, as given by Eq.
(8.16),  we have ·  2rr(d/).) sin 00 + 2rrm = 2nl/}..
(8.17a)  or .
ml I  sm 00 = --J" + d (8.17b)  When the beam points broadside, (00 = 0), Eq.
(8.17b) yields m = l/).0, where A.0 is defined as  the wavelength corresponding to the beam position at broadside.
The corresponding  frequency is denoted Jo, and the direction of beam pointing becomes  sin Oo = ~ ( 1 -() = ~ ( 1 -J) (8.18)  If the beam is steered over the limits ± 01 the wavelength excursion ~).
is given by  (8.19)  Thus there is a tradeoff between the wavelength excursion and the length of line connecting the  elements.
Figure 8.
I 5 is a plot of the beam direction as a function of the frequency for various  values of the ~·wrap-up fqcto,' t/d, as given by Eq.
(8.18).
Note that the beam position is not  symmetrical with frequency.
To scan the beam ±45° about broadside requires a bandwidth of  almost 30 percent with a wrap-up factor of 5, and 7 percent for a wrap-up factor of 20.
 (Percentage bandwidth = 100 ~flfo .)  A frequency-scan radar requires a considerable portion of the available band or a radar t_o -·······-~ be devoted to beam steering.
Although this is a simple method of electronic steermg, it does  not usually allow the frequency band to be used for other purposes, such as for high range- resolution or for frequency agility.
\, \ ·  If too short a pulse (too wide a signal bandwidth)·is used in the frequency-scan array, the  pattern will be distorted.
There are two equivalent methods for viewing this limitation.
From  the frequency domain point of view, each spectral component of frequency corresponds to a  different pointing direction.
If the signal contains widely spaced frequency components the  beam will be spread over a considerable angular region rather than confined to a beamwidth  as determined from diffraction theory.
Alternatively, from the time delay point of view, a  narrow pulse impressed at the input of the series-fed array of Fig.
8.14, requires a finite time to  300 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  70°  60°  Q)  g' 50 ° ·· L irnit for  0 d O 6 X.0 § 40°  u  lfl 30° .
 20° .
-- f I t0 lid== '  0 85 0 90 0 95  1 05 15  Lid= 1 -10° f I t0  -20°  -30°  ~  -40° O'  C  0  50° C  0 u  lfl 60° --- 70°  20 80°  _l i ' __ Ll.
 Figure 8.15 Scan angle 00 versus frequency.
/0 corresponds to 00 0.
Dashed curve gives onsd of grating  lobe ford 0.5A0; dot-dash curve for d = 0.6.t0.
 travel down the transmission line.
The finite time implies a finite bandwidth.
The greater the  wrap-up factor, the less the frequency band required to steer the beam over a given angle;  however, the longer it will take to fill the array and the less will be the bandwidth that the array  can support.
For example, if the array antenna had an aperture of 5 m and if the wrap-up  factor were 15, it would take 0.25 JlS to fill the array.
The pulse width should be long compared  to this time if distortion is not to result.
 A frequency-scan radar can radiate undesirable grating lohes, just as can any other array,  if the electrical spacing between elements is too large.
From Eq.
(8.IOh), the relationship  between the angle 09 at which the first grating lobe appears, and the angle 00 to which th.:! main  beam is steered, is given by  !sin of/ -sin Oo I )../d  If we assume that the grating lobe can be tolerated if it is located at ± 90°, then  j l + sin 00 I ~ )../d (8.20)  (8.21)  The limiting scan angle for the appearance of grating lobes is shown by the dashed curves in  Fig.
8.15 for the two cases d = 0.5A0 and 0.6..1.0• The onset of the grating lobe can set a limit to  the maximum angle of scan.
The appearance of grating lobes is not symmetrical about 00 = 0.
 If, for example, the element spacing were 0.5...1.0 and 1/d = 15, the beam can be scanned from  00 = 0 to 00 = 62°.
(This assumes the lowest frequency is determined by the condition that the  element spacing be not less than one-half wavelength.) With d = 0.6,l0, the beam can be  scanned from -48° to + 36° without the appearance of grating lobes, for l/d = 15.
 1 IIE FUTTRONICALLY SlEERElJ PHASED ARRAY ANTENNA IN RADAR 301  It is possible for a frequency-scan array lo employ different frequencies lo radiate over the  same angular region, assuming that the antenna.feed· and.· elements are sufficiently  broadband.
64 This can be seen from an examination of Eq.
(8.17b ).
The factor m in this  equation can take on any integer value.
As the frequency is changed, one beam after another  will appear and disappear, each beam corresponding to a different value of m.
Only one beam  at a time will be radiated if the grating lobe relation of Eq.
(8.21) is satisfied; else-multiple  beams.
or grating lobes, will appear.
It can be shown that if an array radiates at a particular  angle corresponding to a value min Eq.
(8.17b) when the frequency isf, then for some other  value 1111 a beam will be radiated at the same angle when the frequency isf1 =(m1/m)f  Consider, for example an array with spacing d = 0.6J0 and 1/d = 15.
This corresponds to  m = f/).0 = 9.
From Fig.
8.15 it can be seen that the array will scan over the region ± 30° as the  frequency is varied from 0.968/0 to 1.035/0, where /0 is the frequency corresponding to the  hroadside position of the beam.
As the frequency is increased, the factor m = 10 applies and  the same angular region is scanned as the frequency varies from 1.075/0 to 1.149/0• Form= 11,  1he corresponding frequency range is from J.183/0 to 1.264/0• The ability to radiate from the  ...
~ame array over more than one frequency region is of advantage when mutual interference  between radars is of concern.
It can also be of importance for military applications in which  frequency diversity is desired.
 Equation (8.18) assumed a transmission line whose velocity of propagation was that or  the velocity of light.
It is more usual, however, for transmission lines in a frequency-scan array  to have a velocity of propagation which varies with frequency; i.e., they are dispersive.
A  waveguide is an example of a dispersive line.
The velocity vs.
frequency characteristic of such  transmission lines can be used to advantage to provide· more frequency sensitivity; that is, a  smaller wrap-up factor can be obtained for a g1ven scan angle and frequency excursion.
 A sketch of a folded waveguide for exciting an array of slotted waveguides is shown in  Fig.
8.16.
This type of feed is known as a snake feed, serpentine, or sinuous feed.
Other  slow-wave transmission lines can be used for the feed, including helical waveguide69• 70 and  corrugated waveguide.71 The configuration or Fig.
8.16 can be used to scan a pencil beam in  elevation.
with mechanical rotation providing the azimuth scan.
The AN/SPS-48, Fig.
8.17, is  such an example.
It is a frequency-scan radar used on many U.S.
Navy ships for the  measurement of the elevation and azimuth or aircraft targets.
It is sometimes called a 3D radar,  with range being the third coordinate, in addition to the two angles.
The AN/SPS-48 radiates  multiple frequencies so as to generate simultaneous multiple beams to permit a higher scan  rate than would be possible with a single beam.
Since the range to the target is less as the  Snake  feed  I f·  Figure 8.16 Planar-array frequency scan antenna  consisting of a folded-wavelength delay-line feeding  a set of linear waveguides that are so oriented  that radiating slots in the narrow wall of the guide  lie in the plane of the antenna.63  302 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  Figure 8.17 AN/SPS-48 frequency-scan radar antenna.
 elevation angle increases, the transmitted power is decreased as the elevation angle is in­ creased.
(This is sometimes called power programming.) In a shipboard application, the eleva­ tion scanning control can be used to electronically stabilize the beam position to compensate  for ship's motion.
 In a normal frequency-scan radar, the beam dwells at each angular resolution cell (beam­ width) for one or more pulse repetition intervals.
Another method for utilizing the frequency  domain to scan an angular region is to radiate a single frequency-modulated pulse with a  modulation-band wide enough to scan the beam over the entire angular region.
Thus, over the  duration of a single pulse, the antenna beam scans all angles.
This is sometimes cal.led witlri11- p11lse frequency scanning.
66• 1 22 (The term within-pulse scanning has been applied to other  methods of scanning, as described in Sec.
8.
7.) The transmitted waveform is similar to the  rrequency-modulated pulse compression waveform (chirp) discussed in Sec.
11.5.
The carrier  frequencies of any echo pulses returned to the radar will be determined by the elevation angle  of the targets.
The receiver employs a bank of filters, each tuned to a different carrier frequency  which in turn corresponds to a different angle.
This is analogous to the output of a beam­ forming matrix, as in Sec.
8.7.
The number of filters depends on the antenna beamwidth and  Tl If.
EU:CTRONICAI.I.Y STEERED PHASED ARRAY ANTENNA IN RADAR JOJ  the total angular coverage.
The handwidth t\/~, or these filters is determined by the frequency  change needed to scan the antenna beam one beamwi<lth, that is  .
df df l  Nn = d00 On = dOo D (8.22)  where (18 = heamwidth and IJ = aperture dimension.
Substituting E4.
(8.18) into the above  gives  f cos 00  ti.fR = .f~ {//d)(D/c) (8.23)  The time 111 ror the signal to transit the snake reed from one end to the other is equal to  (//d)(D/c).
Thus, in the vicinity of broadside (00 ::'.:!'.
0), the bandwidth available for pulse com­ pression is J/8 ::'.:!'.
1/t I>.
The frequency-modulated signal occupying a band equal to l/t O can be  compressed in a pulse compression filter to produce a narrow pulse at the output of the filter.
 This then is one method for combining frequency scan with pulse compression, where the  angular resolution depends on the antenna beam width and the range resolution depends on  the group time delay t O•  The rrequency-scan technique is well suited to scanning a beam or a number of beams in a  single angle coordinate.
It is possible to use the frequency domain to produce a TV (raster)  type of scan in two orthogonal angular coordinates by employing an array of slightly disper­ sive arrays fed from a single highly dispersive array.
(The single snake line in this case is much  longer electrically than the snake lines reeding a linear array.) The single snake line passes  through several modes in traversing the frequency band.
It has been said that a 90 by 20°  sector might be possible using a 30 percent frequency band.67 One of the disadvantages of this  form of two-dimensional frequency-scan array is that it require~ a wide band and is very  limited in signal bandwidth, much more so than the array which steers in one dimension only.
 Another method for employing frequency scan in a planar array is to use the frequency  change to steer in one coordinate and phase shifters to steer in the other.68 This is sometimes  called a phase-freq11e11cr array (Fig.
8.18) in contrast to a phase-phase array which uses phase  shifters to steer in both angular coordinates.
The antenna may be considered as a number of  frequency-scan arrays placed side by side.
In an N by M element planar array there might be a  separate snake feed for each of the N rows to obtain frequency steering in one coordinate.
and i•  one phase shifter for each of the M columns to achieve steering in the orthogonal plane.
 Changing the frequency of a signal propagating through a length of transmission line is  a convenient method for obtaining a phase shirt, but it is not always desirable to operate a  radar with a changing frequency.
A phase shifting technique that uses a frequency change, but  which then converts back to a constant frequency, is the Huggins phase shifter shown in  Fig.
8.19.
A signal of frequency /0, whose phase is to be shifted an amount <J,, is mixed with a  signal from a variable frequency oscillator fr in the first mixer.
The output of the variable­ frequency oscillator .fc is also passed through a delay line with a time delay r.
The output of the  delay line is a signal of frequency .fc with a phase shirt <J, = 2nfc r.
This phase-shifted signal and  the output of the first mixer are then heterodyned in the second mixer.
If the sum frequency is  selected from the first mixer, the difference frequency is selected from the second mixer.
The  result is a signal with the same frequency as the input/0, but with the phase shift <J,.
Because  mixers are employed, this type of phase shifter operates at low power.
It is convenient to  implement at IF, although it is also possible to employ the principle at RF.
A tapped delay  304 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  Variable  frequency  signal  Figure 8.18 Volumetric scanning of a planar array using frequency scan in one coordinate and phase-shift  scan in the other.
 1 st  mixer  Deloy  T 2d fo L¢  mixer  Fixed t0 frequency >---+---<  oscillator  Variable fc  frequency 1----+---'  oscillator Figure 8.19 Schematic representation of the Huggins  phase shifter.
 Delay line  Mixer  Figure 8.20 Huggins phase shift­ ing applied to a linear array feed.
 TIIE ELECTRONICALLY STEERED PHASED ARRAY ANTENNA IN RADAR 305  line, as illustrated in Fig.
8.20, can be utilized to obtain a series fed array.
Two of these in a  mixer-matrix array can provide steering in two angular coordinates.
One delay line at  frequency f1 might be used to obtain the elevation steering and a second line at frequencyf 2  might obtain the azimuth steering.
The output of the mixer at each element is taken at the sum  frequency.
f1 + f2, to give the required phase shifts for two-dimensional beam steering.
 R.5 ARRAY ELE!\1ENTS78·7()  Almost any type of radiating antenna element can be considered for use in an array antenna.
 Detailed descriptions of the various radiators used for arrays may be found in the standard  texts on antennas and will not be discussed here.
It should be cautioned, however, that the  properties of a radiating element in an array can differ significantly from its properties when in  free space.
For example, the radiation resistance of an infinitely thin, half-wave dipole in free  space is 73 ohms, but in an infinite array with half-wavelength element spacing and a back screen  of quarter-wave separation it is l 53 ohms when the beam is broadside.
The impedance will also  vary with scan angle.
For a finite array the properties vary with location of the element within  the array.
In some arrays, dummy elements are placed on the periphery so as to provide the  elements near the edge with an environment more like those located in the interior.
 Although there have been many di!Terent kinds of radiators used in phased arrays, the  dipole.
the open-ended waveguide, and the slotted waveguide probably have been employed  more than others.
In addition to the conventional dipole, the dipole with its arms bent back  (like an arrowhead) has been used for wide-angle coverage, the thick dipole has been used for  reducing mutual coupling and for broad bandwidth (a dipole with a director rod also reduces  mutual coupling), crossed dipoles are employed for operation with dual orthogonal polariza­ tion.
and printed-circuit dipoles for simplification of fabrication.
The dipole is always used  over a renecting ground plane, or its equivalent, in order to confine the main beam.radiation to  the forward direction.
 Slots cut into the walls of a waveguide are similar in many respects to the dipole since the  slot is the Babinet equivalent of the dipole.
A slot array is generally easier to construct at the  higher microwave frequencies than an array of dipoles.
Although the slots may be in either  the broad or the narrow wall of the wavegu'ide, the narrow wall is generally preferred (edge  slots) so that t,the waveguides may be stacked sufficiently close to obtain wide-angle scan  without grating lobes.
The waveguide slot array antenna is more suited for one-dimensional  scanning than scanning in two coordinates.
This type of construction is also suitable for  mechanically rotating antennas.
Figure 8.17 (AN/SPS-48) shows a stack of slotted waveguides  for forming a beam that is frequency-scanned in elevation.
The slotted guides forming the rows  of the antenna are sometimes called sticks.
The power coupled out of the guide by the slot is a  function of the angle at which the slot is cut.
When half-wavelength-spaced slots are fed in a  series fashion, the field inside the guide changes phase by 180° between elements.
The phases of  every other slot therefore must be reversed to cause the radiated energy to be in phase.
This is  accomplished in a slotted waveguide by altering the direction of tilts of adjacent elements.
In a  dipole array, the phase is reversed by reversing every other dipole.
 Open-ended waveguides are another popular form of array radiator.
They are a natural  extension of the waveguide sections in which the phase shifters are placed.
Their performance  can be calculated or measured in a simple phased-array simulator, 7 2• 73 and good performance  can be obtained with a well-designed radiator.
The waveguide might be loaded with dielectric  to reduce its physical size in order to fit the element within the required space.
Ridge-loaded  306 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  waveguide may be used for the same purpose.
If wide-angle scan is not required, the open­ ended waveguides may be flared to form a horn with greater directivity.
An array of open­ ended waveguides quite often will be covered with a thin, flat sheet of dielectric to serve as a  means for better matching the array to free space, as well as to act as a radome to protect the  array from the weather.
 Other radiators that have been used in phased arrays include microstrip antennas, 160  polyrods, helices, spirals, and log-periodic elements.
Radiating elements are generally of low  gain, as is consistent with the broad-beamwidth needed for wide-angle scan and the narrow  sracing to avoid grating lobes.
More directive elements can he used when the scanning of the  beam need not be over a wide angle.
The more directive the element, the fewer that are needed  to fill a given aperture.
 Another important consideration· in the selection of an antenna element and the design of  an array, is the mutual coupling between the radiating elements.
When thei field intensity  pattern of an array antenna was .considered previously [Eq.
(8.3 )] it was assumed that the  elemental radiators were independent of one another.
In practice this is only an approxima­ tion.
Electromagnetic radiation doesn't always respect such an assumption.
Current in one  clement will affect the phase and amplitude of the currents in neighboring elements.
In a  planar array, the current at a particular element might be influenced significantly by a rela­ tively large number of its neighbors (perhaps from 20 to 100).
Since the phases and amplitudes  of the currents at each of the elements change with the scan angle, the effects of mutual  coupling also change with scan angle and complicate the problem of computing and compen­ sating coupling effects.
Mutual coupling, therefore, causes the actual radiation pattern to differ  from that which would_ be predicted from an array of independent radiators.
Thus to achieve  the benefits from full control of the aperture illumination of a phased array, mutual coupling  among the elements must be properly taken into account.
 Most analyses of mutual coupling are concerned with the change in impedance at the  input to the element.74-77 It is important to know how the impedance changes in order to  properly match the impedance of the transmitter and the receiver to the radiator.
The effects  of diffraction of energy by neighboring elements should also be considered as a mutual  coupling problem.
This is especially noted with end-fire elements (such as polyrods or log­ periodic antennas) which are spaced close enough to couple or diffract energy.
The effect of  mutual coupling on the input impedance with such elements is usually small.
However, the  disturbance to the aperture illumination can be quite large and can result in significant  differences from the pattern computed by ignoring such effects.
 8.6 FEEDS FOR ARRA YS20·81-84  If a single transmitter and receiver are utilized in a phased array, there must be some form of  network to connect the single port of the transmitter and/or the single port of the receiver to  each of the antenna elements.
The power divider used to connect the array elements to the  single port is called an array feed.
Several examples of such networks for linear arrays where  shown in Figs.
8.2 and 8.4.
For a planar array the problem is more complicated.
The problem  in combining the outputs of N ports into one port, or vice versa, is to do so with minimum loss.
 It is not always appreciated that loss in the array feed is equivalent to a loss in antenna power  gam.
 There are at least three basic'concepts for feeding an array.
The constrained.feed utilizes  waveguide or other microwave transmission lines along with couplers, junctions, or other  power distribution devices.
, The I space feed distributes the energy to a lens array or a  JIii' Fl ITIRONICAII Y STHRFD PIIASFD ARRAY ANTl'NNA IN RADAR J07  --~------------'  Figure fUI Planar array with phase-shift volumetric scan in two angular coordinates.
 rcflcctarray in a manner analogous to a point-feed illuminating a lens or reflector antenna.
The  rarallcl pla1e feed uses the principles of microwave structures to provide efficient power  division.
It is.
in some respects, a cross between the constrained feed and the space feed.
 Constrained feed.
Figure 8.21 shows a two-dimensional-scanning array which is sometimes  known as a parallel-series feed.
Each element has its own phase shifter.
A separate command  must be computed by the beam-steering computer and distributed to each phase shifter.
The  power distribution to the columns is by parallel feed.
The power in each column is shown  being distributed by a series feed to the vertical elements.
If this were a parallel feed it would be  called a para/lei-parallel.feed.
(Series feeds are shown here so as not to overly complicate the  figure.
Series-parallel or series-series arrangements are also possible.) All the elements which  lie in the same column utilize the same phase shift to steer the beam in azimuth.
Likewise all  the elements which lie in the same row utilize the same phase shift to steer the beam in  elevation.
The phase shift at the 11111th element therefore is the sum of the phases required at the  111th column for steering in azimuth and at the 11th row for steering in elevation.
This summa­ tion can be m~de at the computer and distributed to the MN elements of the array.
Alterna­ tively, M + N control signals can be transmitted to the array if an adder is provided at each  phase shifter to combine the azimuth and elevation phases.
 In the series-series feed each of the M columns of an M by N array utilizes a series  arrangement to produce steering in one coordinate (say elevation).
A separate series-feed is  used to provide the proper phase to each column to steer in the orthogonal coordinate  (azimuth).
A total of M + 1 series feeds are used.
The computation of the phase-shifter com­ mands is simplified since the azimuth and elevation phases are not added in the computer.
 Instead, the phase shifters or a single feed provide the azimuth steering while the M feeds at  each column provide the elevation steering.
In the series-series planar array all series phase  shifters in the elevation plane take the same value and all series phase shifters in the azimuth  plane take the same value.
Thus only two control signals are required.
The steering commands  are simplified at the expense of M -I ad<liti.onal phase shifters and the added loss of a series  arrangement.
 When separate power amplifiers are used at each element in a transmitting array or  308 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  separate receivers are at each element in a receiving array, series-feed arrays are attractive  since their inherent loss is at low-power levels and is made up by the amplifiers.
One method  for producing low-power-level beam steering is to use a single series-fed array at frequency f,  to provide the azimuth phases <l>n.
At each element the signal is heterodyned in a mixer with  the signal from a single series-fed array at frequency /2 to provide the elevation phase <l>m.
The  sum signal at frequency /1 + /2 is used as the carrier frequency.
It has the proper phase <Pm + <Pn  at each element to steer in the two directions.
The mixer would be followed by a power  amplifier if a transmitter, or it might be used _to obtain the local Oicillator frequency if a  receiver.
Only M + N -2 phase shifters are required, but the mixer and power amplifier  required at each element adds to the complication.
This is sometimes called a mixer-macrix  feed.
 A convenient method for achieving two-dimensional scanning is to use frequency scan in  one angular coordinate and phase shifters to scan in the orthogonal angular coordinate, as was  diagrammed in Fig.
8.18.
This is an example of a parallel-series feed.
It may be considered as a  number of frequency-scanned linear arrays placed side by side.
 When the power splitters are four-port hybrid junctions, or the equivalent, the feed is said  to be matched.
Theoretically there are no spurious signals generated by internal reflections in a  matched feed.
It is not always convenient, however, to use four-port junctions.
Three-port tee  junctions are sometimes used for economic reasons to provide the power splitting, hut the  network is not theoretically matched.
Internal reflections due to mismatch in the feed can  appear as spurious sidelobes in the radiation pattern.80  Space feeds.
There are two basic types of space feeds depending on whether they are analogous  to a lens or to a reflector.
The lens array, fig.
8.22, is fed from a primary feed just as a lens  antenna.
An array of antenna elements collects the radiated energy and passes it through the  phase shifters which provide a correction for the spherical wavefront, as well as a linear phase  shift across the aperture to steer the beam in angle.
Another set of elements on the opposite  side of the structure radiate the beam into space.
The primary pattern of the feed illt1minating  the space-fed array provides a natural amplitude taper.
Spillover radiation from the feed,  however, can result in higher sidelobes than from an array with a conventional constrained  feed.
The space-fed array can readily generate a cluster of multiple beams, as for monopulst.:  angle measurement, by use of multiple horns or a multimode feed, rather than with a com­ plicated feed network as in the conventional array.
 There are two sets of radiators in the lens array requiring matching (the front and the  back), thus increasing the matching problem and the potential for lower efficiency.
The feed  ~ ~ ~ >-------%-<  ; ~ ~ Array  ; ~ ~~ment --EA-----_--~-- ·---·--··-- I I  Primary 1  feed /  I I  :, r_:---"t -Phase ~ shifter  >----f?J-<  Figure 8.22 Principle of lens array.
 ()ff,,..,,  µr 1111or y  fped JI IF FllTTRONICi\U Y STITRFD Plli\SFD i\RRi\ Y i\NTENNi\ IN Ri\Di\R 309  I  f'lrtoy , I  I I I "/I'm Pr ii  \, ...
l>--··0-----~~ >--~-Phase  ,hif fer  Figure 8.23 Reflectarray.
 may be placed ofT-axis lo avoid reflections from the back face of the lens, if desired.
It is  possible in a lens array lo reduce the number of phase shifters by "thinning" the number or  output radiators.
This is accomplished by combining pairs or input elements and feeding the  output of each pair lo a single-phase shifter and radiating element.
The thinned elements are  near the outer portion of the antenna rather than at the center so as to produce a density taper  (Sec.
8.10).
This procedure, while reducing the number of phase shifters, generally results in  lower gain and higher far-out sidelobes than would be produced by an amplitude taper.
 A space-fed renectarray with an offset feed is shown in Fig.
8.23.
The energy enters the  antenna elements, passes through the phase shifters, is renected, and again passes back  through the phase shifters to be radiated.
Like the lens array, the phase shifters apply a linear  phase distribution for beam steering and a correction for the curvature of the primary wave­ front from the horn.
Because the energy passes through the phase shifters twice, they need only  hair the phase-shift capability of a lens array or a conventional array; i.e., 180° of one-way  phase shift is adequate, rather than 360°.
The phase shifters, however, must be reciprocal.
As  with tLe lens array, multiple beams can be generated with additional feed horns.
 The lens array allows more freedom than the renectarray in designing the feed assembly  since there is no aperture blocking, but the back surface of the reflectarray makes it easier to  provide the phase shifter control and drive assemblies, structural members, and heat removal.
 Space-fed arrays are generally cheaper than conventional arrays because of the omission of  the transmission-line feed networks and the use of a single transmitter and receiver rather than  a distributed transmitter and receiver at each element.
A space-fed array may be simpler than  an array with a constrained feed, but a sacrifice is made in the control of the aperture  illuminationi'and in the maximum power capability of the array.
Thus the ability to radiate  large power by using a transmitter at each element is lost in this configuration.
 Parallel-plate feeds.
A folded pillbox antenna (Fig.
8.24 ), a parallel-plate horn, or other simi­ lar microwave device can be used to provide the power distribution to the antenna elements.
 These are reactil'e feed systems.
They are basically used with a linear array and would have to  be stacked to feed a planar array.
 Subarra)·s.
It is sometimes convenient to divide an array into subarrays.
For example, the  AN/SPY-I AEGIS array utilizes 32 transmitting and 68 receiving subarrays of different  sizes.81 One reason for dividing the transmitting array into subarrays is to provide a dis­ tributed transmitter.
In the AEGIS array a separate high-power amplifier feeds each of the 32  transmitting subarrays.
It is also possible to give identical phase-steering commands to similar  elements in each subarray, thus allowing simplification of the beam-steering unit and of the  interface cabling between the array and the beam-steering unit.
The term subarray has also  been applied to the array feed networks for producing sum and difference radiation patterns.82  310 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  Pickup horns ·· ·  Pillbox  used  OS  array , ,  feed  L_ ......
 (b) Phase shifters  Rodia ting  elements  Figure 8.24 Example of a pillbox antenna (shown in (a)) used as a kcd for an array (b).
(-~lier Rirnrdi.1t.i)  \, 8.7 SIMULTANEOUS MULTIPLE BEAMS FROM ARRAY ANTENNAS  \...
 One of the properties of the phased array is the ability to generate multiple independent beam:.
 simultaneously from a single aperture.
In principle, an N-element array can generate N  independent beams.
Multiple beams allow parallel operation and a higher data rate than can  be achieved from a single beam.
The multiple beams may be fixed in space, steered indepen­ dently, or steered as a group (as in monopulse angle measurement).
The multiple beams might  be generated on transmit as well as receive.
It is convenient in some applications to generate  the multiple beams on receive only and transmit with a wide radiation pattern encompassing  the total coverage of the multiple receiving beams.
The ability to form many beams is usually  easier on reception than transmission.
This is not necessarily a disadvantage since it is a useful  method of operating an array in many applications.
 The simple linear array which generates a single beam can be converted to a mulliple­ beam antenna by attaching additional phase shifters to the output of each element.
Each beam  to be formed requires one additional phase shifter, as shown in Fig.
8.25.
The simple array in  this figure is shown with but three elements, each with three sets of phase shifters.
One set of  phase shifters produces a beam directed broadside to the array (0 = 0).
Another set of three  phase shifters generates a beam in the 8 = + 00 direction.
The angle 00 is determined by the  relationship 80 = sin -1(ti(j>)./2m/), where Liq, is the phase difference inserted between adjacent  elements.
Amplifiers may be placed between the individual antenna elements and the beam­ forming (phase-shifting) networks to amplify the incoming signal and compensate for any  losses in the beam-forming networks.
The output of each amplifier is subdivided into a number  of independent signals which are individually processed as if they ·were from separate receivers.
 Postamplification beam forming.
When receiving beams are formed in networks placed after  the RF amplifiers, as in Fig.
8.25, the antenna is sometimes called a poscamplification beam­ forming array, abbreviated PABF A.
A separate transmitting antenna may be used to illumin­ ate the volume covered by the multiple receiving beams or, alternatively, it is possible to  transmit multiple beams identical to the multiple receiving beams, using the radiating elements  of the same array antenna.
Note that if the multiple transmitting beams are contiguous and at  the same frequency, the composite transmitted pattern is similar to the pattern from a single  beam encompassing the same angular region.
 The receiving beam-forming network may be at IF or RF.
Tapped delay lines have been a  TIii' l'I.ITIRONICALI.Y STl'l'RED PHASELJ ARRAY ANTENNA IN RADAR 311  , -Bo  ------··---------~  Beam Beam Beam  Na.3 No.2 No.1  Figure 8.25 Simultaneous postarnplifier beam formation.
rp0 = constant phase; I rjJ 1 -<Po I = I ~rp I  I 2rr(d/1.) sin 00 I- coll\'enient method for obtaining multiple beams at IF.
Beam-forming at IF is possible since  phase is preserved during frequency translation from RF to IF (except for the constant phase  shirt introduced by the common local oscillator).
 Blass beam-forming arra~·.
8 5 The RF beam-forming principle shown in Ftg.
8.26 has been  used in the At~illR-1.
a one-of-a-kind developmental height-finder radar built for the Federal  A \'iation Agency.
Waveguide transmission lines were arranged to serve as the delay lines.
 Energy was tapped from each waveguide at the appropriate points by directional couplers to  form beams at various elevation angles.
Considerable waveguide was used in this design.
To  produce the 333 independent beams, the Blass height finder employed 30 miles of S-band  waveguide.
 Burler beam-forming array.8fi 100 Another RF beam-forming device is the parallel network  attributed to Butler, and independently discovered by Shelton.
This is a lossless network which  utilizes J-dB directional couplers, or hybrid junctions.
along with fixed phased shifters, to form  N contiguous beams from an N-element array, where N is an integer that is expressed as some  power of 2, that is.
N = 2r.
The 3-d B directional coupler is a four-port junction which has the  property that a signal fed into one port will divide equally (in power) between the other two  ports and no power will appear in the fourth port.
A 90° phase difference is introduced  hetween the two equally divided signals.
Similarly, a signal introduced into the fourth port will  312 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  Crossed-line  directional coupler  ~  .
c \  \ \,  !...
!...
 <l.l <l.l > >  <t>- ';jj (\J  u u  (IJ <!)  0:: 0:: !...
!...
 <l.l <l.l  > >  'ijj r0 -~ <:j u QJ  0:: L  Q)  >  Q) .,,  u  Q)  0::  f igurc 8.26 RF beam-forming using  tapped transmission lincli.
 divide its power equally between the same 1wo ports with a 90° relative phase dilTerern.:t.:, and  no power will appear in the first port.
The relative p~ase difference in this case is of opposite  sign compared to the phase difference resulting from a signal introduced into the first port.
 Consider a simple two-element array with half-wavelength spacing.
connected to the two  ports of a 3-dB directional coupler as shown in Fig.
8.27.
If a signal is inserted in port No.
L  the 90° phase shift that results between the signals in ports 2 and 3 will produce a beam  oriented in a direction 30° to the right of the array normal.
A signal in port No.
4 results in  0.701 V !St  0.707 V /90°  0  CD  l V /S),0  Righi beom 0  1v&  Left beam Figure 8.27 3-dB directional coupler generating two beams  from a two-element array.
 TIii' Fl.l'CIIH>NICAI.I.Y STl'l'RFD l'IIASFD ARRAY ANTENNA IN RADAR J1J  a phase distribution that produces a heam 30° lo the left of the array normal.
Thus this  simple two-element array with a single 3-uB coupler produces two inclependent beams.
 The two-element array is a trivial example of the Butler beam-forming antenna.
Figure  8.28 illustrates the circuit or an eighl-elcme11t array that generates eight i11depe11dent beams.
It  utilizes 12 directional couplers and eight fixed phase shifters.
The Butler matrix has 2,, inputs  and 2,, outputs.
Modifications of the Butler array to any number of elements have been  suggested, but the resulting beam-forming network is not necessarily lossless.
88·97 The number  of directional couplers or hybrids required for an N element array is equal to (N/2) log2 N,  and the number of fixed phase shifters is (N/2)(log 2 N -I).
 The Butler beam-forming network is theoretically lossless; i.e., no power is intentionally  dissipated in terminations.
There will always be a finite insertion loss, however, due to the  inherent losses in the directional couplers, phase shifters, and transmission lines that make up  the network./\ 16-element network at 900 MHz, for example, had an insertion loss of0.74 dB,  practically all of which was due to the strip transmission line used in the construction.87 In a  lossless, passive antenna radiating multiple beams from a common aperture it has been shown88  that the radiation pattern and the crossover level of adjacent beams cannot be specified  independently.
With uniform illumination, as in the Butler array, the crossover level is 3.9 dB  helow the peak.
This is independent of the beam position, element spacing, and wavelength.
 1  <\  1R 4L Antenna  4  3R 2L Elements  5  2R 3L 6 7  4R ll  Figure 8.28 Eight-element Butler beam-forming matrix.
8  Directional  ......
--couplers  Fixed  3)4 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  The low crossover level of the Butler array is one of its disadvantages.
If a lossless network  could be achieved with a cosine illumination so as to reduce the sidelobe levels compared to  those obtained with a uniform illumination, the crossover level would be even worse (a level of  -9.5 dB).
 By combining the output beams of the networks with additional circuitry, the Butler  beam-forming network can be modified to obtain aperture illuminations that result in lower  sidelobes than available with uniform illumination.
The beamwidth is widened, the gain  lowered, and the network is no longer theoretically lossless.
The addition of two adjacent  heams of a Butler array, with the proper phase correction, results in an array with a cosine  illumination.
The crossover is lower than the lossless network, but the first sidelobe is -23 JB  instead of -13.2 dB.
 There is no theoretical limit to the bandwidth of a Butler array except for the bandwidth  associated with the hardware making up the network, which can be greater than 30 percent.
 They have even been constructed with bandwidths of several octaves.94 Operating over too  wide a band, however, changes the beamwidth, shifts the location of the beams, and can  introduce grating lobes just as with any other array antenna.
 The complexity of the Butler beamforming network increases with the number of ele­ ments.
A 64-element network, for example, requires 192 directional couplers and 160 fixed­ phase shifters.
The construction of a large Butler network requires a large number of  cross-over connections in the transmission lines.
These can present practical difficulties in the  fabrication of the microwave printed circuits used to make up the device.
20 Many beams also  require many parallel receivers, an added complexity.
For these reasons, Butler beam-forming  networks with large numbers of elements are not the general rule.
 It is possible to construct planar arrays with Butler networks.
A 2P by 2q element array (p,  q are integers) requires 2P + 2q networks to achieve 2P+ q beams.
Other methods of using Butler  networks in planar arrays are possible.
Shelton,91 for example, describes a technique for  generating multiple beams in hexagonal planar arrays with triangular spacing.
 fhe Butler networks in this section were assumed to use 3-dB directional couplers with a  90° phase difference between the two equal outputs.
Hybrid junctions can also be used.
These  produce a 180° phase difference between the two output signals and require a slightly different  design procedure.
•00  It is of interest to note the relation of the Butler network to the Fast Fourier Transform  (FFT).
As stated previously, the radiated field of an antenna is related to the illumination  across the aperture by the Fourier transform.
Shelton93 has pointed out that the flow diagram  of the FFT is basically similar to the diagram of the Butler network.
Thus the Butler network  is a manifestation of the FFT.
The antenna equivalent of the conventional Fourier transform is  the Blass beam-forming network illustrated by Fig.
8.26.
The Blass network required N2  couplers for N inputs and N outputs, while the conventional Fourier transform also requires  N2 computations for an N-point transform.
The Butler network utilizes (N/2) log2 N junc­ tions, just as the FFT uses (N/2) log2 N computations for an N-point transform.
 Within-pulse scanning.101-104 If an antenna beam is scanned sequentially through its angular  coverage, one position at a time, it illuminates all directions just as does a multiple-beam  array.
If the beam is scanned rapidly enough, however, it will have the effect of seeing ..
almost  simultaneously" in all directions.
The scan rate of the beam must be greater than the radar  signal-bandwidth to preserve the information contained in the received signal.
The entire scan  is covered within a single pulse.
Hence, the name within-pulse scanning.
This is a method for  achieving the equivalent of a multiple-beam array.
 There have been at least two different variations of within-pulse scanning which have  TIIF.
l'f.f:CTRONICALI.Y STEERED PHASED ARRAY ANTENNA IN RADAR 315  heen demonstrated experimentally.
Both are more suited for electronic scanning in one angu­ lar coordinate than for two-angle-coordinate electronic scanning.
Thus they are of interest for  determining elevation angle in JD radar.
In one method,66 a frequency-scan beam is rapidly  swept through the angular region of interest.
and the received signal is passed through a bank  of matched filters.
each filter corresponding lo a ditTerent angular direction.
This was men­ I ioned in Sec.
8.4.
 The other is a receive-only method that uses a receiving array with mixers and local  oscillators ( LOs), arranged so as lo provide N separate receiving beams fixed in space  (Fig.
8.29).
Each mixer is supplied with a different LO frequency.
The transmitting antenna  provides a single beam illuminating the coverage of the N receiving beams.
As described in  Sec.
8.2.
in order to generate a beam at some angle 00, there must be a relative phase difference  hctween adjacent elements equal to ¢ 21t(d/,.l) sin 00• If the leCt-hand element of an N­ clcment linear array is taken as the reference, then the phase shifters at the other elements must  have values of¢.
2¢ ....
, ( N I)¢.
If the beam is scanned as a function of time.
these phase  shifts also change as a function of time.
A constant rate of change of phase with time is  e4uivalent lo a constant frequency.
Thus a frequency difference at adjacent elements results in  a scanning heam.
If the LOs in the mixers of Fig.
8.29 differ in frequency by JP the beam  repetitively scans its coverage at a rate off,.
That is, the antenna beam occupies all possible  scan positions during the scan time I/{,.
Another way or looking at this is to note that if the  relative phase between adjacent elements of an array is changed by 21t radians, the radiation  pattern will assume alt possible scan positions.
If the 2n radians is changed in a time 1/fs, then the  rate of change of phase is 2nf,.
Thus the linear phase change can be accomplished if  the rrequency <lilTerence between the LOs at the mixers of adjacent elements is fs.
 By multiplying the summed output of all the element mixers with a periodic sampling  train of narrow gating pulses, a particular portion of space is observed.
Changing the relative  time phase between the sampling pulse train and the array output results in observing a  different angular direction.
Thus the beam can be steered by varying the time phase of the  ,.---.)# J'.,!<;(' 0  '1 l -...
generolor ..
.· ...
N-1 y r,-T Is  ~ ,, -/5  ~ r,  ~ ·-,-,-+-(--+----+- ~ : N-1 c, r, + z's  t ~--~ ._ _____ ___, ' .-----'-----,  ! Bandpass fill er  Reom Aeomwidfh BW=B  steprrng control  Figure 8.29 Within-pulse scanning using frequency-multiplexed linear array.
This implementation has  been called MOSAR.
(f,·om Jolmson103 Courtesy Proc.
IEEE.)  316 INTIH)l)UCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  sampling signal.
By providing more than one sampling signal, multiple simultaneous beams  can be generated which can either be fixed or independently steered.
 The local oscillator signals of Fig.
8.29 are derived coherently by mixing the two frequen­ ciesf1 and.f~ and filtering the desired mixer products/, + nfs, 11 = 1, 2, ...
, N.
The frequency J.,  which is the rate at which the far field is sampled, must be greater than the total signal  bandwidth if the modu_lation envelope of the radar pulses is to be preserved.
The outputs from  the elements must be limited to a bandwidth B before adding them all together, if noise overlap  is to be avoided.
The required bandwidth of the summed signal channel is Nf,, which must be  made greater than NB.
This can be quite large (perhaps several gigahertz in some radars) and  can represent a limitation on the implementation of the technique.
 The various beam positions can be obtained by sampling the output at the proper time.
In  Fig.
8.29 one beam sampling channel is illustrated.
The sampling signal Sa is a train of short  pulses at a repetition ratefs which can be time-phased to gate the scanning signal 6r according  to the desired beam direction.
The beam-steering phase is indicated by a in the figure.
If '1.
is  variahle.
the beam is steerable.
The generation of multiple fixed beams or a number of  independent steerable beams requires a duplication of the sampling pulse generators and  sampling mixers.
 Other beam-forming methods.
Several nonarray techniques using reflectors or lenses have  been considered for the generation of multiple beams.
The Luneburg lens and the torus  reflector with multiple feeds as described in Chap.
7 are examples.
A radar with a reflector  antenna designed to generate a cluster of many beams has been sometimes called a pincushion  radar.
 In one example of a developmental radar that generated multiple beams, a spherical  transmitting antenna was surrounded by three spherical Luneburg-lens receiving antennas,  each covering a one-third sector of space.105 The transmitting antenna was a spherical phased  array of several thousand elements.
with only a fraction of these energized at any one time to  form a directive beam.
Each energized array ekment was driven from a separate power  amplifier.
which obtained i'ts properly phased input signal from a Luneburg lens.
This lens  functioned as a low-power RF analog beam~formingdevice for the spherical array.
Such a kns is  sometimes called a cm11p11ti11g lens.
The beam position of the spherical array was selected by  switching the proper elements of the Lune burg beam-forming lens to the elements or the trans­ mit array.
Each of the three Luneburg-lens receive antennas in the radar system could generate a  cluster of three beams pointing in the direction of the transmit beam.
The angle of arrival was  extracted by comparison of the amplitudes of the signals in the three-beam cluster.
Beam  switching was performed separately from beam forming on both transmit and receive.
This  example of a radar based on multiple-beam-forming is a system that is probably more complex  than would he needed now to accomplish the same radar mission.
 Another approach to multiple-beam antennas utilized a planar lens array fed by a con­ strained lens consisting of two connected hemispherical surfaces and a hemispherical feed  surface.82 The details of this antenna will not be described here.
Its advantage is that it has true  time delay, allowing a wide instantaneous bandwidth.
 The Mubis106 antenna, which uses a parallel-plate lens, and the Bootlace107 antenna,  which is a form of lens array, are also capable of RF beam forming.
As mentioned, the  Luneburg lens can be used as a beam-forming network to form multiple beams in conjunction  with a circular or spherical array, 108 or the lens can be used directly to generate multiple  beams.
Since the Luneburg Jens is not generally capable of high power, it is primarily a  receiving antenna.
For transmission, it can acl at low power as an analog computer for the  high-power spherical lens.
..
JI  Till' 1'.I.ITIHONH"AI.I.Y STl'FRED l'IIASED ARRAY ANTENNA IN RADAR 317  In principle, multiple receiving beams can be generated utilizing the Fast Fourier Trans­ form (FFT) processor.159 If the output of each receiving element is sampled at the Nyquist  rate and if the sampled voltages are converted to a digital number, the FFT processor may be  used to generate multiple beams digitally, just as the Butler beam-forming array generates  them in analog fashion.
Thus the antenna beams are generated by computation.
Its practical  implementation rc4uires converting RF or IF signals at each element to digital numbers.
 S)stem considerations.
One of the attractive features claimed for a multiple-beam-forming  array is that it docs away with phase shifters.
These are replaced, however, by multiple  receivers.
one for each beam.
This can represent an expensive trade.
Jf instead of one receiver  per heam.
only one or a few receivers are time-shared over the total coverage, some form or  switching is re4uired.
If the requirements for switching speed and flexibility are similar to those  of a conventional electronically steered phased-array radar, the problem of switching a  receiver hetween ports of the heam-forming array may be as difficult as that of providing the  phase shifting in a conventional array radar.105  In principle, a surveillance radar with a fixed transmitting beam of width 01 and a number  N of fixed, narrow receiving beams of width 0, covering the same volume (NO,= 0,), has  performance equivalent to a radar with a single scanning transmit-receive beam of width 0,.
 provided the comparison is made on a similar basis and the received signals are processed in  the optimum manner in each case.
The transmit antenna gain in the multiple-beam system is  I! Nth that of the scanning single-beam system.
The reduction of transmit antenna gain in a  multiple-beam radar is compensated, however, in the ideal case by the increased number of  hits available for integration.
The gain of the transmitting antenna in the multiple-beam  system is 0,/0, = I/ N that of the transmitting gain of the scanning-beam antenna.
Thus the  signal-to-noise ratio per pulse of the multiple-beam radar is less than the signal-to-noise ratio  of the scanning-beam radar.
If these N pulses are integrated without loss as in a perfect  predetection integrator, the total signal-to-noise ratio in the multiple-beam radar just compen­ sates for the lesser transmit gain.
Thus the multiple-beam rttdar and the scanning-beam radar  have equivalent detection capability, provided the data rates are the same and integration is  without loss.
Data rate is defined here as the revisit time in a scanning-beam radar, and in a  multiple-beam radar it is the time over which the total number of pulses are integrated.
In  practice, postdetection integration is usually employed and there will be a finite integration  loss.
In such a case the scanning-beam system will have an advantage over the multiple-beam  system.
,_  1 n a multiple-beam system which uses a broad transmitting beam to illuminate the region  covered by the contiguous receiving beams, the benefit of the two-way sidelobe levels that is  characteristic of a conventional scanning radar antenna is not obtained.
Thus it is usually  desirable to suppress the side lobes of the multiple receiving beams more than usual in order to  reduce the likelihood of echoes from large targets being received via the one-way sidelobes.
 Multiple-beam array antennas with a large number of simultaneous beams have not seen  wide application, probably because of the complexity of such systems.
They have, however,  had application in 3D mechanically rotating air-surveillance radars which employ a small  number of contiguous beams stacked in elevation to provide the elevation coordinate.
 In some applications, the effect of multiple, independent beams can be obtained with a  single-beam phased-array radar which is capable of flexible and rapid beam steering.
For  example, a sequential burst of pulses can be transmitted at the beginning of the transmission,  with each pulse radiated in a different direction.
This requires rapidly switching phase shifters  to steer the beam between pulses.
It also requires an application where a short minimum range  is not important since reception cannot take place during the transmission of the burst of  318 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  pulses.
Thus this approach would be suitable for radars whose targets are at long range, such  as satellite surveillance or BMD (Ballistic Missile Defense).
On reception, a separate receive  beam must be generated for each direction of transmission.
In a surveillance application this  could require the complication of some sort of beam-forming.
In a tracking phased-array  radar, however, a single time-shared receive beam can be used simultaneously to track many  targets at different angular directions.
Since the targets are under track, their approximate  ranges are known so that a beam need be formed in the proper direction only during the time  that a target echo is expected.
In this manner, several targets can be held in track during the  interpulse period, provided the phase shifters can switch sufficiently rapidly and a control  computer is available to take advantage of the inherent flexibility of the array.
 8.8 RANDOM ERRORS IN ARRAYS  In the analysis of the effects of reflector-antenna errors in Sec.
7.8 only the phase error was  considered.
In an array, however, other factors may enter to cause distortion of the radiation  pattern.
These include errors in the amplitude as well as the phase of the current al the  individual elements of the array, missing or inoperative elements, rotation or translation of an  element from its correct position, and variations in the individual element patterns.
These  errors can result in a decrease in gain, increase in the sidelobes, and a shift in the location of the  main beam.
 Since it is not always possible to know the exact nature of the errors that might be  encountered in a specific antenna, the properties of the antenna must be described in statistical  terms.
That is, the average, or expected, value of the radiation pattern of an ensemble of  antennas of similar type can be computed based on the statistics of the random errors.
The  statistical description of the antenna properties cannot be applied to any particular antenna,  but applies to the collection of similar antennas whose errors are specified by the same  statistical parameters.
 The ensemble average power pattern' of a uniform array of M by N isotropic elements  arranged on a rectangular grid with equal spacing between elements can be expressed as 109  M N  IJ(B, </>)12 = P;e-,plfo(B, </>)12 + [(1 + !l2)Pe -P;e-62J L Li;," (8.24)  m=I n=I  where Pe= probability of an element being operative (or the fraction of the elements that  remain working)  f> = phase error (described by a gaussian probability density function)  I .to( o, <t>) 12 = no-error power pattern  !l = amplitude error ·  imn = no-error current at the mnth element  Thus the effect of random errors is to produce an average power pattern that is the superposi­ tion of two terms, similar to Eq.
(7.31) for the continuous aperture.
The first term represents  the no-error power pattern multiplied by the square of the fraction of elements remaining and  by a factor proportional to the phase error.' The other term depends on both the amplitude  error and the phase error as well as the fraction of elements remaining operative.
It also  depends on the aperture illumination, as given by the currents imn.
Note that this second term  is independent of the angular coordinates 8, cf,.
It can be thought of as a" statistical omnidirec­ tional" pattern.
It causes the far-out sidelobes'to differ in the presen~ of error as compared to  the no-error pattern.
(The no-error pattern sidelobes generally drop off rapidly with increasing  TIIE 1'1.1:CJRONICAI.I.Y SITFRl'D PIIASED ARRAY ANTENNA IN RADAR 319  angle from hroadside; therefore, heyond some angle the radiation pattern will be dominated  by the error-produced sidelobes.) The shape of the main beam and the near-in sidelobes are  relatively unaffected by errors.
although their magnitudes are modified.
Note that the factor P,,  can also be used to evaluate the effect of random thinning of array antennas.
 For Pe= I and small errors.
the normalized pattern, obtained from Eq.
(8.24) by dividing  by the value of 1.t~(O, 0) 12, is  (8.25)  The second term of this expression indicates that the larger the number of elements, the  smaller will be the statistical sidelobe level.
The main-beam intensity, being coherent, increases  as the square of the number of elements, whereas the sidelobes due to errors, being incoherent.
 increases only directly with the number of elements.
The gain of a broadside array of isotropic  elements is approximately  Go= (8.26)  m n  (Note that when imn = constant, G0 = MN.) Then the normalized pattern of Eq.
(8.25) can he  ex pressed as  (8.27)  The greater the gain of the antenna, the less the relative effect of the errors on the sidelobes.
 Bv substituting the radiation intensity of Eq.
(8.24) into the definition of gain (or directi­ vity) of Eq.
(7.3) it can be shown that  P..
Pe  G/Go = (1 + ~i1) ~xp r=Jz) ::::: 1 + p + ~p (8.28)  Note that the relative reduction in gain is independent of the number of elements and depends  only on the fraction of elements that are operative and the mean square value of the errors.
 When P" = 1 and 11 = 0, the expression is, for small-phase errors, similar to that of Eq.
(7.30)  for the continuous aperture.
 In addition to raising the sidelobe level, random phase and amplitude errors in the  aperture distribution cause an error in the position of the main beam.
Rondinelli 110 has shown  that for a uniform amplitude distribution across an M by M square array, the statistical rms  beam pointing error is  where rr = rms value of normalized error current assuming Rayleigh distributed errors  k = 2rr/)  cl., = element spacing  M = number of elements along one dimension of square array (8.29)  The phase angle is assumed uniformly distributed.
Equation (8.29) indicates an error of  0.22 x 10-4 radian ( -0.001°) for a 100-by-100-element uniformly illuminated array with a  beam width of approximately 1 ° when a = 0.4.
 320 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  Leichter's analysis 111 of beam-pointing errors was performed for a continuous line  source, but may be applied to a linear array.
Both uniform distributions and modified Taylor  distributions were considered.
The amplitude and phase distributions were described by the  gaussian distribution and were assumed independent of one another.
An example of Leichter's  results for a uniform amplitude distribution is shown in Fig.
8.30.
 Several conclusions may be derived from the various studies of errors described above  and from Sec.
7.8.
For array antennas the following seem to apply:  I.
The larger the number of elements (MN) in ti1e array, the smaller will he lhc spurious  radiation for a given error tolerance and a given design sidelobe level.
In other words, lower  sidelobes are more likely to be achieved with larger antennas.
This comes about because the  intensity of the main beam increases as the square of the number of elements (M N)2, while  the spurious radiation increases only linearly since it represents the inc~herentJaddition of  many contributions.
11 2  2.
The rise in the sidelobe level due to random errors is independent of the beam scan  angle.110  3.
The lower the design sidelobe level, the greater will be the rise in the sidelobes, assuming a  given antenna size and a given error tolerance.
1 1 3  4.
In a two-dimensional array, the most serious random error is in the translational position  of the dipole elements.
Of secondary importance are the errors in the currents applied to the  elements.
The angular position of the dipole elements is relatively unimportant.
113  The following conclusions apply to the continuous antenna:  L According to Ruze, 112 the spurious sidelobe radiation is proportional to the mean square  error, just as in the discrete array, and in addition is proportional to the square of the  correlation interval measured in wavelengths.
Bates 114 defines his correlation interval dif­ ferently from Ruze and obtains a first-power dependence for this reason.
 2.
If errors are unavoidable in a reflecting antenna surface.
they should be kept small in extent';  that is, for the same mechanical tolerance, the antenna with the smaller correlation interval  L 2 .----.---,---.,------.-----,  1.0  0.8 - 0.4  02 =l,000  t =100  0.02 0.04 0.06 0.08 0.10  B/o, Figure 8.30 Plot of a.,, versus 0/0i, where aJ is the rms  phase error such that the pointing error will be in thi.:  interval ( -0, 0) with a probability p(O) for arrays with  A/2 spacing; solid curves apply for p(O) :a 0.95; dashed  curves apply for p(O) = 0.99; 01 = angle lo the first null;  D = antenna length.
(Courtesy H11glies Aircraft Co.)  TIIE FLHTRUNICALI.Y STEERED PIIASl:D ARRAY ANTENNA IN RADAR 321  (rougher surface) will give lower sidelobes than an antenna with a larger correlation inter­ val.
An error stretching most of the length of the antenna is likely to have a worse effect than  a localized bump or dent of much greater amplitude.
Therefore small disturbances such as  screws and rivets on the surface of the re!lector will have little elTect on the antenna  rndiation rattern.
 3.
;\11 increase i11 rrequency increases both the phase errors and the correlafio11 interval in  terms of wavelengths.
Therefore the gain of a constant-area antenna does not increase as  rapidly as the square of the frequency.
For renectors of equal gain (same diameter in  wavelengths) Eq.
(7.32) shows that the relative sidelobe level caused by errors will increase  ·;1s the fourth power of the frequency, or 12 dB/octave.112  ;\n imrortant conclusion is that the details of the radiation pattern, especially in the  region outside the main beam, are more likely to be determined by the accuracy with which the  antenna is constructed than by the manner in which the aperture is illuminated.
Thus  the mechanical engineer and the skilled machinist and technician are just as important as  the antenna designer in realizing the desired radiation pattern.
 Effects of phase shifter quantization.82·115 The discrete value of phase shift that results from  the use of quantized phase shifters introduces an" error" in the desired aperture illumination.
 Phase quantization can cause a loss in antenna gain, an increase in the rms sidelobe level, the  generation of spurious sidelobes, and a shift in the pointing of the main beam.
The effect of  quantized phase shifters on the radiation pattern is similar to the effect of random errors.
 The gain of an array antenna with a mean square phase error b2 in its aperture illumina­ tion is approximately  G=G 0(1-c52) (8.30)  where G0 = no-error gain.
This follows from Eq.
(8.28) with Pe= l.
~2 = O.
and c52 small.
For  a quantized rhase shifter consisting of B bits, the phase error c5 is described by a uniform  probahility density function extending over an interval ± rr./2R.
From Sec 2.4 the mean square  phase error for the uniform probability density function is J2 = rr.2/3(228).
Substituting into  Eq.
(8.30).
the loss of gain is found to be 1.0 dB for a two-bit phase shifter, 0.23 dB for a  three-bit phase shifter, and 0.06 dB for four bits.
On the basis of the loss in gain, a three-or  four-bit phase shifter should be satisfactory for most applications.
 Phase quantization errors also result in an increase in the rms sidelobe level and in the  peak side lobe level.
With the assumptions that ( l) the energy lost by the reduction in main  beam gain shows up as an increase in therms sidelobe level, (2) the element gain is the same for  the main heam and the side lobes (within the region of space scanned by the array), (3) an  allowance of one dB for the reduction in gain due to the aperture illumination, and (4) one dB  for scanning degradation.
then the sidelobe level due to the quantization can be expressed as  rms sidelobe level~ -2i--2 N (8.31)  where N = total number of elements in the array.
For an array with four thousand elements, a  three-hit rhase shifter will give rrns sidelohes better than 47 dB below the main beam, and a  four-hit phase shifter gives 53 dB sidelobes.
Thus three or four bits should be sufficient for  most large arrays.
except where very low sidelobes are desired.
 /\!though the above assumed a randl'm distribution of phase error across the aperture for  computation of the rms sidelobe level, the actual phase distribution with quantized phase  shifters is likely to he periodic.
The periodic nature of the quantized phase will give rise to  322 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS .
 spurious quantizatio11 lobes, similar to grating lobes.
The peak-quantization lobe relative to the  main beam, when the phase error has a triangular repetitive distribution is  .
.
1 b I Peak quantization o e = -28 2 (8.32)  This applies when the main beam points close to broadside and there are many radiating  elements within the quantized phase period.
The position of the quantization lobe in this case  IS  (8.33)  where V0 = angle to which main beam is steered.
Equation (8.32) is an optimistic estimate for  the peak lobe.
The greatest phase quantization lobe is said to occur when the element spacing  is exactly one-half the phase quantization period or an exact odd multiple thereqf.
82· 115 With  an element spacing of one-half wavelength, the quantization lobe will appear at sin 01 ~  sin V0 -1, with a value of  P k .
.
I b n:2 l cos () 1 ea quant1zat10n o e ~ ---------4 228 cos 00 (8.34)  The peak sidelobes due to the phase quantization can be significant, and attempts should  be made to reduce them if their presence is objectionable.
One method for reducing the peak  lobe is to randomize the phase quantization.
A constant phase shift can be inserted in the path  to each element, with a value that differs from element to element by amounts that are  unrelated to the bit size.
This added phase shift is then subtracted in the command sent to the  phase shifter.
With an optical-fed array, such as the reflectarray or the lens array, decorrela­ tion of the phase quantization is inherent in the array construction.
In this case, the reduction  in peak quantization lobes is said to be equivalent to adding one bit to the phase shifters in a  100-element array, 2 bits in a 1000-element array, and 3 bits in a 5000-element array.
 The maximum pointing error due to quantization, is 115  1t l  l:!Oo/0 8 = 4 is (8.35)  where 08 is the beamwidth.
A four-bit phase shifter, for example would give l:!00/08 = 0.049.
 Small steering increments are possible with quantized phase shifters.
For example, a linear  array of 100 elements can be steered in increments of about 0.0 l beamwidth with 3-bit phase  shifters.
8 2  8.9 COMPUTER CONTROL OF PHASED-ARRAY RADAR116·121  A computer is a necessary part of a phased-array radar.
It is vital in applications where  flexible, multifunction operations are desired, as in satellite surveillance, air defense systems,  ballistic missile defense, and multifunction airborne radar.
The computer permits the inherent  flexibility of an array to be exploited by efficiently controlling the radar and scheduling its  operations.
However, the cost of achieving this capability is not insignificant and has been one  of the major factors in making the array radar expensive.
 The computer is needed in a phased-array radar to provide beam-steering commands for  the individual phase shifters; signal management by determining the type of wavdorm, the  number of observations, data rate, power, and frequency; the corresponding signal processi11g  and data processing in accordance with the mode of operation; outputs of processed daltl to \ )  THE ELECTRONICALLY STEERED PHASED ARRAY ANTENNA IN RADAR 323  users.
including the generation of displays;" housekeeping" functions of performance monitor­ ing.
fault location, data recording and simulations; and the exerntive ma11ageme11t of the radar  by assigning priorities to the various tasks and how they should be performed so as to achieve  a compromise between the required radar actions and the resources available in the radar  and computer.
In addition, the computer provides the means whereby an operator can manually  interact with the radar.
 Beam-steering computer.
Although a single general-purpose computer can be used to perform  all the computations and control required for a phased-array radar, it is often desirable to  utilize a separate, special-purpose computer for beam steering.
This can be an integral part of  the radar hardware so as to minimize the problem of communicating the large number of  phase-shifter orders.
The general-purpose radar-control computer provides the beam-steering  computer with the desired elevation angle and azimuth angle.
The beam-steering computer  translates this into commands necessary for each phase shifter.
In some array designs with  frequency-dependent phase shifters, the frequency also must be supplied lo the beam-steering  computer along with the two angles.
 In some cases the generation and distribution of a large number of individual phase­ shifter commands (one for each element) might be economically prohibitive.
In devising  computation algorithms and computer hardware, advantage can be taken of the fact that the  phase shill t/Jm" required at the 11111th element of a rectangular-spaced array can be separated by  row and column since tJ,m" = mt/Jr+ 111/Jx, where 111, 11 are integers corresponding to the 111th row  and 11th column, t/1 }" is the phase dilTerence needed between adjacent rows to steer the beam in  elevation.
and t/1 x is the phase difference between adjacent columns needed to steer in azimuth:  This is sometimes called row/column steering.
Baugh 121 describes a "non-time-critical"  row/column beam-steering computer that represents a minimum equipment approach that  takes from 10 lo 20 ms to generate the phase-shifter commands.
He also describes a "time­ critical ..
design, which requires some form of adding device per element, that reduces the time  to 50 to 100 11s.
The better the hardware the less can be the computation time.
 The use of subarrays usually simplifies the problem of the beam-steering computer.
 Instead of requiring a command for each of the elements of the array, the subarray steering  requires only p + q phase shifter commands per pointing angle, where p is the number of  elements in the subarray and q is the number of subarrays in the array.
However, with q  identical subarrays of p elements each, the tolerance on the individual phase shifters must  usually be better than with a similar conventional array of pq elements since with subarrays  ' the errors across the entire aperture are no longer independent.
 Arra)" radar S)"Stem functions.
An array radar is sometimes required to perform more than one  function with the same equipment.
The problem with a multifunction array is to utilize  effectively the resource of time and the resource of radar energy.
The computer allows the radar  to utilize its resources effectively by scheduling the execution of the various functions so as  to perform the more important tasks first.
 A multifunction array radar might be called upon to perform the following tasks:  Search of a specified volume of space at a specified rate, and the detection of targets.
 Track initiation, or transition to track, after a new detection is established.
 Track mai11re11a11ce, or track update, by acquiring new data and consolidating it with existing  tracks.
 User serrices, whereby the specific information desired by the user is acquired, such as obtain­ ing a satellite ephemeris or the solution of a fire-control problem.
 324 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  In each of these, the proper radar waveform must be selected along with the corresponding  receiver processing.
This is known as radar signal management and is an important function of  the computer.
In the AN/FPS-85 satellite-surveillance radar, for example, seven different radar  waveforms were available for performing the target detection and tracking mission as shown  in Table 8.1.118 An eighth waveform was used for alignment of the transmitter and receiver  modules.
 The search and detection function requires that the computer generate the angular coor­ dinates of !he region to be searched, the type of transmitted waveform to be used, the length of  the dwell period, and the time assigned for the execution of the dwell by the radar.
Since the  radar is performing tracking and other functions as well as search, conflicts in scheduling the  radar or the processor might arise.
Tracking functions are often more critical of time than  search.
and would have a higher priority in the event of a scheduling conflict.
When search  must be interrupted for a higher-priority task, the computer program must be d.esigned to do  so with minimum disruption.
In scheduling the various radar functions, the computer must  insure that the average-power limits of the radar transmitter are not exceeded.
 The llexibility of a phased-array radar allows more freedom in the selection of a detection  criterion.
For example, after initial crossing of the detection threshold, the radar beam can be  returned to the same direction sooner than it would in normal search in order to verify that a  target was indeed detected and that the threshold crossing was not a false alarm due to noise.
 This rer(ficatim1 pulse can be of greater power and/or of longer duration to increase the  probability of detection.
The two-step process of (I) initial detection and (2) verification is  sometimes called sequemial detection.
Because of the availability of a verification pulse, the  power transmitted by the normal search-pulse can be less than if the detection decision had to  be made on the basis of only a sipgle observation.
 There is always a limit to the information that can be processed by any general-purpose  radar conlrol computer.
The process of initiating and maintaining track can be very demand- Table 8.1 Waveforms used in AN/FPS-85 satellite surveillance radar 118  Name  I.
Search chirp pulse  2.
Search simple pulse  .l Track chirp pulse  ..\.
Track simple pulse  5.
Coherent extended  range track  6.
Coherent intermedi­ ate doppler  7.
Coherent precision  range  8.
Array calibration  waveform Description  250 JIS, FM  10 /IS  250 /IS, FM  \ /tS  40-pulse burst of 125- JIS pulses; burst dur­ ation I s  40-pulse burst of 25-J~S  pulses; burst durn­ tion 0.2 s  40-pulse burst of 5-;is  pulses, stepped fre­ quency; burst dura­ tion 1.2 ms  60 JIS Primary function  Long-range search and  track acquisition  Short-range search and  track acquisition  Long-range track  Short-range track and  short-range SLBM  search  Extended-range I rack  and signature  Intermediate doppler  and signature  Precision-range  tracking  Transmitter and re­ ceiver module cali­ bration  TIIE Fl.l:CTRONICAI.LY STEERED PHASED ARRAY ANTENNA IN RADAR 325  ing on the compu!er resources, hence it is necessary to exclude information that is of no  interest to the system.
Such unwanted inrormation may be from clutter, interference, or  jamming.
In principle, the computer can be programmed to recognize and reject these un­ wanted signals, hut this is an inerficicnl method for eliminating them.
It is more convenient to  eliminate them in the radar signal-processor hy either analog l111lk-rrocessi11y or its special­ purpose diµital equivalent.
Such signal processing includes matched filtering.
doppler (MTI)  filtering, polari1atio11 fillering, and adaptive video thresholding.
 Fvcn if all unwanted detections an; eliminated, there arc two additional problems that  can lead to a prnlifcralion of detections and place ,i burden on the computer: (I) multiple  detections of new targets and (2) rcdctcctions of old targets.
If these arc not recognized as such.
 the computer will attempt to correlate them with existing tracks and initiate new tracks, which  can tie up the computer capacity needlessly.
Multiple detections of the same target can occur  in adjacent beam positions if the echo signal is of more than marginal strength.
If the beam  scans a uniform pattern, as it would if it were generated by a conventional mechanically  scanned antenna, extraneous hits from adjacent beam positions can be readily recognized as  such.
An operator viewing a PP! would have no problem.
However, in a flexible phased-array  radar.
the scanning of the heam positions might not be uniform.
The likelihood of overdetec­ tion of a target will depend on how the volume is scanned.
To avoid this problem the detection  decision might have to be delayed until the neighboring beam positions have been scanned.
 After a detection decision is made it must be correlated against existing tracks to determine  whether il is a new target or an existing Larget already in track.
This is an important aspect of  the detection process since the initiation of a track after a new target is detected requires a  sequence of radar dwells that can consume the resources of the radar and the computer.
 The 1rack-i11iriatio11 process after a new detection has been established is a demanding one.
 The radar must observe the target a significant number of times within a modest time interval  to quickly cstahlish the target's direction of travel and speed.
 Tl,e track-mai11te11a11ce function determines when new observations should be made on  existing tracks in order to update the entries in the track file: Track maintenance not only  cstahlishes when the next radar observation must be made, but takes the steps necessary to  obtain it.
In performing this function it is often convenient to obtain the target position  estimate in radar coordinates.
Radar errors can be readily handled in this coordinate system.
If  the target is an aircraft, its position can .then be converted into cartesian coordinates for  smoothing and extrapolation of its trajectory.
A constant-velocity target flying a straight line,  nonra<lial course would have radial acceleration in the spherical coordinates of the radar,  which is av~ided with cartesian coordinates.
 Figure 8.3 I.
rrom Weinstock, 120 is an example of the timing of events that must occur in  radar transmission and reception.
The bottom figure shows the timing of the radar transmis­ sions.
While the radar is still receiving echoes from the (N -l)st dwell, a block of command  words is communicated to the radar for control of the Nth dwell and the beam-steering  computer calculates the phase-shirter orders needed for the next transmission.
After the time or  the maximum range return has elapsed, the phase shifters can be set for the next transmission.
 At this time.
the signal processor can be set to accommodate the next dwell.
If the array  antenna employs nonreciprocal phase shifters, the complementary phase distribution needed  for reception is set just after the transmission of the pulse.
While the system is being set for the  next transmission, the data received from the last transmission can be loaded into buITer  storage for transrer to the radar control computer.
Thus, during the Nth sequence of dwell  executions, the returns from the (N -I )st sequence are processed and commands are gen­ erated for the {N + I )st sequence.
 Time and radar power (or energy) are two resources that must be properly handled in a  ]26 INTROIHJC'TION TO RADAR SYSTl:MS  Communicalions  Phase shifter  orders Command  data  buffer  I:.
full Data  routed" : ", .
:JJ.------, I  Transm,tled Tmnsrn1ss1on of  command dote to  radar for dwell N  Beam  steering......_  computer '---.._  calculoles "--- phase orders  for dwell N  Maximum Rodar return  !Julie, 1:,  Mo, range  dwell (N-1) full -data  from dwell  (N-1) , ' l / J  ., I  / I  I  ~  Tronsm,ss1on of  dato-dwe!l(N-1)  Pho se shit I er s  .
sw!lched for  fransm1f  Pho5e shd ter s  sel for  > receive - dwell N  Rod or  transmit/ receive  operol1on ,.
pulse range ...
: ,  Dwell (N-1) Owel!N  Figure 8.31 Representative command/response sequence.
(Courfe.'i_r RCA.
Inc.) Command  dota to,  · dwell (N;.
1)  computer-controlled multifunction radar.
The various functions to be performed must he  efficiently prioritized so as not to exceed either resource.
In st:arch, the maximum rangi.:  of interest strongly affects the time resource.
In tracking.
the target range does not usually limit  the time resource since the range is known and the dwell interval can he adjusted accordingly.
 The power transmitted by the radar will depend on the type of function it is to perform as well  as the target maximum range and possibly the past behavior or the target.
Thus the radar  resource of time is affected more by the long-range targets, and the radar power is more  affected by the tactical function.
 The data processor, as well as the radar, can cause the system to run out of available tune.
 The time required to process each target dwell as well as the amount of computer memory  needed per target is usually independent of the target range.
Thus the saturation limit of !he  computer will be reached if it is given too many data points per unit time.
This is more likely to  occur with short-range targets since they generally require a higher data rate !han long-range  targets.
 In order to maintain maximum effectiveness of the radar and its computer when overload­ ing occurs, some sort of priority system is required.
Tasks which are not as time critical should  be deferred so that high-priority tasks can be accomplished.
Table 8.2 is an example of  a priority structure for a tactical air defense system in which the radar performs search  and automatic tracking, as well as support missile engagements.
121 There are eight categories  of priority, from the dedicated mode with the highest priority, to the standard testing and  dummy operations (or time wasters) with the lowest priority.
There is more than one  similar function within each category which can be treated either on a first-in--first-out  basis or by giving further priority ordering.
Note that the subcategories of the ·• 0" priority  also appear in lower-priority categories.
 TIii'.
FLFCTRONICALLY STF.f.Rf.D PUASF.D ARRAY ANTENNA IN RADAR 327  Table 8.2 Example of priorities for a tactical system 121  0 Dedicated mode  Burn through  Target definition  Special test  Engagements  Engaged hostile  Own missile  Preen gaged hostile  1 Time-critical Previously scheduled events  that capture radar ror  long periods of time  High-priority transition  High-priority confirmation  Horizon search  Special request  Burn through  Target definition  Special ,cans  Target acquisition  4 High-priority tracks  Confirmed hostile  Assumed hostile  Unevaluated  Controlled friendly  Confirmation  Track transition  5 Low-priority track  Assumed friendly  Confirmed friendly  Above-horizon search  All coverages  Special test  7 Simulation, diagnostics, and dummies  Table courtesy RCA.
Inc.
 The computer must be capable of responding to the immediate demands of high-priority  tasks withojut throwing away the results of partially completed lower-priority tasks.
The execu­ tirc program must recognize the presence of a high-priority task and initiate it properly.
There  are two methods for interleaving high and low priorities.
The first is preemption of control by a  higher-priority task as soon as it arises.
The interrupted task is put aside in such a way that it  can he resumed when time permits.
The second method, time slicing, breaks all lower-priority  tasks into nonpreemptable segments.
These segments must be short enough to avoid excessive  delays in the transfer of control to the time-critical tasks.
 The phased-array radar and its computer controller saturate differently.
Long-range  dwells are demanding of radar execution time, but since they generally involve a low data rate  they are not particularly demanding of data processing time.
On the other hand, high data rate  tracking of short-range targets is not as demanding of radar execution time as for long-range  targets.
but the data-processing capability becomes the lim.iting factor.
The handling of a large  number of short-range targets in track can drive the processor to full utilization and require  that search operations.
which have lower priority than track, be reduced.
Thus the mechanism  by which the system saturates depends on the nature of the target situation.
 328 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  The AN/FPS-85 is a large UHF phased-array radar located at Eglin Air Force Base,  Florida which was designed for the detection and tracking of earth0orhiting objects  (satellites).
118 It was one of the first major applications of a computer-controlled multifunc­ tion phased-array radar.
The system computer consists of two IBM System 360/651 central  processors, each with 131,072 thirty-two-bit words of core memory and a bask add time of  14 11s.
There are digital devices that provide the interface between the system computer and the  radar equipment, digital and analog signal processors, monitoring and controls, and equip­ ment for space object identification.
The programs for the computer total over 1,250,000 words  of storage.
About 60 percent of this large number of words consists of decision tables lo locale  faults when compared to expected outputs.
 The cost of the computer hardware and soft wan: of a multifunction radar system can be a  significant fraction of the total system cost.
Computer system design must be integral with that  of the radar hardware itself.
The development of the software can be an especially.,1-lemanding  task that cannot be considered minor.
 8.10 OTHER ARRAY TOPICS  Hemispherical coverage.123 -125 A single planar phased-array antenna might typically provide  coverage of an angular sector ± 45° from the array normal; however, it is possible to achieve a  scan coverage of ± 60° or greater.
The amount of scan depends on the loss of gain, the amount  of beam broadening, and the rise in sidelobes that can be tolerated.
The frequency range over  which the antenna must operate and the VSWR that can be accepted also determine how far  the beam can be scanned.
With a scan capability of ± 60°, a minimum of three planar aper­ tures, or faces, are required to cover the hemisphere.
But when other factors are considereJ,  more than three faces are usually desired.
The greater the number of faces, the less will be !he  loss in gain, beam broadening, VSWR variation, polarization change, and the number of  elements per face.
Other factors which must be considered in selecting the optimum number of  faces are the number of transmitters and receivers, the complexity of the control of the array,  and the total cost.
 Table 8.3 summarizes the properties of N array faces to give hemispherical coverage at a  single frequency.123 In the 5-and 6-face arrays, one face is normal to the zenith, which explains  why the tilt angle is less for these two cases.
Each array of a 4-face array, for example, woulJ  scan ± 55°.
To minimize the loss in gain, each face would be tilted back an angle of 35.3° from  the vertical.
Elements are arranged in an equilateral triangular pattern with element separa- Table 8.3 Properties of hemispherical coverage arrays 123  Number of faces 3 4 s 6  Maximum scan angle 63.4° 54.7° 47.1° 40.7°  Tilt angle 26.6" ' 35.3° l S.5° 20.4°  Element spacing (wavelengths) 0.628 0.691 0.679 0.700  Maximum power reflected 14% 7% 4% J 0/  -lo  Maximum beam broadening 2.2 l.
75 1.47 l.32  Maximum gain reduction (dB) 4.1 2.8 l.9 1.3  Relative total number of elements:  t.
Equal gain at max scan · 1.22 1.00 1.05 l.04  2.
Equal beamwidth at max scan 1.45 1.00 0.92 0.84  3.
Equal average-gain over scan I.OS 1.00 1.17 1.24  4.
Equal average-beamwidth over scan 1.15 1.00 l.09 I.I I  THE ELECTRONICALLY STEERED PHASED ARRAY ANTENNA IN RADAR 329  tion of 0.691 wavelengths.
Assuming an array matched at broadside, resistive mismatch off  broadside results in 7 percent·of-the power reflected at the maximum scan angle.
The beam­ width at the maximum scan angle is 1.75 times that of the broadside beamwidth.
The reduction  in gain is 2.8 dU.
which includes the effect of 7 percent mismatch as well as the effect of beam  broadening.
The more faces that are used, the greater can be the element spacing before the  onset of grating lobes.
If it is required that the gains at the maximum scan angle be the same.
it  is seen in the tahlc that the 4-face array requires the fewest clements.
However, if the beam­ widths at the maximum scan are to be the same, the 6-face array requires the fewest total  number of elements.
When the criterion is to maintain either the average gain or the average  heamwidth the same over the scan, the 4-face array yields the minimum total number of  elements.
 These results apply to a ground-based array.
If the array is on a ship, the lower limit of the  elevation scan angle must be less than 0° to allow for the roll and pitch orthe ship.
(A value of  -20° might be a typical requirement.) The optimum tilt angle of the array would be dilTerent  than if the lower limit were 0°.
In one example 125 a tilt angle of 27° is taken for a 4-face array  covering from + 90 to -20° in elevation, instead of the 35.3° of Table 8.3.
The reduction in  gain is 4.3 dB at the maximum scan angle instead of 2.8 dB.
 Dome antenna.126 129 A novel approach to obtaining hemispherical coverage is the dome  antenna depicted in Fig.
8.32.
A planar array of conventional design with variable phase  shifters is shown situated below a hemispherical lens with fixed phase shirts.
The lens, with its  fixed phase shifts.
alters the phase front of the field radiated by the planar array to cause a  change in the direction of propagation.
The dome acts as an RF analog to an optical prism  that changes the scan angle of the planar array by a factor K(O).
For example, a constant value  of K = 1.5 extends the coverage of a ± 60° planar array to ± 90°.
The loss of gain varies in this  case from about 3.8 dB to 5.4 dB over the region of coverage.
The dome need not be a  hemisphere but can be shaped to favor particular regions of space.
The dome can consist of  dielectric-loaded circular waveguides inserted into holes drilled in the hemispherical shell.
An  experimental model at C band had a combined mismatch and insertion loss of about 0.8 dB.
 The dome might also be fabricated from radome-like material using a honeycomb skin with  lightweight printed-circuit phase shifts glued to the inner surface.
 In a conventional phased array, a linear phase gradient is applied across the aperture t.o  steer the beam.
However, a nonlinear phase distribution is required across the planar array of  the dome antenna.
The beamwidth can vary on the order of 4 to 1 over the entire scan range of  the dome afitenna.
Furthermore, the beam might not be as narrow on the horizon as might be  obtained with a conventional antenna configuration of equivalent aperture.
As with any array  /  ' Variable phase controls Planar feed array Figure 8.32 Dome antenna for achieving  hemispherical coverage.
(Courtesy IEEE.)  330 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  arranged on the surface of a sphere, the plane of polarization changes with the scan angle.
 With circular polarization, however; there is no change with scan.
 A conventional array with four faces can track four times the number of targets as a dome  antenna (which operates with a single planar array for hemispherical coverage), assuming the  traffic is distributed uniformly.
The average power required for the planar array of the dome  antenna is approximately the sum of the average powers required for each of the individual  arrays, assuming comparable performance.
 It has been claimed that the dome antenna is of less cost than four arrays of conventional  design covering the same volume.
However, any comparison of this technique with conven­ tional antennas must be done on the basis of the entire radar system and its intended applica­ tion, not just the antenna.
The required transmitter power, the loss in antenna gain, change of  beamwidth, complexity of computer control, traffic handling, polarization change, and total  system cost must all be considered when evaluating the relative merits of such ijntennas for a  particular application.
 Conformal arrays.130 135 One of the desires of the radar systems engineer is to be able to  place array elements anywhere on an arbitrary surface and achieve a directive beam, with good  side lobes and efficiency, which can be conveniently scanned electronically.
An array of radiat­ ing elements arranged along the nose of an aircraft, on the wing, or the fuselage would thus be  an attractive option for the systems designer.
Such an array, which conforms to the geometry  of a nonplanar surface, is called a conformal array.
 In principle, the elements of an array located on any non planar surface can be made to  radiate a beam in some given direction by applying the proper phase, amplitude, and polariza­ tion at each element.
In practice, however, it is difficult to control the beamshape and obtain  low sidelobes from an arbitrary surface, especially if the beam is electronically scanned.
 Furthermore, the mechanisms for feeding the elements and steering the beam of a conformal  array, as well as the generation of the phase-shifter commands, are generally more complicated  than those of a planar array.
Although it is desired that conformal arrays be applicable to any  surface, the complications that arise when dealing with a general nonplanar surface have  restricted its consideration to relatively simple shapes, such as the cylinder, cone, ogive, and  sphere.
Even these shapes present difficulties in analysis and equipment implementation, and  in realizing antennas competitive with the planar array.
 The cylinder, which is probably the simplest form of nonplanar array, has a geometry  suitable for antennas that scan 360° in azimuth.
The scanning beam of a cylindrical anienna  does not change its shape and broaden when steered, as does a scanning beam from a planar  array.
Beam steering in a circularly symmetric array can be accommodated by commutating  or rotating the aperture distribution.
Since the elements on the side of the cylindrical array  opposite from the direction of propagation do not contribute energy in the desired direction,  they are not excited.
Unlike the planar array, the circular symmetry ensures that mutual  coupling between elements is always the same as the beam scans in azimuth.
 The truncated cone has similar properties to the cylindrical array, and might be utilized  instead of the cylinder when the beam is to be scanned in elevation as well as azimuth.
The  conical surface as a radiating structure for a conformal array is also of interest since missiles  are sometimes of this shape.
 The ogive, which is the type of surface found on the nose of some aircrafl, hears a  resemblance to the cone.
A conformal array arranged on the aircraft nose would allow wide  coverage, provide a good aerodynamic shape, eliminate the distortion of the pattern of a  mechanically scanned antenna caused by the conventional nose-radome, and would permit  larger antenna apertures than the conventional nose-antenna configuration.
The hemispheri- lllF.
FLITTRONICAl.l.Y STEFRED PHASED ARRAY ANTENNA IN RADAR 331  cal array also attracts attention when hemispherical coverage is desired.
In principle.
the  pattern is independent of beam direction.
 Most of the work on conformal arrays has been with the cylinder.
Even though it may be  a relatively simple shape compared to the others mentioned above or to the generalized  non planar surface, the properties of the cylindrical array are not as suitable in general as those  of the planar array.
In a cylindrical array, the radiation pattern cannot be separated into an  element factor and an array factor as in planar array theory.
Each element points in a dilTerenl  direction.
Thus computations of patterns must include both element and array together.
 Another difficulty is that the phase as well as the magnitude of the element pattern varies with  position.
As a result of the cylindrical geometry, the radiation pattern is only partially separ­ able in spatial coo1di11111cs.
(11 can he considered as the product of a ring.array patlcrn and a  linear-array pattern.) Tl1c azimuth pattern of a vertical cylindrical array changes with both  azimuth and elevation as the beam is scanned in elevation.
The far~out sidelobes of a cylindri­ cal array are generally large and broad in angle, as compared to those of a planar array.
The  design of efficient feed networks, the phase and amplitude control devices, distributed trans­ mitter and/or receiver modules, and the control algorithms and logic are other problem areas.
 Similar problems occur with other conformal-array shapes.
In particular the conical  shape can present a serious polarization problem since the polarization varies with the direc­ tion of propagation.
Another problem is that the radiating elements can see dilTerent environ­ ments depending on their location on the cone.
The pattern of the conical array cannot be  separated into elevation and azimuth patterns.
 Conformal arrays would have application for flush-mounted airborne radar antennas,  especially on conical and ogive surfaces.
The cylinder, truncated cone, and the hemisphere are.
 possible antenna shapes for shipboard or surface applications.
Such conformal arrays have  been considered for radar but they do not appear suitable for general application.
They have  also been examined for I FF and air traffic control interrogation antennas.132  A serious competitor to the cylindrical array is a number of planar arrays arranged to  approximate the cylinder.
This is a much simpler system and is quite practical.
(If necessary it  can be surrounded by a cylindrical radome.) The change of beam shape with scan angle can be  minimized.
if desired, by radiating cooperatively from more than one planar face.
As the beam  is scanned ofT broadside.
some of the transmitter power can be diverted to the face adjacent to  the direction of scan to radiate energy in the same direction.135 The broadening of the beam  due to the foreshortening of the planar aperture is compensated by the cooperative use of the  adjacent planar aperture.
 f)  Unequally spaced arrays.
1 36 139 Most array antennas have equal spacings between adjacent  elements.
Unequal spacings have sometimes been considered in order to obtain a given beam­ width with considerably fewer elements than an equally spaced array, or to approximate a  desired pattern without the need for an amplitude-tapered aperture illumination.
Since the  minimum element spacing is about one-half wavelength, unequally spaced arrays generally  have fewer elements than equally spaced arrays of the same size aperture.
For this reason they  are also called thinned arrays.
 The design of a thinned array consists of selecting the diameter of the aperture to give the  desired beamwidth, selecting the number of elements to give the desired gain (gain is directly  proportional to the number of elements), and arranging the elements to achieve some desirable  property of the side lobes, such as minimizing the peak sidelobe or approximating some desired  radiation pattern.
There have been many methods proposed in the literature for determining  the element spacings (or locations within the aperture) of such arrays.
Only two will be  mentioned here: dynamic programming and density tapering.
 332 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  One approach is to try all possible element locations with the given number of elements  and select that arrangement which produces the best result.
This technique, called rota/  e1H1111eri11io11, is generally impractical because of the large number of possible solutions that  would need to be examined.
An equivalent result, with less computation, is to apply dy11a111ic  programming, a method for determining the optimum solution to a multistage problem by  optimizing each stage of the problem on the basis of the input to that stage.
As applied to  arrays, the various stages of dynamic programming involve the selection of the spacings of  each clement or pair of symmetrically placed elements.
The application of dynamic program­ ming has been successfully applied to the design of one dimensional (linear) unequally spaced  array.
Although the computations required are far Jess than for total enumeration, there is a  practical limit to the number of elements in the array that can be treated by this method.
 The other technique, density taper, is applicable to the design of either linear arrays or to  large planar arrays.
Consider a uniform grid of possible element locations with~qual spacing.
 The aperture illumination function that would normally be considered for a conventional  antenna is used as the model for determining the density of equal-amplitude elements.
That is,  the density of equal-amplitude elements is made to approximate the desired aperture illumina- /  tion.
The choice of element locations to achieve the desired density distribution may be made  on either a statistical basis or deterministically.
One possible application of density taper is in  a transmitting array where it is desired to radiate equal power from each element, but where  the high peak-sidelobe of the uniform illumination is not acceptable.
Although lower peak­ sidclnbes can be obtained in this manner, the far-out sidelobes are generally considerably  greater than if the same illumination function were used to establish an amplitude taper with  an equally spaced array.
 The unequally spaced array has seen only limited application, primarily because its  advantages do not usually outweigh its disadvantages.
The reduction in gain and the increases  in sidelohes that are a consequence of thinning the elements are usually not desirable in most  radar applications.
 The purpose or unequal element spacing in a highly thinned array is to eliminate the  grating lobes that would appear if equal element spacings of large value were used.
Grating  lobes are not necessarily undesirable, since the energy contained in the grating lobes can be  used to detect targets.
However, if this energy is distributed in the sidelobes by employing  unequal spacings, it is wasted.
The disadvantage with detecting targets in the grating lobes is ;  that the angle measurement can be ambiguous.
There are methods, however, for resolving  these ambiguities.140  Instead of thinning elements, the number of phase shifters can he thinned.141 That is,  some of the phase shifters in the array can be used to adjust the phase of more than one  element, so that the number of phase shifters is less than the number of elements.
A 50 percent  saving in the total number or phase shifters might be·had.
Thinning in this manner also gives  rise to phase errors which cause a deterioration in the radiation pattern.
 Adaptive antennas.
142-151 An adaptive antenna senses the received signals incident across its  aperture and adjusts the phase and amplitude of the aperture illumination to achieve some  cksircd performance, such as maximizing the received signal-to-noise ratio.
The noise may be  either internal receiver noise or external noise, as from jammers.
Clutter echoes or interference  from other electromagnetic radiations can also be minimized by adaptive antennas.
Adaptive  antenna techniques can automatically compensate for mechanical or electrical errors in an  antenna by sensing the errors and applying corrective signals, 149 and can compensate for  failed clements, radome effects, and blockage of the aperture from nearby structures.
Much of  the interest in adaptive antennas has been to reduce the effects of noise jamming in the antenna  TIii' l'I.ITTRONICAI.I.Y STl'ERED l'IIASED ARRAY ANTENNA IN RADAR 333  sidelobes.
The ideal adaptive antenna acts automatically to adjust itself as a matched  (spatial) filter by reducing the sidelobes in the direction of the unwanted signals.
Adaptive  antennas require some a priori knowledge of the desired signal, such as its direction,  waveform, or statistical properties.
 ff all the elements of an adaptive phased-array antenna have a separate adaptive control  loop, it is called a .fitlly adapti11e array.
The adaption process is based on the application of  some criterion such as the minimization of the mean-square error or the maximization of the  signal-to-noise ratio.
In arrays with a large number of adaptive elements the time required for  the array to converge to the desired aperture illumination can be relatively long.
The conver­ gence time can be reduced at the cost of hardware complexity.
The complexity of the adaptive  mechanization and the speed of convergence limit the practical utility of the large adaptive  array.
The fewer the adjustable elements the more practical is the adaptive array.
 One potential application of adaptive a·rray antennas is for airborne surveillance radar.
 In addition to the reduction of jamming noise which enter the airborne surveillance radar,  it is important to reduce the clutter that enters via the radar antenna sidelobes.
The detection  of targets from an airborne platform places severe demands on radar design in order to reduce  or eliminate clutter that enters the radar receiver via the main beam.
This is done in a  conventional A MTI radar by signal processing (filtering) as described in Sec.
4.11.
However,  clutter that enters the radar receiver via the antenna sidelobes has doppler frequencies that  cannot be rejected by conventional filtering, since targets of interest can have the same doppler  as the side lobe clutter.
An adaptive array antenna can place nulls in the direction of sidelobe  clutter by using the side lobe clutter itself as the signal to be cancelled.
This is accomplished by  separating the sidelobe clutter from the main-beam clutter by doppler filtering.
The filtered  signal adaptively adjusts the aperture illumination to minimize the sidelobes in those direc­ tions from which clutter appears.
 The co'1ere11t sidelobe canceler (Sec.
14.5) is a form of adaptive antenna that uses a small  number of auxiliary elements to adaptively place nulls in the direction of external noise  sources.
It is an example of a successful application of the principles of the adaptive antenna  that utilizes only a relatively few number of adaptive elements.
The fully adaptive array of  large size is, in theory, capable of nulling a larger region of space than a system with but a  relatively few adaptive elements, as in the sidelobe canceler.
However, the added complexity  and longer convergence time that accompanies the greater degrees of freedom of the large,  fully adaptive array has been a burden that is difficult to justify on a cost-effective basis for  general application.
 The obje~tive of the usual adaptive antenna or the coherent sidelobe canceler is to adjust  the sidelobe levels to minimize the effects of noise or other unwanted signals.
If the radar  application allows the use of antennas with extremely low sidelobes, the same result will be  achieved as with the adaptive antenna.
In general, the extremely low sidelobe antenna can be a  better solution, if the desired low side lobe levels can be achieved and maintained economically.
 In principle, the automatic tracking radar discussed in Chap.
5 is another example of an  adaptive antenna.
The aperture illumination is sensed by a conical scan or monopulse feed and  the antenna is repositioned to maintain the signal-to-noise ratio a maximum.
 Triangular arrangement of elements.• 5 2-154 If the elements of a planar array are arranged in a  pattern of equilateral triangles rather than squares, a savings can be had in the total number of  elements needed.
This assumes that the number of elements in an array is determined by the  requirement that no spurious beams (grating lobes) appear in the radiation pattern.
The  reduction in the number of elements depends on the solid angle over which the main beam is  positioned.
For example, if the beam is to be scanned anywhere within a cone defined by a  334 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  half-angle of 45°, the number of elements required with triangular spacing is 13.4 percent Jess  than with square spacing.
In this case.
the altitude of the equilateral triangle in the triangularly  arranged array is equal to the element spacing of the squarely arranged array.
If instead, the  main beam is positioned not within a cone, but over a "pyramidal" region, the reduction is  less.
The amount of reduction is only 9.2 percent in covering a ± 45 by ± 45° "square" angular  region, and 7.7 percent for a ±45 by ±25 region.
The smaller the angular region, the less the  saving.
One caution in the use of triangular spacings is that, compared to square spacings, it is  more likely to produce high sidelobes in some portions of space.
This is due to the phase  quantization that results from digital phase shifters.154 For most applications, however, these  quantization lobes do not limit the system performance significantly.
 Limited-scan arrays.
The scan angle of a conventional array antenna might typically rangl!  from ± 45° to perhaps ± 60° in both angle coordinates.
If the required sca.9 angle can be  limited to a much smaller angular region the number of radiating elements and the number of  phase shifters can be reduced.
This can result in a simpler and cheaper phased-array radar  than the conventional array that must scan a wide angle in two orthogonal coordinates.
 Although the conventional phased-array radar has not seen extensive application because of  its high cost and complexity, the limited-scan array has had significant application because it is  more competitive in both performance and cost to mechanical scanning antennas.
Applica­ tions for limited-scan arrays in radar have included the one-dimensional electronic scan of 3 D  radars (Sec.
14.4), aircraft landing or ground-control approach (GCA) radars, 157 and hostile­ weapon-location radars.' 58  8.11 APPLICATIONS OF THE ARRAY IN RADAR  The phased-array antenna has been of considerable interest to the radar systems engineer  because its properties are different from those of other microwave antennas.
The array antenna  takes several forms: ·  Mechanically scanne,I array.
The array antenna in this configuration is used to form a fixed  beam that is scanned by mechanical motion of the· entire antenna.
No electronic beam­ steering is employed.
This is an economical approach to air-surveillance radars at the  lower radar frequencies, such as VHF.
It is also employed at higher frequencies when a  precise aperture illumination is required, as to obtain extremely low sidelobes.
At the  lower frequencies, the array might be a collection of dipoles or Yagis, and at the higher  frequencies the array might consist of slotted waveguides.
 Linear array with frequency scan,.
The frequency-scanned, linear array feeding a parabolic  cylinder or a planar array of slotted waveguides has seen wide application as a 3D  air-surveillance radar.
In this application, a pencil beam is scanned in elevation by use of  frequency and scanned in azimuth :by mechanical rotation of the entire antenna.
 Linear array with phase scan., Electronic phase steering, instead of frequency scanning, in the  3D air-sur,veillance radar is generally more expensive, but allows the use of the frequency  domain for purposes other than beam steering.
The linear array configuration is also used  to generate multiple, contiguous fixed beams (stacked beams) for 3D radar.
Another  application is to use either phase-or frequency-steering in a stationary linear array to  steer the beam in one angular coordinate, as for the GCA radar.
 Pliase{requency planar array ..
A two-dimensional (planar) phased array can utilize frequency  scanning to steer the beam in one angular coordinate and phase shifters to steer in the  TIii' FI.FCIRONICALLY STEERED PHASFLJ ARRAY ANTENNA IN RADAR 335  orthogonal coordinate.
This approach is generally easier than using phase shifters to  scan in both coordinates.
but as with any frequency-scanned array the use of the  rrequency domain ror other purposes is limited when frequency is employed for  hea 111-st eeri n g.
 Plwse-plwse planar arrar.
The planar array which utilizes phase shifting to steer the beam in  two orthogonal coordinates is the type of array that is of major interest for radar applica­ tion because of its inherent versatility.
Its application, however.
has been limited by its  relatively high cost.
The phase-phase array is what is generally implied when the term  electrn11ically steered phased array is used.
 The phased array antenna has seen application in radar for such purposes as aircrart  surveillance from on board ship (AN/SPS-33), satellite surveillance (AN/FPS-85).
ballistic  missile defense (PAR, MSR), air defense (AN/SPY-I and Patriot), aircraft landing systems  (A N/TPN-19 and A N/TPS-32), mortar (AN/TPQ-36) and artillery (AN/TPQ-37) location.
 tracking of ballistic missiles (Cobra Dane), and airborne bomber radar (EAR).
 There have been many developmental array radars built in the United States, including  ESAR.
ZMAR, MAR, Typhon, Hapdar, ADAR, MERA, RASSR, and others.
Although much  effort and funds have been expended, except for limited-scan arrays there has been no large  serial production of such radars comparable to the serial production of radars with mechan­ ically rotating reflector antennas.
 8.12 ADVANTAGES AND LIMITATIONS  The array antenna has several unique characteristics that make it a candidate for considera­ tion in radar application.
However, the attractive features of the array antenna are sometimes  nullified by several serious disadvantages.
 The array antenna has the following desirable characteristics not generally enjoyed by  other antenna types:  lnertialess, rapid heam-steeri11g.
The beam from an array can be scanned, or switched from one  position to another, in a time limited only by the switching speed of the phase shifters.
 Typically, the beam can be switched in several microseconds, but it can be considerably  shorter j.f desired.
 M ultip/e, independent beams.
A single aperture can generate many simultaneous independent  beams.
Alternatively, the same effect can be obtained by rapidly switching a single beam  through a sequence of positions.
 Potetttialfor large peak and/or average power.
If necessary, each element of the array can be fed  by a separate high-power transmitter with the combining of the outputs made in" space··  to obtain a total power greater than can be obtained from a single transmitter.
 C antral of the radiation pattern.
A particular radiation pattern may be more readily obtained  with the array than with other microwave antennas since the amplitude and phase of each  array element may be individually controlled.
Thus, radiation patterns with extremely  low sidelobes or with a shaped main beam may be achieved.
Separate monopulse sum and  difference patterns, each with its own optimum shape, are also possible.
 Graceful degradation.
The distributed nature of the array means that it can fail gradually  rather than all at once (catastrophically).
 Com•enient aperwre shape.
The shape of the array permits flush mounting and it can be  hardened to resist blast.
 336 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  Electronic beam stabilization.
The ability to steer the beam electronically can be used lo  stabilize the beam-direction when the radar is on a platform, such as a ship or aircraft,  that is subject to roll.
pitch, or yaw.
 The above attributes of an array antenna offer the radar systems engineer additional  flexibility in attempting to meet the requirements of radar applications.
Some comments  should be made, however, about the practical utility of these characteristics.
These attributes  are obtained for a price, so that they should only be considered when warranted.
It is not  obvious that they are always absolutely essential for the success of a particular application.
 For example, it is certainly true that a mechanically scanned reflector antenna cannot  switch a beam from one direction to another as fast as can a phased-array antenna.
However,  it is seldom, if ever, that the operational requirements do not permit the system designer to  configure a system to do an equivalent job with a mechanically scanned antenna.
 An N-element array can, in principle, generate N independent beams.
However, in prac­ tice it is seldom required that a radar generate more than a few simultaneous beams (perhaps  no more than a dozen), since the complexity of the array radar increases with increasing  number of beams.
 Although the array has the potential for radiating large power, it is seldom that an array is  required to radiate more power than can be radiated by other antenna types or to utilize a  total power which cannot possibly be generated by current high-power microwave tube tech­ nology that feeds a single transmission line.
 Conventional microwave antenn.as cannot generate radiation patterns with sidelobes as  low as can be obtaineq by an array antenna, especially a nonscanning array.
However, when a  planar array is electronically scanned, the change of mutual coupling that accompanies a  change in beam position makes the maintenance of low sidelobes more difficult.
 If an array has some margin in performance to permit graceful degradation, it is likely  that this margin will be eliminated during the procurement process if the cost of the radar  escalates.
Even if the radar is delivered with margin for graceful degradation, it is likely that  after some time in operation it will always be at the degraded level because of a desire to keep  maintenance costs to a minimum.
Another problem is to know when graceful degradation has  gone too far and maintenance is needed.
 The full testing of an array radar system is often more complicated than with conven­ tional radar systems.
Also, the incorporation of IFF can be more complicated than with  rotating antennas.
 Although the above are limitations to the phased arr!}y in radar, they are probably not  sufficiently serious to restrict its greater use.
However, the major limitation that has limited the  widespread use of the conventional phased array in radar is its high cost, which is due in large  part to its complexity.
The software for the computer system that is needed to utilize the  inherent flexibility of the array radar also contributes significantly to the system cost and  complexity.
 One of the factors that is often misleading is the usual picture of an array as a single  radiating face of relatively modest size.
A single array antenna can scan but a limited sector;  ± 45° in each plane is perhaps typical.
Four or more faces might therefore be necessary for  hemispherical coverage.
However, the usual photograph or drawing of a phased-array radar  seldom reveals the amount of electronic equipment behind the array face that is required to  make it a useful radar.
 Another of the advantages sometimes claimed for an array radar is that it is capable of  performing more than one function simultaneously; for example, it can do surveillance of a  volume as well as track individual targets.
The multifunction attribute of an array radar has  THE ELECTRONICALLY STEERED PHASED ARRAY ANTENNA IN RADAR 337  been of considerable interest, but it can also be a serious liability in some applications.
The  preferred frequency for a ground-based aircraft surveillance radar is al the lower portion of the  microwave region (UHF or L band).
The major factors of importance that favor the lower  frequencies for surveillance radar are the large average power and the large antenna aperture.
 hoth of which are easier lo obtain al the lower frequencies.
Also, a good MTI is easier to  achieve and the effects of weather arc less at these frequencies.
The preferred frequency range  for an aircrart-tracking radar is the upper portion of the microwave band (C or X bands) since  it is easier to obtain the wide bandwidths and narrow beamwidths for precision target tracking  than at the lower frequencies.
Thus tracking radars differ significantly from surveillance  radars.
When a single radar is lo perform both surveillance and tracking.
a single rrequency  so111ewherc in the middle of the microwave band must he selected as a compromise (Shand.
or  perhaps C or L hands).
The compromise rrequency might thus be higher than would be <lcsired  for search and lower than desired for tracking.
The resLilt is that a single-frequency.
multifunc­ tion radar might not be as efficient as separate ra<lars operating at separate frequencies.
each  ortimizcd to fulfill a single, dedicated function.
It is conceivable in some circumstances that  two radars, one optimized for surveillam:e and the other for track, will perform belier, be less  costly.
and take less total space than a single multifunction radar.
 The caution regarding the drawbacks of a multifunction radar is especially true of aircraft­ smveillance radar.
However, if the particular application is such that the optimum frequency  for search is the same as that for tracking, it is more likely that a multifunction array radar  would have merit over separate radars.
Such seems to be the case for satellite surveillance  where the same frequency (UHF) seems desirable for both search and track, as in the  AN/FPS-85.
 The unique characteristics of an array antenna offer the radar systems designer capabili­ ties not available with other techniques.
As with any other device, the array will see major  application when it can perform some radar function cheaper than any other anlcnna type or  when it can do something not practical by other means.
 REFERENCES  I.
Southworth, G.
C.: "Forty Years of Radio Research," Gordon and Breach.
New York, 1%2.
 pp.
98-100.
 2.
Wilmolly.
R.
M.: History of the Directional Antenna in the Standard Broadcast Band for the  Purpose of Protecting Service Area of Distant Stations, IRE Trans., vol.
PGBTS-7, pp.
51 55.
 Februar\ 1957 .
 .3.
Friis.
H.
T..
and C.
B.
Feldman: A Multiple· Unit Steerable Antenna for Short-Wave Receptil,n.
/3cll  Sys.
Teclr.
J ..
vol.
16, pp.
337-419, July, 1937.
 4.
Skolnik.
M.
I.: Survey of Phased Array Accomplishments and Requirements for Navy Ships,  ·· Phased Array Antennas," A.
A.
Oliner and G.
H.
Knittel (eds.), Artech House.
Inc ..
1972, pp.
15 20.
 5.
Ridenour.
L.
N.: "Radar· System Engineering," McGraw-Hill Book Co., New York.
1947.
 pp.
219 295.
 6.
Smith, R.
A.: "Aerials for Metre and Decimetre Wave-Lengths," Cambridge University Press.
 London.
1949.
 7.
Price.
A.: "Instruments of Darkness," Charles Scribner's Sons, New York.
1977.
 8.
Kraus.
J.
D.: "Antennas." McGraw-Hill Book Co., New York, 1950.
 9.
Schelkunoff.
S.
A.: A.
Mathematical Theory of Linear Arrays, Bell System Tecli .
.I ..
vol.
22.
 pp.
80-107, January.
1943.
 10.
Schelkunolf.
S.
A ..
and H.
T.
Friis: "Antennas, Theory and Practice," John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New  York, 1952.
 11.
Smith.
R.
A.: "Aerials for Metre and Decimetre Wave-lengths," Cambridge University Press.
 London.
1949.
 338 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  12.
Hansen, R.
C.: ..
Microwave Scanning Antennas, Volume 11," Academic Press, New York, 1966.
 13.
Hines, J.
N., V.
H.
Rumsey, and T.
E.
Tice: On the Design of Arrays, Proc.
I Rt:, vol.
42,  pp.
J 262-126 7, August, 1954.
 14.
Amitay, N., V.
Galindo, and C.
P.
Wu: "Theory and Analysis of Phased Array Antennas," Wiley- lnterscience, New York, 1972.
 J 5.
Von Au lock, W.
H.: Properties of Phased Arrays, Proc.
I RE, vol.
48, pp.
1715 -1727, October, 1960.
 16.
Ogg.
F.
C., Jr.: Steerable Array Radars, IRE Trans., vol.
MIL-5.
pp.
80-94, April, 1961.
 17.
Bickmore, R.
W.: A Note on the Effective Aperture of Electrically Scanned Arrays, I RE Trans.,  vol.
A P-6, pp.
194-196, April, 1958.
 18.
Elliott, R.
S.: The Theory of Antenna Arrays," Microwave Scanning Antennas, vol.
II," R.
C.
Hansen  (ed.), Academic Press, New York, N.Y., 1966, chap.
I.
 19.
Davies.
D.
E.
N.: Radar Systems with Electronic Sector Scanning, J.
Brit.
IRE, vol.
18, pp.
709-713,  December, 1958.
 20.
Kummer, W.
H.: Feeding and Phase Scanning," Miaowave Scanning Antennas, vol.
Ill," R.
C.
 Hansen (ed.), Academic Press, New York, 1966, chap.
I.
 21.
Craig, C.
W.
and H.
K.
Hom: A Low-Loss Microstrip X-band Diode Phase Shifter, Jf74 Go11emment  Microcircuit Applications Conference Digest of Papers, pp.
58-59, June, 1974.
 22.
Hines, M.
E.: Fundamental Limitations in RF Switching and Phase Shifting Using Semiconductor  Diodes, Proc.
IEEE, vol.
52, pp.
697-708, June, 1964.
 23.
White, J.
F.: Review of Semiconductor Microwave Phase Shifters, Proc.
If££, vol.
56,  pp.
1924-1931, November, 1968.
 24.
Temme, D.
H.: Diode and Ferrite Pnaser Technology," Phased Array Antennas," A.
A.
Oliner and  G.
H.
Knittel (eds.), Artech House, Inc., Dedham; Mass., 1972, pp.
212-218.
 25.
Ince, W.
J.: Recent Advances in Diode and Ferrite Phaser Technology for Phased Array Radars,  pt.
I, M icrowai,e J ., vol.
15, pp.
36-46, Sept., l 972; pt.
ll.
M icroware J ., vol.
15.
pp.
31-36, October,  1972.
 26.
Stark, L.: Microwave Theory of Phased-Array Antennas-A Review, Proc.
I £EE, vol.
62,  pp.
1661-1701, December, 1974.
 27.
Dionne, G.
F.: A Review of Ferrites for Microwave Application, Proc.
I £EE, vol.
63, pp.
777-789,  May, 1975.
 28.
Von Aulock, W.
H ..
and C.
E.
Fay: "Linear Ferrite Devices for Microwave Application." Academic  Press, New York, 1968.
 29.
Clarricoats, P.
J.
B.: "Microwave Ferrites," John Wiley and Sons, New York, 1961.
 30.
Ince, W.
J., and D.
H.
Temme: Phasers and Time Delay Elements.
Adra11ccs i11 Microll'ares.
vol.
4.
 Academic Press, New York, 1969.
 31.
Stark, L., R.
W.
Burns, and W.
P.
Clark: Phase Shifters for Arrays, chap.
12 of Radar Halli/hoot.:, M.
I.
 Skolnik (ed.), McGraw-Hill Book Co., New York, 1970.
 3~.
Clark, W.
P.: A High Power Phase Shifter for Phased-Array Systems.
/l:fE Tram., vol.
MTT-13,  pp.
785-788, November, 1965.
 33.
Whicker, L.
R.
(ed.):" Ferrite Control Components, vol.
2, Ferrite Phasers and Ferrite MIC Com­ ponents," Artech House, Inc., Dedham, Mass ..
1974.
 (A collection of reprints of pap'ers covering toroidal waveguide phase shifters, dual-mode phase  shifters.
Reggia-Spencer phase shifters, other novel ferrite phaser configurations, and ferrite micro­ wave integrated components.)  34.
Di Bartolo, J., W.
J.
Ince, and D, H.
Temme: A Solid State "Flux-Drive" rontrol Circuit for  Latching-Ferrite-Phaser Applications, Microware J., vol.
15, pp.
59-64, September, 1972.
 35.
Whicker, L.: Selecting Ferrite Phasers for Phased Arrays, Microll'ares, vol.
11, pp.
44-48, August.
 1972.
 36.
Boyd.
C.
R., Jr.: A Dual-Mode Latching Reciprocal Ferrite Phase Shifter, I £EE Tran\.,  vol.
MTT-18, pp.
1119-1124, December, 1970.
 37.
Boyd, C.
R., Jr.: Comments on the Design and Manufacture of Dual-Mode Reciprocal Latching  Ferrite Phase Shifters, I £EE Trans., vol.
MTT-22, pp.
593-60 I, June, 1974.
 38.
Fox, G.
A., S.
E.
Miller, and M.
T.
Weiss: Behavior and Application of Ferrites in the Microwave  Region, Be/I System Tech.
J., vol.
34, pp.
5-103, January, 1955.
 39.
Fox, A.G.: An Adjustable Wave-guide Phase Changer, Proc.
IRE.
vol.
35, pp.
1489-1498, Decem­ ber.
1947.
 40.
Seckelmann, R.: Phase-Shift Characteristics of Helical Phase Shifters, I £EE Trans, vol.
MTI-14,  pp.
24 -28, January, 1966.
 41.
Boxer, A.
S., S.
Hershenov, and E.
F.
Landry: A High-Power Coaxial Ferrite Phase Shifter, IRE  Trans, vol.
MTT-9, p.
577, November, 1961.
 1111' Fl 1:crnoNIC'AI.I.Y SITl'RF() l'IIASED ARRAY ANTENNA IN RADAR JJ9  42.
Sakiotis, N.
U ..
and II.
N.
Chait: Ferritcs at Microwaves, Proc.
IRE, vol.
41, pp.
87-93, January.
 1953.
 43.
Lax, B ..
K.
J.
Button.
and L.
M.
Roth: Ferrite Phase Shirters in Rectangular Waveguide, J.
Applied  Phrsics, vol.
25.
pp.
1413-1421, November, 1954.
 44.
Scharrr11an, H.: Three New Ferrite Phase Shirters, Proc.
IRE, vol.
44, pp.
1456-1459, October, 1956.
 45.
Monaghan.
S.
R ..
and M.
C.
Mohr: Polarization Insensitive Phase Shirter for Use in Phased Array  Antennas.
Microware J., vol.
12, pp.
75--80, December, 1969.
 46.
Querido.
H.J., J.
Frank, and T.
Cheston: Wide Band Phase Shiners, IEEE Trans, vol.
AP-15.
p.
300.
 March, 1967.
 47.
Johnson, C.
M.: Ferrite Phase Shifter for the UHF Region, IRE Trans, vol.
MTT-7, pp.
27-31,  January.
1959.
 48.
Stem, E., and G.
N.
Tsandoulas: Ferroscan: Toward Continuous-Aperture Scanning, IEEE Trans.
 vol.
AP-23.
pp.
15-20, January, 1975.
 49.
Cohn.
M., and A.
F.
Eiken berg: Ferroelectric Phase Shifters for VHF and UHF, I RE Trans.
 \OI.
MTT-10, pp.
536-548, November, 1962.
 50.
Senf, H.
R.: Electronic Antenna Scanning, Proc.
Natl.
Conf on Aerona11t.
Electronics (Dayton, Ohio).
 1958.
pp.
407-411.
 51.
Kummer, W.
H.: Feeding and Phase Scanning, chap.
l in" Microwave Scanning Antennas, vol.
111:·  R.
C.
Hansen (ed.), Academic Press, New York, 1966.
 52.
Alday.
J.
R.: Microwave Plasma Beam Sweeping Array, IRE Trans, vol.
AP-10, pp.
96-97, January,  1962.
 53.
Pringle.
D.
H ..
and E.
M.
Bradley: Some New Microwave Control Valves Employing the Negative  Glow Discharge.
J.
Electron., (London), vol.
1, pp.
389-404, 1956.
 54.
Betts.
F ..
D.
H.
Temme, and J.
A.
Weiss: A Switchable Circulator: S-band; Stripline; Remanent; 15  Kilowatts; JO Microseconds; Temperature Stable, IEEE Trans., vol.
MTT-14, pp.
665-669, Decem­ her.
1966.
 55.
Stark, L.: A Helical Line Scanner ror Beam Steering a Linear Array, I RE Trans., vol.
AP-5.
 pp.
211-216, April.
1957.
 56.
Reed.
R.
H.: Modified Magic Tee Phase Shifter, IRE Trans., no.
PGAP-1, pp.
126-134, February,  1952.
 57.
Barrett.
R.
M.: Electronic Scanning: Past and Future, Electronic Scanning Symposium, Apr.
29-30,  May I.
1958.
AFCRC-TR-58-145(1), ASTIA Document 152409.
 58.
Bacon.
G.
E.: Variable-elevation-beam Aerial Systems for 11 Metres, J.
I EE, vol.
93, pt.
IIIA,  pp.
539-544, 1946.
 59.
Harvey, G.
G.: Report of Conference on Rapid Scanning, MIT Radiation Lab.
Repc.
54-27.
June 15.
 1943.
ASTIA ATI 46616.
 60.
Kaiser.
J.
A.: Spiral Antennas Applied to Scanning Arrays, Electronic Scanning Symposium, Apr.
 29-JO.
May I, 1958.
AFCRC-TR-58-145(1), ASTIA Document 152409.
 61.
Brown.
R.
M ..
Jr., and R.
C.
Dodson: Parasitic Spiral Arrays, IRE Intern.
Com·.
Record, vol.
8, pt.
I,  pp.
51 -66, 1960.
 62.
Waterman, A.
T., Jr.: A Rapid Beam Swinging Experiment in Transhorizon Propagation, IRE  Trans., VQI.
AP-6, pp.
338-340, October, 1958.
 6J.
Hammer.
I.
W.: Frequency-scanned Arrays, chap.
13 of" Radar Handbook," M.
I.
Skolnik (ed.),  McGraw-Hill Book Co., N.Y., 1970.
 64.
Begovich.
N.
A.: Frequency Scanning, chap.
2 of" Microwave Scanning Antennas, Vol.
III," R.
C.
 Hansen (ed.).
Academic Press, N.Y ..
1966.
 65.
Radford.
M.
F.: Frequency Scanning Aerials, Electronic Engineering, vol.
36, pp.
222-226, April,  1964.
 66.
Milne, K.: The Combination of Pulse Compression with Frequency Scanning for Three-Dimensional  Radars.
Radio Electronic Engr., vol.
28, pp.
89-106, Aug., 1964.
 67.
Croney, J.: Doubly Dispersive Frequency Scanning Antenna, Microwm·e J., vol.
6, pp.
76-80, July,  196J.
 68.
Loughren.
A.
V.: System for Space-Scanning with a Radiated Beam of Wave Signals, U.S.
Patent  No.
2,409,944, issued Oct.
22, 1946.
 69.
Croney, J., and J.
R.
Mark: Design of a Volumetric Frequency Scanning Antenna, Proceedings  European Microwal'e Conference, Sept.
8-12, 1969, IEE Conference Publication No.
58, pp.
148-15 l.
 70.
Okubo, G.
H.: Helix Frequency Scanning Feed, Microwave J., vol.
8, pp.
39-44, December.
1965.
 71.
Dewey, R.: Corrugated Waveguide Frequency Scanning Aerials, Proceedings International Confer­ ence on Radar-Present and F11t11re, Oct.
23-25, 1973, IEE Conference Publication no.
105.
 pp.
100-105.
 340 l0<TIWDUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  72.
Wheeler, H.
A.: A Systematic Approach to the Design of a Radiator Element for a Phased-Array  Antenna, Proc.
IEEE, vol.
56, ·pp.
1940-1951, November, 1968.
 7.1.
Wheeler, H.
A.: A Survey of the Simulator Technique for Designing a Radiating Element in a  Phased-Array Antenna,·· Phased Array Antennas, Proceedings of the 1970 Phased Array Antenna  Symposium," Artech House, Inc., Dedham, Massachusetts, 1972, pp.
132 148.
 74.
Carter, P.
S., Jr.: Mutual Impedance Effects in Large Beam Scanning Arrays, I RE Trans., vol.
AP-8,  pp.
276-285, May, 1960.
 75.
Edelberg, S., and A.
A.
Oliner: Mutual Coupling in Large Arrays: pt.
I, Slot Arrays, I RE Trans.,  vol.
AP-8, pp.
286-297, May, 1960; pt.
II, Compensation Effects, pp.
360-367, July, 1960.
 76.
Oliner, A.
A., and R.
G.
Malech: Radiating Elements and Mutual Coupling," Microwave Scanning  Antennas, vol.
II," R.
C.
Hansen (ed.), Academic Press, N.Y., 1966, chap.
2.
 77.
Oliner, A.
A., and R.
G.
Malech: Mutual Coupling in Infinite Scanning Arrays," Microwave Scanning  Antennas, vol.
II," R.
C.
Hansen (ed.), Academic Press, N.Y., 1966, chap.
3.
 78.
Stark.
L.: Comparison of Array Element Types," Phased Array Antennas, Proceedings of the 1970  Phased Array Antenna Symposium," Artech House, Inc., Dedham, Mass., 1972, pp.
51-67.
 79.
Knittel.
G.
H.: Design of Radiating Elements for Large Planar Arrays: Accomplishthents and Re­ maining Challenges, Microwai·e J., vol.
15, pp, 27-34, September, 1972.
 80.
Kurtz, L.A ..
and R.
S.
Elliott: Systematic Errors Caused by the Scanning of Antenna Arrays: Phase  Shifters in the Branch Lines, IRE Trans., vol.
AP-4, pp, 619-627, October, 1956.
 81.
Scudder, R.
M., and W.
H.
Sheppard: AN/SPY-I Phased-Array Antenna, Microwal'e J., vol.
17,  pp.
51-55, May, 1974.
 8~.
Cheston, T.
C..
and J.
Frank: Array Antennas, chap.
I l of Radar Ha11dbook, M.
I.
Skolnik (ed.),  McGraw-Hill Book Co., New York, 1970.
 83.
Hill, R.
T.: Phased Array Feed Systems, A Survey, ..
Phased Array Antennas, Proceedings of the 1970  Phased Array Antenna Symposium," A.
A.
Oliner and G.
H.
Knittel (eds.), Artech House, Dedham.
 Mass ..
1972, pp.
197-211.
 84.
Odium, W.
J.: Selection of a Phased Array Antenna for Radar Applications, IEEE Trans, vol.
AES-3,  no.
6 (Supplement), pp.
226-235, November, 1967.
 85.
Blass, J.: Multidirectional Antenna-A New Approach to Stacked Beams, 1960 I RE lt11ematio11u/  Co11re11rio11 Record, pt.
I, pp.
48-50.
 86.
Shelton, J.
P., and K.
S.
Kelleher: Multiple Beams from Linear Arrays, IRE Trans., vol.
AP-9,  pp.
154-161, March, 1961.
 87.
Delaney, W.
P.: An RF Multiple Beam-Forming Technique.
IRE Trnns., vol.
MIL-6.
pp.
179-186.
 April, i%2.
 88.
White, W.
D.: Pattern Limitations in Multiple-Beam Antennas, I RE Trall\., vol.
AP-10, pp.
410 416,  July, 1962.
 89.
Moody, H.
J.: The Systematic Design of the Butler Matrix, IEEE Tra11s ..
vol.
A P-11.
pp.
786--788.
 Nov., 1964.
 90.
Butler, J.
L.: Digital.
Matrix, and Intermediate-Frequency Scanning, chap.
3 of ..
Microwave Scan­ ning Antennas, vol.
Jll," R.
C.
Hansen (ed.), Academic Press, New York, 1966, pp.
217-288.
 91.
Shelton, J.
P.: Multibeam Planar Arrays, Proc.
I £EE, vol.
56, pp.
1818-21, November, 1968.
 92.
Nester, W.
H.: The Fast Fourier Transform and the Butler Matrix, IEEE Tra11s., vol.
AP-16, p.
360,  May, 1968.
 93.
Shelton, J.
W.: Fast Fourier Transform and Butler Matrices, Proc.
1 EEE.
vol.
56, p.
350, Mardi,  1968.
 94.
Withers, M.
J.: Frequency Insensitive Phase-Shift Networks and their use in a Wide-Bandwidth  Butler Matrix, Electronics Letters, vol.
5, No.
20, pp.
416-198, Oct.
2, 1969.
 95.
Chow, P.
E.
K., and D.
E.
N.
Davies: Wide Bandwidth Butler Matrix, Electronics Letters, vol.
3,  pp.
252-253, June, 1967.
 96.
Shelton, J.P.: Reduced Sidelobes for Butler-Matrix-Fed Linear Arrays, IEEE Trans., vol.
AP-17,  pp.
645-47, September, 1969.
 97.
Foster, H.
E., and R.
E.
Hiatt: Butler Network Extension to Any Number of Antenna Ports, I EE£  Trnns., vol.
AP-18, pp.
818-820, November, 1970.
 98.
Cheston, T.
C., and J.
Frank: Array Antennas, chap.
11 of" Radar Handbook," M.
I.
Skolnik (ed.),  McGraw-Hill Book Co., New York, 1970, sec.
1 l.9.
 99.
Sheleg, B.: Butler Submatrix Feed Systems for Antenna Arrays, IEEE Trans., vol.
AP-21, pp.
228-9,  March, 1973.
 JOO.
Hering, K.
H.: The Design of Hybrid Multiple Beam Forming Networks," Phased Array Antennas,"  A.
A.
Oliner and G.
H.
Knittel (eds.), Artech House, Inc., Dedham, Mass., 1972, pp.
240-242.
 JOI.
Cottony, H.
V., and A.
C.
Wilson: A High-Resolution Rapid-Scan Antenna, J.
Res.
Natl.
Bur.
Std.,  vol.
65D, pp.
101-l lO, 1961.
 1111' FI.ITTRONICALI.Y STEERED PHASED ARRAY ANTENNA IN RADAR 341  102.
Davies.
D.
E.
N.: A Fast Electronically Scanned Radar Receiving System, J.
Brit.
Inst.
Radio E11grs ..
 vol.
22.
pp.
305-318, April, 1961.
 103.
Johnson.
M.
A.: Phased-Array Beam Steering by Multiplex Sampling, Proc.
IEEE, vol.
56.
 pp.
1801-1811.
November, 1968.
 104.
Radford, M.
F ..
and R.
Greenwood: A Within-Pulse Scanning Height-Finder, International Co11(er­ e11ce rm Radar-- Prese11r a11d F11t11re, IEE Conference Publication, no.
105, pp.
50-55, 1973.
 I05.
Schrank.
11.
F ..
W.
11.
I looper.
and R.
S.
Davis: A Study of Array Beam Switching Techniques.
Ro111e  Air l>er-elo11111e11t Center Tl'Clrnical Doc11111e11tary Report No.
RADC-TDR-64-421, December, 1964.
 10(,.
Farth-hased Flectronics, /:lcctronics.
vol.
34, no.
46, pp.
114, 115, 117.
Nov.
17.
1961.
 107.
( ienl, 11.: The Bootlace Aerial, RRL J.
(Royal Radar Establishment, Malvern.
England).
110.
40.
 pp.
47 58.
October.
1957.
 108.
Shelton.
J.
P ..
Jr ..
and K.
S.
Kelleher: Recent Electronic Scanning Developments.
Co11f Proc ..
Fourth  Natl.< ·om·.
011 Military Llcctronics.
pp.
JO-J4, 1960.
 109.
Skolnik.
M.
I.: Nonuniform Arrays.
chap.
6 of"Antenna Theory, pt.
I." R.
E.
Collin and F.
J.
Zucker  (eds.).
McGraw-Hill Book Co., New York, 1969, p.
231.
 110.
Rondinelli, L.
A.: Effects of Random Errors on the Performance of Antenna Arrays of Many Ele­ ments./ RE Natl.
Conr.
Record, vol.
7, pt.
I.
pp.
174-187, 1959.
 111.
Leichter, M.: Beam Pointing Errors of Long Line Sources.
Hughes Aircraft Co.
Tech.
Mem.
588.
 April.
1959; also IRE Trans., vol.
AP-8, pp.
268-275, May, 1960.
 112.
Ruze.
J.: Physical Limitations on Antennas.MIT Research Lah.
Electronics Tech.
Rept.
248.
Oct.
30,  1952.
 11 J.
Elliot.
R.
S.: Mechanical and Electrical Tolerances for Two-dimensional Scanning Antenna Arrays.
 IRE Trans., vol.
AP-6.'pp.
114-120.
January, 1958.
 114.
Bates.
R.
H.
T.: Random Errors in Aperture Distributions, IRE Trans., vol.
AP-7, pp.
369-372,  Octoher.
19.59.
 115.
Miller.
C.
J.: Minimizing the Effects of Phase Quantization Errors in an Electronically Scanned  Array." Proceedings of Symposium on Electronically Scanned Array Techniques and Applications,"  Ro111e Air De1·elop111ent Center Technical D0rnme111ary Report No.
RADC-TDR-64-225, vol.
I,  PP 11 38.
July.
1964.
 116.
('hampine.
G.
A.: Computer Control of Array Radar, Sperrr Enqineeriny Reriew.
vol.
18, No.
4.
 rr-I 8 23.
Winter.
1965.
 117.
SchclT.
B.
fl..
and D.
G.
Hammel: Real-time Computer Control of Phased Array Radars.
Suppl.
to  I 1-.LT·: Fram 011 Aerospace a11d Electronic S_rste111s, vol.
AES-3, no.
6, pp.
198-206, Nov., 1967.
 I IR.
Reed.
J.E.: The AN/FPS-85 Radar System, Proc.
IEEE.
vol.
57, pp.
324-335.
March, 1969.
 119.
Johnson.
C.
M.: Ballistic-Missile Defense Radars, IEEE Spectrum, vol.
7, pp.
32-41, March, 1970.
 120.
Weins1<1ck.
W.: Computer Control of a Multifunction Radar, RC A Engineer, vol.
18, no.
I.
June­ .July.
1972.
 121.
Baugh.
R.
A.: "Computer Control of Modern Radars," Privately published by RCA Inc., 1973.
 122.
Motkin.
D.
L.: Three-dimensional Air Surveillance Radar.
Systems Teclmolog_v.
(Plcssey Co.
!ford.
 England).
no.
21.
pp.
29 33.
June.
1975.
 I 2.1.
Knittel.
G.
II.: Choosing the Number of Faces of a_ Phased-Array Antenna for Hemisphere Scan  Coverate.
IEEE Trans ..
vol.
AP-13, pp.
878-882, Nov., 1965.
 124.
Krnetrn.
J.
L.: An Analytical Approach to the Coverage of a Hemisphere by N Planar Phased  Arrays.
TEEE Trans., vol.
AP-IS.
pp.
367-371.
May, 1967.
 12.5.
Hering.
K.
H.: Optimization of Tilt Angle and Element Arrangement for Planar Arrays, Microwar•e  .I .• vol.
14.
pp.
41-51.
Jan .• 1971.
 126.
Liebman, P.
M ..
L.
Schwartzman, and A.
E.
Hylas: Dome Radar-A New Phased Array System,  Record of rite IEEE 1975 l11ternatio11al Radar Conference, pp.
349-353, Apr.
21-23, 1975, IEEE Publi­ cation 75 CHO 938-1 AES.
 127.
Bearse.
S.
V.: Planar Array Looks Through Lens to Provide Hemispherical Coverage, M icrowaues,  vol.
14.
pp.
9-10, July.
1975.
 128.
Schwartzman.
L..
and J.
Stangel: The Dome Antenna, Microwar•e J., vol.
18.
pp.
31-34, October.
 1975.
 129.
Schwartzman.
L..
and P.
M.
Liebman: A Report on the Sperry Dome Radar, Microwm•e J., vol.
22.
 pp.
65 69.
March.
1979.
 130.
Hansen, R.
C.: Conformal Arrays, J\ficrmW11·e J., vol.
13.
p.
39, April, 1970.
 131.
Sureau, J.C.: Conformal Arrays Corne or Age, Microwal'e J., vol.
16.
pp.
23-26.
October, 197J.
 132.
Giannini.
R.
J., J.
H.
Gutman.
and P.
W.
Hannon: A Cylindrical Phased-Array Antenna for ATC  Interrogation.
Microwat•e J ..
vol.
16, pp.
46-49, October, 1973.
 LU.
Kummer, W.
H.
(ed.): Special Issue on Conformal Arrays, IEEE Tra11s., vol.
AP-22, no.
I, January.
 1974.
 342 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  134.
Hansen, R.
C.: Workshop on Conformal Arrays, Microwa,,e J., vol.
18, p.
28, October, 1975.
 135.
Hsiao, J.
K .• and A.G.
Cha: Patterns a,nd Polarizations of Simultaneously Excited Planar Arrays on  a Conformal Surface, I EE£ Trans., vol.
AP-22, pp.
81-84, January, 1974.
 136.
Skolnik, M.
I.: Nonuniform Arrays, chap.
6 in "Antenna Theory, pt.
I," R.
E.
Collin and F.
J.
Zuder  (eds.), McGraw-Hill Book Co., New York, 1969.
 137.
Skolnik, M.
I., G.
Nemhauser, and J.
W.
Sherman: Dynamic Programming Applied to Unequally  Spaced Arrays, IEEE Tram.., vol.
AP-12, pp.
35-43, January, 1964.
 138.
Skolnik, M.
I., J.
W.
Sherman, and F.
C.
Ogg: Statistically Designed Density-tapered Arrays, I £EE  Trans., vol.
AP-12, pp.
408-417, July, 1964.
 139.
Steinberg, B.
D.: The Peak Sidelobe of the Phased Array Having Randomly ~ocated Elements, I £EE  Trans ..
vol.
AP-20, pp.
129-136, March, 1972.
 140.
Skolnik, M.
I.: Resolution of Angular Ambiguities in Radar Array Antennas with Widely-Spaced  Elements and Grating Lobes, IEEE Trans., vol.
AP-10, pp.
351-352, May, 1962.
 141.
Goto, N., and D.
K.
Cheng: Phase Shifter Thinning and Sidelobe Reduction for Large Phased  Arrays, IEEE Trans., vol.
AP-24, pp.
139-143, March, 1976.
 142.
Hansen.
R.
C.
(ed.): Special Issue on Active and Adaptive Antennas,/£££ Trans., vot.
AP-12.
no.
2,  March, 1964.
 143.
Skolnik, M.
I., and D.
D.
King: Self-Phasing Arrays, IEEE Trans., vol.
AP-12, pp.
142-49, March,  1964.
 144.
Widrow, B., P.
E.
Mantey, L.
J.
Griffiths, and B.
B.
Goode: Adaptive Antenna Systems, Proc.
IEEE.
 vol.
55, pp.
2143-2159, December, 1967.
 145.
Gabriel.
W.
F.: Adaptive Array Antennas for AEW Radar, Report of NRL Progress.
pp.
39 44,  December, 1972.
 146.
Brennan, L.
E., and l.
S.
Reed: Theory of Adaptive Radar, IEEE Trans., vol.
AES-9.
pp.
237-2S2.
 March, 1973.
 147.
Zahm, C.
L.: Application of Adaptive Arrays to Suppress Strong Jammers in the Presence of Weak  Signals, IEEE Trans., vol.
AES-9, pp.
260--27 l, March, 1973.
 148.
Brennan, L.
E., I.
S.
Reed, and P.
Swerling: Adaptive Arrays, Microware J., vol.
17.
pp.
43.
46.
p.
74,  May, 1974.
 149.
O'Donovan, P.
L., and A.
W.
Rudge: Adaptive Control of a Flexible Linear Array.
£Jectro11ics  Letters, vol.
9, pp.
121-122, Mar.
22, 1973.
 150.
Gabriel.
W.
F.: Adaptive Arrays-An Introduction, Proc.
IEEE, vol.
64, pp.
239-272, February,  1976.
 15 l.
Gabriel, W.
F.
(ed.): Special Issue on Adaptive Antennas, IEEE Trans., vol.
AP-24, September, 1976.
 152.
Sharp, E.
D.: A Triangular Arrangement or Planar-Array Elements that Reduces the Number  Needed, IRE Trans., vol.
AP-9, pp.
126-129, March, 1961.
 153.
Cheng, D.
H.
S.: Characteristics of Triangular Lattice Arrays.
Proc.
IEEE, vol.
56, pp.
1811-1817.
 November, 1968.
 154.
Nelson, E.
A.: Quantization Sidelobes of a Phased Array with a Triangular Element Arrangement,  IEEE Trans., vol.
AP-17, pp.
363-365, May.
1969.
 155.
Garver, R.
V.: "Microwave Diode Control Devices," Artech House, (nc., 1976.
 156.
Whicker, L.
R., and R.
R.
Jones: A Digital Current Controlled Latching Ferrite Phase Shifter, I fEE  1965 International Convention Record, pt.
V, pp.
217-223.
 157.
Ward, H.
R., C.
A.
Fowler, and H.
I.
Lipson: GCA Radars: Their History and State of Development.
 Proc.
IEEE, vol.
62, pp.
705-716, June, 1974.
 158.
Ethington, D.
A.: The AN;TPQ-36 and AN;TPQ-37 Firefinder Radars, lmernational Cuuference  RADAR-77, Oct.
25-28, 1977, IEE (London) Publication no.
155, pp.
33-35.
 159.
Ruvin, A.
E., and L.
Weinberg: Digital Multiple Beamforming Techniques for Radar, I £EE  EASCON '78 Record, pp.
152-163, Sept.
25-27, 1978, IEEE Publication 78 CH 1354-4 AES.
 160.
Malagisi, C.
S.: Microstrip Disc Element .Reflect Array, IEEE EASCON '78 Recunl, pp.
186-192.
 Sept.
25-27, 1978, IEEE Publication 78 CH 1352-4 AES.
 161.
Ricardi, L.
J.: Array Beam-Forming Networks, MIT Lincoln Lahoratory Teclinical Note 1965-12.
 13 April 1965.
 162.
Whicker, L.
R., and C.
W.
Young, Jr.: The Evolution of Ferrite Control Components.
Microware J.,  vol.
21, pp.
33-37, November, 1978.
 CHAPTER  NINE  RECEIVERS, DISPLAYS, AND DUPLEXERS  9.1 THE RADAR RECEIVER  The function of the radar receiver is to detect desired echo signals in the presence of noise,  interference, or clutter.
It must separate wanted from unwanted signals, and amplify the  wanted signals to a level where target information can be displayed to an operator or used in  an automatic data processor.
The design of the radar receiver will depend not only on the type  of waveform to be detected, but on the nature of the noise, interference, and clutter echoes with  which the desired echo signals must compete.
In this chapter, the receiver design is considered  mainly as a problem of extracting desired signals from noise.
Chapter 13 considers the problem  of radar design when the desired signals must compete with clutter.
The current chapter also  includes brief discussions of radar displays and duplexers.
 Noise can enter the receiver via the antenna terminals along with the desired signals, or it  might be generated within the receiver itself.
At the microwave frequencies usually used for  radar.
the external noise which enters via the antenna is generally quite low so that the receiver  sensitivity is usually set by the internal noise generated within the receiver.
(External noise is  discussed in Sec.
12.8.) The measure of receiver internal noise is the noise-figure (introduced  previously in Sec.
2.3).
 Good receiver design is based on maximizing the output signal-to-noise ratio.
As  described in Sec.
10.2, to maximize the output signal-to-noise ratio, the receiver must be  designed as a matched filter, or its equivalent.
The matched filter specifies the frequency  response function of the IF part of the radar receiver.
Obviously, the receiver should be  designed to generate as little internal noise as possible, especially in the input stages where the  desired signals are weakest.
Although special attention must be paid to minimize the noise of  the input stages, the lowest noise receivers are not always desired in many radar applications ir  other important receiver properties must be sacrificed.
 Receiver design also must be concerned with achieving sufficient gain, phase, and ampli­ tude stability, dynamic range, tuning, ruggedness, and simplicity.
Protection must be provided  against overload or saturation, and burnout from nearby interfering tr~nsmitters.
Timing and  344 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  reference signals are needed to properly extract target information.
Spt!cific applications such  as MTI radar, tracking radar, or radars designed Jo m inimizc duller place spccia I denrnnds on  the receiver.
Receivers that must operate with a transmitter whose frequency can drifl need  some means of automatic frequency control (AFC).
Radars that encounter hostile counter­ measures need receivers that can minimize the effects of such interference.
Thus there can be  many demands placed upon the receiver designer in meeting the requirements of modern  high-quality radar systems.
The receiver engineer has responded well to the challenge, and  there exists a highly refined state of technology available for radar applications.
Radar receiver  design and implementation may not always be an easy task; but in tribute to the receiver  designer, it has seldom been an obstacle preventing the radar systems engineer from eventually  accomplishing the desired objectives.
 Although the superregenerative, crystal video, and tuned radio frequency (TR F) receivers  have been employed in radar systems, the superheterodyne has seen almost exolusive applica­ tion because of its good sensitivity, high gain, selectivity, and reliability.
No other receiver type  has been competitive to the superheterodyne.
A simple block diagram of a radar superheter­ odyne receiver was shown in Fig.
1.2.
There are many factors that enter into the design of  radar receivers; however, only the receiver noise-figure and the receiver front-end, as thc;y  determine receiver sensitivity, will be discussed here.
 9.2 NOISE FIGURE  In Sec.
2.3 the noise figure of a receiver was described as a measure of the noise produced by a  practical receiver as compared with the noise of an ideal receiver.1.2 The noise figure I\ of a  linear network may be defined as  F = Sin/Nin = Nout  " SoutfNout kTo BnG  where Sin = available input signal power  Nin = available input noise power (equal to kT0 Bn)  S0u, = available output signal power  N0u, = available output noise power (9.
l)  "Available power" refers to the power which would be delivered to a matched load.
The  available gain G is equal to S0u1/Sin, k Boltzmann's constant = 1.38 x 10-23 J/deg.
 T0 = standard temperature of 290 K (approximately room temperature), and Bn is the noise  bandwidth defined by Eq.
(2.3).
The product kT0 ~ 4 x 10-21 W/Hz.
The purpose for  defining a standard temperature is to refer any measurements to a common basis of compari­ son.
Equation (9.1) permits two different but equivalent interpretations of noise figure.
It may  be considered as the degradation of the signal-to-noise ratio caused hy the network (receiver),  or it may be interpreted as the ratio of the actual available output noise power to the noise  power which would be available if the network merely amplified the thermal noise.
The  noise figure may also be written ·  ~To BnG + l!:.N = l + l!:.N  kToBnG kToBnG (9.2)  where l!:.N is the additional noise introduced by the network itself.
 The noise figure is commonly expressed in decibels, that is, JO log F n.
The term noise  factor is also used aftimes instead of noise figure.
The two terms are now synonymous.
 RECEIVERS, IJISPLAYS, ANIJ IJUPLEXERS 345  The definition of noise figure assumes the input and output of the network are matched.
 In some devices.
less noise is obtained under mismatched, rather than matched, conditions.
In  spite of definitions.
such networks would be operated so as to achieve the maximum output  signal-to-noise ratio.
 Noise figure of networks in cascade.
Consider two networks in cascade, each with the same  noise bandwidth B" but with dilTerent noise figures and available gain (Fig.
9.1 ).
Let F 1, GI be  the noise figure and available gain, respectively, of the first network, and F 2, G2 be similar  parameters for the second network.
The problem is to find F O, the overall noise-figure of the  two circuits in cascade.
From the definition of noise figure (Eq.
(9.l)J the output noise N0 of  the two circuits in cascade is  N" = F" GIG 2 k J;, B" = noise from network 1 at output of network 2  + noise 11N 2 introduced by network 2  No= k'l~BnF1G1G2 + 11N2 = kT0BnF,G,G2 + (F2 -l)kT0BnG2  or (9.3a)  (9.3b)  (9.4)  The contribution of the second network to the overall noise-figure may be made negligible if  the gain of the first network is large.
This is of importance in the design of multistage receivers.
 It is not sufficient that only the first stage of a low-noise receiver have a small noise figure.
The  succeeding stage must also have a small noise figure, or else the gain of the first stage must be  high enough to swamp the noise of the succeeding stage.
If the first network is not an amplifier  but is a network with loss (as in a crystal mixer), the gain G 1 should be interpreted as a number  less than unity.
 The noise figure of N networks in cascade may be sh.own to be  F = F + F 2 -I + F.]_-= 1 + ...
+ ___ _!_~_-=-_!_ ___ _  o I G, G,G2 G,G2···GN-I (9.5)  Similar expressions may be derived when bandwidths and/or the temperature of the individual  networks aremot the same.3  Noise temperature.
The noise introduced by a network may also be expressed as an effective  noise temperature, T.., defined as that (fictional) temperature at the input of the network which  would account for the noise 11N at the output.
Therefore !l.N = kYe B" G and  (9.6)  (9.7)  The system noise temperature I: is defined as the effective noise temperature of the receiver  system including the effects of antenna temperature T,,.
(It is also sometimes called the system  Figure 9.1 Two networks in cascade.
 346 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  operating noise temperature.60) If the receiver effective noise temperature is -~, then  'f:.
= Ta+ Te= To Fs  where Fs is the system noise-figure including the effect of antenna temperature.
(9.8)  The effective noise temperature of a receiver consisting of a number of networks m  cascade is  (9.9)  where ~ and Gi are the effective noise temperature and gain of the ith network.
 The effective noise temperature and the noise figure both describe the same characteristic  of a network.
In general, the effective noise temperature has been preferred f9r describing  low-noise devices, and the noise figure is preferred for conventional receivers.
For radar  receivers the noise figure is the more widely used term, and is what is used in this text.
 Measurement of noise figure.
The noise figure of a radar receiver can degrade in operation and  cause reduced capability.
Therefore some means for monitoring the noise figure should be  provided in operating radars so that a worsening of receiver sensitivity can be detected and  corrected.
The monitoring of the noise figure can be accomplished either automatically or  manually by the operator.
 The receiver noise-figure can be measured with a broadband noise source of known  intensity, such as a gas-discharge tube22 or a solid-~tate noise source.
The noise figure is  determined by measuring ( 1) the noise power output N 1 of the receiver when a matched  impedance at temperature T0 = 290 K is connected to the receiver input and (2) the noise  power output N 2 when a matched noise generator of temperature T2 is connected to the  receiver input.2 The temperature T2 is the equivalent noise temperature of the broadband noise  ,;enerator.
The noise figure can be shown to be  (9.10)  where Y N2/N1•  The measurement of noise figure can be made during radar operation without degrading  the receiver sensitivity by pulse-modulating the noise source in synchronism with the radar  trigger and injecting the noise into the receiver during the "fly back" or "dead time" of the  radar, just prior to the triggering of the next transmitter pulse.
The measurement of the  receiver output with the noise source on (N 2) and the noise source off (Ni) can be made on  alternate pulse periods.
 The receiver noise-figure or sensitivity can also be measured by use of a calibrated signal  generator.
With a matched resistance at the receiver input, the output power is due to receiver  noise alone.
The signal generator power is then applied to the receiver input and adjusted until  the signal-plus-noise power is equal to twice the receiver noise power read with the matched  resistance.
The input signal under this condition is sometimes said to be the minimum discern­ ible signal.
It is also proportional to.
the receiver noise-figure.
 The sensitivity of a radar may be visually displayed by using the measurement of receiver  noise to display the normal range rings on the PPI only within the range at which the radar  can detect targets reliably.
This provides the operator with a continuous and immediate  indication of radar sensitivity.
When noise jamming is present, the appearance or nonappear­ ance of the range rings can be.made to be a function of azimuth as well as range.
 RECEIVERS, DISPLAYS, AND DUPLEXERS 347  In making a measurement of the receivernoise-figure, the noise source or signal generator  is usually inserted by a directional coupler ahead of the duplexer and other RF components so  that the overall noise-figure of the system is measured rather than that of the receiver alone.
 9.3 l\tlXERS  Many radar superheterodyne receivers do not employ a low-noise RF amplifier.
Instead, the  first stage is simply the mixer.
Although the noise figure of a mixer front-end may not be as low  as other devices that can be used as receiver front-ends, it is acceptable for many radar  applications when other factors besides low noise are important.
The function of the mixer is  to convert RF energy to IF energy with minimum loss and without spurious responses.
Silicon  point-contact and Schottky-barrier diodes 15•24 based on the nonlinear resistance character­ istic of metal-to-semiconductor contacts have been used as the mixing element.4•5 Schottky­ harrier diodes are made of either silicon or GaAs, with GaAs preferred for the higher  microwave frequencies.
The Schottky-barrier diodes have had lower noise figures and lower  flicker noise than conventional point-contact diodes, but the silicon point-contact diode has  had better burnout properties.
An integral part or the mixer is the local oscillator.
The IF  amplifier is also of importance in mixer design because of its influence on the overall  noise-figure.
 Conversion loss and noise-temperature ratio.
The conversion loss of a mixer is defined as  L = ~~~i!~~l: RF power  c available IF power (9.11)  It is a measure of the efficiency of the mixer in converting RF signal power into IF.
The  conversion loss of typical microwave crystals in a conventional single-ended mixer  configuration varies from about 5 to 6.5 dB.
A crystal mixer is called "broadband" when the  signal and image frequencies are both terminated in matched loads.
A signal impressed in  the RF signal channel of a broadband mixer is converted in equal portions to the IF signal and  the RF image.
Therefore the theoretical conversion loss can never be less than 3 dB with this  configuration.
(The image frequency is defined as that frequency which is displaced from the  local oscillator frequency fi.0 by the IF frequency, and which appears on the opposite side of  the local oscilfator frequency as the signal frequency !RF.
It is equal to 2JLo -faF .)  Short-circuiting or open-circuiting the image-frequency termination results in a" narrow­ band " mixer.
The conversion loss is less in the narrowband than in the broadband mixer.
In  principle, it can be about 2 dB lower.6 The design of a broadband mixer has been simpler to  achieve and less critical than a narrowband mixer.
 The 11oise-temperature ratio of a crystal mixer (not to be confused with effective noise  temperature) is defined as  actual available IF noise power t = ..
.
.
.
..
·---·----------··  ' available noise power from an equivalent resistance (9.12a)  or = Fc~ToBnGc = F G = Fe  tr k To B" c c L, (9.12b)  · where Fe = crystal mixer noise figure and Le 1/Gc = conversion loss.
The noise temperature  ratio of a crystal mixer varies approximately inversely with frequency from about 100 kHz (the  exact value depends upon the diode25) down to a small fraction of a hertz.
This is called flicker  348 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  noise, or 1 /f noise.
Above approximately 500 kHz, the noise-temperature ratio approaches a  constant value.
At a frequency of30 MHz, a typical radar IF, it might range from 1.3 to 2.0.
 From Eq.
(9.12b) the noise figure of the mixer is Fe = t, Le.
This, however, is not a  complete measure of the sensitivity of a receiver with a mixer front-end.
The overall noise­ figure depends not only on the mixer stage, but also on the noise figure of the IF stage and the  mixer conversion loss.
It may be determined from the expression for the noise figure of two  networks in cascade [Eq.
(9.4)].
The first network is the mixer with noise figure t, Le and  gain = 1/ Le.
The second network is the IF amplifier with a noise figure F1F.
The receiver  noise-figure with a mixer front-end is then  F2 -l F0 = F1 + G, = Lc{t, + FIF -1) (9.13)  (This does not include losses in the RF transmission line connecting the rc.ceiver to the  antenna.) If, for example, the conversion loss of the mixer were 6.0 dB, the IF noise figure 1.5 dB,  and the noise-temperature ratio 1.4, the receiver noise figure would be 8.6 dB.
For low-noise­ temperature-ratio diodes, the receiver noise figure is approximately equal to the conversion  loss times the IF noise figure.
 Balanced mixers.
Noise that accompanies the local-oscillator (LO) signal can appear at the IF  frequency because of the nonlinear action of the mixer.
The LO noise must be removed if  receiver sensitivity is to be maximized.
One method for eliminating LO noise that interferes  with the desired signal is to insert a narrow-bandpass RF filter between the local oscillator and  the mixer.
The center frequency of the filter is that of the local oscillator, and its bandwidth  must be narrow so that LO noise at the signal and the image frequencies do not appear at the  mixer.
Since the receiver is tuned by changing the LO frequency, the narrowband filter must be  tunable also.
 A method of eliminating local-oscillator noise without the disadvantage of a narrow­ bandwidth filter is the balanced mixer (Fig.
9.2).
A balanced mixer uses a hybrid junction, a  magic T, or an equivalent.
These are four-port junctions.
Figure 9.2 illustrates a magic T in  which the LO and RF signals are applied to two ports.
Diode mixers are in each of the  remaining two arms of the magic T.
At one of the diodes the sum of the RF and LO signals  appears, and at the other diode the difference of the two is obtained.
(In a magic T the LO  would be applied to the H-plane arm, and the RF signal would be applied to the £-plane arm.
Y  The diode mixers would be mounted at equal distances in each of the collinear arms.) The  two diode mixers should have identical characteristics and be well matched.
The IF signal is  LO RF  t J  RF  IF ou!pul Figure 9.2 Principle of the balanced mixer based on the magic T.
 RECEIVERS, DISPLAYS, AND DUPLEXERS 349  recovered by subtracting the outputs of the two diode mixers.
In Fig.
9.2 the balanced diodes  are shown reversed so that the IF outputs can be added.
Local-oscillator noise at the two  diode mixers will be in phase and will be canceled at the output.
It is only the AM noise of the  local oscillator which is canceled.
The FM noise inserted by the local oscillator is unaffected by  the balanced mixer.9  In a single-ended mixer, the mixing action generates all harmonics of the RF and LO  frequencies.
and com'1inations thereof.
7 The output is designed to filter out the frequency of  interest.
usually the uiJTercncc frequency.
A balanced mixer suppresses the even harmonics of  the LO signal.
A do11hle-/,ala11cecl mixer is basically two single-ended mixers connected in  parallel and 180" out of phase.
It suppresses even harmonics of both the RF and the LO  signals.8·55  Reactive image termination.
If the image frequency of a mixer is presented with the proper  reactive termination (such as an open or a short circuit), the conversion loss and the noise  figure can be l to 2 dB less than with a "broadband" mixer in which the image frequency is  terminated in a matched load.
6• 1° The reactive termination causes energy converted to the  image frequency to be renected back into the mixer and reconverted to IF.16•24  Both the sum and the image frequencies can be reflected back to the diode mixer to  achieve a lower conversion loss, but a number of adjustments are required for good results.24  One method for terminating the image in a reactive load is to employ a narrow bandpass filter,  or preselect or, at the RF signal frequency.
A limitation of this approach is that it is not suitable  for very wide bandwidths.
The filter has to be retuned if the mixer must operate at another  frequency.
Also, the high Q of the filter introduces a loss which will increase the system  noise-figure.
 A method for achieving a reactive termination without narrow-bandwidth components is  the image-recovery mixer shown in Fig.
9.3.
This has also been called an image-enhanced  mixer, 11 or product return mixer.56 (It is similar to the image-reject mixer6•7•11•55 whose  purpose is to reject the image response.) The RF hybriq junction on the left of the circuit  produces a 90" phase difference between the LO inputs to the two mixers.
The IF hybrid  junction on the right imparts another 90° phase differential in such a manner that the images  cancel, but the IF signals from the two mixers add in phase.
The two mixers in Fig.
9.3 may be  single-ended, balanced, or double-balanced mixers.
12 This mixer is capable of wide bandwidth,  and is restricted only by the rrequency sensitivity of the structure of the microwave circuit.
The  noise figure of an image-recovery circuit (Fig.
9.4) is competitive with other receiver front­ ends.
The irhage-recovery mixer is attractive as a receiver front-end because of its high dy­ namic range, low intermodulation products, less susceptibility to burnout, and less cost as  compared to other front-ends.
1 3  RF  input LO 90°  hybrid  Junction Diode  mixer  Diode  m,xer 90°  hybrid  junction IF  output  Figure 9.3 Image-recovery mixer.
 350 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  Diode burnout.
A crystal diode which is subjected to excessive RF power may surfer burnout.
 This is a rather loosely defined term which is applied to any irreversible deterioration in the  detection or conversion properties of a crystal diode as the result or electrical overload.
If  excessive RF energy is applied to the diode the heat generated cannot be dissipated properly  and the diode can be damaged.
Excessive energy causes the diode to open-circuit or the  semiconductor to puncture, resulting in failure of the device.
As defined above, however,  burnout of a diode can occur before the onset of physical destruction.
An increase in the  receiver noise due to the effects of excessive RF energy can be just as harmful as complete  destruction; perhaps more so, for gradual deterioration of performance might not be noticed  as readily as would catastrophic failure.
It is for this reason that some means of automatic  monitoring of receiver noise-figure is necessary if the radar is to be maintained in prime  operating conditions.
 A degradation in the noise figure of a predetermined amount usually is co9sidered as the  criterion for diode failure when defining burnout.
Sometimes an increase in noise figure of  3 dB has been used as the criterion.
19 In other cases, a 1-d B increase has been used.15  However, with Schottky and point·contact diodes, there is an increase in 1/f noise and a  decrease in the breakdown voltage at lower power levels than would be indicated by the above  criteria.
14  One of the causes of diode burnout in radar receivers has been the increased RF leakage  through a conventional duplexer due to aging of the TR tube.
When the transmitter fires, the  TR tube breaks down.
A finite time, usually on the order of several nanoseconds, must elapse  before breakdown is complete.
During this time, RF energy leaks into the receiver.
This is  called the spike•leakage energy.
From l to 10 ergs of spike-leakage energy might be required to  burn out microwave crystal diodes.
The amount of energy contained within the remainder of  the pulse after the initial spike is usually small and is not as serious as spike leakage.
 When a solid·state duplexer is used or when a solid-state limiter follows the TR switch,  there need be no initial spike and burnout is not determined by the pulse energy.
Burnout due  to pulses without an initial spike, but greater than about 1 µs in duration, is determined  primarily by the peak power.
16 (The burnout conditions for pulses 1 µs or greater is essentially  the same as for CW.) Crystal diodes can withstand several watts or more of peak power under  pulse conditions.
For pulses shorter than 1 µs, the peak-power capability increases, but not at  a sufficient rate for constant energy.15  In addition to leakage through the duplexer, diode burnout can result from the accidental  reception of power from nearby radars or from (he discharge of static electricity through the  diode.
 Noise figure due to RF losses.
Any losses in the RF portion ahead of the receiver front-end  result in a lowering of the overall noise-figure.
These losses, denoted Lu·, might be due to the  receiver transmission line, duplexer, rotary joint, preselector filter, monitoring devices.
or loss  in the randome.
The noise figure due to these RF losses may be derived from the definition of  Eq.
(9.1 ), which is  (9.1)  The noise N0u, from the lossy RF components is kT0 Bn, and G = 1/L,.F.
Therefore on substi·  tution into Eq.
(9.1 ), the noise figure F,.
due to the RF losses is simply  F,.
= LRF (9.14)  RECEIVERS, DISPLAYS, AND DUPLEXERS 35(  The noise figure of a receiver with noise figure F,, preceded by RF losses equal to LRF is  F2 -1 F o = Ft + -----· = LRF + (F, -l)LRF = F,LRF  G1  where F1 = LRF, G1 = 1/LRF, and F2 = F,.
 9.4 LOW-NOISE FRONT-ENDS (9.15)  Early microwave superheterodyne receivers did not use an RF amplifier as the first stage, or  front-end, since the RF amplifiers at that time had a greater noise figure than when the mixer  alone was employed as the receiver input stage.
There are now a number of RF amplifiers that  can provide a suitable noise figure.
Figure 9.4 plots noise figure as a function of frequency for  the several receiver front-ends used in radar applications.
The parametric amplifier10• 18 has  the lowest noise figure of those devices described here, especially at the higher microwave  frequencies.
However, it is generally more complex and expensive compared to the other  front-ends.
 The transistor amplifier can be applied over most of the entire range of frequencies of inter­ est to radar.10· 19·20 The silicon bipolar-transistor has been used at the lower radar frequencies  (he low L band) and the galium arsenide field-elTect transistor (GaAs FET) is preferred at the  60  5 0 - CD  ,:J 4 0 .
 ~ ::,  O'  (I.) 30 ..
"' 6 z  20  1 0 - 5000 10,000 30,000  Frequency -MHz  Figure 9.4 Noise figures of typical microwave receiver front-ends as a function of frequency- 352 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  higher frequencies.
The transistor is generally used in a multistage configuration with a  typical gain per stage decreasing from 12 dB at VHF to 6 dB at K11 band.
10 In the GaAs FET,  the thermal noise contribution is greater than the shot noise.
Cooling the device will therefore  improve the noise figure.
2 1  The tunnel-diode amplifier has been considered in the past as a low-noise front-end, with  noise figures from 4 to 7 dB over the range 2 to 25 GHz.10 It has been supplanted by the  improvements made in the transistor amplifier.
The traveling-wave-tube amplifier has also  been considered as a low-noise front-end, but it has been overtaken by other devices.
Cryo­ genic parametric amplifiers and masers produce the lowest noise figures, but the added  complexity of operating at low temperatures has tempered their use in radar.
 The noise figure of the ordinary "broadband" mixer whose image frequency is ter­ minated in a matched load is not shown in Fig.
9.4.
It would lie about 2 dB higher than the  noise figure shown for the image-recovery mixer.
->  There are other factors beside the noise figure which can influence the selection of a  receiver front-end.
Cost, burnout, and dynamic range must also be considered.
The selection of  a particular type of receiver front-end might also be influenced by its instantaneous band­ width, tuning range, phase and amplitude stability, and any special requirements for cooling.
 The image-recovery mixer represents.
a practical compromise which tends to balance its  slightly greater noise figure by its lower cost, greater ruggedness, and greater dynamic range.13  Utility of low-noise front-ends.
The lower the noise figure of the radar receiver, the less need be  the transmitter power and/or the antenna aperture.
Reductions in the size of the transmitter  and the antenna are always desirable if there are no concomitant reductions in performance.
A  few decibels improvement in receiver noise-figure can be obtained at a relatively low cost as  compared to the cost and complexity of adding the same few decibels to a high-power  transmitter.
 There are, however, limitations to the use of a low-noise front-end in some radar  applications.
7 A~ mentioned above, the cost, burnout, and dynamic range of low-noise devices  might not be acceptable in some applications.
Even if the low-noise device itself is of large  dynamic range, there can be a reduction of the dynamic range of the receiver as compared to a  receiver with a mixer as its front-end.
Dynamic range is usually defined as the ratio of the  maximum signal that can be handled to the smallest signal capable of being detected.
The  smallest signal is the minimum detectable signal as determined by receiver noise, and  the maximum signal is that which causes a specified degree of intermodulation or a specified  deviation from linearity (usually l dB) of the output-vs.-input curve.
 When an RF amplifier is inserted ahead of the mixer stage, and if no change is made in the  remainder of the receiver, the minimum signal will be reduced because of the lower noise  figure of the RF amplifier, but the maximum signal that can be handled by the receiver will  also be reduced by an amount equal to the gain of the amplifier.
Since the gain of the RF  amplifier is usually high compared to the reduction in receiver noise-figure, the net result is a  reduction in receiver dynamic range.
However, this can be corrected and the original dynamic  range recovered by reducing the gain of the IF amplifier to maintain a constant output (or  constant noise level going into the display).54 On the other hand, if the mixer rather than the  IF amplifier is what limits the total dynamic range of the receiver, the introduction of the  low-noise front-end will cause a sacrifice in the mixer dynamic range and, consequently,  the dynamic range of the entire receiver.7  A low-noise receiver may also not be warranted if the RF losses preceding the receiver are  high.
From Eq.
(9.15) the overall noise figure of a radar receiver with a noise figure F, preceded  by RF circuitry with a loss l..ttF, is equal to F, l..ttF.
In a radar the overall loss l..ttF due to the  RECEIVERS, lJISPLAYS, AND DUPLEXERS 353  transmission line, rotary joint, duplexer, receiver protector, and preselector filter might not be  insignificant.
In some nonradar applications, as for example radio astronomy, most of these  lossy components are not necessary as th'ey ate ·1n radar, so that a low noise figure front-end  can be used effectively.
However, an extremely low receiver noise-figure is not usually warranted  in radar because of the unavoidable RF losses found in most radars.
Even if the noise figure of  the receiver were essentially O dB, the overall receiver noise-figure would still be equal to the  losses in the RF portion of the system.
 Jn a military radar, a low-noise receiver can make the radar more susceptible to the effects  of deliherate electronic countermeasures (ECM).
When practical, it may be preferred to delib­ erately employ a conventional receiver with modest sensitivity and to make up for the  reduced sensitivity by larger transmitter power.
This is not the most economical way to build a  radar.
hut it does make the task of the hostile ECM designer more difficult.
 J\ variety of low-noise radar receivers are available to the radar system designer.
The  well-recognized benefits of low-noise receivers, combined with their relative affordability,  make them an attractive feature in modern radar design.
However, low-noise receivers are  sometimes accompanied by other less desirable properties that tend to result in a compromise  in receiver performance.
Thus a low-noise receiver might not always be the obvious selection,  if properties other than sensitivity are important.
 9.5 DISPLAYS  The purpose of the display is to visually present in a form suitable for operator interpretation  and action the information contained in the radar echo signal.
When the display is connected  directly to the video output of the receiver, the information displayed is called raw video.
This  is the "traditional_" type of radar presentation.
When the receiver video output is first  processed by an automatic detector or automatic detection and tracking processor (ADT), the  output displayed is sometimes called synthetic video.
 The cathode-ray tube (CRT) has been almost universally used as the radar display.
There  are two basic cathode-ray tube displays.
One is the deflection-modulated CRT, such as the  /\-scope, in which a target is indicated by the deflection of the electron beam.
The other is the  i11tensity-modulated CRT, such as the PPI, in which a target is indicated by intensifying  the electron beam and presenting a luminous spot on the face of the CRT.
In general,  deflection-modulated displays have the advantage of simpler circuits than those of intensity­ modulated displays, and targets may be more readily discerned in the presence of noise or  interference.
On the other hand, intensity-modulated displays have the ·advantage of present­ ing data in a convenient and easily interpreted form.
The deflection of the beam or the  appearance of an intensity-modulated spot on a radar display caused by the presence of a  target is commonly referred to as a blip.
 The focusing and deflection of the electron beam may be accomplished electrostatically,  electromagnetically, or by a combination of the two.
Electrostatic deflection CRTs use an  electric field applied to pairs of deflecting electrodes, or plates, to deflect the electron beam.
 Such tubes are usually longer than magnetic tubes, but the overall size, weight, and power  dissipation are less.
Electromagnetic deflection CRTs .require magnetic coils, or deflection  yokes, positioned around the neck of the tube.
They are relatively lossy and require more drive  power than electrostatic devices.
Deflection-modulated CRTs, such as the A-scope, generally  employ electrostatic deflection.
Intensity-modulated CRTs, such as the PPI, generally employ  electromagnetic deflection.
 Magnetically focused tubes utilize either an electromagnet or a permanent magnet around  354 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  the neck of the CRT to provide an axial magnetic field.
Magnetic focus generally can provide  better resolution, but the spot tends to defocus at the edge of the tube.
 The CRT display is by no means ideal.
It employs a relatively large vacuum tube and the  entire display is often big and can be expensive.
The cost is not simply the tube itself, which is  usually modest, but the various circuits needed to display the desired information and provide  the operator with flexibility.
The amount of information that can be displayed is limited by the  spot size, which in a high-performance display is less than 0.1 percent of the screen diameter.
2 7  In some high-range-resolution radars, however, the number of resolvable range cells available  from the radar might be greater than the number of resolution cells available on the PPI  screen.
The result is a collapsing loss (Sec.
2.12).
Increasing the CRT diameter does not  necessarily help, since the spot diameter varies linearly with the screen diameter.
Another  limitation is the dynamic range, or contrast ratio, of an intensity modulated display which is of  the order of 10 dB.
This might cause blooming of the display by large targets so as to mask the  blips from nearby smaller targets.
.J  The decay of the visual information displayed on the CRT should be long enough to allow  the operator not to miss target detections, yet short enough not to allow the information  painted on one scan to interfere with the new information entered from the succeeding scan.
 However, there is usually not sufficient flexibility available to the CRT designer to always  obtain the desired phosphor decay characteristics.
The brilliance of the initial" flash" from the  CRT phosphor may be high, but the afterglow is dim so that it is often necessary to carefully  control both the color and the intensity of the ambient lighting to achieve optimum seeing  conditions.
The conventional CRT usually requires a darkened room or the use of a viewing  hood by the operator.
In spite of the limitations of the conventional CRT display, it is almost  universally used for radar applications.
Many of its limitations can be overcome, but  sometimes with a sacrifice in some other property.
 The ability of an operator to extract information efficiently from a CRT display will  depend on such factors as the brightness of the display, density and character of the back­ ground noise, pulse repetition rate, scan rate of the antenna beam, signal clipping, decay time  of the phosphor, length of time of blip exposure, blip size, viewing distance, ambient illumina·  tion, dark adaptation, display size, and operator fatigue.
Empirical data derived from exper­ imental testing of many of these factors are available.28•29  There has been much interest in applying solid-state technology as a radar display to  replace the vacuum-tube CRT.
Although the light-emitting diode has been too costly and  complex to be a general replacement for the CRT, it might be applied when required to display  limited information without the display occupying excessive space, such as in the Distance  from Touchdown Indicator (DFTI) used in aircraft control towers to monitor landing  aircraft.27 Liquid crystal displays which can operate in high ambient lighting conditions have  also been of interest for some special radar requirements, but they also are limited compared  to the capability of a CRT.
The plasma panel has also been considered as a bright radar  display capable of incorporating alphanumeric labels.59  Types of display presentations.
The various types of CRT displays which might be used for  surveillance and tracking radars are defined as follows:  A-scope.
A deflection-modulated display in which the vertical deflection is proportional to target echo  strength and the horizontal coordinate is proportional to range.
 B-scope.
An intensity-modulated rectangular display with azimuth angle indicated by the horizontal  coordinate and range by the vertical coordinate.
 C-scope.
An intensity-modulated rectangular display with azimuth angle indicated by the horizontal  coordinate and elevation angle by the vertical coordinate.
 D-scope.
A C-scope in which the blips extend vertically to give a rough estimate or distance.
 RECEIVERS, DISPLAYS, AND DUPLEXERS 3S5  £-scope.
An intensity-modulated rectangular display with distance indicated by the horizontal coordinate  and elevation angle by the vertical coordinate: Similarto the RHI in which target height or altitude is  the vertical coordinate.
 F-Scope.
A rectangular display in which a target appears as a centralized blip when the radar antenna is  aimed at it.
Horizontal and vertical aiming errors are respectively indicated by the horizontal and  vertical displacement of the blip.
 G-Scope.
A rectangular display in which a target appears as a laterally centralized blip when the radar  antenna is aimed at it in azimuth, and wings appear to grow on the pip as the distance to the target is  diminished; horizontal and vertical aiming errors are respectively indicated by horizontal and verti­ cal displacement of the blip.
 fl-scope.
A B-scope modified to include indication of angle of elevation.
The target appears as two closely  spaced blips which approximate a short bright line, the slope of which is in proportion to the sine of  the angle of target elevation.
 I-scope.
A display in which a target appears as a complete circle when the radar antenna is pointed at it  and in which the radius of the circle is proportional to target distance; incorrect aiming or the  antenna changes the circle to a segment whose arc length is inversely proportional to the magnitude  or the pointing error.
and the position of the segment indicates the reciprocal or the pointing  direction of the antenna.
 )-scope.
A modified A-scope in which the time base is a circle and targets appear as radial deflections from  the time base.
 K-scope.
A modified A-scope in which a target appears as a pair of vertical deflections.
When the radar  antenna is correctly pointed at the target, the two deflections are of equal height, and when not so  pointed, the difference in deflection amplitude is an indication of the direction and magnitude of the  pointing error.
 L-scope, A display in which a target appears as two horizontal blips, one extending to the right from a  central vertical time base and the other to the left; both blips are or equal amplitude when the radar is  pointed directly at the target, any inequality representing relative pointing error, and distance  upward along the baseline representing target distance.
 M-scope.
A type of A-scope in which the target distance is determined by moving an adjustable pedestal  signal along the baseline until it coincides with the horizontal position of the target signal  deflections; the control which moves the pedestal is calibrated in distance.
 N-scope.
A K-scope having an adjustable pedestal signa~ as in the M-scope, for the measurement of  distance.
 0-scope.
An A-scope modified by the inclusion or an adjustable notch for measuring distance.
 PP/, or Plan Position Indicator (also called P-scope).
An intensity-modulated circular display on which  echo signals produced from reflecting objects are shown in plan position with range and azimuth  angle displayed in polar (rho-theta) coordinates, forming a map-like display.
An offset, or ojfcenter,  PPI has the zero position of the time base at a position other than at the center of the display to  provide the equivalent of a larger display for a selected portion or the service area.
A delayed PP/ is  one in which the initiation of the time base is delayed.
 R-scope.
An A-scope with a segment of the time base expanded near the blip for greater accuracy in  distanCf measurement.
 RH I, or Range-Height Indicator.
An intensity modulated display with height (altitude) as the vertical axis  and range as the horizontal axis.
 The above definitions are taken from the IEEE Standard Definitions,23 with some  modifications.
The terms A-scope and A-display, 8-scope and 8-display, etc., are used inter­ changeably.
These letter descriptions of radar displays date back to World War II.
They are  not all in current usage; however, the PPI, A-scope, 8-scope, and RHI are among the more  usual displays employed in radar.
There are also other types of modern radar displays not  included in the above listing which have not been given special letter designations.
These  include the various synthetic and raw video displays with alphanumeric characters and sym­ bols for conveying additional information directly on the display.
 CRT screem.
A number of different cathode-ray-tube screens are used in radar applications.
 They differ primarily in their decay times and persistence.
The properties of some of the  ohosphors which have been used in radar CRTs are listed in Table 9.1.
The degree of image  356 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  persistence required in a cathode-ray-tube screen depends upon the application.
A long­ persistence screen such as the P19 is appropriate for PPI presentations where the frame times  are on the order of several seconds.
On the other hand, where no persistence is needed, as when  the frame time is less than the response time of the eye (0.1 s or less), a PI phosphor might he  used.
The Pl phosphor is commonly found in most A-scope presentations.
 In order to achieve long decay times a two-layer, or cascade, screen is sometimes used, as  in the P7 or the P14.
The first phosphor layer emits an intense light of short duration when  excited by the electron beam.
The light from the initial flash excites the second layer, emitting a  persistent luminescence.
The tandem action of the cascade screen results in greater efficiency  than if the second, long-persistence layer had been excited by the electron beam directly,  instead of by light emitted from the first layer.
In the P14 screen, the initial flash of short  duration from the first screen is blue in color and the persistent light radiated by the second  screen is orange.
An orange filter placed across the face of the tube eliminates the flash and  leaves only the long-persistent trace.
If a blue filter were used instead, the persisterlt afterglow of  the second layer wou1d be removed, leaving only the short-duration flash.
Thus a single  cascade screen can give either a short or a long persistence display, depending upon the filter  employed.
 In Table 9.1 the color emitted by the screen during both fluorescence (short duration) and  phosphorescence (long duration) is given.
In general terms, fluorescence may be thought of as  luminescence which ceases almost immediately upon removal of the excitation, whereas in  phosphorescence the luminescence persists.
Cascaded screens produce different colors under  fluorescence or phosphorescence.
 Not all long-duration screens need be cascade.
The Pl9 is a single-component phosphor  with long persistence and no flash.
If extremely long persistence is desired in a cathode-ray-tube  display, a storage tube may be used.
For all practical purposes, an image placed on a storage  tube will remain indefinitely until erased.
 Table 9.1 Radar CRT phosphor characteristics (after Berg26)  Phosphor Fluorescent color Phosphorescent color Persistence•  Pl Yellowish green Yellowish green Medium  P7 Blue Yellowish green Blue, medium short;  yellow, long  P12 Orange Orange Long  Pl3 Reddish orange Reddish orange Medium  Pl4 Purplish bbe Yellowish orange Blue, medium short;  yellowish orange, medium  Pl 7 Blue Yellow Blue, short; yellow, long  Pl9 Orange Orange Long  P21 Reddish orange Reddish orange Medium  P25 Orange Orange Medium  P26 Orange Orange Very long  P28 Yellowish green Yellowish green Long  P32 Purplish blue Yellowish green Long  P33 Orange Orange Very long  P34 Bluish green Yellowish green Very long  P38 Orange Orange Very long  P39 Yellowish green Yellowish green Long  • Persistence to 10 percent level: short= 1 to 10 µs; medium short= 10 µs to 1 ms;  medium= 1 to 100 ms; long= 100 ms to 1 s; very long= > 1 s.
 RECEIVERS, DISPLAYS, AND DUPLEXERS 357  Resolution on the CRT is limited by the phosphor characteristics as well as the electron  beam.
A double-layer phosphor will hav:e poorer resolution that a single-layer phosphor.
 Color CRTs.
The availability or color cathode-ray tubes provides another "dimension" for  the display of target inrormation.
Target altitude, cross section, or identity might be color  coded.
The outputs from more than one radar or the outputs from each beam of a stacked­ beam radar may be displayed on the same CRT in different color, as can alphanumeric data  or symhols.
Color can be an "attention-getter," and can improve the accuracy of recognition.
 l n an MTI radar with a synthetic-video display that presents only moving targets, the clutter  that is rejected (the raw video) can be superimposed on the display by showing it in a  different color than the synt hct ic-video targets.
(The dis play of weather clutter is of importance  to the air traflic controller to avoid directing aircraft to areas of severe weather.
The display  of land clutter is also of importance in some applications so as to provide reference landmarks.)  In principle.
availability of color allows an intensity-modulated CRT, which is normally of  limited dynamic range, to display target amplitude information by color coding the target blip  according to the magnitude of the target cross section.
Studies show that three or perhaps  four colors is the optimum number for color display application.57•58 A particular four-color  display tested for air -traffic-control radar utilized yellow to present the aircraft data blocks,  g1 een for the area-sector map lines, red for navigation aids, and orange for showing  precipitation.61  The tricolor shadow-mask cathode-ray tube commonly used for color television has a  phosphor screen that consists of a series of three color dots.
Although it may be well suited  for commercial TV, it is not always a good display for radar since its resolution is limited  by the size and spacing of the dots.
Another color CRT of interest to radar is the penetration  color t11he using a multi-layer screen.
The color is controlled by the anode voltage which  determines the depth of penetration of the electron beam into a series of phosphor layers.
 Varying the anode voltage varies the depth of penetration and the particular phosphor layer  that is excited.
Typically, the difference between penetration of the layers is about 4 kV per  layer.:rn A single-electron-gun.
bicolor penetration·CRT, for example, might employ a layer of  red phosphor and a layer of green separated by a layer of transparent dielectric material.26•2 7  At low anode voltage (6 kV) the red phosphor is excited.
At high voltage (12 kV), the  green phosphor is excited.
With intermediate voltages, yellow and orange can be obtained,  giving a total of four different colors which can be distinguished.
This method of color  excitation permits better resolution to be obtained than with conventional TV color tubes.
 The range oicolors available is not as great as with a color TV tube, but in many information­ display applications it is sufficient.
 A similar technique using anode-voltage control with two phosphors having the same  color but different decay times can provide a CRT display with variable persistence.
It is also  possible to achieve a multicolor tube with variable persistence.
 Although color displays may be pleasing and attractive to the operator, the applications  in which they have proven superior to properly coded monochromatic displays apparently  are fewer in number than might have been anticipated.'8  Bright displays.
There are applications where it is not possible or convenient to use the  conventional CRT display that requires a darkened environment; such as in the cockpit of an  aircrart or an airfield control tower.
One form of bright display is the direct-view storage  tuhe.
31 It not only operates under ambient light conditions, but it can provide a variable  persistence.
In this device, neither the brightness nor the persistence is directly affected by the  short duration of the video signal, or by the characteristic of the viewing-screen phosphor.
 358 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  The storage tube uses two electron beams generated by separate electron guns.
One is a  writing beam.
The other is a ..
flood beam that permits a bright; persistent display of the  information carried by the writing beam.
The writing beam does not impinge directly on the  viewing screen as in a conventional CRT.
It strikes a storage mesh, mounted just behind the  screen, made up of a thin film of insulator material deposited on a metallic backing electrode.
 The insulator, which is the storage medium, is illuminated continuously by a "flood" beam.
 When illuminated by the writing beam, charge is stored on the insulator surface because of  its secondary emission characteristics.
The information written on the insulator storage  surface forms a charge pattern that is made visible by the action of the flood beam.
At those  points where the action of the writing beam reduces the potential of the storage medium  sufficiently, the electrons from the flood beam are allowed to pass through and reach the  viewing screen.
The display is continuous since the phosphor is continuously excited in the  written areas by the flood beam.
.J  A resolution of about 80 lines per inch with a screen brightness of 200 foot-lamberts  can be obtained.
The persistence can be varied from a fraction of a second to several  minutes, or longer.31 From five to seven gray-scale ranges are typical.26 The direct-view  storage tube can also be obtained with two colors and the shades in between.
30  The direct-view storage tube generally is capable of less resolution than a conventional  CRT.
Also, the continuous buildup on the storage medium of strong, fixed clutter echoes  when the persistence is long can result in a loss of picture quality due to a loss of resolution  and a loss of contrast caused by the brightening of the dark area immediately surrounding  the blip.
.
 Another method for achieving a bright display is the scan converter.
The output of a  normal PPI display is stored in either an analog or digital storage medium, and the stored  information is read out and displayed on a conventional TV monitor.26·32·33 The conversion  of the radial rho-theta raster of the PPI to the rectangular raster of the TV represents a  "scan conversion," hence the name.
,The stored display may be read out repetitively to  produce a bright flicker-free display., The display is bright not only because the stored  information is displayed at a sufficiently high repetition rate to appear continuous, btit  also because TV monitors with typical brightness of 50 to 100 foot-lamberts are inherently  brighter than the conventional CRT display.
 One type of storage device that has been used in scan converters is a double-ended  storage tube with two electron guns, one on each side of a charge-storage surface.
32 The  radar output is written in PPI format by one electron gun on one side of the charge-storage  surface.
The second gun, on the other side of the storage surface, reads the stored charge  pattern with a TV raster.
The video outputs of several different radars, each with their own  scan converter, can be combined on a single TV display.
Use of the scan converter permits  the convenient display of data from radars with different antenna rotation rates without the  confusion produced by generating different rotation rates on the PPI.
The complete displays  of each radar or selected sectors from each radar can be combined as desired so that the TV  display presents the available information in the best possible manner without including the  sectors of those radars with poor or no data.
Radar video clutter-maps or computer-generated  information can also be combined on the TV display.
A disadvantage of this form of scan  converter is its low resolution.
,  A digital memory can be used as the storage device in a scan converter to overcome  the limitations of the analog storage tube.
 .
.
.
 Rear Port.
This is a flat plate-glass window in the cone of a cathode-ray tube aligned to be  parallel to the tube faceplate.34•57 It allows slide or film information to be projected onto the  RECEIVERS, DISPLAYS, AND DUPLEXERS 359  back of the tube phosphor, or it can be used to photograph the display without interfering  with the operator.
The CRT phosphordoubles as art optical and an electronic screen to give  the operator a mixed presentation viewed in the usual manner from the front.
 Synthetic-video Displa)·s.26·35·36 The use of a digital computer, as in an automatic detection  and tracking processor.
to extract target information results in a synthetic display in which  target information is presented with standard symbols and accompanying alphanumerics.
 This is especially useful in an air-traffic-control display in which such information as target  identity and altitude is desired to be displayed.
The positions of targets on a predetermined  number of previous scans might be shown on a synthetic display, or a line might be generated  to indicate the direction of the target's trajectory and the target's speed.
(The length of the  line can be made proportional to target speed.) The use of a computer to generate the  graphics and control the CRT display offers flexibility in the choice of such things as range  scales.
off center display.
blow-up of selected areas, physical map outlines, grid displays, airport  runways.
stored clutter map, raw video, outlines of areas of weather blanked by the operator,  display of stored llight plans, and time-compressed display of several successive radar scans.
 Also it can aid in lhe requesting of height-finder data by the operator, blanking of areas  containing excessive interference or weather, providing training of operators by superimposing  simulated targets.
and other functions necessary for an air-traffic-control system or air-defense  system.
The operator can communicate in an interactive manner with the computer by such  means as a keyboard, light pen, track ball, or even voice entry.
Sometimes an auxiliary  CRT display is mounted adjacent to the main radar display to provide tabular data and  other information that would otherwise clutter the main display.
 The characters and symbols that constitute the synthetic information may be inserted  on a CRT during the radar dead time at the end of the sweep prior to the triggering of the  next pulse.
In some situations there might be too much information to be fully inserted  during the available dead time.
In a long-range air-traffic-control radar located in a busy area  there might be more than a hundred targets for display extracted.
For each target the  necessary information to be presented might consist of perhaps ten alphanumeric characters  and a number of line segments.35 When the amount of data is large, writing time might  have to be taken from the radar time by blanking one out of every n sweeps or writing the  synthetic information during a random interruption of the sweep.
It is also possible to utilize  a second electron gun in the CRT to minimize the amount of time taken from the radar to  insert the synthetic data.
Another method for achieving the necessary time to display alpha­ numeric da(a is to store the video in a shift register and then read it out at a higher rate.
 The CCD, or charge coupled device, is one possibility as a shift register.
 The data on the synthetic display must be refreshed at a sufficiently high rate to obtain  a high brightness and lo avoid flicker.
When a number of displays are used with the output  of a single radar, a dedicated minicomputer can be used at each display position for the  rdresh of data so as to reduce the data-transfer rate from the radar central processor.
 9.6 DVPLEXERS AND RECEIVER PROTECTORS  The duplexer is the device that allows a single antenna to serve both the transmitter and the  receiver.
On transmission it must protect the receiver from burnout or damage, and on  reception it must channel the echo signal to the receiver.
Duplexers, especially for high-power  applications, sometimes employ a form of gas-discharge device.
Solid-state devices are also  utilized.
In a typical duplexer application the transmitter peak power might be a megawatt or  360 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  more and the maximum safe power that can be tolerated at the receiver might be less than a  watt.
Therefore, the duplexer must provide, in this example, more than 60 dB of isolation  between the transmitter and receiver with only negligible loss of the desired signal.
In addition,  during the interpulse period or when the radar is shut down, the receiver must be protected  from high-power radiation, as from nearby radars, that might enter the radar antenna with less  power than that needed to activate the duplexer, but with greater power than can be safely  handled by the receiver.
 There have been two basic methods employed that allow the use of a common antenna  for both transmitting and receiving.
The older method is represented by the branch-type du­ plexer and the balanced duplexer which utilize gas TR-tubes for accomplishing the necessary  switching actions.
The other method uses a ferrite circulator to separate the transmitter  and receiver, and a receiver protector consisting of a gas TR-tube and diode limiter.
 .J  Branch-type duplexers.
The branch-type duplexer, diagrammed in Fig.
9.5 was one of the  earliest duplexer configurations employed.
It consists of a TR (transmit-receive) switch and an  ATR (anti-transmit receive) switch, both of which are gas-discharge tubes.
When the transmit­ ter is turned on, the TR and the ATR tubes ionize; that is, they break down, or fire.
The TR in  the fired condition acts as a short circuit to prevent transmitter power from entering the  receiver.
Since the TR is located a quarter wavelength from the main transmission line, it  appears as a short circuit at the receiver but as an open circuit at the transmission line so that  it does not impede the flow of transmitter power.
Since the A TR is displaced a quarter  wavelength from the main transmission line, the short circuit it produces during the fired  condition appears as an open circuit on the transmission line and thus has no effect on  transmission.
 During reception, the transmitter is off and neither the TR nor the A TR is fired.
The open  circuit of the A TR, being a quarter wave from the transmission line, appears as a short circuit  across the line.
Since this short circuit is located a quarter wave from the receiver branch-line,  the transmitter is effectively disconnected from the line and the echo signal power is directed to  the receiver.
The diagram of Fig.
9.5 is a parallel configuration.
Series or series-parallel  configurations are possible.
3 7  The branch-type duplexer is oflimited bandwidth and power-handling capability, and has  generally been replaced by the balanced duplexer and other protection devices.
It is used, in  spite of these limitations, in some low-cost radars.
 Balanced duplexers.
The balanced duplexer, Fig.
9.6, is based on the short-slot hybrid junction  which consists of two sections of waveguides joined along one of their narrow walls with a slot  cut in the common narrow wall to provide coupling between the two.38 The short-slot hybrid  Antenna  Receiver Figure 9.5 Principle of branch-type duplexer.
 /\nlenno  Transmitter  Antenna  Transmitter RECEIVERS, DISPLAYS, AND DUPLEXERS 361  Dummy load  Receiver  protector  .......
\ Jt .d.
.
)  · Short-slot 1ylm 1uncl1ons  (al  Dual TR  tu bes Dummy load  Receiver  1------,------1 protector  \Short-slot hybrid junctions)  ( b)  Figure 9.6 Balanced duplexer using dual TR tubes and two short-slot hybrid junctions.
(a) Transmit  condition; (b) receive condition.
 may be considered as a broadband directional coupler with a coupling ratio of 3 dB.
In the  transmit condition (Fig.
9.6a) power is divided equally into each waveguide by the first short­ slot hybrid junction.
Both TR tubes break down and reflect the incident power out the antenna  arm as shown.
The short-slot hybrid has the property that each time the energy passes through  the slot in either direction, its phase is advanced 90°.
Therefore, the energy must travel as  indicated by the solid lines.
Any energy which leaks through the TR tubes (shown by the  dashed lines) is directed to the arm with the matched dummy load and not to the receiver.
In  addition to the attenuation provided by the TR tubes, the hybrid junctions provide an addi­ tional 20 to 30 dB of isolation.
 On reception the TR tubes are unfired and the echo signals pass through the duplexer and  into the receiver as shown in Fig.
9.6b.
The power splits equally at the first junction and  because of the 90° phase advance on passing through the slot, the energy recombines in the  receiving attn and not in the dummy-load arm.
 The power-handling capability of the balanced duplexer is inherently greater than that of  the branch-type duplexer and it has wide bandwidth, over ten percent with proper design.
A  receiver protector, to be described later, is usually inserted between the duplexer and the  receiver for added protection.
 Another form of balanced duplexer39 uses four ATR tubes and two hybrid junctions  (Fig.
9.7).
During transmission (Fig.
9.7a) the ATR tubes located in a mount between the two  short-slot hybrids ionize and allow high power to pass to the antenna.
Dashed lines show the  flow of power.
During reception (Fig.
9.7b) the ATR tubes present a high impedance which  resu Its in the echo-signal power being reflected to the receiver.
The ATR type of balanced  duplexer has higher power-handling capability than that of Fig.
9.6, but it has less bandwidth.
 TR tubes.
The TR tube is a gas-discharge device designed lo break down and ionize quickly at  the onset of high RF power, and to deionize quickly once the power is removed.
One common  construction of a TR consists or a section of waveguide containing one or more resonant filters  362 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  Transmitter  Dummy load  Transmitter ATR tubes  (tired) ~ H\!Ct:i\ll!l ----'-'·'--""----~~---~----- protector  3 >( __ ~_x ___ _  Short-slot )..q Short-slot  hybrid f-2-.J hybrid Antenna  ( al  ATR tubes  ______ C-::'\ ~ Receiver ~<~~~----- protector  Dummy load ~,_ ___ X ___ E.3-E3 c;:::::_~------- Antenna  Short-slot S hart-slot  hybrid hybrid  ( b) .J  Figure 9.7 Balanced duplexer using ATR tubes.
(a) Transmit condition; (b) receive condition.
 and two glass-to-metal windows to seal in the gas at low pressure.
A noble gas like argon in the  TR tube has a low breakdown voltage, and offers good receiver protection and relatively long  life.
Pure-argon-filled tubes, however, have relatively long deionization times and are not  suitable for short-range applications.
The deionization process can be speeded up by the  addition of water vapor or a halogen.
The life of TR tubes filled with a mixture of a noble gas  (argon) and a gas with high electron affinity (water vapor) is Jess than the life of tubes filled  with a noble gas only.
 To ensure reliable and rapid breakdown of the TR tube upon application of the RF pulse,  an auxiliary source of electrons is supplied to the tube.
This may be accomplished with a  ..
keep-alive," which is a weak d-c discharge that generates electrons which diffuse into the TR  where they act to trigger the breakdown once RF power is applied.
The keep-alive generates  noise just as any other gas-discharge device.
The excess noise temperature is generally less  than 50 K.
40 ·  Receiver protectors.
Since the keep-alive in the TR is not usually energized when the radar is  turned off, considerably more power is needed to break down the TR than when it is energized.
 Radiations from nearby transmitters m!ly therefore damage the receiver without firing the TR.
 To protect the receiver under these conditions, a mechanical shutter can be used to short­ circuit the input to the receiver whenever the radar is not operating.
The shutter might be  designed to attenuate a signal by 25 to 50 dB.
 The TR is not a perfect switch; some transmitter power always leaks through to the  receiver.
The envelope of the RF leakage might be similar to that shown in Fig.
9.8.
The  short-duration, large-amplitude" spike." at the leading edge of the leakage pulse is the result of  the finite time required for the TR to ionize or break down.
Typically, this time is of the order  of 10 nanoseconds.
After the gas in the TR tube is ionized, the power leaking through the tube  is considerably reduced from the peak value of the spike.
This portion of the leakage pulse is  termed the flat.
Damage to the receiver front-end may result when either the energy contained  within the spike or the power in the fiat portion of the pulse is too large.
"Typical ..
TR tubes  might have a spike leakage of one erg_<!r less and might provide an attenuation of the incident  transmitter power of the order of 7~ to 90 dB.
 t  Q.l  D'  0  0 > RECEIVERS, DISPLAYS, AND DUPLEXERS 363  lime-~ Figure 9.8 Leakage pulse through a TR tube.
 A fraction of the transmitter power incident on the TR tube is absorbed by the discharge.
 This is called arc loss.
Its magnitude depends upon the characteristics of the input window and  the gas used.
The arc loss might be! to l dB in tubes filled with water vapor and 0.1 dB or less  with argon filling.
On reception, the TR tube introduces an insertion loss of about ! to l dB.
 The life of a conventional TR is limited by the keep-alive, the amount of water vapor in  the gas filling, and by disappearance, or "clean-up," of the gas due to the gas molecules  becoming imbedded in the walls of the TR tubes.41 The end of life of a TR tube is determined  more by the amount of leakage power which it allows to pass than by physical destruction or  wear.
 The keep-alive can be replaced as a supplier of priming electrons in the TR by a radio­ active source, such as tritium, which produces low-energy-level beta rays.
52 The tritium is  in compound form as a tritide film.
The replacement of the keep-alive by radioactive tritium  eliminates the excess noise of the keep-alive and increases the life of the TR by an ·order of  magnitude.
Since a tritium TR needs no active voltages, a mechanical shutter is not required to  protect the receiver from nearby transmissions when the radar is turned off.
This also improves  the reliability.
The tritium-activated TR is usually followed by a diode limiter.
The combina­ tion of the two is called a passive TR-limiter and is widely used as a receiver protector.
 Solid-state limiters.
Solid-state PN and PIN diodes can be made to act as RF limiters and are  thus of interest as receiver protectors.42-44 Ideally, a limiter passes low power without attenua­ tion, but above some threshold it provides attenuation of the signal so as to maintain the  output power constant.
This property can be used for the protection of radar receivers in two  different!" implementations depending on whether the diodes are operated unbiased (self­ actuated) or with a d-c forward-bias current.
Unbiased operation is also known as passive.
It is  used for low-power applications.
Biased operation is also known as active and is capable of  switching high power.43·44•62 Biased PIN diodes can replace the gas-tube TRs of the balanced­ duplexer configuration of Fig.
9.6 or they may be used as receiver protectors.
For example,44 a  VHF balanced duplexer configuration using 32 PIN diodes mounted in 3t inch coaxial line (16  in each of two SPST shunt-type limiters) handled 150 kW peak power, 10 kW average power,  with a pulse width of 200 µs.
At the frequency of operation (200 to 225 MHz), the use of  self-actuated diodes was practical.
Recovery time was required to be less than 10 µs.
The loss  on transmit was 0.15 dB and on receive it was 2 dB.
(The receive loss could be reduced to  l dB with application of reverse bias to the diodes.) The device provided from 40 to 50 dB of  protection.
Another example45 is an L-band receiver protector using 10 PIN diodes mounted  in a coaxial line which was able to handle 1.6 MW peak power and 100 kW average power  with a 50 11s pulse width over a 10 percent bandwidth.
The loss was 0.6 dB, isolation 70 dB,  turn-on time 2 11s and turn-off time 25 11s.
Although the active diode-limiter offers many  364 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  advantages for duplexer application, it does not protect the receiver when the bias is off.
 Therefore, it offers poor protection against nearby transmissions during the interpulse period  or when the radar is shut down.
 The passive diode-limiter without any bias current is operable at all times, but it is  capable of handling much less power than the active limiter with bias.
Thus its use as an all  solid-state limiter is restricted to low power systems, perhaps handling less than l.5 kW peak  power.45 When it can be used, the diode limiter has the advantage of fast recovery time (about  l Jts for t kW peak power, and 50ns for 100 W)/3 no spike leakage; low flat leakage; reason­ able loss, size and weight; and it can have a long life.
40  Passive TR-limiter.
The passive diode-limiter also finds important application when used with  a radioactive-primed gas tube TR.
The combination is known as a passive TR-limiter.
The  passive TR-limiter protects the receiver from nearby transmissions even when the fadar is shut  off since it requires no active voltages for either the radioactive-primed TR tube or the diode  limiter.
The presence of the diode limiter following the TR tube considerably reduces the spike  leakage, increasing the life of the device itself as well as the receiver front-end it is supposed to  protect.
The passive TR-limiter, however, has a higher insertion loss than the TR tube but it  generates no excess noise because it does not employ a keep-alive discharge.
Its recovery time  is superior to the conventional TR tube, but inferior to the diode limiter acting alone or the  ferrite diode limiter.40  The passive TR-limiter has low leakage over a wide range of input power.
As an  example,40 below 1 mW peak power the output power is linearly related to the input power.
 From 10 mW to 100 kW, the output Hat-leakage increases by as little as 3 to to dB.
Below  1-W input power, the diode alone provides the limiting action.
Above l-W, the TR tube ionizes  to protect the diode limiter from burnout.
More than one diode may be used to provide  greater attenuation or larger bandwidth.
 Before the introduction of the solid-state diode limiter, a low-power gas TR-tube, known  as a protector TR, was often used as added protection for the receiver.
Jt was placed between  the receiver port of the duplexer and the receiver to safeguard against random pulses from  nearby radar equipments which were too weak to fire the conventional TR tubes in the  duplexer, but strong enough to damage the receiver.
The passive TR-limiter or the diode  limiter has replaced the protector TR.
Such devices are known as receiver protectors.
Receiver  protectors also serve to protect against power reflected by mismatches at the antenna.
 Ferrite limiter.
The ferrite limiter46 followed by a diode limiter, has also been employed as a  solid-state receiver protector.40•45 The·diode is necessary to reduce the spike leakage to a safe  level since the ferrite acting alone does not offer sufficient suppression of the spike leakage at  high peak power.
The ferrite diode limiter has fast recovery time (can be as low as several tens  of nanoseconds), and if the power rating is not exceeded, the life should be essentially un­ limited.
The spike and flat leakage is low, hut the insertion loss is usually higher and the  package is generally longer and heavier than other receiver protectors.
Except for the initial  spike, the ferrite limiter is an absorptive device as compared to the gas-tube TR or the  TR-limiter which are reflective.
Therefore, the incident power is absorbed in the ferrite so that  the average power capability can be a probJem.
Air or water cooling might be needed.
 The ferrite material may be biased, as for example a latching-ferrite circulator, to permit  the handling of higher power.
45 Since the latching-ferrite receiver protector is undamaged by  high power when in either state, protection from nearby transmitters can be had by inserting a  passive TR -li111iter following the ferrite.
 Transmitter  Circulator Antenna  TR tube Diode  ,__----..,(radioaclive -,____,,__, limiter  primed)  Passive TR-limiter RECEIVERS, DISPLAYS, AND DUPLEXERS 365  Receiver  Figure 9.9 Circulator and receiver protector.
A four-port circulator is shown with the fourth port ter­ minated in a matched load to provide greater isolation between the transmitter and the receiver than  provided by a three-port circulator.
 Circulator and receiver protector.
The ferrite circulator4 7 is a three-or four-port device that  can.
in principle, offer separation of the transmitter and receiver without the need for the  conventional duplexer configurations of Figs.
9.5 to 9.7.
The circulator does not provide  sufficient protection by itself and requires a receiver protector as in Fig.
9.9.
The isolation  bet ween the transmitter and receiver ports of a circulator is seldom sufficient to protect the  receiver from damage.
However, it is not the isolation between transmitter and receiver ports  that usually determines the amount of transmitter power at the receiver, but the impedance  mismatch at the antenna which reflects transmitter power back into the receiver.
The VSWR is  a measure of the amount of power reflected by the antenna.
For example, a VSWR of 1.5  means that about 4 percent of the transmitter power will be reflected by the antenna mismatch  in the direction of the receiver, which corresponds to an isolation of only 14 dB.
About 11  percent of the power is reflected when the VSWR is 2.0, corresponding to less than 10 dB of  isolation.
Thus, a receiver protector is almost always required.
It also reduces to a safe level  radiations from nearby transmitters.
The receiver protector might use solid-state diodes for an  all solid-state configuration,48 or it might be a passive TR-limiter consisting of a radioactive  primed TR-tube followed by a diode limiter.49·50 The ferrite circulator with receiver protector  is attractive for radar applications because of its long life, wide bandwidth, and compact  design.
 Other duplexer considerations.
The duplexers described above using passive receiver protec­ tors have recovery times from a fraction of a microsecond to several tens of microseconds.
By  employing the principle of multipacting, a recovery time as short as 5 ns is possible.44•51 A  multipactdr is a vacuum tube which contains surfaces capable of a high yield of secondary  emission upon impact by an electron.
Th·e secondary emission surfaces are biased with a d-c  potential.
The presence of RF energy causes electrons to make multiple impacts to generate by  secondary emission a large electron cloud.
The electron cloud moves in phase with the oscilla­ tion of the applied RF electric field to absorb energy from the RF field.
The RF power is  dissipated thermally at the secondary emission surfaces.
The recovery time of the multipactor  is extremely fast.
It has low spike-leakage, and can handle high peak and average powers.
The  flat-leakage power passed by the multipactor is high enough to require a passive diode limiter  following the multipactor.
The multipactor has the disadvantage of being complex, and it  offers no protection if the power is turned off.
 With fast-rise-time, high-power RF sources, the receiver protector may be required to  self-limit in less than one nanosecond.
This can be achieved with fast-acting PN (varactor)  diodes.
A number of diode stages, preceded by plasma limiters, might be employed in such a  receiver protector.
In one design, an X-band passive receiver protector was capable of limiting  a l ns risetime, multi-kilowatt RF pulses to 1-W spike levels.53  366 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  In many radar systems the STC (sensitivity time control), which is a time-dependent  attenuator, is placed in the RF portion of the radar receiver rather than in the IF.
When a  diode limiter is used in the receiver protector, the STC function can be readily incorporated by  inserting a variable bias into the limiter diodes to provide an attenuator that varies with  time.40.49 The PIN diodes serve the dual function of self-limiting during transmit, and act as a  variable attenuator, or STC, during receive.
One of the advantages of an integral STC using  the diode limiter rather than a separate RF STC, is that no additional insertion loss is suffered  for the STC other than that inherent in the TR-limiter itself.
 In a solid-state limiter, it is also possible to couple a noise diode into the output to  provide a convenient source for checking receiver noise-figure.40  Several hundred hours of life is considered typical for conventional TR tubes that use an  active keep-alive discharge.
However, a duplexer using a passive radioactive-primed TR and  diode limiter is capable of perhaps five thousand hours of life, 50 with predictionsJof up to four  years of continuous operation.49  REFERENCES  1.
Friis, H.
T.: Noise Figures of Radio Receivers, Proc.
IRE, vol.
32, pp.
419-422, July, 1944.
 2.
Mumford, W.
W., and E.
Scheibe:" Noise: Performance Factors in Communication Systems," Hori­ zon House-Microwave, Inc., Dedham, Mass.
1968.
 3.
Goldberg, H.: Some Notes on Noise Figures, Proc.
iRE, vol.
36, pp.
1205-1214, October, 1948.
 4.
Van Voorhis, S.
N.
(ed.): "Microwave Receivers," MIT Radiation Laboratory Series, vol.
23,  McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York, 1948.
 5.
Torrey, H.
C., and C.
A.
Whitmer: "Crystal Rectifiers," MIT Radiation Laboratory Series, vol.
15,  McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York, 1948.
 6.
Palamutcuoglu, 0., J.
G.
Gardiner, and D.
P.
Howson: Image-Cancelling Mixers at 2 GHz, Electronic  Letters, vol.
10, no.
7, pp.
104-106, Apr.
4, 1974.
 7.
Taylor, J.
W., Jr., and J.
Mattern: Receivers, chap.
5 of "Radar Handbook," M.
I.
Skolnik (ed.),  McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York, 1970.
 8.
Neuf, D., D.
Brown, and B.
Jaracz: Multi-Octave Double-Balanced Mixer, Microwm,e J., vol.
16, pp.
 13-14, January, 1973.
 9.
Shigemoto, J.: Balanced Mixer Noise Considerations, Microwave J., vol.
10, pp.
77-79, October, 1967.
 10.
Okean, H.
C., and A.
J.
Kelly: Low-Noise Receiver Design Trends Using State-of-the-Art Building  Blocks, l EEE Trans., vol.
MTI-25, pp.
254-267, April, 1977.
 11.
Cochrane, J.
B., and F.
A.
Marki: Thin-Film Mixers Team Up To Block Out Image Noise, Micro­ waves, vol.
11, pp.
34-40, 84, March, 1977.
 12.
Neuf, D.: A Quiet Mixer, Microwave J., vol.
16, pp.
29-32, May, 1973.
 13.
Neuf, D.: Radar Retrofit: Increase Receiver Sensitivity Cost EITectively, Microwave System News, vol.
 5, pp.
55-60, April/May, 1976.
 14.
Anand, Y., and C.
Howell: A Burnout Criterion for Schottky-Barrier Mixer Diodes, Proc.
IEEE, vol.
 56, p.
2098, November, 1968.
 15.
Anand, Y., and W.
J.
Moroney: Microwave Mixer and Detector Diodes, Proc.
IEEE, vol.
59, pp.
 1182-1190, August, 1971.
 16.
Torrey, H.
C., and C.
A.
Whitmer: "Crystal Rectifiers," MIT Radiation Laboratory Series, vol.
15,  McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York, 1948.
 17.
Dickens, L.
E., and D.
W.
Maki: An Integrated-Circuit Balanced Mixer, lmage and Sum Enhanced,  l EEE Trans., vol.
MTT-23, pp.
276-281, March, 1975.
 18.
Chandler, H.
M.: Microwave Low Noise Amplifiers For Use in Radar Systems, The Marconi Review,  vol.
35, no.
185, pp.
94-120, 2d qtr., 1972.
 19.
Lindauer, J.
T., and N.
K.
Osbrink: GaAs FET Amplifiers are Closing Fast on the Low-Noise  Narrowband Leaders, Microwave System News, vol.
5, pp.
63-67, April/May, 1976.
 20.
Emery, F.
E.: Low Noise GaAs FET Amplifiers, Microwave J., vol.
20, pp.
79-82, June, 1977.
 21.
Miller, R.
E., T.
G.
Phillips, D.
E.
Iglesias, and R.
H.
Kneer: Noise Performance of Microwave GaAs  F.E.T.
Amplifiers at Low Temperatures, Electronics Letters, vol.
13, no.
I, pp.
10-11, Jan.
6, ·1977.
 22.
Mumford, W.
W.: A Broadband Microwave Noise Source, Bell System Tech.
J., vol.
28, pp.
608--618,  October, 1949.
 23.
IEEE Standard 686-1917: "JEEE Standard Radar Definitions," Nov.
9, 1977.
 RECEIVERS, OISPLA YS, AND DUPLEXERS 367  24.
Watson, H.
A., "Microwave Semiconductor Devices and Their Circuit Applications," McGraw-Hill  Book Company, New York, 1969.
 25.
Howes, M.
J., and D.
V.
Morgan (eds.): "Microwave Devices," John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1976.
 26.
Berg, A.
A.: Radar Indicators and Displays, chap.
6 of" Radar Handbook," ed.
by M.
I.
Skolnik.
 McGraw-Hill Book Company.
New York, 1970.
 27.
Byatt, D.
W.
G ..
and J.
Wild: Present and Future Radar Display Techniques, International Co11f.
on  Radar-/'resent mu/ Fwure, Oct.
23 · 25, 1973, pp.
201-206, IEE Conference Publication no.
105.
 28.
Lawson.
J.
L., and G.
E.
Uhlenbeck: "Threshold Signals," vol.
24, M.I.T.
Radiation Laboratory Series.
 McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York, 1950.
 29.
Baker, C.
II.:" Man and Radar Displays," Macmillan Company, New York, 1962.
 :m Luxenberg.
II.
R., and R.
L.
Kuehn:" Display Systems Engineering," McGraw-Hill Book Company.
 New York, 1968.
 31.
Nairn.
N.
P.: Bright Radar Displays Employing Direct-View Storage Tubes, Conference on Air Traffic  Control S_rstems Engineering and Design, London, Mar.
13-17, 1967, IEE Conference Publication no.
 28, pp.
7-10.
 32.
Lyon, I.
D.: Scan-Converted Bright Displays for Air Traffic Control Systems, Conference on Air  Traffic Control Systems E11gi11eering and Design, London, Mar.
13-17, 1967.
IEE Conference Publica­ tion no.
28, pp.
41-44.
 33.
O'Neal, N.
V., and P.
M.
Thiebaud: A Scan Converter Radar Display System, Naval Research  Laboratory Memorandum Report 2979, Washington, D.C., January, 1975.
 34.
Robertson, J.
W., and F.
J.
Savill: Rear Port Displays: Their Advantages, Limitations, and Design  Problems for Radar Applications, International Conference on Radar-Present and Future, Oct.
23-25.
 1973, London, IEE Conference Publication no.
105, pp.
207-2l2.
 35.
Odoardi.
F ..
and C.
Maggi: Modern Radar Data Display System: The Selenia IDM-7 Digital Display,  Ril'ista Tecnica Selenia (Rome, Italy), vol.
2, no.
4, pp.
53-61, 1975.
 36.
Kernan.
P.: Low-Cost Processing and Display System for Radar Tracking and Intercept, IEEE  EASCON '75 Com1entio11 Record, pp.
108-A to 108G, 1975.
 37.
Reintjes.
J.
F., and G.
T.
Coate:" Principles of Radar," 3d ed., chap.
12, McGraw-Hill Book Company,  New York, 1952.
 38.
Riblet, H.J.: The Short-Slot Hybrid Junction, Proc, IRE, vol.
40, pp.
180-184, February, 1952.
 39.
Jones, C.
W.: Broad-Band Balanced Duplexers, IRE Trans., vol.
MTT-5, pp.
4-12, January, 1957.
 40.
Brown, N.
J.: Modern Receiver Protection Capabilities with TR-Limiters, Microwave}., vol.
17, pp.
 61-64.
February, 1974.
 41.
Maddix, H.: Clean up in TR Tubes, IEEE Trans., vol.
ED-15, pp.
98-104, February, 1968.
 42.
Leenov, D.: The Silicon PIN Diode as a Microwave Radar Protector at Megawatt Levels, IEEE  Trans., vol.
ED-11.
pp.
53-61, February, 1964.
 43.
Garver, R.
V.: "Microwave Diode Control Devices," Artech House, Inc., Dedham, Mass., 1976.
 44.
White, J.
F.: "Semiconductor Control," Artech House, Dedham, Mass., 1977.
 45.
Brown, N.
J.: Control and Protection Devices, IEEE NEREM 74 Record, pr 4: Radar Systems and  Components, Oct.
28-31, 1974, IEEE Catalog No.
74 CHO 9340 NEREM, Library of Congress  Catalog no.
61-3748.
 46.
Kupke, 'Y/.
F., T.
S.
Hartwick, and M.
T.
Weiss: Solid-State X-Band Power Limiter, IRE Trans., vol.
 MTT-9, pp.
472-480, November, 1961.
 47.
Knerr, R.H.: An Annotated Bibliography of Microwave Circulators and Isolators: 1968-1975, /EEE  Trans ..
vol.
MTT-23, pp.
818-825, October, 1975.
 48.
Gawronski, M.
J., and H.
Goldie: 200 W MIC L-Band Receiver Protector, Microwave J., vol.
20, pp.
 43-46, May, 1977.
 49.
Ratliff, P.
C., W.
Cherry, M.
J.
Gawronski, and H.
Goldie: L-Band Receiver Protection, Microwave  J., vol.
19, pp.
57-60, January, 1976.
 50.
Goldie, H.: What's New With Receiver Protectors?, Microwaves, vol.
15, pp.
44-52, January, 1976.
 51.
Ferguson, P., and R.
D.
Dokken: For High-Power Protection ...
Try Multipacting, Microwaves, vol.
 13, pp.
52-53, July, 1974.
 52.
Goldie, H.: Radioactive (Tritium) lgnitors for Plasma Limiters, IEEE Trans., vol.
ED-19, pp.
917-928,  August, 1972.
 53.
Nelson, T.
M., and H.
Goldie: Fast Acting X-Band Receiver Protector Using Varactors, /EEE M7T  Symposium Digest, pp.
176-177, 1974.
Also Westinghouse Systems Development Division (Baltimore,  Md.) report DSC'-9731 by the same authors titled, Fast Acting Varactors for Sub-Nanosecond Power  Limiting in Receiver Protectors (no date).
 54.
Hirsch, R.
B.: Plain Talk on Log Amps, Microwaves, vol.
17, pp.
40-44, March, 1978.
(The effect of IF  gain on the receiver dynamic range was also indicated by Warren D.
White, one of the reviewers of the  revised manuscript of this book.)  368 INTRODUCTlON TO RADAR SYSTEMS  55.
Reynolds, J.
F., and M.
R.
Rosenzweig: Learn the Language of Mixer Specification, Microwai,es, vol.
 17, pp.
72-80, May, 1978.
.
 56.
Hallford, B.
R.: Low Conversion Loss X Band Mixer, Microwar,e J., vol.
21, pp.
53-59, April, 1978.
 57.
Robertson, J.
W., and F.
J.
Savill: Practical Experience with Rear Port Displays, International Cor!f"er­ ence on Displays for Man-Machine Systems, 4-7 April, 1977 IEE (London) Conference Publication no.
 150, pp.
17-19.
 58.
Hopkin, V.
D.: Colour Displays in Air Traffic Control, International Conference on Displays for  Man-Machine Systems, Apr.
4-7, 1977, IEE (London) Conference Publication no.
150, pp.
46-49.
 59.
McLoughlan, S.
D., M.
B.
Thomas, and G.
Watkins: The Plasma Panel as a Potential Solution to the  Bright Labelled Radar Display Problem, International Conference on Displays for Man-Machine  Systems, Apr.
4-7, 1977, IEE (London) Conference Publication no.
150, pp.
14-16.
 60.
Jay, F.
(ed-in-ch.): "IEEE Standard Dictionary of Electrical and Electronics Terms," 2d ed., Inst.
of  Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Inc., New York, 1977.
 61.
Anonymous: News item in Aviation Week and Space Technology, vol.
109, no.
13, p.
61, Sept.
25, 1978.
 62.
Tenenholtz, R.: Designing Megawatt Diode Duplexers, Microwave J., vol.
21, pp.
30-34, Dec., 1978,  and vol.
22, pp.
63-68, Jan., 1979.
.J  CHAPTER  TEN  DETECTION OF RADAR SIGNALS IN NOISE  10.1 INTROOUCflON  The two basic operations performed by radar are ( 1) detection of the presence of reflecting  objects, and (2) extraction of information from the received waveform to obtain such target  data as position, velocity, and perhaps size.
The operations of detection and extraction may be  performed separately and in either order, although a radar that is a good detection device is  usually a good radar for extracting information, and vice versa.
In this chapter some aspects of  the problem of detecting radar signals in the presence of noise will be considered.
Noise  ultimately limits the capability of any radar.
The problem of extracting information from the  received waveform is described in the next chapter.
The detection of signals in the presence of  clutter is discussed in Chap.
t 3.
 ('  10.2 MATCHED-FILTER RECEIVER1 .s  A network whose frequency-response function maximizes the output peak-signal-to-mean­ noise (power) ratio is called a matched filter.
This criterion, or its equivalent, is used for the  design of almost all radar receivers.
 The frequency-response [unction, denoted H(f ), expresses the relative amplitude and  phase of the output of a network with respect to the input when the input is a pure sinusoid.
 The magnitude I H(f) I of the frequency-response function is the receiver amplitude passband  characteristic.
Ir the bandwidth of the receiver passband is wide compared with that occupied  by the signal energy, extraneous noise is introduced by the excess bandwidth which lowers the  output signal-to-noise ratio.
On the other hand, if the receiver bandwidth is narrower than the  bandwidth occupied by the signal, the noise energy is reduced along with a considerable part  of the signal energy.
The net result is again a lowered signal-to-noise ratio.
Thus there is an  optimum bandwidth at which the signal-to-noise ratio is a maximum.
This is well known to  the radar receiver designer.
The rule of thumb quoted in pulse radar practice is that the  370 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  receiver bandwidth 8 should be approximately equal to the reciprocal of the pulse width r.
As  we shall see later, this is a reasonable approximation for pulse radars with conventional  superheterodyne receivers.
It is not generally valid for other waveforms, however, and is  mentioned to illustrate in a qualitative manner the effect of the receiver characteristic on  signal-to-noise ratio.
The exact specification of the optimum receiver characteristic involves  the frequency-response function and the shape of the received waveform.
 The receiver frequency-response function, for purposes of this discussion, is assumed to  apply from the antenna terminals to the output of the IF amplifier.
(The second detector and  video portion of the well-designed radar superheterodyne receiver will have negligible efTect on  the output signal-to-noise ratio if the receiver is designed as a matched filter.) Narrowbanding  is most conveniently accomplished in the IF.
The bandwidths of the RF and mixer stages of  the normal superheterodyne receiver are usually large compared with the IF bandwidth.
 Therefore the frequency-response function of the portion of the receiver included' between the  antenna terminals to the output of the IF amplifier is taken to be that of the IF amplifier alone.
 Thus we need only obtain the frequency-response function that maximizes the signal-to-noise  ratio at the output of the IF.
The IF amplifier may be considered as a filter with gain.
The  response of this filter as a function of frequency is the property of interest.
 For a received waveform s(t) with a given ratio of signal energy E to noise energy NO (or  noise power per hertz of bandwidth), North 1 showed that the frequency-response function of  the linear, time-invariant filter which· maximizes the output peak-signal-to-mean-noise  (power) ratio for a fixed input signal-to-noise (energy) ratio is  H(J) = GaS*(J) exp ( -j2nft i) ( 10.
l)  00  where S(J) = f s(t) exp (-j2nft) dt = voltage spectrum (Fourier transform) of input  -00  signal  S*(J) = complex conjugate of S(J)  t 1 = fixed value of time at which signal is observed to be maximum  Ga= constant equal to maximum filter gain (generally taken to be unity)  The noise that accompanies the signal is assumed to be stationary and to have a uniform  spectrum (white noise).
It need not be gaussian.
If the noise is not white, Eq.
( 10.1) may be  modified as discussed later in this section.
The filter whose frequency-response function is  given by Eq.
( 10.1) has been called the North filter, the conjugate filter, or more usually the  matched filter.
It has also been called the Fourier transform criterion.
It should not be confused  with the circuit-theory concept of impedance matching, which maximizes the power transfer  rather than the signal-to-noise ratio.
 The frequency-response function of the matched filter is the conjugate of the spectrum of  the received waveform except for the phase shift exp ( -j2nft 1 ).
This phase shift varies uniformly  with frequency.
Its effect is to cause a constant time delay.
A time delay is necessary in the  specification of the filter for reasons of physical realizability since there can be no output from  the filter until the signal is applied.
The frequency spectrum of the received signal may be  written as an amplitude spectrum I S(J) I and a phase spectrum exp [ -j<J,s(J)].
The matched­ filter frequency-response function may similarly be written in terms of its amplitude and phase  spectra I H(J) I and exp [ -j<J>m(J)].
Ignoring the constant Ga, Eq.
( 10.1) for the matched filter  may then be written as  or  and I H(J) I exp [ -j<J>m(J)] = I S(J) I exp {j[ </>J(J) -2nft i]}  IH(J)I = IS(J)I  <Pm(f) = -<j,s(J) + 21tft1 (10.2)  (10.3a)  (10.3b)  DETECTION OF RADAR SIGNALS IN NOISE 371  Thus the amplitude spectrum or the matched filter is the same as the amplitude spectrum of the  signal, but the phase spectrum of the matched filter is the negative of the phase spectrum of the  signal plus a phase shift proportional to frequency.
 The matched filter may also be specified by its impulse response /z(r), which is the inverse  Fourier transform of the frequency-response function.
 00  h(t) = r H(f) exp (j2rrft) df  • -00 ( 10.4)  Physically, the impulse response is the output of the filter as a function ortime when the input  is an impulse (delta function).
Substituting Eq.
(10.1) into Eq.
(10.4) gives  00  l1(t) = G0 f S"'(f) exp [-j2ef(ti -t)] df  -c,:, ( 10.5)  ,Since S*(f) S( -f ), we have  lz(t) = Ga rxi S(f) exp (j2ef(t1 -t)] df = Gas(t1 -t)  -00 ( 10.6)  A rather interesting result is that the impulse response of the matched filter is the image of  the received waveform; that is, it is the same as the received signal run backward in time  starting from the fixed time t 1• Figure 10.1 shows a received waveform s(r) and the impulse  response l1(r) or its matched filter.
 The impulse response of the filter, if it is to be realizable, is not defined for t < 0.
(One  cannot have any response before the impulse is applied.) Therefore we must always have  t < t 1• This is equivalent to the condition placed on the transfer function H(/) that there be a  phase shift exp ( -j2rrft 1 ).
However, for the sake of convenience, the impulse response of the  matched filter is sometimes written simply as s( -t ).
 Derivation of the matched-filter characteristic.
The frequency-response function of the  matched filter has been derived by a number of authors using either the calculus of varia- 0tions 1 or the Schwartz inequality.
9 In this section we shall derive the matched-filter frequency­ response function using the Schwartz inequality.
 s ( t)  (a)  h( t)  {b) t, ,_  Figure 10.1 (a) Received waveform s(t); (b) impulse response  /r(t) or the matched filter.
 372 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  We wish to show that the frequency-response function of the linear, time-invariant filter  which maximizes the output peak-signal-to-mean-noise ratio is  H(J) = G0S*(J) exp ( -j2nft 1)  when the input noise is stationary and white (uniform spectral density).
The ratio we wish to .
.
.
max1m1ze 1s  ( 10.7)  where jso(t)lmax = maximum value of output signal voltage and N = mean noise power at  receiver output.
The ratio R1 is not quite the same as the signal-to-noise ratio which has been  considered previously in the radar equation.
[Note that the peak power as used 'iiere is actually  the peak instantaneous power, whereas the peak power referred to in the discussion of the  radar equation in Chap.
2 was the average value of the power over the duration of a pulse of  sine wave.
The ratio RI is twice the average signt:11-to-noise power ratio when the input signal  s(t) is a rectangular sine-wave pulse.] The output voltage of a filter with frequency-response  function H(J) is  !s0(t) I = If:  00 S(J)H(J) exp (j2nft) df I ( 10.8)  where S(J) is the Fourier transform of the input (received) signal.
The mean output noise  power is  ( 10.9)  where NO is the input noise power per unit bandwidth.
The factor-! appears before the integral  because the limits extend from -oo to + oo, whereas NO is defined as the noise power per cycle  of bandwidth over positive values only.
Substituting Eqs.
(10.8) and (10.9) into (10.7) and  assuming that the maximum value of !s0(t)l2 occurs at time t = ti, the ratio R1 becomes  R, -IL: S(f)H(f) exp (j2nji1) df 1  Nofoo IH(J)l2df  2 - 00  Schwartz's inequality states that if P and Q are two complex functions, then  f P* P dx J Q*Q dx ~ If P*Q dx 12  The equality sign applies when P = kQ, where k is a constant.
Letting  P* = S(f) exp (j2nft 1) and Q = H(J)  and recalling that  f p• p dx = f Ip 12 dx (10.10)  (JO.I I)  DETECTION OF RADAR SIGNALS IN NOISE 373  we get, on applying the Schwartz inequality to the numerator of Eq.
( 10.10),  Cl" 00  r I H(f) 12 df r I su:i 12 df  • -CO • -00 RI < ----------- - N_o 100 IHU)l2 df  2 .
-o'J  From Parseval's theorem.
ro J IS(J)l2 df  -00  No  2  1'" ISU)l2 df= r"'' s2(t) dt = signal energy= E  ••.
<'Y'l ..
-00  Therefore we have  2E Rr < -­-No (10.12)  ( 10.13)  ( 10.14)  The frequency-response function which maximizes the peak-signal-to-mean-noise ratio Rr  may be obtained by noting that the equality sign in Eq.
( 10.11) applies when P = kQ, or  H(f) = GaS*(J) exp(-j2efti) (10.15)  where the constant k has been set equal to 1/Ga.
 The interesting property of the matched filter is that no matter what the shape of the  input-signal waveform, the maximum ratio of the peak signal power to the mean noise power  is simply twice the energy E contained in the signal divided by the noise power per hertz of  bandwidth N0• The noise power per hertz of bandwidth, N0, is equal to kT0F where k is the  Boltzmann constant, T0 is the standard temperature (290 K), and F is the noise figure.
 lbe matched filter and the correlation function.
The output of the matched filter is not a replica  of the input signal.
However, from the point of view of detecting signals in noise, preservjng the  shape of the signal is of no importance.
If it is necessary to preserve the shape of the input  pulse rather than maximize the output signal-to-noise ratio, some other criterion must be  employed.
10  The output of the matched filter may be shown to b(: proportional to the input signal  cross-correlated with a replica of the transmitted signal, except for the time delay t 1• The  cross-correla,tion function R(t) of two signals y(,l) and s(,l ), each of finite duration, is defined as  R(t) = J 00  y(J.)s(J.
-t) d).
 -ro ( 10.16)  The output y0(t) of a filter with impulse response h(t) when the input is Yin(t) = s(t) + n(t) is  00  Yo(t) = J Yin(l)h(t -A.) dA.
 -00  If the filter is a matched filter, then h(11.) = s(t1 -,l) and Eq.
(10.17) becomes  Yo(t) = J 00  Y1n(A.)s(t 1 -t + ,l) d).
= R(t -ti)  -ro (10.17)  ( 10.18)  Thus the matched filter forms the cross correlation between the received signal corrupted by  noise and a replica of the transmitted signal.
The replica of the transmitted signal is" built in"  to the matched filter via the frequency-response function.
If the input signal y10(t) were the  374 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  L O 9 ~~~~~~~~_..._,...~~~-...---,----,-r ,--r -T T ] l ! I -·1  w - :::; 08  w .c u a o 1 - E  0 -t; 0.6  w 0.
 "' t:' 0.5 - ~  L 0.4 - (U - >­u  C:  -~ 0 2 u  ....
 C1)  11 0.1 --s,n91e-tuned (RLC)  resonant passband ...-Recton9ulor - shaped passband  1.0 2.0 3.0 40  Halt-power bondw'1dth times pulsewidth, Br J  50  Figure 10.2 Efficiency, relative to a matched filter, of a single-tuned resonant filter and a rectangular  shaped filter, when the input signal is a rectangular pulse of width r.
B = filter bandwidth.
 same as the signal s(t) for which the matched filter was designed (that is, the noise is assumed  negligible), the output would be the autocorrelation function.
The autocorrelation function of  a rectangular pulse of width r is a triangle whose base is of width 2r.
 '· .
Efficiency of nonmatched 61ters.
In practice the matched filter cannot always be obtained  exactly.
It is appropriate, therefore, to examine the erficiency of non matched filters compared  with the ideal matched filter.
The measure of efficiency is taken as the peak signal-to-noise  ratio from the nonmatched filter divided by the peak signal-to-noise ratio (2£/ N 0) from the  matched filter.
Figure 10.2 plots the efficiency for a single-tuned (RLC) resonant filter and a  rectangular-shaped filter of half-power bandwidth B, when the input is a rectangular pulse of  width r.
The maximum efficiency of the single-tuned filter occurs for Br ;::::: OA.
The correspond­ ing loss in signal-to~noise ratio is 0.88 dB as compared with a matched filter.
Table 10.
l lists  Table 10.l Efficiency of nonmatched filters compared with the matched filter  Loss in SNR compared  Input signal Filter Optimum Br with matched filter, dB  Rectangular pulse Rectangular l.37 0.85  Rectangular pulse Gaussian 0.72 0.49  Gaussian pulse Rectangular 0.72 0.49  Gaussian pulse Gaussian 0.44 0 (matched)  Rectangular pulse One-stage,  single-tuned circuit 0.4 0.88  Rectangular pulse 2 cascaded single-tuned  stages ...
:· .
, ~ .
0.613 0.56  Rectangular pulse 5 cascaded single-tuned  stages .
' .
0.672 0.5  ;  DETECTION OF RADAR SIGNALS IN NOISE 375  the values of Br which maximize the signal-to-noise ratio,(SNR) for.various combinations of  filters and pulse shapes.
It can be seen that the loss in SNR incurred by use of these non­ matched filters is small.
 Matched filter with nonwhite noise.
In the derivation of the matched-filter characteristic  [Eq.
( 10.15 )], the spectrum or the noise accompanying the signal was assumed to be white; that  is.
it was independent or frequency.
If this assumption were not true, the filter which maximizes  the output signal-to-noise ratio would not be the same as the matched filter of Eq.
(10.15).
It  has been shown11 13 that if the input power spectrum of the interfering noise is given by  [N;(.{)]2, the frequency-response function of the filter which maximizes the output signal-to­ noise ratio is  ( 10.19)  When the noise is nonwhite, the filter which maximizes the output signal-to-noise ratio is  called the NWN (nonwhite noise) matched filter.
For white noise [N;(/)]2 = constant and the  NWN matched-filter frequency-response function ofEq.
(10.19)reducestothatofEq.
(10.15).
 Equation ( 10.19) can be written as  H(/) (10.20)  This indicates that the NWN matched filter can be considered as the cascade of two filters.
The  first filter, with frequency-response function 1/Ni(/).
acts to make the noise spectrum uniform,  or white.
It is sometimes called the whitening filter.
The second is the matched filter described  by Eq.
( 10.15) when the input is white noise and a signal whose spectrum is S(/)/ Ni(/).
 10.3 CORRELATION DETECTION1+--23  Equation ( 10.18) describes the output of the matched filter as the cross correlation between the  input signal and a delayed replica of the transmitted signal.
This implies that the matched-filter  receiver can be replaced by a cross-correlation receiver that performs the same mathematica?  operation, as shown in Fig.
lO.J.
The input signal y(t) is multiplied by a delayed replica of the  transmitted !ignal s(r -T,), and the product is passed through a low-pass filter to perform  the integration.
The cross-correlation receiver of Fig.
10.3 tests for the presence of a target at  only a single time delay T,.
Targets at other time delays, or ranges, might be found by varying  T,.
However.
this requires a longer search time.
The search time can be reduced by adding  Received signal fl( t) - Mixer Low-poss  (multiplier! ~ filter I-->- {integratorl Output  ~  Stored Deloy  replica s ( t l r,.
s(t-T,.)  Fiiure 10.3 Block diagram of a cross-correlation receiver.
 376 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  parallel channels, each containing a delay line corresponding to a particular value of T,, as  well as a multiplier and low-pass filter.
In some applications it may be possible to record the  signa·t on some storage medium, and at a higher playback speed perform the search sequen­ tially with different values of T,..
That is, the playback speed is increased in proportion to the  number of time-delay intervals T,.
that are to be tested.
 Since the cross-correlation receiver and the matched-filter receiver are equivalent math­ ematically, the choice as to which one to use in a particular radar application is determined by  which is more practical to implement.
The matched-filter receiver, or an approximation, has  been generally preferred in the vast majority of applications.
 10.4 DETECTION CRITERIA .J  The detection of weak signals in the presence of noise is equivalent to deciding whether the  receiver output is due to noise alone or to signal-plus-noise.
This is the type of decision  probably made (subconsciously) by a human operator on the basis of the information present  at the radar indicator.
When the detection process is carried out automatically by electronic  means without the aid of an operator, the detection criterion cannot be left to chance and must  be carefully specified and built into the decision-making device by the radar designer.
 In Chap.
2 the radar detection process was described in terms of threshold detection.
 Almost all radar detection decisions are based upon comparing the output of a receiver with  some threshold level.
If the envelope of the receiver output exceeds a pre-established threshold,  a signal is said to be present.
The purpose of the threshold is to divide the output into a region  of no detection and a region of detection; or in other words, the threshold detector allows a  choice between one of two hypotheses.
One hypothesis is that the receiver output is due to  noise alone; the other is that the output is due to signal-plus-noise.
It was shownjn Chap.
2  that the dividing line between these two regions depended upon the probability of a false  alarm, which in turn is related to the average time between false alarms.
 There are two types of errors that might be made in the decision process.
These are  unavoidable with observations of finite duration in the presence of noise.
One kind of error is  to mistake noise for signal when only noise is present.
This occurs whenever the noise is large  enough to exceed the threshold level.
In statistical detection theory it is sometimes called a  type I error.
The radar engineer would call it a false alarm.
A type II error is one in which the  signal is erroneously considered to be noise when signal is actually present.
This is a missed  detection to the radar engineer.
The setting of the threshold represents a compromise between  these two types or errors.
A relatively large threshold will reduce the probability or a false  alarm, but there will be more missed detections.
The nature of the radar application will  influence to a large extent the relative importance of these two errors and, therefore, the setting  of the threshold.
 Neyman-Pearson observer.
The threshold level was selected in Chap.
2 so as not to exceed a  specified false-alarm probability; that is, the probability of detection was maximized for a fixed  probability of false alarm.
This is equivalent to fixing the probability of a type I error and  minimizing the type II error.
It is similar to the Neyman-Pearson test used in statistics  for determining the validity of a specified statistical hypothesis.
24•25 Therefore this type of  threshold detector is sometimes called a Neyman-Pearson Observer.
In statistical terms it is  claimed to be a uniformly most powerful test and is an optimum one, no matter what the a  priori probabilities of signal and noise.
25 The Neyman-Pearson criterion is wen suited for  radar application and is usually used in practice, whether knowingly or not.
 DETECTION OF RADAR SIUNALS IN NOISE 377  Likelihood-ratio receinr.
The likelihood ratio is an important statistical tool and may be  defined as the ratio of the probability~<lcnsity function correspori<ling to signal-plus-noise.
 Psn(1·).
to the probability-density function of noise alone, Pn(v).
 L,( P) Psn(v)  Pn(v) ( 10.21)  It is a measure of how likely it is thal the receiver envelope vis due to signal-plus-noise as  compared with noise alone.
It is a random variable and depends upon the receiver input.
If the  likelihood ratio L,(11) is surficicntly large, it would be reasonable to conclude that the signal  was indeed present.
Thus detection may be accomplished by establishing a threshold at the  oulpu! of a receiver which computes the JikeJihood ratio.
The selection of the proper threshold  level will depend upon the statistical <letection criterion used and by the probabilities of error  desired and their relative importance.
 The likelihood ratio is primarily useful in the analysis of the statistical-detection problem.
 It is difficult to conceive, however, of a receiver that computes the likelihood ratio directly as  defined by Eq.
(10.21).
However, in certain cases the receiver which computes the likelihood  ratio is equivalent to a receiver which computes the cross-correlation function or to one with a  matched-filter characteristic, that is, one which maximizes the output signal-to-noise ratio.
24  The Neyman-Pearson Observer is equivalent to examining the likelihood ratio and deter­ mining if Lr(v) ?: K, where K is a real, nonnegative number dependent upon the probability of  false alarm selected.
 Inverse probability receiver.
A detection criterion that has been popular particularly for the  theoretical analysis of statistical detection and for statistical parameter estimation is that  based on inverse probability.
The usual detection criteria employ the concept of direct probabil­ ity, which describes the chance of an event happening on a given hypothesis.
For example, the  probability that a particular radar will detect a certain target under specified conditions is a  direct probability.
On the other hand, if an event actually ha:ppens, the problem of forming the  best estimate of the cause of the event is a problem in inverse probability.
For example, assume  the event in question to be the output voltage v from a radar receiver.
Upon obtaining this  voltage, it is of interest to determine whether the output was caused by noise or by signal in the  presence of noise.
The probabilities of obtaining noise and signal-plus-noise before the event  takes place are the a priori probabilities.
They represent the initial state of knowledge concern­ ing the even>-The probability that the receiver output v was caused by noise or by signal-plus­ noise is an a posteriori probability and represents the state of knowledge obtained as a result  of observing the output.
 The method of inverse probability involves the use of the a priori probabilities associated  with each of the possible hypotheses which could explain the event.
The a priori probabiJities  are used, along with a knowledge of the event, to compute the a posteriori probabilities.
A  separate a posteriori probability is computed for each hypothesis.
That hypothesis which  results in the largest a posteriori probability is selected as the most likely to explain the event.
 This method has been applied by Woodward and Davies to the reception of signals in  noise.26-28 It is based upon the application of Bayes' rule for the probability of causes.29 The  joint probability of two events x and y is  p(x, y) = p(x)p(yjx) = p(y)p(xjy)  where p(x) and p(y) = probabilities of events x and y, respectively (10.22)  p(y Ix)= conditional probability that event y will occur, given that event x has  occurred  r,{y I,.) -r()nrlitinnnl nrnhnhilitv nf PVPllf Y P-ivf"'n ffrnt ,.
hAc:: nrr.urrPn  378 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  Let the event x = SN represent signal-plus-noise, and let the event y be the receiver input,  which may consist of either signaf ...
pius-noise or noise alone.
Equation ( I0.22) may be ·  rewritten as  p(SN I y) = p(SN)p(y l~~l  p(y) ( 10.23)  This is Bayes' rule.
It expresses the (a posteriori) probability that the signal is present, given  that the receiver input is y.
 For a particular input y, the receiver can assess from Eq.
( 10.23) the probability that a  particular signal was received.
Since y will then be fixed, the denominator p(y) will be constant  and the a posteriori probability is  p(SN I y) = kp(SN)p(y I SN) j ( 10.24)  where the constant k is determined by the normalizing condition; that is, the integral of  p(SN I y) over all possible values must be unity.
Therefore, if the a priori probability p(SN) is  known, the a posteriori probability may be found directly from Eq.
(10.24) once p(ylSN) has  been evaluated.
If the received waveform y(t) as a function of time consists of the signal  waveform si(t) plus the white gaussian noise waveform n(t) = y(t) -si(t), Woodward and  Davies27 show that  p(y I SN)= Pn[n(t)] = Pn[y(t) -si(t)] ex exp [-~~ J n2(t) dt I ( 10.25)  where Pn[n(t)] = probability-density function for noise waveform n(t) and N0 = mean noise  power per unit bandwidth (dimensions of energy).
With this substitution, the a posteriori  probability for the signal si(t) becomes  { l To } p(SN I y) = kp(SN) exp -No ( [y(t) -si(t)]2 dt (10.26)  The integral in this expression is a definite one, with limits defined by the duration of the  observation time (0-.
T0).
 Equation (10.26) forms the basis of the technique used by Woodward and Davies for the  analysis of radar reception problems when the interference is caused by white gaussian noise.
 Except for the a priori weighting factor p(SN), Eq.
( 10.26) shows that the most probable  waveform si(t) is the one which has the least-mean-square deviation from the received  waveform y(t).
 The computation of the a posteriori probability might be accomplished by computing the  cross-correlation function between the actual waveform and the various possible waveforms  that might be received.
Expanding the integral in Eq.
(10.26) we get  f [y(t) -s;(t)]2 dt = f y2(t) dt -2 f y(t)s1(t) dt + f sr(t) dt ( 10.27)  Upon reception, the waveform y(t) is known, so that the first integral on the right-hand side of  the equation is constant and can be absorbed in the constant k.
The last integral is the energy E  contained within the signal si(t) and also is a constant.
The second integral is not a constant.
 The a posteriori probability can be written  [ 2 To l p(SN I y) = kp(SN) exp N~ t y(t)s1(t) dt ( 10.28)  DETECTION OF RADAR SIGNALS IN NOISE 379  where the first and third integrals of Eq.
(10.27) are absorbed in the constant k.
An a posteriori  receiver, if it could be built, is one whose output is given by the above equation.
If the receiver  output (the a posteriori probability) is greater than a predetermined threshold, a target is said  to be present.
If the a priori probability p(SN) can be considered constant, the computation of  the a posteriori probability is equivalent to multiplying the received signal y(t) by the signal  waveform si(t) and integrating with respect to time.
This is the same process performed by the  cross-correlation receiver (Sec.
10.3) and is equivalent to the operation of a matched filter  (Sec.
10.2).
 A limitation of the method of inverse probability based on the application of Bayes' rule is  the difficulty of specifying the a priori probabilities.
In most cases of practical interest, one is  ignorant of the a priori probabilities.
For example, it would be necessary to specify the a priori  probability of finding a target at any particular range at any particular time.
This is an almost  impossible task.
In the absence of better data.
it might be assumed that all range intervals are  equally probable a priori, and the a priori probability may be considered to be constant.
 However, such an assumption applied blindly to computations involving inverse probability  can sometimes lead to erroneous and contradictory conclusions.
29 This difficulty in specifying  the a priori probability was recognized by Woodward and Davies.27 They suggest, however,  that the a priori factor be omitted from the inverse-probability specification when it is doubt­ ful, and in practice it may be supplied subjectively by the human observer.
This merely begs  the question, for it has not been proved that an operator can supply the necessary a priori  probability, and in addition, there are many applications where no operator is involved in  making the detection decision.
Nevertheless, it may be stated that whenever the a priori  probabilities are known, the inverse-probability method may be used with confidence.
When  the a priori probabilities are not known, the likelihood-ratio test is usually employed.
 Relationship of inverse probability and likelihood-ratio receivers.
The receiver input y may be  either signal-plus-noise or noise alone.
Therefore the probability of the event y may be ex­ pressed as  p(y) = p(y I SN)p(SN) + p(y I N)p(N)  The a posteriori probability of Eq.
( 10.23) becomes  p(SN)p(y I SN)  p(SN I y) = p(y I SN)p(SN) + p(y I N)p(N)  r  Or, in terms of the likelihood ratio30  L,(y) p(y ISN)  p(yl N)  L,(y)p(SN) p{SN IY) L,(y)p(SN) + 1 -p(SN) (10.29)  (10.30)  (10.31)  Therefore, if a receiver can be built which computes the likelihood ratio and if the a priori  probability p(SN) is known, the a posteriori probability can be calculated.
Since p(SNjy) is a  monotonic function of L,(y), the output of the likelihood receiver {or the matched-filter  receiver) can be calibrated directly in terms of the a posteriori probability.
The chief difference  between the two representations is that the concept of inverse probability requires a knowlege  of the a priori probabilities whereas the likelihood ratio does not.
(The likelihood ratio follows  from inverse probability if the assumption is made that the a priori probabilities are equally  likely.) Both the a posteriori method and the likelihood method may be implemented by  computing the cross-correlation function between the received signal and the signal s1(t).
 380 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  Ideal observer.
The criterion of Neyman-Pearson is nol the only one which might be uscJ for  establishing a threshold level.
One of the first mathematical criteria applied to the theory of  radar detection was the Idea Observer ·as formulated by Siegert.
31 (The term" Ideal" does not  necessarily imply that this criterion is the ideal criterion.) The criterion of the Ideal Observer  maximizes the total probability of a correct decision (or minimizes the total probability of an  error).
Since t~e two ways in which an error might be made are (l) false aJarm and (2) missed  detection, the probability of ari error is.
 p(E) = p(N)pra + p(SN)pm ( I0.32)  where p(N) and p(SN) a priori probabilities of obtaining noise and signal-plus-noise, re­ spectively [p(N) + p(SN) = l]  Pra = conditional probability of a false alarm, given that noise is present  Pm = conditional probability of a miss, given that signal is present (a, fJ  are often used in mathematical references for P,a and Pm)  The a priori probability is the probability of obtaining either noise alone or signal-plus-noise  before the detection decision is made.
These probabilities must be known beforehand in the  Ideal Observer.
 The false-alarm probability depends upon the miss probability in the case of the Ideal  Observer.
This is unlike the Neyman-Pearson Observer in which Pra was fixed.
The function of  the Ideal Observer is to minimize the total probability of error.
It accomplishes this by  adjusting the threshold, which in turn affects both the false alarm and the miss probabilities.
 The dependence of the two errors upon one another is probably the chief limitation of the  Ideal Observer as a radar detection criterion.
Middleton25 states that when the probability of  false alarm is 0.05, the probability of detection is 0.90.
A false-alarm probability of 0.05 is  usually high for most radar applications.
Radar false-alarm probabilities are rarely greater  than 10-4• Low values of false-alarm probability with the Ideal Observer require extremely  large values of detection probabilities.
For example, a false-alarm probability of 10-5 corre­ sponds to a detection probability of 0.99998.
Thus the privilege of minimizing the total error  seems to result in overdetecting the target.
Therefore, from a practical point of view, the Ideal  Observer is less efficient than the Neyman-Pearson Observer for most radar applications.
 The Ideal Observer applies equal weight to an error due to a false alarm and to an error  due to a miss.
However, there may be cases in which equal weight is not appropriate (Bayes  criterion).
If the errors are not of equal importance, the theory of the Ideal Observer may be  modified to take this into account using the concepts of statistical decision theory.24•32-34  Unfortunately, in most radar applications there is no realistic basis for assigning a value to a  miss or to a false alarm; consequently, the usefulness of decision theory in radar is limited.
 Sequential observer.
Most radars utilize the equivalent of the Neyman-Pearson Observer and  operate with a fixed number of pulses.
However, the detection decision might very well be  made on the basis of only a few observations or possibly a single observation, and it would not  be necessary to record the later observations that occur once the threshold has been crossed.
 Hence there may be some advantage to using a flexible detection criterion which takes account  of this fact.
Such a detection criterion is the Sequential Observer.
30-43 The Sequential Observer  makes an observation of the receiver output and, on the basis of this single observation,  decides between one of three choices: (1) the receiver output is due to the presence of signal  with noise; (2) the output is due to noise alone; or (3) the available evidence is not convincing  enough to make a decision between choices 1 and 2.
If the evidence is sufficient to allow a  choice to be made between signal-plus-noise (1) and noise alone (2), the test is completed.
But  DETECTION OF RADAR SIGNALS IN NOISE 381  if choice 3 is indicated.
no conclusive decision can be reached and another observation is made.
 The three choices are again examined on the basis of the combined observations.
If no  decision is reached as to the presence of signal or the presence of noise, another observation  is made.
and the process is repeated until the evidence is convincing enough to make a definite  conclusion.
 The Sequential Observer fixes the probability of errors beforehand but allows the integra­ tion time (or the number of observations) to be a variable.
Two threshold levels are established  with a gray region in between.
If the output is definitely below the lower threshold, noise alone  is said to he present.
If the upper threshold is exceeded, the signal is declared to be present  along with the noise.
But if the output lies between the two thresholds, no decision is possible  and anol her ohserv a I ion is nrnde.
 The Sequential Observer permits a significant reduction in the average number of samples  (pulses) needed for making a decision.
The improvement depends upon whether a signal is  present or not.
If a signal is present, the average number of samples (or observations) required  for making a decision is significantly greater than when noise alone is present.
The Sequential  Observer makes a relatively prompt decision when only noise is present.
 The average savings also depend upon whether detection is performed coherently or  noncoherently.
Assuming coherent detection (pulses integrated predetection) and Pv = 0.90  and Pra = 10-8, the Sequential Observer is able to determine, on the average, that noise alone  is present with less than one-tenth the number of observations required for the Neyman­ Pearson Observer.90 In the presence of a threshold signal, the Sequential Observer requires,  on the average, about one-half the number of observations of the equivalent fixed-sample  observer.
Again assuming Pv = 0.90 and Pra = 10-8, a noncoherent Sequential Observer  (pulses integrated postdetection) requires only one-fourteenth the number of observations  when only noise is present.
When signal is present, approximately one-half the number of  observations are needed as with an equivalent Neyman-Pearson Observer.
 Unfortunately, the application of the Sequential Observer to radar is limited.
At any  particular antenna position a radar normally observes many range resolution intervals, per­ haps several hundred.
At each range interval within ~he beamwidth of the antenna a decision  has to be made concerning the presence or absence of a target before the antenna beam can be  positioned to a new direction.
Therefore the dwell time in any direction is determined not by  the average number of observations made by each sequential detector, but by that range  interval which requires the largest number of observations.
This can result in relatively long  dwell times, and it is possible for the savings obtained with the Sequential Observer to be  negated.
Th~ required dwell time might be even longer than that of the fixed sample-number  Neyman-Pearson Observer.
 If the Sequential Observer allows a savings in average power of from 8 to 10 dB when  implemented for a single-range cell, the power advantage decreases to 3 to 4 dB for 200-range  cells and can even be as little as 1 dB.40 In addition, th~ Sequential Observer requires some­ thing more flexible than the usual rotating-antenna radar.
Because of the variable dwell time  the anteona beam-positioning system must usually be a phased-array antenna and the data  processing must be digital.
Thus if full benefit is to be had from the Sequential Observer in  radar, only one or a few independent decisions per beam position should be made.
It might be  employed when only a single "guard-band" is desired for detecting targets within a selected  range interval, a not too usual application.
It has also been considered for use in a low-signal  density environment when the criterion is that either no signal is present or one signal of fixed  and specified level is present and equally likely to be in any range interval.
38•39  The term sequential detection is sometimes used synonymously with Sequential Observer.
 Sequential detection has also been used to describe a two-step, or two-stage, detection process  382 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  that can be employed wit.h phased:-array radar.
39·42 The radar transmits a pulse or.a series of  pulses in a particular direction as in an ordinary radar, except that the false alarm probability  is slightly higher than would normally be used.
If no threshold crossings are obtained, the  antenna beam moves to the next angular position.
However, if a threshold crossing is observed  from any range cell, a second pulse or set of pulses is transmitted with higher energy, and with  a different threshold.
A target is declared to be present only if threshold crossings are observed  from the same range cell on both transmissions.
The second transmission might also be of  greater resolution as well as higher power.
When the two thresholds are optimized, it has been  found that a second transmission is employed in about four percent of the beam positions.'0 It  is claimed that a power saving of from 3 to 4 dB can be obtained as compared with uniform  scanning.42  j  10.5 DETECTOR CHARACTERISTICS  The portion of the radar receiver which extracts the modulation from the carrier is called the  detector.
The use of this term implies somewhat more than simply a rectifying element.
It  includes that portion of the radar receiver from the output of the IF amplifier to the input of  the indicator or data processor.
We shall not be concerned about the problem of amplification,  although it is an important aspect of receiver design.
Instead, we shall be more interested in the  effect of the detector on the desired signal and the noise.
 One form of detector is the envelope detector, which recognizes the presence of the signal  on the basis of the amplitude of the carrier envelope.
All phase information is destroyed.
It is  also possible to design a detector which utilizes only phase information for recognizing targets.
 An example is one which counts the.
zero crossings of the received waveform.
The zero­ crossings detector destroys amplitude information.
If the exact phase of the echo carrier were  known, it would be possible to design a detector which makes optimum use of both the phase  information and the amplitude .information contained in the echo signal.
It would perform  more efficiently than a detector 'Yhich .used either amplitude information only or phase infor­ mation only.
The coherent detector is an example of one which uses both phase and amplitude.
 These three types of detectors-the envelope, the zero-crossings, and the coherent detectors­ are considered in the present section ...
 Ennlope detector-optimum-detector law.
The function of the envelope detector is to extract  the modulation and reject the carrier.
By eliminating the carrier, all phase information is lost  and the detection decision is based solely on the envelope amplitude.
It will be recalled that  most of the analysis of the radar equation in Chap.
2 was based on the envelope detector.
 The envelope detector consists of a rectifying element and a low-pass filter to pass the  modulation frequencies but to remove the carrier frequency.
The rectifier characteristic relates  the output signal to the input signal and.
is called• the detector law.
Most detector laws  approximate either a linear or a square-law·characteristic.
In the linear detector the output  signal is directly pr9portional to the input envelope.
(Actually, the so-called linear detector is a  nonlinear device, or else it would not be a detector.) Similarly, in the square-law detector, the  output signal is proportional to the ·square I of the input envelope.
In some of the quoted  mathematical results, the linear-detector law is assumed, while in others, the square law is  assumed.
In general, the difference' between the two is small and the detector law in any  analysis is usually chosen for mathematical convenience.
When we speak of a detector law we  really mean the combined Jaw of the, detector and video integrator, if one is used.
If the \ ,,f  DFTEC'TION OF RADAR SIGNALS IN NOISE 383  detector were linear while the video integrator had a square-law characteristic, the combina­ tion of detector and integrator would be considered square law.
 In the following we shall derive the optimum form of the secondJdetector law.26•43  Assume that there are II independent pulses with envelope amplitudes v1, v2, .•• , v" available  from the radar receiver.
The problem consists in determining whether these II pulses are due to  signal-plus-noise or whether they are due to noise alone.
The probability-density function for  the envelope of II independent noise samples is the product of the probability-density function  for each sample.
or  " Pn(11, t'i) = rJ Pn(v;) ( 10.33)  i= I  The prohahility-dcnsity function for ith noise pulse Pn(v1) is given by Eq.
(2.21), rewritten  ( v~) Pn(v;) = V; exp -i (2.21)  where I'; is the ratio of the envelope amplitude R to therms noise voltage t/1//2.
Likewise, the  probability-density function for the envelope of 11 signal-plus-noise pulses is  " P.,(11, v;) = n Ps(v;) (10.34)  i= I  The probability-density function for signal-plus-noise, Ps(v;), 1s the Rice distribution of  Eq.
(2.27)  (2.27)  where a = ratio of signal (sine-wave) amplitude to rms noise voltage and I 0(x) = modified  Bessel function of zero order.
The detection process is equivalent tt, determining which of the  two density functions [Eq.
( 10.33) or ( 10.34 )] more closely describes the output of the receiver.
 The ratio of the density function for signal-plus-noise to that for noise alone is the  likelihood ratio.
It may be used to decide whether or not the signal is present.
The greater the  likelihood ratio, the more probable it is that the receiver input is due to signal-plus-noise  rather than noise alone.
The likelihood ratio, or any other monotonic function of this ratio,  must exceed a predetermined threshold val"ue in order to declare that the signal is present.
 The selection of the threshold will depend upon the probability of false alarm.
The likelihood  ratio [Eq.
(10.34) divided by (10.33)] is  L,(r,) = exp (-n a22 ) ;oi Io(av,) ~ 11.
(10.35)  where A.
is the constant which depends on the false-alarm probability.
Taking the logarithm  gives  (10.36)  This states that for optimum processing one should take the pulses, each of amplitude v1  " (where i = 1, 2, ...
, 11), and sum them according to the law L In J0(av1).
This sum is  I= l  compared with a threshold as given by the right-hand side of Eq.
(10.36).
Therefore the  combined detector and integrator must have a law given by  y = In J0(av) (10.37)  384 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  where y = output voltage or detector and integrator  a amplitude of sine-wave signal divided by rms noise voltage  v = amplitude of IF voltage envelope divided by rms noise voltage  J0(x) = modified Bessel function of zero order  This equation specifies the form of the detector law which maximizes the likelihood ratio  for a fixed probability of false alarm.
A suitable approximation lo Eq.
(10.37) is91  y = In /0(av) ~ ~ + 4 -2 (10.38)  For large signal-to-noise ratios (a p 1 ), this is approximately  y ~ av ( 10.39)  Thus the linear detector is a good approximation to the optimum In I 0(ai1) detector law when  the signal-to-noise ratio is large.
For small signal-to-noise ratios the app1oximation of  Eq.
( 10.38) can be written  --- ( I0.40)  which is the characteristic of a square-law detector.
 Hence it may be concluded that for small signal-to-noise.
ratios the square-law detector  may be a suitable approximation to the optimum detector, while for large signal-to-noise  ratios the linear detector is more appropriate.
In practice, it makes little difference which of the  two detector laws is used.
The difference between the square-law and the linear detectors was  shown by Marcum43 to produce less than 0.2 dB difference in the required signal-to-noise  ratio.
If one has a choice, the linear law might be preferred because of its linearity and, hence,  its large dynamic range.
The linear detector, like any detector law, approaches the square-law  characteristic for small signal-to-noise ratios.
 Logarithmic detector.
If the output of the receiver is proportional to the logarithm of the input  envelope, it is called a logarithmic receiver.
It finds application where large variations of input  signals are expected.
It might be used to prevent receiver saturation or to reduce the effects  of unwanted clutter targets in certain types of non-MTI radar receivers (Sec.
l3.8).
 The detection characteristics (probability of detection as a function of the probability of  false alarm, signal-to-noise ratio, and the number of hits integrated) for the logarithmic  receiver have been computed by Green,44 following the methods of Marcurn.43 For lO pulses  integrated, the loss with the logarithmic receiver is about 0.5 dB, while for 100 pulses in­ tegrated, the loss is about LO dB.
As the number of pulses increases, the loss due to a logarith­ mic detector approaches a maximum value· of l.
l dB.45  Zero-crossings detector.
The information contained in the zero crossings of the received signal  can, in principle, be used for detecting the presence of signals in noise.
The greater the  signal-to-noise ratio the less will be the average number of zero crossings.
The average number  of zero-crossings per second at the output of a narrow-bandpass filter of rectangular shape  when the input is a sine wave in gaussian noise is46  -_ [S/N + 1 + (f;/12Jl)J 1'2  no -2fo SIN + 1 ( 10.42)  where /0 = center frequency of filter  /8 = filter bandwidth  S/N = srgnal-to-noise (power) ratio  Input  fo.
'Po Balanced  mi~er  • lo, <Po  Reference  oscillator Low-pass  filter DETECTION OF RADAR SIGNALS IN NOISE 385  Figure l0.4 Basic configuration of a coherent detector.
 Ir a suitable device is used to measure 110, a target signal is said to be present if this number is  less than a predetermined (threshold) value and is said to be absent if the threshold is  exceeded.
(The value or 110 is a maximum when S/N 0.)  Coherent detector.
The coherent detector (Fig.
10.4) consists of a reference oscillator feeding a  balanced mixer.
The input to the mixer is a signal of known frequency/ 0 and known phase ¢0  plus its accompanying noise.
The reference-oscillator signal is assumed to have the same  frequency and phase as the input signal to be detected.
The output of the mixer is followed by a  low-pass filter which allows only the d-c and the low-frequency modulation components to  pass while rejecting the higher frequencies in the vicinity of the carrier.
The coherent detector  provides a translation of the carrier frequency to direct current.
It does not extract the  modulation envelope and is a truly linear detector, whereas the" linear" envelope detector was  not linear in the same sense.
Therefore the coherent detector will be a more efficient detector,  especially when signal-to-noise ratios are low.
 The coherent detector does not destroy phase information as does the envelope detector,  nor does it destroy amplitude information as does the zero-crossings detector.
Since it utilizes  99 9 Probobili!y of false olorrn 10-e 10-12 99.8  99 5  99 /  /  98 /  /  C 95 - /  0 / ·.::: / u 90 - OJ / +- OJ / -0  0 80 /  70 -,.
/  /  _Q 60 / 0  _Q / 0 50 L / CL 40 I  30 I  I Signal known 20 I  I ---Signal known  10 I except for phase  5 I  10-• 10-6 10-e 10-,o I0-12 Probobilify of folse olorrn  2  () 10 ?O 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100  2t/No  Figure IO.!i Comparison of detection probabilities for signal known completely (coherent detector) and  for signal known except for phase (envelope detector).
 386 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  more information than either the envelope or the zero-crossings detector, it is not surprising  that the signal-to.,noise.ratio from the coherent detector is better than from the other two.
The  improvement in the signal-to-noise ratio might vary from l to 3 dB or more, over the range of  signal-to-noise ratios of interest in most radar applications.
A comparison is shown in  Fig.
10.5 or the detection probabilit.ies when the signal parameters are known completely  (coherent detector) and when the signal is known except for phase (envelope detector).24 The  abscissa is plotted as 2£/ NO instead of signal-to-noise ratio, where E is the signal energy and  NO is the noise power per hertz of bandwidth.
 Although the coherent detector may be of superior sensitivity than other detectors it is  seldom used in radar applications since the phase of the received signal is not usually known.
 10.6 PERFORMANCE OF THE RADAR OPERA TOR  J  The rate of information inherent in a typical radar signal is considerably greater than can be  handled by a human operator.
A one-me,ahertz-bandwidth signal, for example, is capable of  conveying information at a rate of two megabits/s, but an operator can accept an information  rate of only 10 to 20 bits/s.
Thus there is a tremendous mismatch between the information  content of a radar and the information-handling capability or an operator.
The function of the  radar display is to aid the operator to extract in an efficient manner the information contained  in the radar signal that is important to the task.
The usual type of radar display is a cathode­ ray tube or its equivalent.
 The ability of the operator to detect radar signals in the presence of noise or clutter  cannot be determined with as great a reliability as can the performance of the electronic  threshold detector described in Chap.
2.
Human behavior is certainly less predictable than  that of an electronic device.
However, it appears that an operator's performance can be as  good as that predicted for the ideal electronic threshold detector if the operator is well trained,  motivated, alert, not fatigued, and the display is properly designed.
Furthermore, the operator  is probably better able to recognize and interpret patterns relating groups of associated echoes  than can automatic devices.4 7  It has been shown experimentally that when an operator views a display in which the  pulses received from successive sweeps are displayed side-by.side without loss of memory  (fading of the recorded signals with time), the integration improvement achieved by an opera­ tor is equivalent to what would be expected from classical detection theory.48·49 This is  illustrated by the data of Fig.
10.6, which plots the experimentally observed signal-to-noise  ratio necessary to achieve a probability of detection of 0.50 as a function of the number of  pulses available on the display.
Curve A applies to a chemical recorder which makes a  permanent record, and curve B applies to an intensity modulated B·scope of long persistence.
 (The chemical recorder has been of more use in sonar than in radar.) The integration improve­ ment was found to be from 2.2 to 2.5 dB per doubling or the number of pulses, which is  consistent with .the computations for the theoretical integration improvement obtained by  Marcum43 for ideal postdetection integration.
The results for the chemical recorder (curve A)  are slightly better than the B-scope (curve B) due to the imperfect memory of the cathode-ray  tube B-scope as compared with the permanent· memory of the chemical recorder.
Similar  results were noted for the improvement in a conventional PPI when the pulses were displayed  side·by-side.
 In other experiments with the PPI, the integration improvement has been reported to be  proportional to 1.5 dB per doubling of the number of pulses, which corresponds to n112• so  Improvements as high as 1.8 dB per doubling were also observed, but this is less than the 2.2 to  DETECTION OF RADAR SIGNALS IN NOISE 387  12  ~ 11 A  ~ 0 10 0  l.()  I...
9 2 8 ...
 m 8 t)  7  "' 6  V,  0 5 C  ' 4  3  u 2 0 .c  V, -I '" -'-.c f-0  +' 10 20 30 40 60 80 100 200 300 400  Number of pulses integrated  Figure 10.6 Improvement of operator detection threshold (signal-to-noise ratio per pulse) as a function of  the number of pulses (sweeps) for side-by-side displays.
Curve A, chemical recorder; curve B, cathode-ray­ tube B-scope display; curve C, line or slope 1.5 dB/doubling ( oc n1'2); curve D, line of slope 3 dB/doubling  ( rx n) for perfect predetection integration .
.a.'s are theoretical values for ideal postdetection-integration  improvement as computed by Marcum43 for a false-alarm probability of 10-3, (From J.
Brit.
I RE.49)  2.5 dB per doubling mentioned above.
The applicability of these particular tests to the usual  PPI display can be questioned since a 5-inch-diameter CRT was used with simulated echoes  placed at an azimuth unknown to the operator at a distance of 1 inch from the center of the  scope.
The conclusion that might be drawn from such experiments is that somewhat less than  theoretical integration improvement will be obtained if the pulses are not displayed properly;  that is, the persistence of the display should be sufficient to prevent excessive "loss of  memory," the dynamic range of the display must be large enough not to lose signal informa­ tion, and the display resolution should be consistent with the radar resolution to avoid  collapsing loss.
Since the dynamic range of most displays is limited to a relatively small value,  the pulses received from a target should be displayed side by side (as is usually the case on a  PPI or B-sfope) rather than piled up at a single point on the display.
In such a case the  integration is performed by the eye-brain combination of the operator.
 Experimental measurements of the operator's ability to detect signals on an A-scope  showed the integration-improvement factor to be n1'2, or 1.5 dB per doubling of the number of  pulses integrated.
31 This is less than predicted for an ideal postdetection integrator.
It was also  found that the operator's detection capability was maximum when Bt ::::::: 1, where B = IF  bandwidth and t = pulse width, as is consistent with the analysis of Sec.
10.2.
 The detectability of a target echo on a CRT display depends on such factors as the size  and brightness of the CRT spot, the noise background, pulse repetition frequency, antenna  rotation rate, type of phosphor, and its decay characteristics, the size of the display, and the  color and intensity of the ambient illumination.
The effect of most of these factors has been  determined empirically.
31•51•62 The name pipology is sometimes applied to the art of designing  and operating the radar display so as to optimize the operator's ability to detect target pips.
(A  target pip is also called a blip.) It has also been found from experience that an operator should  not, in general, be required to perform his duties for more than one-half hour at one sitting.51  388 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  10.7 AUTOMATIC DETECTION  The function of the radar operator viewing the ordinary radar display is to recognize the  presence of targe_ts and extract their location.
When the function is performed by electronic  decision circuitry without the interventio11 of an operator, the process is known as mttomatic  detection.
One of the chief reasons for employing automatic detection is to overcome the  limitations of an operator due to fatigue, boredom, and overload.
In addition, the use of  automatic detection allows the radar output to be transmitted over telephone lines rather than  by more expensive broadband microwave links, since only detected target information need be  transmitted and not the full bandwidth signal (raw video).
Automatic detection is also an  important part of automatic detection and track (ADT) systems, as discussed in Sec.
5.10.
The  automatic detector has also been called plot extractor and data extractor.
 Usually there are four basic aspects to automatic detection: (I) the inte9ration of the  pulses received from the target; (2) the detection decision; and the determination of the target  location in (3) range and (4) azimuth.
Sometimes there is also included in automatic-detection  circuitry the means for maintaining a constant false alarm rate (CFAR ).
This is discussed  separately in the next section.
 Binary moving-window detector.39·52-60 As a radar antenna scans by a target it will normally  receive n echo pulses.
If m of these expected n pulses exceed a predetermined value (threshold),  a target may be declared to be present.
The use of a criterion that requires m out of n echo  pulses to be present .is a form of integration.
It is less efficient than ideal postdetection  integration, but it has the advantage of simplicity.
It is called the binary moving-window  detector, but it has also been called double-threshold detector, m-out-of-n detector, coinci­ dence detector, sliding-window detector, and binary integrator.
 A bloc!< diagram of the binary moving-window detector is shown in Fig.
10.7.
The radar  video is passed through a threshold detector, which may be thought of as a bottom clipper.
 Only those signals whose amplitude exceeds the preset threshdd are allowed to pass.
This is  the first of two thresholds, hence the name double-threshold detector which is sometimes used.
 The output of the first threshold is sampled by the quantizer at least once per range-resolution  cell.
A standard pulse is generated if the video waveform exceeds the first threshold, and  nothing if it does not.
These are designated by 1 or O respectively.
Thus the output of the  quantizer is a series of ls and Os.
This is then separated into separate range cells by the range ··'"  First  threshold  Rodar Video Threshold  receiver detector Range gate  Quantizer -...- No.
1  I ' Range gate  No.2 Second  threshold  Binary  counter Target  Count pulse  sampler  Figure J0.7 Block diagram of a binary moving window detector, or binary integrator.
 DF!ECTION OF RADAR SIGNALS IN NOISE 389  gates, and lhc Is and Os from the last II sweeps are stored and counted in the binary counter.
If  there are at least m ls within the lasf II sweeps, a target-is said to be present.
The number mis.
 the second threshold to be passed in the double-threshold detector.
The two thresholds must  be selected jointly for best performance.
The optimum value of m for a constant echo signal is  shown in fig.
10.8.
(Similar results are available for fluctuating targets.
39•58•.59) This curve  is approximate since there is some slight dependence upon the false-a)arm probabiJity, but it  appears to oe independent or the signal-to-noise ratio.
The actual value of m can differ  significantly from m.,r, without a large penalty in signal-to-noise ratio.
For example.
the  signal-to-noise ratio will be within 0.5 dB of optimum form ranging over a value of 0.44 11 for a  nonfluctuating target or a Swerling case l, and 0.34 n for a Swerling case 2.59  The quantization or signals into but two levels (zero or one} in the binary moving-window  detector results in a loss of about 1.5 to 2 dB in signal-to-noise ratio as compared to the ideal  post-detection integrator.53 55•5 7 When the amplitude is quantized into more than two levels,  !he loss is less.
For example, quantization into four levels (2 bits), reduces the loss to about  onc-t hird t ha! ex pcricnccd in two-level, or binary.
quantization ( t bit).
60  A corollary advantage of the binary moving-window detector is that it is less sensitive to  the effects of a single large interference pulse that might exist along with the target echo pulses.
 r n the usual integrator, the fuU energy of the interference pulse is added.
ln the binary  moving-window detector.
however, it contributes no more than would any other pulse that  crosses the llrst threshold since a I is recorded no matter what the amplitude.
Similarly, the  double-threshold detector has some advantage over the usual integrator when the background  interference is not receiver noise but is nongaussian, as is some sea clutter and land clutter.
 10,000  lO r0  0 N8  01  ~  <I>  0  1,000 _  V1  QJ  .'.:':  :::J  Cl.
 ·o  ,._  (JJ  .0  E ::,  C  a  :§  [::! r  100  10  Figure 10.8 Optimum number of pulses m0"1 (out of a  I ·--~--~-~--~-----n maximum of n) for a binary moving window detector.
A  O 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 LO constant (nonfluctuating) target is assumed.
{After  mopt /n Swerling,52 courtesy Rand Corporation.)  390 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  Such clutter is characterized by having large "spiky" echoes.
Although they may occur in­ frequently, they can be quite large and give undue weight in a conventional integrator.
In the  double-threshold detector they contribute the same as any threshold-crossing signal no matter  what their amplitude.
An analysis of the problem of detection of signals in clutter (or noise)  that is nongaussian, indicates that a detector based on the median value crossing a threshold is  significantly more efficient than the usual detection criterion based on the mem, value.
61 The  implementation of the binary moving window detector is similar to that of the median  detector.
 An estimate of the target's angular position may be made by locating the center of the  group of 11 pulses.
56 This operation is called beam splitting.
The moving-window detector has  no prior knowledge of the target beginning.
It must be sufficiently sensitive to quickly detect a  region of increased density of ls, yet it must not be so sensitive that it initiates false alarms due  to noise.
Once a target beginning is realized, the detector must be able to sense tye end of the  region of increased-density of ls.
Again, if it is too sensitive to change, the detector will tend to  split targets.
1 •  ,I  Tapped-delay-line integrator.
An integrator based on the tapped delay line is shown in  Fig.
10.9.
The time delay through the line is made equal to the total integration time, and the  taps are spaced at intervals equal to the pulse-repetition period.
The number of taps equals the  number of pulses to be integrated.
The outputs from each of the taps are tied together to form  the sum of the previous n pulses.
One of the advantages of this integrator is that any type of  weighting may be applied to the individual pulses by simply inserting the proper altenuation  at each tap of the delay line.
 This form of integrator that sums the last n pulses is also known as the moi>ing-winclow  detector or the analog moving-window detector.64 ·Jt, of course, can also be implemented in  digital circuitry.
It is similar to the binary moving-window detector discussed above, but it  does not use a double threshold and it does not suppress the effects of large interference spikes  as does the binary detector.
It does not suffer the 1.5 to 2 dB loss of the binary detector and it  can be employed to estimate the target's angle by beam splitting.
The detection performance of  the moving-window detector is about 0.5 dB worse than the optimal detector which weights  the returned signals by the fourth power of the antenna voltage pattern.63 The angular loca­ tion of the target can be estimated from the output of this detector by laking the midpoint  between the first and last crossings of the detection threshold, or by taking the maximum value  of the running sum.
After correcting for the bias, the accuracy of the location measurement is  only about 20 percent worse than theoretical.63  Recirculating-delay-line integrator.65 -70 The delay-line integrator, or moving-window detec­ tor, described above requires that a number of pulses, equal to that expected from the target,  be held in storage.
A simplification can be had by recirculating the output through a single  delay line (Fig.
10.lOa) whose delay is equal to the pulse repetition period.
The recirculating- Topped delay line  Vide~  .
: : t -~ 0f ~t t t f Integrated ..
..
..
..
 output  Figure 10.9 Pulse integrator using tapped delay line.
 Loop goin k < 1  l  Input --~------1 Deloy line f _j  lnteqroled  output  (a)  Deloy line  (cl lnlegrated  oulpul.
DETECTION OF RADAR SIGNALS IN NOISE 391  Delay line Inlegroted  output  ,_,__--; Delay line  (b)  -----< l<.11---- Figure IO.
IO Recirculating-delay-line integrator, or feedback integrator, k loop gain < I.
(a) single  delay loop; (h) double loop; (c) two-pole filter.
 dela_r-line imegrator.
also called the feedback integrator, adds each new sweep to the sum of all  the previous sweeps.
To prevent unwanted oscillations, or" ringing," due to positive feedback,  the sum must be attenuated by an amount k after each pass through the line.
The factor k is the  gain of the loop formed by the delay line and the feedback path.
It must be less than unity for  stable operation.
The effect of k < 1 is that the integrator has imperfect "memory." The  optimum value of k depends on the number of pulses received from the target (Sec.
2.6 and  Ref.
65 ).
 Analog delay lines that have been used in such devices include acoustic lines, lumped­ parameter delay lines, electrostatic storage tubes, and magnetic drums or disks'.
They do not  have, in general, sufficient stability to permit large values of k.
When analog lines are used,  loop gains are not much larger than 0.9 in the configuration of Fig.
10.lOa, and 0.98 in the  configuration of Fig.
10.
lOb.
Since the effective numbe·r of pulses integrated is equal to  ( I -k)-1, a value or k 0.9 corresponds to about 10 pulses integrated and k = 0.98 to about  50 pulses.
However, when the recirculating-delay-line integrator is implemented with digital  circuitry, values of k approaching unity can be achieved.65 ·  The factor k in the recirculating-delay-line integrator of Fig.
10.
lOa is equivalent to an  exponential weighting of the received pulses.
It results in a loss of about 1.0 dB in signal-to·  noise ratio as compared with the ideal postdetection integrator that weights the received pulses  in direct proportion to the fourth power of the antenna beam pattern.
66 It is 0.5 dB Jess  efficient than the moving window detector with uniform weights.67 The double-loop integrator  of Fig.
10.
tob is a two-pole filter with a multiple pole.
It is about 0.3 dB less efficient than the  ideal integrator with optimum weights.
66 The double delay-line configuration of Fig.
to.toe is  also a two-pole filter but unlike the double-loop integrator, the two poles need not be at the  same location.
Its detection performance is only 0.15 dB less efficient than the optimum.66  The recirculating delay-line integrators of Fig.
10.10 can be used to obtain an estimate of  392 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  the angular location of the target.
The target can be found, as in beam splitting, by taking the  midpoint between the start and end of the threshold crossing.
There will he a hias in the angle  estimate that depends on the signal-to-noise ratio, but this hias can be estimated accuratdy.
t> 7  The standard deviation of angular estimates obtained with the single delay-line is about 15  percent greater than the optimum estimates hased on the Cramer-Rao lower hound.t>t> If the  maximum value of the output is used as an estimator of the target location, the bias is  constant.
However, the standard deviation of the estimates are 100 percent greater than the  optimum.
66 Similarly the standard deviation of the double-loop integrator using the maxi­ mum value as the estimator produces a standard deviation 50 to 100 percent greater than the  optimum.
The two-pole filter of Fig.
10.
!Oc, on the other hand, has a standard deviation 15  percent greater than optimum, and the estimator based on the maxiff um value has a constant  bias.66 Its relatively good angle-estimating accuracy, good detection performance, along with  the relative simplicity of a feedback integrator makes the two-pole filter a good..Jchoice as an  automatic detector for scanning radars.
 10.8 CONSTANT-FALSE-ALARM-RATE (CFAR) RECEIVER  The threshold at the output of a radar receiver, as discussed in Sec.
2.5, is chosen so as to  achieve a desired false-alarm probability.
The false-alarm rate is quite sensitive to the thresh­ old level.
For example, a 1 dB change in the threshold can result in three orders of magni­ tude change in the false alarm probability (Fig.
2.5).
It does not take much ·c>i a drift in the  receiver gain, a change in receiver noise, or the presence of external noise or clutter echoes to  inundate the radar display with extraneous responses.
 lf changes in the false-alarm rate are gradual, an operator viewing a display can compen­ sate with a manual gain adjustment.
It has been said75 that the maximum increase in noise  level that can be tolerated with a manual system using displays anJ operators is from 5 to  10 dB.
But with an automatic detection and tracking (ADT) system, the tolerable increase is  less than l dB.
Excessive false alarms in an ADT system cause the computer to overload as it  attempts to associate false alarms with established tracks or to generate new, but false, tracks.
 Manual control is too slow and imprecise for automatic systems.
Some automatic, instanta­ neous means is required to maintain a constant false-alarm rate.
Devices that accomplish this  purpose are called CF AR.
 A CFAR may be obtained by observing the noise or clutter background in the viciniLy of  the target and adjusting the threshold in accordance with the measured background.
Figure  10.11 illustrates the cell-averaging CF AR which utilizes a tapped deL1y-line to sample the  range cells to either side of the range cell of interest, or test cell.
T11e output of the test cell is the  radar output.
The spacing betwe-~n the taps is equal to the range ;esolution.
The Oulputs from  the delay line taps are summed.
This sum, when multiplied by the appropriate constant,  determines the threshold level for achieving the desired probability of false alarm.
Thus  the threshold varies continuously according ''J the noise ur the clutter environment fo~md  within a range interval surrounding the range cell under observation.
76 This form of CF AR  has sometimes been called Adaptive Video Threshold, or A VT.
The particular CF AR shown in  Fig.
10.11 does not sum all the range cells as described above, but sums the cells ahead of the  test cell separately from the sum of the cells following the test cell.
The threshoid is determined  by whichever of the two sums is the greater.
This is done to minir ize the generation of false  alarms at the leading and trailing edges of abrupt clutter regions.: <\.
small additional loss is  incurred, however, compared to using all the taps to establish the ;hreshold.
(For example,  with 32 reference cells, a 10-5 probability of false alarm, and 0.9 probability of detection, the  Video  11111u I l  I Tapped t1Play line  Sum I  I J~ Test  cell  I Greoler I  I of I  I I DETECTION OF RADAR SIGNALS IN NOISE 393  Tapped delay line  Sum I  J I  Threshold CFAR  oulput  Figure I0.11 Cell averaging CF AR.
In this version the greater of the outputs from the range cells ahead or  or behind the cell of interest is used to set the threshold.
 loss with a conventional cell-averaging CFAR is 0.8 dB.
With the «greater-of" technique the  loss is increased to I.
I <l B.
7 s)  Typically the number of taps used in a cell-averaging CF AR might vary from 16 to 20.
 The CFAR may be thought of as using the outputs of the sampled cells to estimate the  unknown amplitude of the background noise or clutter.
Because of the finite number of  samples, the background is not completely known and a loss occurs compared to the ideal  detector.
For example, when only 10 independent samples are used, a loss of 3.5 dB is said to  result for a probability of detection of 0.9 and probability of false alarm of 10-6, when the  background is broadband noise or clutter with a Rayleigh probability density.
74• 75 With 20  independent samples the loss is l.5 dB, and with 40 samples it is 0.7 dB.
The above applies to  single-hit detection.
The loss decreases with increasing number of pulses integrated.
With 10  pulses integrated, the loss with 10 independent samples decreases to 0.7 dB, and to 0.3 dB for  100 pulses integrated.88  ff the target echo is large, energy can spill over into the adjacent range-resolution cells and  affect the measurement of the average background.
For this reason, the range cells surround­ ing the test cell are often omitted when averaging the background.
As mentioned in Sec.
5.10,  the resolution of targets in range is degraded by the adaptive threshold process.
 The above description of the cell-averaging CF AR assumed that the background from  which the threshold was set was determined by sampling in range.
In those radars which  extract the doppler frequency shirt, as with a bank of doppler filters, the estimate of the  background tan be based on both the range and the doppler domains.
77 It is also possible to  utilize data from the adjacent angle-resolution cells to establish the threshold.
 A common assumption in the design of many CF ARs is that the probability density  function of the background noise amplitude is known (usually taken to be gaussian) except for  a scale factor.
Clutter, however, is often nonhomogeneous and thus nonstationary, as well as  being of unknown probability density function in some cases.
With such uncertainty in the  background, a nonparametric method of detection must be used.75•78-:82 (A nonparametric  detector, also called a distribution-free detector, in its most general Corm does not require prior  knowledge of the probability density function of the noise or the signal.39) A nonparametric  detector permits a constant false-alarm rate to be achieved for background noise that might be  described by very broad classes of probabiJity density functions.
It has a greater loss than when  the character of the noise is known and an optimum detector can be designed, but it does keep  the false alarm rate fixed.
One form of nonparametric detector is based on the ..
ranks" of  observations in which the components of the observations are ranked in order of magnitude,  and detection is based only on some function of these ranks.39 This can be implemented with a  394 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  rank detector which computes the ranks by pair-wise comparisons of the qutput from the range  cell under test with each of the outputs from the neighboring range cells that sample the  background noise.
78-81 After the detector ranks the sample under test with its neighboring  samples, it integrates the ranks and a target is declared arter testing against a fixed and an  adaptive threshold.
80•81  There are several other methods for achieving CF AR besides the use of cell averaging.
 One of the first CF AR receivers to be described in the literature used the output of a post­ detection integrator (low-pass filter) to estimate the average noise.
This was then applied as a  feed-forward signal to control the threshold level to maintain the false-alarm rate  constant.
71· 72 The noise had to remain constant for a time corresponding to the total number  of pulses returned from the target.
Another CF AR technique is the hard limiter, sometimes  called the Dicke fix.
12-74 This consists of a broadband IF filter followed by a hard limiter and  a narrow-band matched filter.
The hard limiter is set low enough to ensure thjt receiver noise  is limited.
Thus the output is unaffected by the level of the noise.
A signal, however, causes the  output of the matched filter to increase by a factor M, equal to the ratio of the bandwidth of  the broadband filter to the bandwidth of the narrow-band (matched) filter.
This form of CF AR  may not be desirable with MTI since hard limiting reduces the improvement factor or the  clutter attenuation (Sec.
4.8).
Hard limiting also introduces an additional loss.
The larger the  ratio of the bandwidths M, the less the loss.
For example, for a 0.5 probability of detection and  a 10-3 probability of false alarm, the loss is LO dB for M = 100, 2.2 dB for M = 20, and 7 dB  for M = 10.73 In essence the Dicke fix (that uses wideband limiting) samples the adjacent  resolution cells in the frequency, domain, as compared to the cell·averaging CF AR that  samples the background in the adjacent resolution cells in the time domain.
 When the product of the bandwidth Band the pulse width t is greater than unity, as in a  pulse compression radar, the loss is determined by the product M Bt rather than M.
Thus, a  loss of LO dB corresponds to M Br = · 100.
The ratio of the bandwidths M therefore can be  unity when Br is large enough.
73 Both coded-pulse waveforms85 and frequency-modulated  waveforms have been considered for puls~ compression radar with CFAR.86  The benefits of a large Br for CF AR can also be obtained without transmitting a pulse­ compression waveform.87 A conventional pulse waveform can be transmitted, and on recep­ tion the received signal passed through a dispersive delay"line (a pulse expansion network) that  spreads the signal over a duration T.
The output of the dispersive filter is hard limited and fed  to a second dispersive delay line with a characteristic inverse to the first.
The rms noise power  at the output is smaller than the peak power from a point target by the factor BT.
A dei~ction  threshold is set somewhere within this range or possible amplitude to allow point targets that  are larger than the background to.be detected.
This dispersive CFAR may be placed either  before or after the matched filter.
'  The log-FTC receiver described in Sec.' 13.8 has CF AR properties when the background  has a Rayleigh probability density function.
The FTC, or fast time-constant, acts as a differen­ tiating circuit, .
or high-pass filter, to remove the mean value of the clutter or noise.
This  function can be obtained with a more sophisticated filter consisting of a parallel combination  of integrator and subtractor.
83 The integrator is a narrow-band filter that averages the order of  ten range-resolution cells to establish the background level.
A receiver implemented in this  manner has been called a log-CF AR.• The· term LOG/CF AR has been applied to the cell­ averaging CF AR which· is preceded I by :a logarithmic detector.
84 The normalization of the  threshold is accomplished in thc•l!OG/CFAR by subtraction rather than by division as in the  conventional cell-averaging CFAR! Also, the LOG/CF AR is capable of operating over a larger  dynamic range of background noise levels, but it has poorer detectability for ·the same number  of reference noise samples than the conventional cell-averaging CF AR.
 DETECTION OF RADAR SIGNALS IN NOISI\ 395  CF AR is widely used to prevent clutter and noise interference from saturating the display  of an ordinary radar and preventing targets from-being obscured.
It is also needed in ADT, or  track-while-scan systems, to prevent the tracking computer from being overloaded by extra­ neous clutter targets or noise.
CF AR, however, is not without its disadvantages and can be  considered a necessary evil.
It introduces an additional loss compared to optimum detection,  and in some systems the number of pulses processed needs to be large to keep the loss low.
 More important, CF AR maintains the false-alarm rate constant at the expense of the probabil­ ity of detection.
Thus, it causes targets to be missed.
Furthermore, the operator is usually  given no indication that there may be missed detections.
In radars with a simple CFAR,  interference or hostile jamming can lower the sensitivity of the radar without the operator even  being aware that it is happening since the jamming is not visible on the scope.
Thus some  means should be included to inform the operator when the detection probability has been  lowered because of the CFAR action.
 It is better to incorporate in the design of a radar means for eliminating unwanted signals  before they enter the ADT than to depend on CFAR to eliminate them.
Examples of signal  processing techniques that eliminate unwanted signals without a severe penalty in detectability  include MTJ for clutter echoes, the low sidelobe antenna and/or sidelobe cancelers for jam­ ming noise, and the sidelobe blanker or the prf filter for pulse interference.
 REFERENCES  I.
North, D.
0.: An Analysis or the Factors Which Determine Signal/Noise Discrimination in Pulsed­ carrier Systems, RCA Tech.
Rept.
PTR-6C, June 25, 1943 (ATI 14009).
Reprinted in Proc.
IEEE,  vol.
51, pp.
1016-1027, July, 1963.
 The roHowing references (2 to 8) appear in IRE Trans., vol.
IT-6, no.
3, June, 1960, special issue on  Matched Filters:  2.
Turin, G.
L.: An Introduction to Matched Filters, pp.
311-329.
 3.
Westerfield, E.
C., R.
H.
Prager, and J.
L.
Stewart; Processing Gains against Reverberation (Clutter)  Using Matched Filters, pp.
342-348.
 4.
Middleton, D.: On New Classes of Matched Filters and Generalizations of the Matched Filter  Concept, pp.
349-360.
 5.
Sussman, S.
M.: A Matched Filter Communications System for Multipath Channels, pp.
367-373.
 6.
Lerner, R.
M.: A Matched Filter Detection System for Complicated Doppler Shirted Signals,  pp.
373-385.
 7.
Cutronf.
L.
J ..
E.
N.
Leith, C.
J.
Palermo, and L.
J.
Porcello: Optical Data Processing and Filtering  Systems, pp.
386-400.
 8.
Welle, G.
R.: Quaternary Codes for Pulsed Radar, pp.
400-408.
 9.
Van Vleck, J.
H., and D.
Middleton: A Theoretical Comparison of Visual, Aural, and Meter Reception  of Pulsed Signals in the Presence of Noise, J.
Appl.
Phys., vol.
17, pp.
940-971, November, 1946.
 IO.
Davenport, W.
B., Jr., and W.
L.
Root: ..
Introduction to Random Signals and Noise," chap.
11,  McGraw-Hill Book Company, Inc., New York, 1958.
 11.
Dwork, B.
M.: Detection of a Pulse Superimposed on Fluctuation Noise, Proc.
IRE, vol.
38,  pp.
771-774, July, 1950.
 12.
Zadeh, L.A., and J.
R.
Ragazzini: Optimum Filters for the Detection of Signals in Noise, Proc.
IRE,  vol.
40, pp.
1223-1231, October, 1952.
 13.
Urkowitz.
H.: Filters for the Detection of Small Radar Signals in Clutter, J.
Appl.
Phys., vol.
24,  pp.
1024-1031, August, 1953.
 14.
Raemer, H.
R., and A.
8.
Reich: Correlation Devices Detect Weak Signals, Electronics, vol.
32, no.
21,  pp.
58-60, May 22, 1959.
 15.
Lee, Y.
W.: Application of Statistical Methods to Communication Problems, MIT Research Lab.
 Electronics Tech.
Rept.
18 l, Sept.
l, 1950.
 16.
Lee, Y.
W., T.
P.
Cheatham, Jr., and J.
B.
Wiesner: Application of Correlation Analysis to the  Detection or Periodic Signals in Noise, Proc.
IRE, vol.
38, pp.
1165-1171, October, 1950.
 396 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  17.
Lee, Y.
W., and J.
B.
Wiesner: Correlation Functions and Communication Applications, Electronics,  vol.
23, pp.
86-92, June, 1950.
 18.
Singleton, H.
E.: A Digital E_lt;:ctronic Couelator, Proc.
I RE, vol.
38, pp.
1422~ 1428, December, l 950.
 19.
Horton, B.
M.: Noise-modulated Distance Measuring Systems, Proc.
I RE, vol.
47, pp.
821-828, May,  1959.
 20.
Rudnick, P.: The Detection of Weak Signals by Correlation Methods, J.
Appl.
Phys., vol.
24,  pp.
128-131, February, 1953.
 21.
Fano, R.
M.: Signal-to-noise Ratios in Correlation Detectors, MIT Research Lab.
Electronics Tech.
 Rept.
186, Feb.
19, 1951.
 22.
George, S.
F.: Effectiveness of Crosscorrelation Detectors, Proc.
Natl.
Electronics Conj.
(Chicago),  vol.
10, pp.
109-118, 1954.
 23.
Green, P.
I., Jr.: The Output Signal-to-noise Ratio of Correlation Detectors, IRE Trans., vol.
IT-3,  pp.
10-18, March, 1957.
 24.
Peterson, W.
W., T.
G.
Birdsall, and W.
C.
Fox: The Theory of Signal Detectability, IRE Trans.,  no.
PGIT-4, pp.
171-212, September, 1954.
 25.
M idd let on, D.: Statistical Criteria for the Detection of Pulsed Carriers in Noise, pts.
I ~nd If, J.
Appl.
 Phys., vol.
24, pp.
371-391, April, 1953; also letters to the editor by D.
Middleton et al.
in J.
Appl.
 Phys., January, 1954.
 26.
Woodward, P.
M.: "Probability and Information Theory with Applications to Radar," McGraw-Hill  Book Company, New York, 1953.
 27.
Woodward, P.
M., and I.
L.
Davies: Information Theory and Inverse Probability in Telecommunica­ tions, Proc.
IEE, vol.
99, pt.
III, pp.
37-44, March, 1952.
 28.
Davies, I.
L.: On Determining the Presence of Signals in Noise, Proc.
I EE, pt.
JII, pp.
45-51, March,  1952.
 29.
Fuller, W.: "An Introduction to Probability Theory and Its Applications," 2d ed., vol.
l, p.
114, John  Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York, 1957.
 30.
Peterson, W.W., and T.
G.
Birdsall: The Theory of Signal Detectability, Univ.
Mich., Dept.
Elec.
Eng.
 Tech.
Rept.
13, Contract DA-36-039 sc-15358, June, 1953.
 31.
Lawson, J.
L., and G.
E.
Uhlenbeck (eds.): "Threshold Signals," MIT Radiation Laboratory Series,  vol.
24, sec.
7.5, McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York, 1950.
 32.
Middleton, D.: Statistical Theory of Signal Detection, IRE Trans., no.
PGIT-3, pp.
26-51, March,  1954.
 33.
Van Meter, 0., and D.
Middleton: Modern Statistical Approaches to Reception in Communication  Theory, IRE Trans., no.
PGIT-4, pp.
119-141, September, 1954.
 34.
Middleton, D., and D.
Van Meter: Detection and Extraction of Signals in Noise from the Viewpoint of  Statistical Decision Theory, J.
Soc.
Ind.
Appl.
Math., vol.
3, pp.
192-253, December, 1955, and vol.
4,  pp.
86-119, June, 1956:.
 35.
Bussgang, J.
J., and D.
Middleton: Optimum Sequen_tial Detection of Signals in Noise, I RE Trans.,  vol.
IT-1, pp.
5-18, December, 1955.
 36.
Blasbalg, H.: The Relationship of Sequential Filter Theory tp Information Theory and Its Application  to the Detection of Signals in Noise by Bernoulli Trials, IRE Trans., vol.
IT-3, pp.
122-131, June,  1957.
 37.
Wald, A.: "Sequential Analysis," John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York, 1947.
 38.
Marcus, M.
B., and P.
Swerling: Sequential Detection in Radar with Multiple Resolution Elements,  I RE Trans., vol.
IT-8, pp.
237-245, April, 1962 ..
 39.
Caspers, J.
W.: Automatic-detection Theory, chap.
15 of" Radar Handbook," M.
I.
Skolnik (ed.~  McGraw-Hill Book Company, Inc., New York, 1970.
 40.
Bussgang, J.
J.: Sequential Methods in Radar Detection, Proc.
IEEE, vol.
58, pp.
731-743, May, 1970.
 41.
Guarguaglini, P.
F., and F.
Marcoz: The DFTSD: A Sequential Suboptimum Processor for Muhiple­ range-bin Radar Systems, IEEE Trans., vol.
AES-10, pp.
193-203, March, 1974.
 42.
Brennan, L.
E., and F.
S.
Hi!~ Jr.: A Two-step Sequential Procedure for Improving the Cumulative  Probability of Detection in Radars, IEEE Trans., vol.
MIL-9, pp.
278-287, July-October, 1965.
 43.
Marcum, J.: A Statistical Theory of Target Detection by Pulsed Radar, Mathematical Appendilt, I RE  Trans., vol.
IT-6, pp.
145-267, Apri~ 1960.
 44.
Green, B.
A., Jr.: Radar Detection· Probability with Logarithmic Detectors, IRE Trans., vol.
IT-4,  pp.
50-52, March, 1958.
 45.
Hansen, V.
G.: Postdetectionlntegration Loss for Logarithmic Detectors, IEEE Trans., vol.
AES-8,  pp.
386-388, May, 1972.
See correction, AES-10, p.
168, January, 1974.
 46.
Bendat, J.
S.: "Principles and Applications of Random Noise Theory," chap.
10, John Wiley & Sons,  Inc., New York, 1958.
,,.
:,, , ..
1 , :· .
 DETECTION OF RADAR SIGNALS IN NOISE 397  47.
Benjamin, R.: Man and Machine in the Extraction and Use of Radar Information, J.
Brit.
IRE,  vol.
26, pp.
309-316, October, 1963.
 48.
Tucker, D.
G.: Detection of Pulse Signals in Noise: Trace-to-Trace Correlation in Visual Displays, J.
 Brit.
IRE, vol.
17, pp.
319-329, June, 1957.
 49.
Skolnik M.
I., and D.
G.
Tucker: Discussion on" Detection of Pulse Signals in Noise: Trace-to-Trace  Correlation in Visual Displays," J.
Brit.
IRE, vol.
17, pp.
705-706, December, 1957.
 50.
Payne-Scott, R.: The Visibility of Small Echoes on Radar PPI Displays, Proc.
IRE, vol.
36,  pp.
180-196.
February, 1948.
 51.
Baker, C.
H.: "Man and Radar Displays," The Macmillan Company, New York, 1962.
 52.
Swerling, P.: The" Double Threshold" Method of Detection, Rand Corp.
Rept.
RM-1008, Dec.
17,  1952, Santa Monica, Calif.
 53.
Harrington, J.
V.: An Analysis of the Detection of Repeated Signals in Noise by Binary Integration,  IRE Trans., vol.
IT-I, pp.
1-9, March, 1955.
 54.
Schwartz, M.: A Coincidence Procedure for Signal Detection, IRE Trans., vol.
IT-2, pp.
135-139,  December, J 956.
 55.
Drukey, D.
L., and L.
C.
Levitt: Radar Range Performance, Hughes Aircraft Co.
Tech.
Mem.
560,  Aug.
I, 1957, Culver City, Calif.
 56.
Dinneen, G.
P., and I.
S.
Reed: An Analysis of Signal Detection and Location by Digital Means, I RE  .j Trans., vol.
IT-2, pp.
29-38, March, 1956.
 57.
Dillard, G.
M.: A Moving-Window Detector for Binary Integration, IEEE Trans., vol.
IT-13, pp.
2-6,  January, 1967.
 58.
Worley, R.: Optimum Thresholds for Binary Integration, IEEE Trans., vol.
IT-14, pp.
349-353,  March, 1968.
 59.
Walker, J.
F.: Performance Data for a Double-Threshold Detection Radar, IEEE Trans., vol.
AES-7,  pp.
142-146, January, 1971.
Comment by V.
G.
Hansen, p.
561, May, 1971.
 60.
Hansen, V.
G.: Optimization and Performance of Multilevel Quantization in Automatic Detectors,  IEEE Trans., vol.
AES-10, pp.
274-280, March, 1974.
 61.
Trunk, G.
V., and S.
F.
George: Detection of Targets in Non-Gaussian Sea Clutter, IEEE Trans.,  vol.
AES-6, pp.
620-628, September, 1970.
 62.
Popov, G.
P.: "Engineering Psychology in Radar," JPRS-55522, Joint Publications Research Service,  Washington, D.C., 23 March, 1972.
 63.
Trunk, G.
V.: Radar Signal Processing, "Advances in Electronics and Electron Physics," vol.
45,  edited by L.
Marton, Academic Press, lnc., New York, 1978, pp.
203-2~2.
Also Trunk, G.
V.: Survey  of Radar Signal Processing, Naval Research Laboratory Report 8117, Washington, D.C., June 21,  1977.
 64.
Hansen, V.
G.: Performance of the Analog Moving Window Detector, IEEE Trans., vol.
AES-6,  pp.
173-179, March, 1970.
 65.
Trunk, G.
V.: Detection Results for Scanning Radars Employing Feedback Integration, IEEE Trans.,  vol.
AES-6, pp.
522-527, July, 1970.
 66.
Cantrell, B.
H., and G.
V.
Trunk: Angular Accuracy of a Scanning Radar Employing a Two-Pole  Filter, IEEE Tram., vol.
AES-9, pp.
649-653, September, 1973.
 67.
Trunk, G.rV.: Comparison of Two Scanning Radar Detectors: The Moving Window and the Feed­ back Integrator, IEEE Trans., vol.
AES-7, pp.
395-398, March, 1971.
 68.
Urkowitz, H.: Analysis and Synthesis of Delay Line Periodic Filters, IRE Trans., vol.
CT-4, pp.
41-53,  June, 1957.
 69.
Cooper, D.
C., and J.
W.
R.
Griffiths: Video Integration in Radar and Sonar Systems, J.
Brit.
IRE,  vol.
21, pp.
421-433, May, 1961.
 70.
Palmer, D.
S., and D.
C.
Cooper: An Analysis of the Performance of Weighted Integrators, IEEE  Trans., vol.
IT-10, pp.
296-302, October, 1964.
 71.
Siebert, W.
M.: Some Applications of Detection Theory to Radar, IRE Natl.
Conv.
Record, vol.
6,  pt.
4, pp.
5-14, 1958.
 72.
Hansen, V.
G., and A.
J.
Zotti: The Detection Perrorrnance of the Siebert and Dicke-Fix CFAR Radar  Detectors, IEEE Trans., vol.
AES-7, pp.
706-709, July, 1971.
 73.
Carpentier, M.
H.: "Radars: New Concepts," Gordon and Breach, New York, 1968, sec.
4.6.
 74.
Nathanson, F.
E.: "Radar Design Principles," McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York, 1969,  chap.
4.
 75.
Hansen, V.
G.: Constant False Alarm Processing in Search Radars, International Conference on  Radar-Present and Future, Oct.
23-25, 1973, pp.
325-332, IEE Publication No.
105.
 76.
Hubbard, J.
V.: Digital Automatic Radar Data Extraction Equipment, J.
Brit.
IRE, vol.
26,  pp.
397-405, November, 1963.
 398 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  77.
Finn, H.
M., and R.
S.
Johnson: Adaptive Detection Mode with Threshold Control as a Function of  Spatially Sampled Clutter-Level Estimates, RC A Rev., vol.
29, pp.
414-464, September, I 968.
 78.
Dillard, G.
M., and C.
E.
Antoniak: A Pnctical Distribution-Free Detection Procedure for Multiple­ Range-Bin Radars, IEEE Trans., vol.
AES-6, pp.
629-635, November, 1970.
 79.
Hansen, V.
G., and B.
A.
Olsen: Nonparametric Radar Extraction Using a Generalized Sign Test,  IEEE Trans., vol.
AES-7, pp.
942-950, September, 1971.
 80.
Trunk, G.
V., B.
H.
Cantrell, and F.
D.
Queen: Modified Generalized Sign Test Processor for 2-D  Radar, IEEE Trans., vol.
AES-IO, pp.
574-582, September, 1974.
 81.
Cantrell, B.
H., G.
V.
Trunk, F.
D.
Queen, J.
D.
Wilson, and J.
J.
Alter: Automatic Detection and  Integrated Tracking System, Record of the IEEE 1975 International Radar Conference, pp.
391-395,  IEEE Publication 75 CHO 938-1 AES.
 82.
Dillard, G.
M.: Mean-Level Detection Utilizing a Digital First-Order Recursive Filter, IEEE Trans.,  vol.
AES-12, pp.
793-798, November, 1976.
 83.
Taylor, J.
W., Jr., and J.
Mattern: Receivers, chap.
5 of" Radar Handbook," M.
I.
Skolnik (ed.1  McGraw-Hill Book Co., Inc., New York, 1970.
 84.
Hanson, V.
G., and H.
R.
Ward: Detection Performance of the Cell Averaging LOG/e'F AR Receiver,  IEEE Trans., vol.
AES-8, pp.
648-652, September, 1972.
 85.
Taylor, J.
W., Jr., and G.
Brunins: Long-Range Surveillance Radars for Automatic Control Systems,  Record of the IEEE 1975 International Radar Conference, pp.
312-317.
 86.
Mortley, W.
S., and S.
N.
Radcliffe: Pulse Compression and Signal Processing, International Confer­ ence on Radar-Present and Future, Oct.
23-25, 1973, pp.
292-296, IEE Publication no.
105.
 87.
Ward, H.
R.: Dispersive Constant False Alarm Rate Receiver, Proc.
IEEE, vol.
60, pp.
735-736, June,  1972.
 88.
Mitchell, R.
L., and J.
F.
Walker: Recursive Methods for Computing Detection Probabilities, IEEE  Trans., vol.
AES-7, pp.
671-676, July, 1971.
 89.
Gupta, D.
V., J.
F.
Vetelino, T.
J.
Curry, and J.
T.
Francis: An Adaptive Threshold System for  Nonstationary Noise Backgrounds, IEEE Trans., vol.
AES-13, pp.
11-16, January, 1977.
 90.
Preston, G.
W.: The Search Efficiency or the Probability Ratio Sequential Search Radar, /RE Intern.
 Conv.
Record, vol.
8, pt.
4, pp.
116--124, 1960.
 9 l.
This expression was suggested by Warren D.
White, one of the reviewers of the revised manuscript of  this book.
 11.J INTRODUCTION CHAPTER  ELEVEN  EXTRACTION OF INFORMATION  AND WAVEFORM DESIGN  In Chap.
lO, which was concerned with detection, it was stated that the observation of radar  signals in noise could be divided into ( l) the detection of the presence of signals in noise and  (2) the extraction of the target information contained in the signal.
The analysis of the detec~  tion of signals in noise is based in large part on the mathematics of statistical hypothesis testing.
 Similarly, extraction of information from radar signals is a problem in statistical parameter  estimation.
The detection of signals and the extraction of information are not totally indepen­ dent processes since either one without the other is meaningless.
 This chapter discusses some of the concepts involved in the extraction of information  from a radar signal.
The next section considers in a qualitative manner the type of target  information available from a radar signal.
The theoretical accuracies with which range, rela­ tive velocity (doppler frequency), and angle of arrival can be determined are derived in  Sec.
11.3.
This is followed by a treatment of the ambiguity function and its effect on waveform  design.
Pulse compression waveforms and processing are discussed in Sec.
11.5.
Although  pulse compression radar is of interest for other than the extraction of information, it is  included in this chapter because of its close relation to the ambiguity function.
The fim1l  section revi@ws several radar techniques that might be used to distinguish one class of target  from another.
 11.2 INFORMATION AVAILABLE FROM A RADAR  A radar obtains information about a target by comparing the received echo signal with the  transmitted signal.
The availability of an echo signal indicates the presence of a reflecting  target; but knowing a target is present is of little use by itself.
Something more must be known.
 Therefore, a radar provides the location of.the target as well as its presence.
It can also provide  information about the type of target This is known as target classification.
 The time delay between the transmission of the radar signal and the receipt of an echo is a  measure of the distance, or range, to the target.
The range measurement is usually the most  significant a radar makes.
No other sensor has been able to compete with radar for determin·  ing the range to a distant target.
A typical radar might be able to measure range to an accuracy  399  400 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  of several hundred meters, but accuracies better than a fraction of a meter are practical.
Radar  ranges might be as short as that of the poiice traffic-speed-meter, or as long as the distances to  the nearby planets.
 Almost all radars utilize directive antennas.
A directive antenna not only provides the  transmitting gain and receiving aperture needed for detecting weak signals, but its narrow  beamwidth allows the target's direction to be determined.
A typical radar might have a heam­ width of perhaps one or two degrees.
The angular resolution is determined by the beam width,  but the angu]ar accuracy can be considerably better than the beamwidth.
A ten to one bewn  splitting would not be unusual for a typical radar.
Some radars can measure angular accuracy  considerably better than this.
An rms error of 0.1 mrad is possible with the best tracking  radars.
 The echo from a moving target produces a frequency shift due to the doppler effect, which  is a measure of the relative velocity.
Relative velocity also can be determined from the rate of  change of range.
Tracking radars often measure relative velocity in this manner rather than use  the doppler shift.
However, radars for the surveillance and tracking of extraterrestrial targets,  such as satellites and spacecraft, might employ the dopplcr shift to measure directly the  relative velocity, but it is seldom used for this purpose in aircraft-surveillance radars.
Instead,  aircraft-surveillance radars use the doppler frequency shift to separate the desired moving  targets from the undesired fixed clutter echoes, as in MTI radars.
 If the target can be viewed from many directions, its shape can he determined.
Space object  identification (SOI) radars are an example of those that extract target shape information.
The  synthetic aperture radar (SAR) which maps the terrain is another example.
Radars that  determine the shape of a target are sometimes called imagit1g radars.
 To obtain the target size or shape requires resolution in range and in angle.
Good range  resolution is generally easier to achieve than comparable resolution in angle.
In some radar  applications it is possible to utilize resolution in the doppler frequency shift as a substitute for  resolution in angle, if there is relative motion between the distributed target and the radar.
 Resolution is possible since each element of the distributed target has a different relative  velocity.
This principle has been used in synthetic aperture radars for ground mapping, inverse  SAR for SOI and the imaging of planets, and in the scatterometer for measuring the ground or  sea echo as a function of incidence angle.
 Internal motions of the target such as the rotation of aircraft engines, vibrations of vehi­ cles, the spinning of a satellite, or the rotation of antennas can also provide information abou!  the target.
The different responses to different polarizations of the electromagnetic wave  provide information on the target symmetry.
It is this property that permits echoes from  ~ymmetrical raindrops to be discriminated against in favor of echoes from asymmetrical  aircraft.
Many microwave radars use circular polarization for this purpose.
The nature of the  surface roughness can be inferred from the radar echo, as can the dielectric properties of the  scattering surface.
The former has been applied to the measurement of sea state (from satel­ lites), and the latter was used in early radar astronomy to probe the nature of the moon's  surface.
 11.3 THEORETICAL ACCURACY OF RADAR 1VIEASUREMENTS  The ability of a radar to detect the presence of an echo signal is fundamentally limited by noise.
 Likewise, noise is the factor that limits the accuracy with which the radar signals may be  estimated.
The parameters usually of interest in radar applications are the range (time delay},  the range rate (doppler velocity), and the angle of arrival.
The amplitude of the echo signal  EXTKACTION OF INFORMATION AND WAVEFORM DESIGN 401  might also be measured, but its precise value is usually not important except insofar as it  influences the signal-to-noise ratio.
 In this section the theoretical accuracies of radar measurements will be derived.
To  simplify the analysis.
it is assumed that the signal is large compared with the noise.
This is a  reasonable assumption since the signal-to-noise ratio must be relatively large if the detection  decision is to be reliable (Sec.
2.5).
Furthermore, as will be evident later, large signal-to-noise  ratios are necessary for accurate measurements.
It is also assumed that the error associated  with a measurement of a particular parameter is independent of the errors in any of the other  parameters.
The validity of this assumption depends upon the availability of a large signal-to­ noisc ratio.
(Further information regarding radar measurements can be found in Ref.
7.)  Theoretical radar accuracies may be derived by a variety of methods including those  based on (I) simple geometrical relationships between signal, noise, and the parameter to be  measured, (2) inverse probability, (3) a suitably selected gating function preceded by a  matched filler, and ( 4) the estimate of the variance using the likelihood function.
The measure  of the error is the root mean square of the difTerence between the measured value and the true  value.
The disturbance limiting the accuracy of the radar measurement is assumed to be the  receiver noise.
It is furthermore assumed that bias errors have been removed.
 It will be shown that the rms error i5M of a radar measurement M can be expressed as  kM i5M = ---= fiE/N 0 (11.1)  where E is the received signal energy.
N0.
is the noise power per unit bandwidth, and k is a  constant whose value is of the order or unity.
For a time-delay measurement, k depends on the  shape of the frequency spectrum S(f ), and M is the rise time of the pulse; for a doppler  fre4uency measurement, k depends on the shape of the time waveform s(t) and M is the  spectral resolution, or the reciprocal of the observation time; and for an angle measurement k  depends on the shape or the aperture illumination A(x), and M is the beamwidth.
 Range-accuracy -leading-edge measurement.
The measurement of range is the measurement of  I ime delay TR = 2R/c, where c is the velocity of light.
One method of determining range with a  pulsed waveform is to measure the time at which the leading edge of the pulse crosses some  threshold 1 (Fig.
11.1 ).
The pulse uncorrupted by noise is shown by the solid curve.
The shape  of the pulse is not perfectly rectangular; the rise and decay times are not zero, for this would  require an mfinite bandwidth.
The effect of noise is to perturb the shape of the pulse and to  shift the time of threshold crossing as shown by the dashed curve.
The maximum slope (rate of  rise) of the leading edge of a rectangular pulse of amplitude A at the output of a video filter is  -- --, II '11  / h' ---- \ Rectangular pulse  Tl (t ) --'-J,  I  ---------_J l  6T, -~ f.-R I  I ---, I ......
__ ,,  -I ~ise -i lime  = lr '.~"Rectangular"pulse  ' plus noise \  A \ Threshold -------.....\-------- \  \  \  " ' ' ..............
____ _ Figure 11.1 Measurement or  time delay using the leading (or  trailing) edge or the pulse.
Solid  curve represents echo pulse un­ corrupted by noise.
Dashed  curve represents the effort of  noise.
 402 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  A/t,, where t, is t,he rise time.
For large signal-to-noise ratios the slope of the pulse corrupted  by noise is essentially the same as the slope of the uncorrupted pulse.
From Fig.
l 1.1 the slope  of the pulse in noise may be written as n( t )/ L\ TR, where n(t) is the noise voltage in the vicinity of  the threshold crossing and L\ TR is the error in the time-delay measurement.
Equating the two  expressions for the slope gives \''  or L\TR = 1~1 Aft,  [(L\ TR)2]'12 = bTR = -~---- -__ !,:_ __ (A2/n2)112 -(2S/N)112 ( 11.2)  (l l.3)  where A 2/n2 is the video signal-to-noise (power) ratio.
The last part of Eq.
( 11.3) follows from  the fact that the video signal-to-noise power ratio is equal to twice the IF signal-to-noise  power ratio (S/ N), assuming a linear-detector law and a large signal-to-noise ratio.
 If the rise time or the video pulse is limited by the bandwidth B of the IF amplifier, then  t,:::::;; 1/B.
Letting S = E/r and N = N0 B, where Eis the signal energy, N0 the noise power per  unit bandwidth, and r the pulse width, the error in the time delay can be written  ( r ) 112  bTR = 2BE/N0 ( 11.4)  If a similar independent time-delay measurement is made at the trailing edge of the pulse, the  two combined measurements will be improved by )2, or  ( r )112  bTR = 4BE/N0 rectangular pulse ( 1 l.5)  For constant pulse amplitude A, the rms time-delay error given by Eq.
( 11.3) is proportional  to the rise time and is independent of the pulse width.
An improvement in accuracy is ob­ tained, therefore, by decreasing the rise time (increasing the bandwidth) or increasing the  signal-to-noise ratio.
 The actual estimate of the time delay obtained by determining when the leading or  trailing edge of the pulse crosses a threshold will depend on the value of the threshold relative  to the peak value of the pulse.
This can result in at) error in measurement even ir no noise is  present.
It is possible to alleviate this situation, however, by using an adaptive threshok\ in  which the level of the threshold is always a fixed fraction of the pulse amplitude.
2  Range accuracy using gating signals and matched filters.3 Consider the receiver block diagram  shown in Fig.
11.2 consisting of a multiplier followed by a low-pass filter (or integrator).
The  two inputs to the multiplier are the received echo signal y(t) and a gating signal g(t -TR).
The  time TR = 2R/c is the estimate of the true delay time T0• The purpose of the gating signal is to  aid in extracting an esimate of T0• As before, it is assumed that the signal is large compared  with noise; consequently there is no doubt as to the existence or the approximate position of  the echo pulse.
 y(t)  Multiplier  q(t-Tnl Low-poss  filter  (integrator) Output  Figure 11.2 Receiver for measuring range (lime delay)  using a gating signal g(t -TR), where TR is the estimate  of the true time delay.
Note the similarity to the cross­ correlation receiver of Fig.
10.3.
 F.XTRA('TION OF INFORMATION AND WAVEFORM DESIGN 403  The echo signal y(t) is compose<l of signal and noise, s(t -T0) + n(t), where s(t T0) is  the echo signal in the absence of noise.
The contributions due to signal s0 and noise n0 at the  output of the low-pass filter may be expressed as  ( 11.6)  110(TR) f g(t -Tn)n(t) dt ( 11.
7)  Defining L\ TR = TR -T0, the form of the output s0(L\ TR) with an optimum gating signal  should be an odd function.
lts value is zero at L\ TR = 0, and its even-order derivatives are zero.
 For small values of L\ TR, the output will be directly proportional to L\ TR.
(Thus it is similar to  · the angle-error detector of a monopulse tracking radar.)  The ratio or the root mean-square noise voltage (n;)112 to the slope M of the output  1(L\ TR) evaluated at L\ TR = 0 will be taken as a measure of the rms error in time measure­ ment.
or  ( 11.8)  where  The error is illustrated in Fig.
l l.3.
The receiver output characteristic with signal s0 only is  represented by the solid curve.
The effect of noise is shown by the dashed curve.
Noise  displaces the zero crossing by an amount L\t.
 Using the calculus of variations, Mallinckrodt and Sollenberger3 show that the Fourier  transform Sg(/) of the optimum gating function which minimizes the time-delay error  [Eq.
( 11.8)] is given, except for an arbitrary constant factor, by  :;J a -:;J a  L.
 "' >  OJ u  "' Cl'.: S (/) = j2nf S(/)  9 I Ni(/)12 (11.9)  /  Figure 11.3 Effect or noise n{t) in shifting the apparent zero crossing or the output s0(TR T0) or the  gating receiver of Fig.
11.2.
 404 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  where S(J) and Ni(!) are the Fourier transforms of the input signal s(t -T0) and the input  noise n(t), respectively.
The factor J2nfcorresponds to a differentiation.
Therefore the optimum  gating waveform appears as the time derivative of the received waveform, if the noise spectrum  is constant.
By applying the convolution theorem to Eq.
( 11.6), the Fourier transform of the  output S0(J) is equal to Sg(f )S*(J), or  j2nf I S(J) 12  So(J)=· 1N:C/Y12·· (11.10)  This is a transform of an odd function.
 The gating signal and the matched filter are related to one another.
In Sec.
10.2 it was  shown that the frequency-response function of the matched filter was given, except for a  constant and a time delay, by  S*(J) H(J) = ----------I N;(J) 12 .) ( 11.
l I )  where in the notation of Sec.
10.2, S*(J) is the complex conjugate of the Fourier transform of  the input signal in the absence of noise and N{f) is the spectrum of the input noise (the  Fourier transform of the input noise voltage).
Therefore, if the multiplier of Fig.
11.2 is  preceded by a matched filter, the form of the optimum gating signal will he  (11.12)  This is the Fourier transform of the doublet impulse 112(t), or first derivative of the impulse  function J'(r ).
The gating waveform is therefore  (11.13)  The above analysis indicates that optimum range processing consists in passing the echo  signal through a matched filter followed by a gating in time that samples the signal waveform  at the instant before and the instant following the time TR.
The difference between these two  samples is a measure of the difference between the estimated delay time TR and the true delay  time T0.
In some respects, the gating process is analogous to the split-range-gate technique for  range-tracking radars described in Sec.
5.6, except that the sampling gates described here are  of infinitesimal width whereas they are usually of the order of a pulse width in range tracking.
 Substituting the optimum gating signal into the expression for accuracy gives (Ref.
3,  Eq.
12)  '5 T ~ = oo --~~- -·-·- 4 f (2nf )2  I S(J)/2 I I N;(J) 12 df  0 (11.14)  If the noise spectrum is a constant with spectral energy equal to NO watts/Hz of bandwidth,  the mean square error is  2 No ('5TR) = -a:,----~-- 4 f (2nf )2  I S(J) 12 df  0 (11.15)  An effective bandwidth p may be defined such that  a:, f (21tf)2 IS(J)l2 df 00  p2 = -00 00 = k f (2nf )2  I S(J) 12 df f IS(f)l2dfl -a:, (11.16)  -a:,  where E is the signal energy.
This definition of bandwidth is unlike those discussed previously  EXTRACTION OF INFORMATION AND WAVEFORM DESIGN 405  in this hook and is not simply related to either the half-power bandwidth or the noise band­ width.
In terms of the effective bandwidth.
the time-delay error becomes  I  ,n~ = //(2E/No)i1i (11.17)  and the range error is ()R = (c/2) f>1~.
 The effective bandwidth as defined hy Eq.
( I 1.16) was first introduce~! by Gabor4 and l1as  been used by Woodward5 in his treatment of detection and accuracy by means of inverse  probability.
Both Gabor and Woodward define the e!Tective bandwidth in terms of the  complex-frequency representation, while the defl.nition presented above is in terms of the real  time waveforms.
In essence, {/2 is the normalized second moment of the spectrum IS(J)l2  about the rm.·an (here taken to be al zero frequency).
The larger the value of {J2, the more  accurate will be the range measurement.
 Examples of time-delay (range) accuracy.
The computation of /32 for a perfectly rectangular  pulse one with zero rise time and zero fall time-results in fJ2 = co.
This implies that the  minimum rms range error for a perfectly rectangular pulse is zero and that the range measure­ ment can be made with no error.
In practice, however, pulses are not perfectly rectangular  since a zero rise time or a zero fall time requires an infinite bandwidth.
Finite bandwidths  result in finite rise times and finite /J2•  In order to compute /J2 (and the range error) for a practical" rectangular" pulse, it will be  assumed that the pulse spectrum is of the form S{f) = (sin rrfr)/nf, just as with the perfectly  rectangular pulse of width r, but that the bandwidth is limited to a finite value Bas shown in  Fig.
[ 1.4.6 This is equivalent to passing a perfectly rectangular pulse through a filter of width  B.
The time waveform of the output will be a pulse of width approximately r, but the slopes of  the leading and trailing edges are finite.
An example of the shape of a bandwidth-limited  rectangular pulse is shown in Fig.
11.5.
The integrals in the expression for /32 [Eq.
11.16]  extend, in this instance, from -B/2 to + B/2 instead of from -co to +co.Thus the effective  bandwidth is  R/2  (211:)2 r f2(sin2 efr)/rr2f2 df  {J2 = .
-8/2  ,1112  I (sin2 nfr)/n2f2 df nBr -sin nBr  ti -s·i-(--n·--B-t) + ( COS_1t_Bt---l-)/-1rBr (11.18)  .
-R/2  where Si X fs the sine integral function defined by r (sin u)/u du.
As Br -co, the product  0  t 2 2B fi ::::; --­ T for large Br  -·· ---8---------~  rron11nr,r•,1 ~-":It,..
(11.19)  Figure 11.4 Spectrum of a band­ width-limited "rectammlar pulse"  406 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  Time -Figure 11.5 Shape of rectangular pulse  after passing through a band-limited rec­ tangular filter.
 This is a reasonably good approximation for almost any value of Br.
Therefore the rms error  in the time-delay measurement for a" rectangular" pulse of width r.
limited to a bandwidth B,  is approximately  J  bTa ~ (4B;/NJ112 bandwidth-limited rectangular pulse ( 11.20)  The pulse width r in the above expression is that of the perfectly rectangular pulse before band  limiting.
It is a good approximation to the width of the band-limited pulse when Br is large.
 Equation (11.20) is the same as Eq.
(11.5) but is derived in a totally different manner.
This  is a rather interesting result, for it seems to imply that the value of time delay obtained with a  straightforward method like the leading-edge technique can be as accurate as the optimum  processing technique described above.
It was assumed in the analysis of a bandwidth-limited  pulse that a matched filter was employed.
H the spectral width of the ..
rectangular" pulse is  changed, the matched filter must be changed also.
 The rms time-delay error for a trapezoidal-shaped pulse of width 2 T1 across the top, fiat  portion and with rise and fall times of T2 may be shown from Eqs.
( 11.16) and ( 11.17) to be  oTi =(Ti+ JTi T2)112  trapezoidal pulse (11.21)  R 6E/N0  When the trapezoidal pulse approaches in shape the rectangular pulse.
that is, when T1 ~ T2,  Eq.
( 11.21 ) becomes  JTR ~ (2i/~J112 (I l.22)  The bandwidth B is approximately the reciprocal of the rise time T2, and if T1 ::::::: r/2, where r is  the pulse width, the rms error is  6T~ ~ (4B;/NJ112  which is the same as that derived previously for the bandwidth-limited rectangular pulse.
 By letting T1 -0 in Eq.
(11.21), the time-delay error for a triangular-shaped pulse is  obtained.
Calling the width at the base of the triangle r8 = 2T2, the rms error is  oT.
_ ta  R -ju(2E/N0)112 triangular pulse ( I J.23)  Consider a pulse described by the gaussian function  ( l.384t2 ) s(t) = exp -t2 (11.24)  EXIRACIION OF lNl'ORM/\TlON i\NlJ WAVEFORM DESIGN 407 .
 where r is the hair-power pulse width:·The· gaussfan-shaped pulse is sometimes specified in  those applications where interference with equipments operating at nearby frequencies is to be  avoided.
The gaussian pulse is well suited for this purpose since its spectrum decays rapidly on  either side of the carrier frequency.
Its rms range error is  .
r 1.18  i5IR = Ll8(2E/N~)iii n8(2E/N0)112 gaussian pulse (11.25)  where lJ is the half-power bandwidth of the gaussian-pulse speclrum.
 The effective bandwidth of a waveform with a uniform frequency spectrum of width Bis  fl = rrB/ jJ.
The waveform which gives rise to a uniform frequency spectrum is of the form  (si11 x)/x.
where x rr.llr.
Therms time-delay error is therefore ·  sm x waveform  X ( 11.26)  The radar waveform which yields the most accurate time-delay measurement, all other  factors being equal, is the one with the largest value of effective bandwidth /J.
If the bandwidth  is limited by external factors to a value 8, the spectrum which produces the largest /J, and  hence the most accurate range measurement, would be one which crowded all its energy at the  two ends or the band; that is,  S(J) = J(J -Jo -8/2) + J(J -Jo + 8/2)  where fo is the carrier frequency and o(x) is the delta function.
The corresponding time  waveform consists of two sine waves at frequencies /0 ± 8/2.
This is the two-frequency CW  radar waveform discussed in Sec.
3.5.
The two-frequency CW radar spectrum (and its corre­ sponding waveform) are not always suitable in practice since they lead to ambiguous measure­ ments ir the frequency separation 8 between the two sine waves is greater than c/2R,,.
where c  is the velocity of propagation and R,, is the maximum unambiguous range.
If the range  neasurement is to be unambiguous, the spectrum must be continuous over the bandwidth B.
 Accuracy of frequency (doppler-velocity) measurement.
Using the method of inverse probabil­ ity, Manasse8 showed that the minimum rms error in the measurement of frequency is  l  JJ= a.(2E/No)i12 ( l l.27)  r  2 J~ ro (21tt)2s2(t) dt a = f~ <X) s2(t) dt where ( 1 l.28)  and s(t) is the input signal as a runction of time.
Note the similarity between the definition of a.
 and {I.
as defined in Eq.
( l l.16), as well as between the expressions for of and oTR.
The  parameter a.
is called the effective time duration or the signal, and (a./21t)2 is the normalized  second moment of s2(r) about the mean epoch, taken to bet= 0.
If the mean is not zero, but  some other value t0, the integrand in the numerator of(ll.28) would be (2n)2(t -c0)2s2(t).
In  radar, the measurement error specified by Eq.
( 11.27) is that of the doppler frequency shift.
 The value of a2 for a perfectly rectangular pulse of width r is 1t2r2/3; thus the rms  frequency error is  -./3 of -n:t(2E/N0)fi2 rectangular pulse ( 11.29)  The longer the pulse width, the better the accuracy of the frequency measurement.
 408 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  For a bandwidth-limited "rectangular" pulse as described by Fig.
1 LS, the value of a:2 is ·  cos rr:Br -3 8(cos nBr -l) 2 sin rr:Br  rcBr (rr:Br)3 --(nBrf + Si (nBr)  Si (nBr) + (cos rrBr 1 )/nBr (11.30)  In the limit as Br -+ oo, the value of a2 approaches n2r2 /3, which is the same as that obtained  for the perfectly rectangular pulse.
 The value of cx2 for a perfectly rectangular pulse is finite even though its value of p2 is  infinite.
The value of a2 will be infinite, however, for a waveform with a perfectly rectangular  frequency spectrum, corresponding to a (sin x)/x time waveform (x = n:Bt) of infinite duration.
 In practice, any waveform must be limited in time, and a2 will therefore be finite.
The  frequency error (or o:2) for a waveform with rectangular spectrum may be found in a manner  similar to that employed for computing /J2 for a bandwidth-limited rectangular pulse.
The  frequency error will be like that of Eq.
(11.20) but with the roles of B and r reversed.
 The rms error in the measurement of doppler frequency with a trapezoidal pulse is  bf- (2T2/3 + 2Tt}112  -(2T2Y.
T,T2 Tl 2T3)112( 2E)'12 Zrc 1 2 + _1_2 + 2 + 1 __  3 3 15 3 N0 trapezoidal pulse (11.31)  This reduces to the expression for a rectangular pulse [Eq.
( l l.29)] as the trapezoidal pulse  becomes more rectangular, that is, when T1 = r/2 ~ T2•  For the triangular pulse, we set T1 = 0 in Eq.
( 11.31) and let 2 T2 r 8.
The rms error is  (10)1/2 .
 lJJ = 1tr.a(Z£/ No)112 triangular pulse { 1 1.32)  The rms frequency error for a gaussian-shaped pulse is  1.18 B  {JJ = nr(2E/N0)112~ = 1.18(2£/N0)112 gaussian pulse (11.33)  The time-delay and frequency-error expressions obtained in this section apply for a single  observation.
When more than one independent measurement is made, the resultant error may  be found by combining the errors in the usual manner for gaussian statistics; that is, the  variance (square of l,f or l>TR) of the combined observations is equal to 1/ N of the variance of a  single observation, where N is the number of independent observations.
If fl2 or cx2 remains the  same for each measurement, the expressions derived here still apply, but with Ethe total signal  energy involved in all N observations.
 Uncertainty relation.
The so-caJJed "uncertainty" relation of radar states that the product of  the effective bandwidth p occupied by a signal waveform and the effective time duration a must  be greater than or equal to x; that is,4  (11.34)  Equation ( 11.34 ), the radar "uncertainty" relationship, may be derived from the definitions of  P and ex given by Eqs.
(11.16) and (11.28) and by applying the Schwartz inequality.
It is a  consequence of the Fourier-transform relationship between a time waveform and its spectrum  and may be derived without recourse to noise considerations.
The use of the word "uncer­ tainty" is a misnomer, for there is nothing uncertain about the "uncertainty" relation of  Eq.
( 11.34 ).
It states the well-known mathematical fact that a narrow waveform yields a wide  EXTRACTION OF INFORMATION AND WAVEFORM DESIGN 409  spectrum and a wide waveform yields a narrow spectrum and both the time waveform and the  rrequency spectrum cannot be made arbitrarily small simultaneously.
 The relation of Eq.
( 11.34) is useful, however, as an indication of the accuracy with which  time delay and frequency may be measured simultaneously.
The product of the rms time­ delay error [Eq.(11.17)] and therms frequency error [Eq.
(11.27)] is  1  () TR bf= 7i;{_2E/ NO) (11.35)  Substituting the inequality of Eq.
( l l.34) in the above gives  ' 1  (51 R f>f s ;(2E/No) ( 1 l.36)  This states that the time delay and the frequency may be simultaneously measured to as small a  theoretical error as one desires by designing the radar to yield a sufficiently large ratio of signal  c11erg_,.
( E) to noise power per here z (NO), or for fixed E/ NO, to select a radar waveform which  results i11 a large va/11e of /Ja.
Large pa products require waveforms long in duration and of  wide bandwidth.
 The poorest waveform for obtaining accurate time-delay and frequency measurements  simultaneously is the one for which pa = n.
It may be shown that this corresponds to the  gaussian-shaped pulse.
The triangular-shaped pulse is little better, since its {3a product is ~n.
 The radar" uncertainty" relation seems to have the opposite interpretation of the uncer­ tainty principle of quantum mechanics.
The latter states that the position and the velocity of  an electron or other atomic particles cannot be simultaneously determined to any degree of  accuracy desired.
Precise determination of one parameter can be had only at the expense of the  other.
This is not so in radar.
Both position (range or time delay) and velocity (doppler  frequency) may in theory be determined simultaneously if the Prx product and/or the  El NO ratio are sufficiently large.
The two uncertainty principles apply to different phenomena,  and the radar principle based on classical concepts shoulcf'not be confused with the physics  principle that describes quantum-mechanical effects.
In classical radar there is no theoretical  limit to the minimum value of the {)TR bf product since the radar systems designer is free to  choose as large a pa product (by proper selection of the waveform) and E/N0 ratio as he  desires, or can afford.
His limits are practical ones, such as power limitations or the inability to  meet tolerances.
In the quantum-mechanical case, on the other hand, the observer does not  have controliover his system as does the radar designer since the {3a product of a quantum  particle is fixed by nature and not by the observer.
 Angular accuracy.
The measurement of angular position is the measurement of the angle of  arrival of the equiphase wavefront of the echo signal.
The theoretical rms error of the angle  measurement may be derived in a manner similar to the derivations of time (range) and  frequency errors discussed above.
The analogy between the angular error and the time-delay  or frequency error comes about because the Fourier transform describes the relationship  between the radiation pattern and the aperture distribution of an antenna in a manner similar  to the relationship between the time waveform and its frequency spectrum.
 For simplicity the angular error in one coordinate plane only will be considered.
The  analysis can be extended to include angular errors in both planes, if desired.
It is assumed that  the signal-to-noise ratios are large and that the noise can be described by the gaussian  probability-density function.
 Consider a linear in-phase receiving antenna of length D, or a rectangular receiving  aperture of width D as shown in Fig.
11.6.
The amplitude distribution across the aperture as a  410 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  y  Figure 11.6 Rectangular rccc1vmg  aperture of width D and amplitude  distribution A (x) giving rise to radiated  pattern G,,(O).
 function of x is denoted A(x ).
The (voltage) gain as a function of the angle O ( one-dimensional  radiation pattern) in the xz plane is proportional to  • D/2 ( X ) Gv(O) = I · A(x) exp j2n -1 sin O dx  • -D/2 A (11.37)  When the angle () is small, sin fJ ~ 0, and Eq.
(11.37) is recognized as an inverse Fourier  transform  f 012 j2nx0 Gv(O) = _ 0 12 A(x) exp -;.-dx (11.38)  This is analogous to the inverse Fourier transform relating the frequency spectrum S(J) and  the time waveform s(t), or  <X)  s(t)= J S(f)exp(j2rrfr),{f  -<X) ( 11.39)  As the antenna scans at a uniform angular rate w.s, the received signal voltage from a fixed  point source will be proportional to Gv(B) = G11(ws l) and may be considered a time waveform.
 If 8/ A [in Eq.
( 11.38)] is identified with tin Eq.
( 11.39), and if xis identified wit hf, the theoretical  rms error can be obtained by analogy to the time-delay accuracy as given by Eq.
( 11.17), or  b(!) = y(lE/~o) 112 (11.40)  where y is the effective aperture width defined by  <X) f (2nx)2IA(x)l2dx  2 ·-<X)  }' = <X) f IA(x)l2dx  -<X) (11.41)  The theoretical angular error of an antenna with a rectangular amplitude distribution  across the aperture is  bO = 1tD(2E/N0)112 (11.42a)  The effective aperture width is 21t times the square root of the normalized second moment of  jA(x)l2 about the mean value of x, taken to be at x = 0.
The half-power beamwidth 08 of a  rectangular distribution is 0.88,l/D, where 08 is in radians.
Therefore  Q~8~ ( ) oO = (2E/No) 112 11.42b  EXTRACTION OF INFORMATION AND WAVEFORM DESIGN 411  where the units of bO are the same as those of 08.
The relative error (blJ/08) is a function of  E/ NO only.
The angular error can be many times less than the beam width, depending upon  the value of E/ NO• The accuracy formulas derived previously for the time delay and the  frequency may be readily applied to the determination of the angular error for various aper~  ture distrioutions.
 The effective aperture width )' for several aperture distributions which can be computed  analytically arc given below:  l'araholic distrih11tio11  For L\ = 0  For L\ = 0.5  Fori'1 = 1.0  Cosine distribution  Triangular distribution 4(1 -L\)x2  A (x) = I -· · ·· jjI ---- y2 = 0.863D2  y2 = l.88D2  y2 = 3.287D2  7tX A(x) = cos 7S  y2 = l.286D2  2 A(x)= I -jj lxl  y2 = 0.986D2 Ix I Ix I D <-· 2  D <-2 (11.43)  ( 11.44)  (11.45)  Inverse probability, likelihood ratio, and accuracy.
The method of inverse probability as  described by Woodward5 can be used as a basis for determining the theoretical accuracies  :ssociated with radar measurements.
The likelihood function also can be used for deriving  measurement accuracy.9 Both methods result in accuracy expressions like that of Eq.
(11.17).
 11.4 AMBl~UITY D1AGRAM5•10-12  The ambiguity diagram represents the response of the matched filter to the signal for which it  is matched as well as to doppler-frequency-shifted (mismatched) signals.
Although it is seldom  used as a basis for practical radar system design, it provides an indication of the limitations  and utility of particular classes of radar waveforms, and gives the radar designer general  guidelines for the selection of suitable waveforms for various applications.
 The output of the matched filter was shown in Sec.
10.2 to be equal to the cross correla­ tion between the received signal and the transmitted signal [Eq.
(10.18)].
When the received  echo signal from the target is large compared to noise, this may be written as  Output of the matched filter= f 00  sr(t)s•(t -TR) dt  -oo (11.46)  where s,(t) is the received signal, s(t) is the transmitted signal, s•(t) is its complex conjugate,  and T'R is the estimate of the time delay (considered a variable).
Complex notation is assumed  in Eq.
(I l.46).
The transmitted signal expressed in complex form is u(t)e'2"f01, where u(t) is the  412 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  complex-modulation function whose magnitude I u(t) I is the envelope of the real signal, and/0  is the carrier frequency.
The received echo signal is assumed to be the same as the transmitted  signal except for the time delay T0 and a doppler frequency shift fd.
Thus  sr(t) = u(t _ To)e12rc(fo+/dHr-To) (11.47)  (The change of amplitude of the echo signal is ignored here.) With these definitions the output  of the matched filter is  ct)  Output= f u(t -To)ei2rc<fo+fdHr-To>[u(t -T~)ei2rcfo(r-Tii>J• dt  -ct)  = Jct) u(t _ To)u*(t _ T~)ei2rc(fo+fd)(r-To) e-j2rcf 0(r-Tii) dt  -ct) .
J (11.48)  It is customary to set T0 = 0 and /0 = 0, and to define T0 -TR = -TR = TR.
The output of  the matched filter is then  x(TR, fd) = Jct) u(t)u•(t + TR)e12xfJ, de -ct) ( 11.49)  In this form a positive TR indicates a target beyond the reference delay T0, and a positive /J  indicates an incoming target.13 The squared magnitude lx(TR,fd)l2 is called the ambiguicy  function and its plot is the ambiguity diagram.
 The ambiguity diagram has been used to assess the properties of the transmitted  waveform as regards its target resolution, measurement accuracy, ambiguity, and response to  clutter.
 Properties of the ambiguity diagram.
The function I x(TR, fd) 12 has the following properties:  Maximum value of I x(TR, !J) 12 = I x(O, 0) 12 = (2£)2 ( 11.50)  lx(-TR, -fd)l2 = lx(TR,fd) 12 (11.51)  I x(TR, 0) 12 = If u(t)u*(t + TR) dt 12  (11.52)  I x(O, fd) 12 = I J u2(t )e1i,,1J' dt I 2 ( 11.53)  ( l l.54)  The first equation given above, Eq.
(11.50), states that the maximum value of the ambigu­ ity function occurs at the origin and its value is (2E)2.
where Eis the energy contained in the  echo signal.
Equation ( 11.51) is a symmetry relation.
Equations ( 11.52) and ( 11.53) describe  the behavior of the ambiguity function on the time-delay axis and the frequency axis, respec­ tively.
Along the TR axis the function x(TR, fd) is the autocorrelation function of the modula­ tion u(t), and along thefd axis it is proportional to the spectrum of u2(t).
Equation (11.54)  states that the total volume under the ambiguity function is a constant equal to (2E)2•  Ideal ambiguity diagram.
If there were no theoretical restrictions, the ideal ambiguity diagram  would consist of a single peak of infinitesimal thickness at the origin and be zero everywhere  else, as shown in Fig.
11.
7.
The single spike eliminates any ambiguities, and its infinitesimal  EXTRACTION OF INFORMATION AND WAVEFORM DESIGN 413  Figure 11.7 lueal, but unattainable, amhiguity diagram.
 thickness at the ongm permits the frequency and the echo delay time to be determined  simultaneously to as high a degree of accuracy as desired.
It would also permit the resolution  j of two targets no matter how close together they were on the ambiguity diagram.
Naturally, it  is not surprising that such a desirable ambiguity diagram is not possible.
The fundamental  properties of the ambiguity function prohibit this type of idealized behavior.
The two chief  restrictions are that the maximum height of the Ix j2 function be (2£)2 and that the volume  under the surface be finite and equal (2£)2• Therefore the peak at the origin is of fixed height  and the function encloses a fixed volume.
A reasonable approximation to the ideal ambiguity  diagram might appear as in Fig.
11.8.
This waveform does not result in ambiguities since there  is only one peak, but the single peak might be too broad to satisfy the requirements of  accuracy and resolution.
The peak might be narrowed, but in order to conserve the volume  under its surface.
the function must be raised elsewhere.
If the peak is made too narrow, the  requirement for a constant volume might cause peaks to form at regions of the ambiguity  diagram other than the origin and give rise to ambiguities.
Tht:s the requirements for accuracy  and ambiguity may not always be possible to satisfy simultaneously.
 r = signal duration  8 = signal bandwidth Figure 11.8 An approximation to the ideal ambiguity  diagram, taking account the restrictions imposed by the  requirement for a fixed value or (2E)2 at the origin and  a constant volume enclosed by the I x.12 surface.
 414 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  The ambiguity diagram in three dimensions may be likened to a box of sand.
The total  amount of sand in the box is fixed and corresponds to a fixed signal energy.
No sand can be  added, and none can be removed.
The sand may be piled up at the center (origin) to as narrow  a pile as one would like, but its height can be no greater than a fixed amount (2£)2• If the sand  in the center is in too narrow a pile, the sand which remains might find itself in one or more  additional piles, perhaps as big as the one at the center.
 The optimum waveform is one which has the desired ambiguity diagram for a given  amount of" sand" (energy).
The usual pulse radar or the usual CW radar, as we shall see, does  not result in an ideal' diagram.
To produce an ambiguity diagram such as that shown in  Fig.
11.8, the transmissions must be noiselike.
 The synthesis of the waveform required to satisfy the requirements of accuracy, ambigu­ ity, and resolution as determined by the ambiguity diagram is a difficult task.
The usual design  procedure is to compute the ambiguity diagram for the more common wav'eforms and to  observe its behavior.
Because of the limitations of synthesis, the ambiguity diagram has been  more a measure of the suitability of a selected waveform than a means of finding the optimum  waveform.
 Single pulse of sine wave.
The ambiguity diagram for a single rectangular pulse of sine wave is  shown in Fig.
11.9.
Contours for constant values of doppler frequency shift (velocity) are  shown in Fig.
11.9a.
The contour for zero velocity is triangular in shape and represents the  autocorrelation function of a rectangular pulse such as would be predicted from Eq.
( 11.52).
 Contours for fixed values of time delay are shown in Fig.
11.9b.
The center contour corre­ sponding to TR = 0 is the spectrum of a rectangular pulse [Eq.
( 11.53 )].
The composite three­ dimensional ambiguity surface is shown in Fig.
l l.9c.
 EXTRACTION OF INFORMATION AND WAVEFORM DESIGN 415  t.
~ •.
 l~, l ·.,/  ', ·,;  Figure 1 l.9 Three-dimensional plot of the ambiguity diagram for a single rectangular pulse.
{a) Contours  for constant dopppler frequency {velocity); (b) contours for constant time delay (range); (c) composite  surface.
{Courtesy S.
Applebaum and P.
W.
Howells, General Electric Co., Heavy Military Electronics Depart­ ment, Syracuse, N.
Y.)  416 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  -r  r  (al r  r b, Figure 11.
IO Two-dimensional am­ biguity <liagrum for a single pulse of  sine wave.
(a) Long pulse; (b) short  pulse.
 .}  It is usually inconvenient to draw a three-dimensional plot of the ambiguity diagram.
For  this reason a two-dimensional plot is c,ften used to convey the salient features.
Figure 11.10 is  an example of the two-dimensional plot of the three-dimensional ambiguity diagram corre­ sponding to the single pulse of Fig.
11.9c.
Shading is used to give an indication of the regions  in which lx(TR, fd)l2 is large (completely shaded areas), regions where Ix 12 is small but not  zero (lightly shaded areas), and regions where Ix 12 is zero (no shading).
The plot for a single  pulse shows a single elliptically shaped region in which Ix 12 is large.
This is what would have  been expected from our previous discussions since a single measurement does not result in  ambiguity if the threshold is chosen properly.
Range error is proportional to the pulse width r,  while doppler error is proportional to 1/r.
Shortening the pulse width improves the range  accuracy, but at the expense of the doppler-velocity accuracy.
Although the shape of the dlipse  can be as thin or as broad as one likes in either axis, the opposite will be true for the other axis.
 The region in the vicinity of the origin cannot be made as small as we wish along both axes  simultaneously without shifting some of the completely shaded region elsewhere in the  diagram.
 By letting r become very large (essentially infinite), Fig.
11.10 may also be used to repre­ sent a CW radar.
Similarly, by letting -r be very small (infinitesimal), the diagram applies to an  impulse radar.
 Periodic pulse train.
Consider a sinusoid modulated by a train of five pulses, each of width r.
 The pulse-repetition perio~ is Tp, and the duration of the pulse train is T.i (Fig.
11.1 la).
The  ambiguity diagram is represented in Fig.
11.l lb.
With a single pulse the time-delay- and  frequency-measurement accuracies depend on one another and are linked by the pulse width 1.
 The periodic train of pulses, however,.does not suffer this limitation.
The time-delay error is  determined by the pulse width -r as before, but the frequency accuracy is determined by the  total duration of the pulse train.
Thus the time-and 'frequency-measurement ae,curacies may  be made independent of one another.
 For the privilege of independently controlling the time and frequency accuracy with a  periodic waveform, additional peaks occur in the ambiguity diagram.
These peaks cause  ambiguities.
The total volume represented by the shaded areas of the ambiguity diagram for  the periodic waveform approximates the total volume of the ambiguity diagram of the single  pulse, assuming that the energy of the two waveforms are the same.
This follows from the  relationship expressed by Eq.
( 11.54 ).
In practice, the radar designer attempts to select the  pulse-repetition period Tp so that all targets or interest occur only in the vicinity of the central  peak, all other peaks being far removed from the region occupied by the targets.
The periodic­ pulse waveform is a good one from the point of view of accuracy if the radar application is  EXTRACTION OF INFORMATION AND WAVEFORM DESIGN 417  ··· rd ····· __________ _j  ( 17)  (b) Figure 11.11 (a) Pulse train con­ sisting of five pulses; (b) ambi­ guity diagram for (a).
 such that it is possible to ignore or eliminate any ambiguities which arise.
The fact that most  practical radars employ this type of waveform attests to its usefulness far better than any  theoretical analysis which might be presented here.
It is encouraging, however, when theoreti­ cal considerations substantiate the qualitative, intuitive reasoning upon which most practicc1l  engineering decisions must usually be based, for lack of any better criterion.
 ('  Single frequency-modulated pulse.
Ambiguitie5 may be avoided with a single-pulse waveform  rather than a periodic-pulse waveform.
Although the accuracy of simultaneously measuring  time and frequency with a simple pulse-modulated sinusoid was seen to be limited, it is  possible to obtain simultaneous time and frequency measurements to as high a degree of  accuracy as desired by transmitting a pulse long enough to satisfy the desired frequency  accuracy and one with enough bandwidth to satisfy the time accuracy.
In other words, the  peak at the center of the ambiguity diagram may be narrowed by transmitting a pulse with a  large bandwidth times pulse-width product_(large pa).
One method of increasing the bandwidth  of a pulse of duration T is to provide internal modulation.
The ambiguity diagram for a  frequency-modulated pulse is shown in Fig.
11.12.
The waveform is a single pulse of sine wave  whose frequency is decreased linearly fromf0 + llf /2 tof0 -fl.//2 over the duration of the pulse  T.
where Jo is the carrier frequency and llf ~ B is the frequency excursion.
 The ambiguity diagram is elliptical, as for the single pulse of unmodulated sine wave.
 However, the axis of the ellipse is tilted at an angle to both the time and frequency axes.
This  418 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  8 \IT -T  Va  T Figure 11.12 Ambiguity diagram for a single frequency­ modulated pulse.
(Also called the chirp pu)e-compression  waveform.)  particular waveform is not entirely satisfactory.
The accuracy along either the time axis or the  frequency axis can be made as good as desired.
However, the accuracy along the ellipse major  axis is relatively poor.
This is a consequence of the fact that both the time delay (range) and the  frequency (doppler) are both determined by measuring a frequency shift.
Thus neither  the range nor the velocity can be determined without knowledge of the other.
 This limitation can be overcome by transmitting a second FM pulse whose slope on the  ambiguity diagram is different from that of Fig.
11.12.
The second modulation might be a  linear frequency modulation which increases, rather than decreases, in frequency.
This is  analogous to the FM-CW radar of Chap.
3, in which the doppler frequency shift is extracted as  well as the range.
lt will be recalled that the sawtooth frequency-modulated waveform of the  FM-CW radar was capable of determining the range as long as there was no doppler frequency  shift.
By using a triangular waveform instead of the sawtooth waveform it was possible to  measure both the range and the doppler frequency.
The same technique can be used with the  frequency-modulated pulse radar.
 Classes of ambiguity diagrams.
There are three general classes of ambiguity diagrams,  Fig.
11.13.
The knife edge, or ridge, is obtained with a single pulse of sine wave.
Its orientation  is along the time-delay axis for a long pulse, along the frequency axis for a short pulse, or it can  be rotated to any direction in the TR, J:i plane by the application of linear frequency modula­ tion.
The bed of spikes in Fig.
11.13b is obtained with a periodic train of pulses.
The interna 1  structure of each ~f the major components, illustrated figuratively by the simple arrows,  depends on the waveform of the individual pulses.
The thumbtack ambiguity diagram,  Fig.
11.13c, is obtained with noise or pseudonoise waveforms.
The width of the spike at the  center can be made narrow along the time axis and along the frequency axis by increasing the  bandwidth and pulse duration, respectively.
However, the plateau which surrounds the spike is  more complex than illustrated in the simple sketch.
With real waveforms, the sidelobes in the  plateau region can be higher than might be desired.
Furthermore, the extent of the platform  increases as the spike is made narrower since the total volume of the ambiguity function must  be a constant, as was giveit'by Eq.
(1 L54).
There can be many variations of these three classes,  as illustrated in Ref.
1 L '  Transmitted waveform and the ambiguity function.
The particular waveform transmitted by a  radar is chosen to.
satisfy the requirements for ( 1) detection, (2) measurement accuracy,  (3) resolution, (4) ambiguity, and (5) clutter rejection.
The ambiguity function and its plot, the  f:XIR/\CTION OF INH>RMATION AND WAVEFORM DESIGN 419  (al Knife edge (ridge) (b) Bed of spikes  {c) Thumbtack  Figure I 1.13 Classes of ambiguity diagrams: (a) knife edge, or ridge; (b) bed of spikes; (c) thumbtack.
 (From G.
W.
Deley, 12 Courtesy McGraw-Hill Book Company.)  ambiguity diagram, may be used to assess qualitatively how well a waveform can achieve these  requirements.
Each of these will be discussed briefly.
 If the receiver is designed as a matched filter for the particular transmitted waveform, the  probability 6f detection is independent of the shape of the waveform and depends only upon  E/ NO, the ratio or the total energy E contained in the signal to the noise power per unit  bandwidth.
The requirements for detection do not place any demands on the shape of the  transmitted waveform except ( 1) that it be possible to achieve with practical radar transmit­ ters, and (2) that it is possible to construct the proper matched filter, or a reasonable approxi­ mation thereto.
The maximum value or the ambiguity function occurs at T,r = 0,/, = 0 and is  equal to (2E)2• Thus the value lx(O, 0)12 is an indication or the detection capabilities or the  radar.
Since the plot or the ambiguity function is orten normalized so that I x(O, 0) 12 = 1, the  ambiguity diagram is seldom used to assess the detection capabilities of the waveform.
 The accuracy with which the range and the velocity can be measured by a particular  waveform depends on the width or the spike, centered at lx(O, 0)12, along the time and the  frequency axes.
The resolution is also related to the width of the central spike, but in order to  resolve two closely spaced targets the central spike must be isolated.
It cannot have any high  peaks nearby that can mask another target close to the desired target.
A waveform that yields  good resolution will also yield good accuracy, but the reverse is not always so.
 420 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  A continuous waveform (a single pulse) produces an ambiguity diagram with a single  peak.
A discontinuous waveform can result in peaks in the ambiguity diagram at other values  of TR,fJ, The pulse train (Fig.
11.11 or 11.13b) is an example.
The presence of additional  spikes can lead to ambiguity in the measurement of target parameters.
An ambiguous measure­ ment is one in which there is more than one choice available for the correct value of a  parameter, but only one choice is appropriate.
Thus the correct value is uncertain.
The  ambiguity diagram permits a visual indication of the ambiguities possible with a particular  waveform.
The ambiguity problem is characteristic of a single target, as is the detection and  accuracy requirements of a waveform, whereas resolution is concerned with multiple targets.
 The ambiguity diagram may be used to determine the ability of a waveform to reject  clutter by superimposing on the TR, fd plane the regions where clutter is found.
If the trans­ mitted waveform is to have good clutter-rejection properties the ambiguity function should  have little or no response in the regions of clutter.
 The problem of synthesizing optimum waveforms based on a desired amb~uity diagram  specified by operational requirements is a difficult one.
The approach to selecting a waveform  with a suitable ambiguity diagram is generally by trial and error rather than by synthesis.
 In summary, this section has considered some of the factors which enter into the selection  of the proper transmitted waveform.
The problem of designing a waveform to achieve detec­ tion may be considered independently of the requirements of accuracy, ambiguity, resolution,  and clutter rejection.
A waveform satisfies the requirements of detection if its energy is  sufficiently large and if the receiver is designed in an optimum manner, such as a matched-filter  receiver.
Waveform shape is important only as it affects the practical design of the matched  filter.
The ability of a particular waveform to satisfy the requirements of accuracy, ambiguity,  resolution, and clutter rejection may be qualitatively determined from an examination of the  ambiguity diagram.
In general, periodic waveforms may be designed to satisfy the require­ ments of accuracy and resolution provided the resulting ambiguities can be tolerated.
A  waveform consisting of a single pulse of sinusoid avoids the ambiguity problem, but the time  delay and frequency cannot simultaneously be measured to as great an accuracy as might ~e  desired.
However, it is possible to determine simultaneously both the frequency and the time  delay to any degree of accuracy with a transmitted waveform containing a large bandwidth  pulse-width product (large pcx.
product).
The problem of synthesizing optimum waveforms  from an ambiguity diagram specified by operational requirements is a difficult one and is often  approached by trial and error.
 The name ambiguity function for I x(TR ,fJ) 12 is somewhat misleading since this fun,;tion  describes more about the waveform than just its ambiguity properties.
Woodward5 coined the  name to demonstrate that the total volume under this function is a constant equal to (2E)2,  independent of the shape of the transmitted waveform, [Eq.
( 11.54 )].
Thus the total area of  ambiguity, or uncertainty, is the same no matter how ·I x(TR, fJ) 12 is distributed over the TR, fd  plane, as illustrated by the sandbox analogy mentioned earlier in this section.
The reader is  advised not to be distracted by trying to understand why this function is described by the  ambiguous use of the term "ambiguity."  11.5 PULSE COMPRESSION  Pulse compression allows a radar to utilize a long pulse to achieve large radiated energy, but  simultaneously to obtain the range resolution of a short pulse.
It accomplishes this by employ­ ing frequency or phase modulation to widen the signal bandwidth.
(Amplitude modulation is  'also possible, but is seldom used.) The received signal is processed in a matched filter that  EXTRACTION OF INFORMATION AND WAVEFORM DESIGN 421  compresses the long pulse to a duration 1/ B, where B is the modulated-pulse spectral band­ width.
Pulse compression is attractive when the peak power required of a short-pulse radar  cannot be achieved with practical transmitters.
 Application of short pulse to radar.
A conventional short-pulse radar may be desired for the  following purposes:  Range resolutio11.
It is usually easier to separate multiple targets in the range coordinate than  in angle.
 Ra11ge accuracy.
If a radar is capable of good range-resolution it is also capable of good range  accuracy.
 Cltarer red11ctio11.
A short pulse increases the target-to-clutter ratio by reducing the clutter  contained within the resolution cell with which the target competes.
 Glint reduction.
In a tracking radar, the angle and range errors introduced by a finite size target  are reduced with increased range-resolution since it permits individual scattering centers  to be resolved.
 Multipatlt resolution.
Sufficient range-resolution permits the separation of the desired target  echo from echoes that arrive via scattering from longer paths, or multipath .
 • 'i-f i11im11m ra11ge.
A short pulse allows the radar to operate with a short minimum range.
 Target classification.
The characteristic echo signal from a distributed target when observed  by a short pulse can be used to recognize one class of target from another.
 ECCM.
I\ short-pulse radar can negate the operation of certain electronic countermeasures  such as range-gate stealers and repeater jammers, if the response time of the ECM is  greater than the radar pulse duration.
The wide bandwidth of the short-pulse radar also  has some advantage against noise jammers.
 Doppler tolerance.
With a single short pulse, the doppler frequency shift will be small  compared to the receiver bandwidth so that only one matched-filter is needed for detec­ tion, rather than a bank of matched filters with each filter tuned for a different doppler  shift.
 A short-pulse radar is not without its disadvantages.
It requires large bandwidth with the  possibility for interference to other users of the band.
The shorter the pulse the more informa­ tion there is available from the radar, and therefore the greater will be the demands on the  information processing and display.
In some high-resolution radars the number of resolution  cells might .,e greater than the capability of conventional displays to present the information  without overlap, so that a collapsing loss can result.
The wide bandwidth might also mean less  dynamic range in some radar designs.
If the radar transmitter is peak-power limited, the  shorter the pulse the less the energy transmitted.
This has resulted in short-pulse radars  usually being limited in range.
 Pulse compression is a method for achieving most of the benefits of a short pulse while  keeping within the practical constraints of the peak~power limitation.
It is usually a suitable  substitute for the short-pulse waveform except when a long minimum range might be a problem  or when maximum immunity to repeater ECM is desired.
Pulse compression radars, in addition  to overcoming the peak-power limitations, have an EMC (Electromagnetic Compatability)  advantage in that they can be made more tolerant to mutual interference.
This is achieved by  allowing each pulse-compression radar that operates within a given band to have its own  characteristic modulation and its own particular matched filter.
The pulse-compression radar,  although widely used as a substitute for a short-pulse radar, has some limitations of its own,  as will be discussed later in this section.
 422 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  There are at least two ways of describing the concept of a pulse-compression radar.
One is  based on an approach similar to that of the ambiguity function of Sec.
11.4.
A modulation of  some form is applied to the transmitted waveform and itsresponse after passing through the  matched filter is examined.
For example, the frequency-modulated pulse waveform whose  ambiguity diagram was shown in Fig.
11.11 is the widely used cliirp pulse-compression  waveform.
The other approach is to consider the modulation applied to a long pulse as  providing distinctive marks over the duration of the pulse.
For instance, the changing  frequency of a linearly frequency-modulated pulse is distributed along the pulse and thus  identifies each segment of the pulse.
By passing this modulated pulse through a delay line  whose delay time is a function of the frequency.
each part of the pulse experiences a different  time delay so that it is possible to have the trailing edge of the pulse speeded up and the leading  edge slowed down so as to effect a time compression of the pulse.
 The pulse compression ratio is a measure of the degree to which the pulse is compressed.
It  is defined as the ratio of the uncompressed pulse width to the compressed pulse ~idth, or the  product of the pulse spectral bandwidth Band the uncompressed pulse width T.
Generally,  BT~ I.
The pulse compression ratio might be as small as 10 ( 13 is a more typical lower value)  or as large as l05 or greater.
Values from 100 to 300 might be considertd as more typical.
 There are many types of modulations used for pulse compression, but two that have seen wide  application are the linear frequency modulation and the phase-codetl pulse.
c~ pulse compression.
The basic .concept of the linear frequency modulated (FM)  pulse--c6mpression radar was described by R.
H.
Dicke, in a patent filed in 1945.14 Figure  11.14, which is derived from Dicke's patent, shows the block diagram or such a radar.
In this  version of a pulse-compression radar the transmitter is frequency modulated and the receiver  contains a pulse-compression filter (which is identical to a matched filter).
The transmitted  waveform consists .
of a rectangular pulse of constant amplitude A and of duralion T  (Fig.
11.15a ).
The frequency increases linearly from f1 to f2 over the duration of the pulse,  Fig.
11.15b.
(Alternatively, the frequency could be linearly decreased with time rather than  increased.) The time waveform of the signal described by Fig.
I I.I Sa and b is shown sche­ matically in Fig.
11.1 Sc.
On reception, the frequency-modulated echo is passed through the  pulse-compression filter, which is designed so that the velocity of propagation through the  filter is proportional to frequency ..
When the pulse-compression filter is thought of as a  dispersive delay line, its action can be described as speeding up the higher frequencies at the  trailing edge of the pulse relative to the lower frequencies at the leading edge so as to compress  the pulse to a width 1/ B, where B = f2 -/1 (Fig.
11.15d).
When the pulse compression filter is  considered as a matched filter, the output (neglecting noise) is the autocorrelation function of  Antenna  TR  LO Transmitter  IF  amplifier Frequency  modulotor  Pulse  compression  filter  Figure 11.14 Block diagram of an FM pulse compression radar.
Video  amplifier To  indicator  i r !Ar  '--(  f?  /1  }1 EXTRACTION OF INFORMATION AND WAVEFORM DESIGN 423  ·-i  fl  i  t,  -,1---,  a I T  (al  /2  (b)  (cl  (d)  _L_~-----Time  Time  Time  l--~~-'-~~~~~~---'-~~~~~~.-Time  t1 t2  ( el Figure l l.15 Linear FM pulse com­ pression.
(a) Transmitted waveform;  (b) frequency of the transmitted  waverorm; (c) representation of the  time waveform; (d) output of the  pulse-compression filter; (e) same as  (b) but with decreasing frequency  modulation.
 the modulated pulse, which is proportional to (sin 11:Bt)/11:Bt.
15 The peak power of the pulse is  increased by the pulse compression ratio !JT after passage through the filter.
 The FM waveform in the block diagram of Fig.
l l.14 is generated by directly modulating  the high-power transmitter.
It is not always convenient to directly modulate a transmitter in  this manner.
Alternatively, the waveform may be generated at a low-power level and amplified  in a power amplifier.
This is the more usual procedure.
The waveform may be generated by a  number of means including a voltage-controlled oscillator whose frequency is made to vary  424 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR.
SYSTEMS  with an applied voltage; the so-called serrasoid modulator 16 which generates a quadratic  waveform and compares this with a repetitive sawtooth wave to generate pulses that have a £2  variation in spacing which are filtered to form a linear-FM waveform; a tapped delay-line with  nonuniform tap spa~ings determined by the positive-going zero crossings of the desired linear­ FM waveform, followed by a filter to form the output waveform; a synthesizer 1 7 which  combines a staircase frequency waveform with the average desired slope, and a sawtooth  frequency waveform which fills-in the steps with a short linear FM; or by digital means in  which an algorithm performs a double integration to produce a phase at the output of the  generator which varies as the square of time, as required for a linear FM.
18 The digital  generator has the advantage of flexibility in the selection of bandwidth and time duration, as  well as good stability and low residual generation errors.
The above are sometimes called  active methods for generating waveforms.
 The linear FM waveform may also be generated by passive methods such as by exciting a  dispersive delay line with an impulse.
The frequency-response function of the di/persive delay  line used for generating the transmitted waveform is the conjugate of that of the pulse­ compression filter.
In the special case of the linear FM waveform the same dispersive delay line  that generates the transmitted waveform may be used as the receiver matched filter if the  received waveform is mixed with an LO whose frequency is greater than that of the received  signal.
This results in a time inversion (it changes s(t) to s( -t)) by converting an increasing FM  to a decreasing FM, or vice versa.
 Dispersive delay lines.
There have been a number of devices used as dispersive delay lines, or  pulse-compression filters, for linear FM waveforms.
16 They may be classed as ultrasonic,  electromagnetic, or digital.
Ultrasonic delay lines include those of aluminum or steel strip,  piezoelectric materials such as quartz with propagation taking place through the bulk (or  volume) of the material, piezoelectric materials with the propagation taking place along the  surface (surface acoustic wave), and YIG (yttrium-iron-garnet) crystals.
The all-pass, time  delay using bridged-T networks with either lumped-constant circuit elements or stripline; the  waveguide operated near its cutoff frequency; and the tapered folded-tape meander line are  examples of electromagnetic dispersive delay lines suitable for linear-FM pulse compression.
 The charge-coupled device has also been considered for application in pulse compression.
19  Each of these delays lines has different characteristics and preferred regions of operation as  regards bandwidth and pulse duration.16 Only the surface acoustic wave (SAW) device will be  described here as an illustration of a typical dispersive delay line suitable for radar applicati0n.10  The surface-acoustic-wave delay line, shown schematically in Fig.
11.16, consists of a  piezoelectric substrate such as a thin slice of quartz or lithium niobate with input and output  interdigital transducers (IDT) arranged on the surface.
The design of the IDT determines the  impulse response of the SAW delay line.
Efficient electric-to-acoustic coupling occurs when the  Thermal compression ..
 bonded Au contacts lnterdigital  electrode  transducers  Figure 11.16 Schematic of a simple surface  acoustic wave (SAW) delay line.
(From  Bristol, 22 Courtesy Proc.
IEEE.)  Matcl1tng s,gnal  (a)  (c) EXTRACTION OF INFORMATION A.NU WAVEFORM DESION 425  \  I Figure l l.17 Three basic forms of  SAW interdigital transducers for  linear FM pulse compression.
(a)  Dispersive delay line with dispersion  designed into one transducer; (b)  dispersion in both transducers, and  (c) a reOective array compressor  (RAC).
(From Maines and Paige,21  courtesy of Proc.
IEEE.)  comb fingers, or electrodes, or the IDT are spaced one-half the wavelength of the acoustic  signal propagating along the SAW material.22 Thus the frequency response of the delay line  depends on the periodicity of the electrode spacings.
A dispersive delay line for linear FM  pulse compression is obtained with a variable electrode spacing, as illustrated in Fig.
11.17 a or  b.
The duration of the resulting pulse is proportional to the length of the interdigital trans­ ducer.
Amplitude shaping can be controlled by varying the overlap of the electrodes, as in  Fig.
11.18.
This is sometimes called apodization.
Weighting of the amplitude, as discussed later  in this section, is sometimes desired so as to reduce the time sidelobes accompanying the  compressed waveform.
 The renective-array compressor (RAC) form of SAW device, shown schematically in  Fig.
11.17c, is a geometry that provides better performance ror large pulse-compression  ratios.
22 Shallow grooves etched in the delay path result in SAW reflections to form a delay  that depends on the frequency.
The structure is less sensitive to fabrication tolerances than  convention'1 transducers.
 A "typical" SAW dispersive delay line developed for linear FM pulse-compression radar  had a bandwidth of 500 MIiz and an uncompressed pulse width·of 0.46 ,,s.23 The center  frequency was 1.3 GHz and the compressed pulse width was 3 ns.
Amplitude weighting of the  received signal reduced the highest sidelobe to -24 dB instead of -13.2 dB without weight­ ing.
(The compressed pulse was widened because of the weighting.) The filter package  measured 0.5 by 1.5 by 2.25 in.
The maximum insertion loss was 40 dB.
Other designs have  resulted in pulse widths as long as 100 µs and pulse-compression ratios as high as 10,000.22  The SAW dispersive delay line is one of the more important of the many devices that have  been employed for pulse-compression radar.
They have been claimed to be simple, low cost,  '1'11111111111111111111, 1 Figure H.18 lnterdigital transducer (nondispersive) showing  overlap of comb fingers, or electrodes, to provide an amplitude  weighting along the pulse.
 426 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  small size, and highly reproducible in manufacture.
The amplitude weighting to reduce  sidelobes can be integrated directly into the interdigital transducer design.
In addition to the  linear FM, they can be designed to operate with nonlinear frequency modulations, phase-coded  pulses, and the burst pulse.
 Time sidelobes and weighting.
The uniform amplitude of the linear FM waveform results in a  compressed pulse shape of the form (sin nBt)/nBr after passage through the matched filter, or  dispersive delay line, where Bis the spectral bandwidth.
24 There are time, or range, side lobes  to either side of the peak response with the first, and largest, side lobe -13.2 dB down from the  peak.
The large sidelobes are often objectionable since a large target might mask nearby, smaller  targets.
Also, near-in sidelobes might at times be mistaken for separate targets.
These sidelobes  can be reduced by amplitude weighting of the received-signal spectrum, just as the spatial  side lobes of an antenna radiation pattern can be reduced by amplitude weighlirlj the illumina­ tion across the antenna aperture, as was described in Sec.
7.2.
The same illumination functions  used in antenna design to reduce spatial sidelobes can also be applied to the frequency domain  to reduce the time sidelobes in pulse compression.
A comparison of several types of spectra I  weighting functions is shown in Table 11.1.
16•24·25 The Taylor weighting with ii = 8 means the  peaks of the first 7 sidelobes (ii -1) are designed to be equal, after which they fall off as 1/t.
 The Dolph-Chebyshev weighting theoretically results in all sidelobes being equal.
It is of  academic interest only, since it is unrealizable.
The Taylor is a practical approximation to the  Dolph-Chebyshev.
A suitable waveform might be the cosine-squared on a pedestal, as in the  Hamming function, for example.
The effect of weighting the received-signal spectrum to lower  the sidelobes also widens the main lobe and reduces the peak signal-to-noise ratio compared  to the unweighted linear FM pulse compression.
This loss is due to the filter not being  matched to the received waveform; that is, the filter is said to be mismatched.
Thus to reduce  the sidelobes to a level of -30 to -40 dB results in a loss in peak signal·to-noise ratio of from  one to two dB.
For many applications the beam broadening and the loss in peak signal-to­ noise ratio due to mismatch are usually tolerated in order to achieve the benefits of the lower  sidelobes.
 Instead of weighting the received-signal spectrum to reduce the time sidelobes, it is  possible, in principle, to.achieve the same affect by amplitude·weighting either the envelope of  transmitted FM signal or the received signal.
J n the case of linear FM with large pulse­ compression ratio, the amplitude weighting applied to the time waveform is of the same form  as the weighting applied to the frequency spectrum, for the same output response.
24  Amplitude-modulating the transmitted signal is not usually practical in high-power radar  Table 11.1 Properties of weighting functions  Peak Main lobe Side lobe  sidelobe Loss width decay  Weighting function dB dB (relative) function  Uniform -13.2 0 1.0 I /t  0.33 + 0.66 COS2 (nf/B) -25.7 0.55 1.23 I /1  cos2 (nf/ B) -31.7 1.76 1.65 I /t 3  Taylor (n = 8) -40 1.14 1.41 I /t  Dolph-Chebyshev -40 1.35 I  0.08 + 0.92 cos2 (nf!B) (Hamming) -42.8 1.34 1.50 1/r  B = bandwidth  EXTRACTION OF INFORMATION AND WAVEFORM DESIGN 427  since most microwave tubes should be operated saturated; i.e., either full-on or off.
Generally,  weighting of the received frequency spectrum has been preferred over either time-weighting  alternative.
 If it were practical to amplitude-weight the transmitted waveform to reduce the time  sidelohes, the receiver can be designed with the appropriate matched filter so that no theoreti­ cal loss in signal-to-noise will result.
This implies that the transmitted signal ener_gy is the same  with or without weighting, as follows from the discussion in Sec.
10.2 of the output signal-to­ noise ratio of a matched filter.
However, when the transmitter is peak-power limited, it is  preferable to use a constant-amplitude transmitted signal and perform the weighting in the  receiver, in spite of the mismatched filter with its reduction in signal-to-noise ratio.25 In one  example,24 transmitting a linear-FM waveform with a gaussian envelope and a matched-filter  receiver to give -40 dB sidelobes resulted in 2.2 dB greater penalty in detection capability  than when a uniform amplitude is transmitted with Hamming weighting on receive in a  mismatched filter.
 It is possible to achieve low time-sidelobes with uniform-amplitude transmitted wave­ forms and no theoretical loss in signal-to-noise ratio by means of nonlinear FM, as dis­ cussed later in this section.
 Doppler-tolerant waveform.
Ir an unknown doppler-frequency shift is experienced when a long  pulse, a noise-modulated pulse, or a pulse train is reflected from a moving target, a receiver  tuned to the transmitted signal will not accept the echo signal if the doppler shift places the  echo frequency outside the band of the receiver matched filter.
That is, the receiver may not be  tuned to the correct frequency.
To circumvent this potential loss of signal, a bank of contig­ uous matched filters must be used to cover the range of expected doppler-frequency shifts.
It  is possible, however, with a suitable transmitted waveform to employ a single matched filter  that will accept doppler-shifted echoes with minimum degradation.
 It has been shown that the waveform which allows a single pulse-compression filter to be  matched for all doppler-frequency shifts (all target velocities) is2fr-28  [2rr.f/ T ( Bt ) l s(r) = A(t) cos .--8-In l -1~ T (11.55)  The amplitude A(t) of Eq.
( 11.55) represents modulation by a rectangular pulse of width T.
 The band occupied by the signal is B, and the carrier frequency isf0.
This expression for the  doppler-tQlerant waveform is difficult to interpret as it stands, but if the natural-log factor is  expanded in a series, Eq.
( 11.55) becomes  (11.56)  When terms greater than the first two can be neglected (which applies when 2rr.B2t3 <{ 3f0 T2),  Eq.
( 11.56) reduces to the classical linear FM waveform.
Thus the linear FM, or chirp, pulse­ compression waveform is a practical approximation to the theoretical doppler-tolerant  waveform.
Differentiating, with respect to time, the argument of Eq.
(11.55), the frequency of  the dopplcr-tolerant waveform is found to be 2rr.f5 T/(fo T -Bt).
Inverting to obtain the  period, it can be seen that the doppler-tolerant waveform is one with a linear period  modulation.
 The short-pulse waveform also can tolerate unknown shifts in the doppler frequency  when using a single matched filter.
 428 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  Phase-coded pulse compression.
16·29•30•38 In this form of pulse compression, a long pulse of  duration Tis divided into N subpulses each of width r.
The phase of each subpulse is chosen to  be either O or n .radians.
If the selection of the 0, n phase is made at random, the waveform  approximates a noise-modulated signal with a thumbtack ambiguity function, as in  Fig.
l 1.13c.
The output of the matched filter will be a spike of width r with an ampliluc.Je N  times greater than that of the long pulse.
The pulse-compression ratio is N = T/r = BT, where  B 1/r = bandwidth.
The output waveform extends a distance T to either side of the peak  response, or central spike.
The portions of the output waveform other than the spike are called  time sitlelobes.
 The binary choice of O or n phase for each subpulse may be made at random.
However,  some random selections may be better suited than others for radar application.
66 One criterion  for the selection of a good "random" phase-coded waveform is that its autocorrelation func­ tion should have equal time-sidelobes.
(Recall from Sec.
to.2 that the output of the matched  filter is the autocorrelation of the input signal for which it is matched, if noise>can be neg­ lected.) The binary phase-coded sequence of 0, n values that result in equal sidelobes after  passage through the matched filter is called a Barker code.
An example is shown in Fig.
l l.
l 9a.
 This is a Barker code of length t 3.
The (+)indicates O phase and ( ) indicates n radians phase.
 The autocorrelation function, or output of the matched filter, is shown in (b ).
There are six  equal time-sidelobes to either side of the peak, each at a level -22.3 dB below the peak.
In (c)  --·----- T = 13 r-------,,..1  r ,._I ;..., r !  1 1+1+1+1+1+1-1-1+1+1-l+l-l+L __  Input to _A_  generate  tronsrn1!  waveform I -r O r  Filler matched  to pulse of  width r (a)  Input for  matched  f ,lier  (cl (b)  13 r  Figure 11.19 (a) Example of a phase-coded pulse with 13 equal subdivisions of either 0°( +) or 1800( -)  phase.
This is known as a Barker code of length 13.
(b) Autocorrelation function of (a), which is an  approximation to the output of the matched filter.
(c) Block diagram of the filter for generating the  transmitted waveform of (a) with the input on the left.
The same tapped delay line can be used as the  receiver matched filter by inserting the received echo at the opposite end (the right-hand side of the delay  line in this illustration).
 FXTRACTION OF INFORMATION AND WAVEFORM DESIGN 429  Table 11.2 Barker codes  Code length Code elements Side lobe level, dB  ----- 2 + ++  J + + ·- 4 + + +.
1 +-+ -6.0  9.5  -12.0  14.0  16.9  --20.8 <; I I I  7 I-' I  11 ! I +- LI ! I I I I I I-+-+ -22.3  is illustrated schematically a lapped delay line that generates this Barker-coded waveform  when an impulse is incident al the left-hand terminal.
The same tapped delay line can be used  as the receiver matched filter if the input is applied at the right-hand terminal.
 The known Barker codes are shown in Table 11.2.
The longest is of length 13.
This is a  relatively low value for a practical pulse-compression waveform.
When a larger pulse­ compression ratio is desired, some form of pseudorandom code is usually used.
A popular  technique is the generation of a linear recursive sequence using a shift register with feedback,  as in Fig.
11.20.
This device generates a binary pseudorandom code of zeros and ones oflength  2" I, where n is the number of stages in the shift register.
Feedback is provided by taking the  output of the shift register and adding it, modulo two, to the output from one of the previous  stages of the shift register.
In the example of Fig.
11.20, the output of the 6th and 7th stage are  combined.
In modulo-two addition, the output is zero when the inputs are alike [(O, 0) or ( l, 1 )]  and is one when the inputs are different.
It is equivalent to ordinary base-two addition with  only the least significant bit carried forward.
A modulo-two adder is also called an exclusive-or  gate.
An 11-stage shift register has a total of 2" different possible states.
However, it cannot have  the state in which all the stages contain zeros since the shift register would remain in this state  and produce all zeros thereafter.
Thus an n-stage shift register can generate a binary sequence  of length no greater than 2" l before repeating.
The actual sequence obtained depends on  both the feedback connections and the initial loading of the register.
When the output se­ quence of an n-stagc shift register is of period 2" -1, it is called a maximal le11gtl1 sequence, or  m-sequence.
These have also been called linear recursive sequences (LRS), pseudonoise (PN)  sequences, and binary-shift-register sequences.
Although the sequence is a series of zeros or  ones, for application to the phase-coded pulse-compression radar the zeros can be considered  as corresponding to zero phase and the ones to n radians phase.
 Since an m-sequence takes on all possible states except the zero state, the initial state of  the shift register does not affect the content of the sequence, but will define the starting point of  the sequence.
A different sequence is obtained with different feedback connections.
(The  number of stages connected modulo two must be even since an odd number of modulo-two  additions taken from the all-ones state will produce a one for the next term and the continued  generation of the all-ones state.
This generates a sequence of length 2" - 2 and is not an  m-sequence.57) Table l l.3 lists the nui:nber of possible m-sequences obtainable from an  n-stage shift register.
 Modulo 2 i------~  .------1 odder  2 3 4 5 6 7 Figure 11.20 Seven-bit shift-register for generating a pseudo- Output random linear recursive sequence of length 127.
 430 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  Table 1.1.3 Number of m-sequences obtainable from an n-stage  shift register 1 6  Example  Length of Number of feedback  Number of maximal sequence maximal stage  stages, n 2n -l sequences connections  3 7 2 3, 2  4 15 2 4, 3  5 31 6 5, 3  6 63 6 6, 5  7 127 18 7, 6  8 255 16 8, 6, 5, 4  9 511 '48 .
9, 5  10 1023 60 10, 7  11 2047 176 II, 9 J  For large 2" -1 = N, the peak sidelobe is approximately 1/ N that of the maximum  response, measured in power.
The actual values vary with the particular sequence.
For exam­ ple, with N = 127, the peak sidelobe is between -18 and -19.8 dB, instead of the -21 dB  predicted on the basis of the code length.
For N = 255, the peak sidelobe varies from  -21.3 dB to -22.6 dB, instead of the -24 dB predicted.
29  The binary codes generated in this manner fit many of the tests for randomness.
(Ran­ domness, however, is not necessari.ly a desirable property of a code used for pulse compres­ sion.) The number of ones in each sequence differs from the number of zeros by at most one  (the balance property).
Among the runs of ones and zeros in each sequence, one-half of the  runs of each kind are of length one, one-fourth are of length two, one-eighth are of length three,  and so on (the run property).
If the sequence is compared term by term with any cyclic shift of  itself, the number of agreements differs from the number of disagreements by at most one (the  correlation property).
These sequences are called linear since they obey the superposition  theorem.
 The peak sidelobe levels of the linear recursive sequences and of Barker codes greater  than length 5 are lower than the -13.2 dB of the linear FM waveform.
However, the side lobes )  of the Barker codes can be further lowered by employing a mismatched filter and accepting a  slight loss in the peak signal-to-noise ratio.
31  Comparison of linear FM and phase-coded pu~e compression.
Both of these waveforms have  their areas of application; but in the past, the linear FM, or chirp, pulse compression has  probably been more widely used.
The time sidelobes of the phase-coded pulse are of the order  of 1/ BT.
The peak sidelobe of the chirp waveform is generally higher, but at a slight sacrifice in  signal-to-noise ratio it can be made low by means of weighting networks.
The chirp waveform  is doppler-tolerant in that a single pulse-compression filter can be used, but it cannot provide  an independent range and doppler measurement.
With moving targets, the phase-coded pulse  might require a bank of contiguous matched filters covering the expected range of doppler  frequencies.
The sidelobes in the time-frequency plane of the ambiguity diagram are usually  larger than desired for good doppler resolution without ambiguity.
Although the ambiguity  diagram of the phase-coded pulse has a narrow spike, the wide plateau means that there can be  a large undesirable response from distributed clutter that extends in both the range and the  doppler domain, and the resolution performance will be poor in a dense-target environment or  when a small target is to be seen in the presence of much stronger echoes.
 EXTRACTION OF INFORMATION AND WAVEFORM DESIGN 431  A different phase-coded sequence can be assigned to each radar so that a number of  radars can share the same spectrum.
In a military radar, the coding can be changed to help  counter repeater jammers that attempt to simulate the waveform.
The chirp waveform fa more  vulnerable to repeater jamming than is the phase-coded pulse.
The chirp waveform is more  likely to be used when a wide bandwidth, or very narrow compressed pulse, is required.
The  phase-coded pulse is more likely to be used when jamming or EMC is a problem, or when  long-duration waveforms are desired.
Generally, the implementation of the chirp pulse­ compression has been less complex than that of the phase-coded pulse.
 Although definite differences exist between these two basic waveforms, it would be  difficult to provide precise guidelines describing where one is preferred to the other.
Each  apt>lication must he examined individually to determine the best form of pulse compression to  use.
 Other pulse-compression waveforms.
Other pulse-compression methods include nonlinear  FM, discrete frequency-shift, polyphase codes, compound Barker codes, code sequencing,  complementary codes, pulse burst, and stretch.
Each will be discussed briefly.
 The nonlinear-FM waveform with constant-amplitude time envelope provides a com­ pressed waveform with low time-side lobes at the output of the receiver matched-filter without  the 1-to 2-dB penalty obtained with the.
linear-FM waveform and mismatched filter.
16•24•32  The non linear variation of frequency with time has the same effect as amplitude-weighting the  transmitted-signal spectrum, while maintaining the rectangular pulse-shape desired for  efficient transmitter operation.
If the nonlinear FM is symmetrical in time, the ambiguity  diagram has a single peak rather than a ridge.
(A symmetrical waveform means the frequency  increases, or decreases, during the first half of the pulse and decreases, or increases, during the  second hair.) The nonlinear FM is thus more sensitive to doppler-frequency shifts and is not  doppler-tolerant.
The surface-acoustic-wave delay line is one method for generating the non­ linear FM waveform and for acting as the matched filter.
 The discrete frequency-shift, or time{requency coded, waveform is generated by dividing a  long pulse into a series of contiguous subpulses and shirting the carrier frequency from  sub pulse to subpulse.16•33 The frequency steps are separated by the reciprocal or the subpulse  width.
A linear stepping of the frequency gives an ambiguity diagram more like the ridge of the  linear FM.
When the frequencies are selected at random, the result is a thumbtack ambiguity  diagram.
The number of subpulses N required to achieve a thumbtack ambiguity diagram  with random frequency stepping is far less than with the phase-coded pulse.
To achieve a total  bandwidth B, each subpulse need only have a bandwidth B/ N.
The width of each subpulse is  thus N/B.
A given pulse-compression ratio BT can be obtained with N = T/(N/B) subpulses,  or N = Ji.ff, instead of the BT subpulses required for the phase-coded pulse.
Pulse­ compression ratios as high as 105 and bandwidths of several hundred megahertz have been  obtained.
33 With the proper frequency-shift sequence; the sidelobe level on a power basis is  l/N2 down from the main response.34 However on the doppler axis ofthe ambiguity function  the resulting sidelobes are l/N rather than l/N2, which is the result of only N = Ji.ff  subpulses.
 According to Nathanson, 33 the discrete frequency-shift waveforms are preferable instead  of linear FM when the pulse-compression ratio and the signal bandwidth are large.
The  resulting thumbtack ambiguity diagram means there will be no range-doppler coupling to  cause erroneous measurements.
The order in which the discrete frequencies are transmitted  can be varied so that each radar can have its own code, and interference between radars will be  reduced.
The components in each channel need only have a bandwidth 1/N times the total  processing bandwidth.
Still another advantage of such systems is that a strong CW interfer.
 432 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  enoe signal will only suppress the target signal in one of the N channels.
However, in a linear  FM system a strong CW signalanywhere in the total signal bandwidth can capture a limiting  receiver and cause suppression of the target echo.
 Instead of the 0, n binary phase shift, smaller increments of phase can be applied in the  phase-coded pulse compression waveform.
These are called po/yphase codes.16·24 The time  sidelobes of a polyphase code can be lower than those of the binary phase-coded waveform of  similar length.63•64 However, the performance of polyphase codes deteriorates rapidly in the  presence of a doppler-frequency shift and therefore they have been limited to situations where  the doppler is negligible.
 Other binary coding methods that have been considered for pulse compression include :3 5  (I) compound Barker codes for obtaining longer codes from the Barker series by coding seg­ ments of one Barker code with another Barker code (a length 13 Barker code compounded  within another length 13 code gives a pulse-compression ratio of 169 and a pe¥ sidelohe of  -22.3 dB); (2) code sequencing 011 successive PRF periods, in which a different code is used for  each transmission to produce random sidelobes which when N pulses are added to produce a  J"N improvement in mainlobe-to-sidelobe amplitude ratio, where N is the number of se­ quences employed; and (3) complementary codes in which a pair of equal-length codes have the  property that the time side lobes of one code are the negative of the other so that if two codes of  a complementary pair are alternated on successive transmissions, the algebraic sum of the two  autocorrelation functions is zero except for the cental peak;36•37  A pulse burst is a waveform in which a series of pulses are transmitted as a group before  any of the echo signals are received.
It is used to obtain simultaneous range and doppler­ velocity resolution when the minimum range is relatively Ion~; as for radars whose targets are  extraterrestrial, such as satellites and ballistic missiles.
Pulse compression might be applied to  each of the individual pulses of the burst for better range resolution, and amplitude weighting  of the pulse burst might be used to lower the doppler sidelobe level to improve the detection of  small doppler-shifted target echoes close in frequency to large clutter echoes.
 Stretch is a technique related to pulse compression that permits an exchange of signal­ time duration for signal bandwidth.
58•59 Its advantage is that high range-resolution can be  obtained with wideband transmitted signals, but without the usual wideband processing circ­ uitry.
However, only a portion of the range interval can be observed in this manner.
If a signal  occupies a time T and a bandwidth B, a change in time aT allows a change in bandwidth B/a.
 Thus if a signal is stretched in time, say by a factor.
a = 10, the bandwidth can be reduced by a  factor of 10, and the signal can be processed with more practical narrow band circuitry.
 However, only -roth the total range interval can be processed.
This disadvantage may be  bothersome in a surveillance radar, but it might be well suited to a tracking radar or to a  high-range-resolution radar used for target classification.
The technique uses elements similar  to those of the linear-FM pulse-compression radar.
A linear-FM waveform (chirp) of narrow  bandwidth B 1 is mixed with a wideband chirp of bandwidth B2• The radiated signal is a chirp  of bandwidth B1 + B2• On receive, the signal is mixed with the same wideband chirp B2 to  give a chirp of narrow bandwidth B1 which is then processed as a normal pulse-compression  signal.
The mixing operation results in a time expansion of a = ( B 1 + B 2)/ B 1; but the range­ resolution possible is that of a signal of bandwidth B 1 + B2, using processing circuitry of  bandwidth B1•  Compatibility with other processing.
Pulse-compression systems are sometimes used in con­ junction with MTI radar.39 The increased range resolution afforded by pulse compression  provides an increased target-to-clutter echo, as does the MTI processing.
If there exists,  however, inherent instabilities in the radar system there can result noiselike time-sidelobes  EXTRACTION OF INFORMATION AND WAVEFORM DESIGN 433  accompanying the pulse"'compression wavefoFm, Such system.instabilities might be .caused by  noise on local oscillators, noise on transmitter power supplies, transmitter time jitter, and  transmitter tube noise.
These noise sidelobes will not cancel in the MTI system and, if  sufficiently large, they can result in uncancelled residue that will appear on the radar display.
 Thus when the system instabilities are high, the detection of targets in clutter can be seriously  degraded.
One approach for operating under such conditions is to use two limiters.
39 One  limiter is placed before the pulse-compression filter and has an output dynamic range equal to  the difference between the peak transmitter power and transmitter noise in the system band­ width.
The other limiter is between the pulse-compression filter and the MTI and has a  dynamic range equal to the expected MTI improvement factor.
 The technology of pulse compression has been applied to radar with conventional, unmod­ ulated pulses to achieve CFAR (constant false alarm rate) performance better than that of the  log-FTC.
In one example,40 a dispersive delay line with a linear time-delay vs.
frequency  characteristic is followed by a hard limiter and by a second dispersive delay line with a  characteristic inverse to the first.
(H the limiter were omitted, the circuit would operate simply  as a linear nondispersive time delay.) It has been claimed that there was no discernible loss in  detectability with this CF AR, but that the detectability loss for log-FTC is about 3 dB.
 A variation of this technique has been applied to chirp pulse-compression radar to  achieve CF AR in conjunction with pulse compression.
Two dispersive delay lines are used  with a hard limiter between them to provide CF AR.
Both lines are of similar characteristics,  and the total pulse-compression ratio is divided between the two.
In one design,41 the first  delay line compressed a 5 JLS pulse to 1.6 µs, and the second delay line following the limiter  compressed the L6 JlS pulse to 0.05 ,,s, for a total pulse-compression ratio of 100.
 When a limiter is used preceding the pulse-compression filter in conventional pulse­ compression radar for suppressing impulsive and other interference, the presence of multiple  targets can cause degraded performance.
If the uncompressed pulse has an amplitude less than  the rms noise level, there is little degradation.
This situation will apply in many cases when the  pulse-compression ratio is large.
However, if two signals are present simultaneously, and if one  is much larger than the rms noise level at the limiter output, the weaker signal will be  suppressed by the stronger over the time interval that they overlap.
The result is that the  probability of detecting the weaker signal is degraded.42 The hard limiting of superimposed  echoes in pulse-compression radar may also cause the generation of false targets in addition to  small-signal suppression.43  Pulse tx)mpression has also been used in conjunction with frequency-scan radar to  achieve improved range resolution.44 This was discussed briefly in Sec.
8.4.
The frequency-scan  radar uses a linear-array antenna to scan a beam in one angular coordinate by changing the  frequency.
The use of the frequency domain for electronic beam scanning normally pre­ cludes the use of the frequency domain for range resolution.
That is, pulse compression and  frequency scan are often not compatible.
However, if the entire angular region is swept within  a single pulse by a frequency-scan antenna, the response from a point target will be frequency­ modulated due to the finite beamwidth.
A dispersive time delay filter can cause the received  echo to be compressed so as to achieve better range resolution.
The amount of range­ resolution possible is limited by the finite time-delay of the signal propagating through the  frequency~scan feed network.
A bank of dispersive filters are needed to cover the angular  sector, as described in Sec.
8.4.
Each filter would be designed to accommodate the spread of  frequencies expected from a particular elevation angle.
 Limitations of pulse compression.
Pulse compression is not without its disadvantages.
It re­ quires a transmitter that can be readily modulated and a receiver with a matched filter more  434 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  sophisticated than that of a conventional pulse radar.
Although it may be more complex than  a conventional long-pulse radar, the equipment for a high-power pulse compression radar is  more practical than would be required of a short-pulse radar with the same pulse energy.
The  time sidelobes accompanying the compressed pulse are objectionable since they can mask  desired targets or create false targets.
When limiting is employed, there can be small-target  suppression and possibly spurious false-targets as well.
The long uncompr-essed pulse can  restrict the minimum range and the ability to detect close-in targets.
A conventional short  pulse at a different frequency might have to be generated at the end of the·Jong pulse to provide  coverage of the close-in range that is blanked by the long pulse.
Since it only has to cover the  range blanked by the long pulse, it need not be of large power.
A separate ~eceiver, or matched  filter, might be needed for this short-range pulse.
A pulse-compression waveform does not  have the immunity to repeater jammers or range-gate stealers inherent in the short-pulse  radar.
By repeating a chirp signal with an offset frequency, the repeater can appear at the  output of the pulse-compression filter ahead of the target skin-echo, thus making it harder to  separate the true signal from the repeater signal.
The frequency offset can compensate for the  finite time-delay required for a repeater to respond.
With a long coded-pulse signal, the  repeater can also put energy into the radar ahead of the compressed pulse, or coincident with  it, if sufficient power is used to overcome the mismatch of the repeater signal to the pulse­ compression filter.
 In spite of its limitations, pulse compression has been an important part of radar systems  technology.
 Spread spectrum.
Spread spectrum communication systems68 employ waveforms similar to  those of pulse compression radar.
The purpose of such waveforms in communications is to  allow multiple simultaneous use of the same frequency spectrum.
This is achieved by coding  each signal differently from the others.
In military applications, spread spectrum communi­ cations also has the capability of rejecting interference as well as reduce the probability of  intercept by a hostile elint receiver.
Sometimes pulse compression radars have been called  spread spectrum radars.
This terminology is misleading since pulse compression is used in  radar for different reasons than spread spectrum is used in communications.
 11.6 CLASSIFICATION OF TARGETS WITH RADAR  In most radar applications, the only properties of the target that are measured are its location  in range and angle.
Such radars are sometimes called blob detectors since they recognize  targets only as "blobs" located somewhere in space.
It is possible, however, to extract more  information about the target.
Radar may be able to recognize one type of target from another;  that is, to determine that the target is a 747 aircraft and not a DC-10, or that a particular ship  is a tanker and not a freighter.
This capability is known as target classification.
When the target  is a spacecraft or satellite, the process is sometimes called SOI, or Space Objecl Identification.
 In this section, several possible radar techniques that might be used for target classification  will be enumerated briefly.
Generally, target classification by radar involves examining the  detailed structure of the echo signal.· It usually requires a larger signal-to-noise ratio than  normally needed for detection.· Thus the range at which target classification can be made is  often less than the range at which the target can be first detected.
 High-range-resolution.
A short-pulse.
radar.
or a pulse-compression radar can provide  sufficient range-resolution to obtain a profile of the target shape, as determined by the target's  EXTRACIION 01' INFORMATION AND WAVEFORM DESIGN 435  major scattering centers.
From this range profile, an estimate of the target size can be made.
 The profile obtained by the radar is the projection in the direction of propagation.
A complete  "image" of the target would require multiple looks from different directions.
If the trajectory  of the target is known from the measurement of the target track, it is possible to infer the  aspect of the radar projection.
A radar should not be expected to provide the same target  details as are seen visually.
An electromagnetic sensor, whether the eye or a radar, responds to  scattering from those details of the target which are comparable to the wavelength of observa­ tion.
Since there is such a large difference in wavelength between microwave radar and visual  sensors, the target details that are seen by radar can be quite different from what is seen  visually.
When attempting to measure target size with a high-range-resolution radar, an error  can be incurred since the extremities of the target are not always good scatterers.
Echoes from  the for ward and rear portions of the target might be obscured in the noise, if the radar is not  surlkiently powerful.
 High-range-resolution with monopuhe.
The inclusion of a monopulse angle-measurement to a  high-range-resolution radar was mentioned briefly in Sec.
5.8.
Resolution in range of the  individual target scattering-centers permits an angle measurement of the scatterer without the  errors introduced by the glint caused by multiple scatterers within the same resolution cell.
 This provides a three-dimensional "image" of the tar_get and thus presents more target infor­ mation from which to derive a classification than does a conventional high-range-resolution  radar without monopulse.
The implementation of this measurement capability is more com­ plicated than a short-pulse radar without angle sensing.
Also, it cannot be employed when  the target angular extent is less than the sensitivity of the monopulse measurement.
 Engine modulations.
The radar echo from aircraft is modulated by the rotating propellers of  piston engines, and by the rotating compressor and turbine blades of jet engines.45 (The  compressor would be seen by a radar looking into the forward part of the jet aircraft and the  turbine when looking into the rear.) The characteristic modulations of the radar echoes from  aircraft can, in some cases, be used to recognize one type of aircraft from another; or more  correctly, one type of aircraft engine from another.
Aircraft jet-engine modulations are likely  to be of relatively high frequency (ten to twenty kilohertz perhaps) because of the high speed of  the engine components that cause the modulated echo.
The helicopter with its large rotating  blades also provides a distinctive modulation of the radar echo that distinguishes it from the  echoes of otqer aircraft.
A ship is less likely to give distinctive modulations, unless it has large  rotating radar antennas or rotating machinery within view of the radar.
 Cross-section fluctuations.
In the discussion of radar cross section in Sec.
2.8, it was stated that  the angular pattern of the cross section of targets has a many-lobed structure whose spacings  depend on the size and nature of the target.
As the target moves relative to the radar, its aspect  changes and the lobed pattern of the target cross section results in a fluctuating received signal.
 These amplitude Huctuations occur at a slow rate, compared with the much higher frequency  fluctuations of the engine modulations mentioned above.
The larger the size of the target the  narrower will be the lobes and the greater will be the fluctuation frequency for a given angular  rate or change of aspect.
In principle, the cross-section fluctuations might be able to provide  some information that can distinguish one type of target from another.
If the target is rotating,  as were some of the early unstabilized satellites, the amplitude fluctuations of the radar cross  section with time can provide information from which the shape of the target can be  determined.
60 It has also been suggested that the complex echo-signal fluctuations (amplitude  and phase) can be employed for target classification.65  436 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  Synthetic aperture radar.
The syntheti<;: aperture radar, which is discussed in Sec.
14.1, is a  radar in a moving vehicle that provides a high resolution image in both range and in a  direction parallel to the vehicle motion.
The latter dimension is sometimes called cross range  when the radar uses a side-looking antenna ~irected.
perpendicular to the direction of motion.
 The range resolution is obtained with either a conventional short-pulse or pulse-compression  waveform, and resolution in cross range is obtained by synthesizing the effect of a large  antenna aperture.
It is used chiefly for mapping of the ground and imaging of stationary  objects on the ground.
 Inverse synthetic aperture radar.
In the ordinary synthetic aperture radar the target is station­ ary and the radar is in motion.
The opposite will also permit target imaging; that is, the radar is  stationary and the target is in motion.
This is called inverse synthetic aperture radar or delay­ doppler mapping.
Although the signal processing required is similar to that of thtfconventional  synthetic aperture radar, the inverse synthetic aperture process can also be viewed as an  equivalent doppler filtering.
Each part of a moving target has a slightly different relative  velocity, or doppler-frequency shift.
Filtering these various dopplcr frequencies resolves the .1  different parts of the target to provide an image.
Although the inverse synthetic aperture  results from relative motion of the target, just as does the cross-section amplitude fluctuations  mentioned previously, the processing of the inverse synthetic aperture radar signal requires a  coherent system (one that preserves phase).
In principle, inverse synthetic aperture radar can  be used to image moving targets such as aircraft and ships.
It has been applied in the past to  imaging of the moon and to mapping the surface below the clouds surrounding the planet  Venus.61  Polarization.
46•47 The polarization of the radar backscattered energy depends on the target  properties and differs, in general, from the polarization of the energy incident on the target.
 This property can be used as a possible basis for discriminating one target from another.
For  example, a thin straight wire can be readily distinguished from a homogeneous sphere by  observing the variation of the echo signal amplitude as the polarization is rotated.
The echo  from the sphere will be unmodulated, and the echo signal from the wire will vary between a  maximum and a minimum at twice the rate at which the polarization is rotated.
The use of  circular polarization to reduce the radar echo from symmetrical raindrops relative to the echo  from aircraft, as described in Sec.
13.8, takes advantage of the differences in target response to  different incident polarizations.
·  For complete knowledge of the effect of polarization, the polarization matrix must be  determined.
If H stands for linear horizontal polarization, 'V for linear vertical, and if the first  letter of a two-letter grouping denotes the transmitted polarization and the second ktter  denotes the polarization of the received signal, then the polarization matrix requires knowl­ edge of the amplitudes and phase of the following components: HH, VV, HV and V H.
HV  and VH are sometimes called the cross polarization components.
In general HV = VH so that  only one need be determined.
Orthogonal circular-polarization components can also be used  to describe the polarization matrix.
By transmitting two orthogonal polarizations and measur­ ing the amplitude and phase of the received echoes on each polarization, as well as the  cross-polarization component, a means of target discrimination, or classification, can be  provided.
Some information about the target can be obtained from the amplitude only, and  not the phase, of the· polarization components.
It has also been suggested that the cross­ polarized component of the backscattered echo from simple axially symmetric objects (such as  disks, cones, and corie-spheres) can provide an estimate of a transverse dimension of the body  and give an indication of the severity of the edges, or "edginess."47  EXTRACTION OF INFORMATION AND WAVEFORM DESIGN 437  Nonlinear-contact effects (METRRA).48 When metals come in contact with each other it is  possible for their junctions to act-as nonlinear ·diodes.
The nonlinear properties of such  junctions can be used to recognize metallic from nonmetallic reflectors when illuminated by  radar.
This technique has sometimes been called METRRA, which stands for Metal Reradiat­ ing Radar.48 Most solid, mechanical, metal-to-metal bonds and properly made solder joints  do not show nonlinear effects.
However, ir there is no molecular contact between the metals,  and the space between them is small (of the order of 100 A), then there can be discernible  nonlinear effects.
Such effects are noted with loose metal-to-metal contacts.
 There are two basic approaches for taking advantage of the nonlinearity of these metal  contacts.
In one approach a single frequency is transmitted and a harmonic of the transmitted  frequency is received.
The nature of the nonlinearity of typical contacts is such that the third  harmonic is usually the greatest.
The other approach simultaneously transmits two frequencies  f1 andf2• and the receiver is tuned to a strong cross-product such as 2f1 ±!2• When receiving  at a frequency different from that transmitted, care must be exercised to ensure that the  transmitter signal does not radiate a significant spectral component at the frequency to which  the receiver is tuned.
 The amount of signal returned from a nonlinear contact at a harmonic frequency is a  nonlinear function of the incident field strength.
Thus the nonlinear target cross section  depends on the power, and the normal radar equation does not apply.
In one system formula­ tion the range dependence varied as the sixth power instead of the fourth power.50 High peak  power is more important with such targets than is high average power.
 Similar techniques have also been proposed for cooperative targets by deliberately pro­ viding the target with a passive transponder employing microwave diodes.49•50  Another related target effect that might be utilized for target recognition is the random  modulation of the scattered signal caused by the modification of the current distribution on  a metal target that results from intermittent contacts on the target.67 This modulation can  be detected by examining the frequency spectrum in the vicinity of the received carrier.
The  acronym RA DAM, which stands for radar detection of agitated metals, has sometimes been  used to describe this effect.69  Inverse scattering.
In principle, the size and shape of a target can be found by measuring the  backscattered field, or radar cross section, at all frequencies and all aspects.
It is not possible,  of course, to obtain such complete information, but the process can be approximated by  measuring the backscatter at a finite number of frequencies and aspects.
The name inverse  scatteri11g5 u'has hecn used to describe this method for obtaining the target size and shape, and  thus provide a means for target classification.
The use of high-range-resolution radar for  profiling a target, and the inverse synthetic aperture radar mentioned above are two practical  exam pies of target classification methods that might be called approximations of inverse  scattering.
 Instead of examining the radar echo as a function of frequency, the target response to an  impulse can give the equivalent information since the Fourier transform of the impulse con­ tains all frequencies.
(In the above, an impulse is an infinitesimally short pulse, and the target  response is the echo signal as a function of time.) This has been proposed as a means of target  classification,52 with the impulse being approximated by a short microwave pulse.
The short  pulse, with its high-frequency content, characterizes the fine, detail of the target.
Although this  can be used as a means of target classification, it has been suggested that the usual short-pulse  radar does not obtain important information about the target since its waveform does not  contain the lower frequencies.53-55•62 The lower frequencies that are suggested as being im­ portant are those corresponding to wavelengths from half the target size to wavelengths about  438 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  ten times the target dimensions.
These correspond to frequencies in the Rayleigh and the  low-resonance regions.
The use of such frequencies is said to provide overall dimensions,  approximate shape, and material composition.
Instead of the impulse response, the response of  a target to a ramp function is sometimes more convenient to work with, especially when the  longer wavelengths are used to obtain target classification.
 The method of inverse scattering seems to require an examination of the target over a  large frequency range, perhaps as much as 10 to 1.
If the phase shift as well as the amplitude of  the echo are measured, fewer frequencies might be utilized than when amplitude alone is  obtained.s6 Experiments with as many as 12 frequencies have been carried out for simple  scattering objects, but as few as four frequencies were said to be adequate for the discrimina­ tion of objects as complex as aircraft.
SJ  Automatic target classification.
For practical utilization, most of the target>classification  methods described above require automatic processing.
Some method of signal recognition or  pattern recognition must be applied to be able to correctly estimate the type of target.
This can  be just as important a part of target classification as the sensor itself.
 Target track history.
The above methods of target classification depend on extracting some­ thing about the target other than its location.
However, the target track, which is obtained  from location data alone, can provide significant information that can be used in the  identification process, especially in a military situation.
The speed, course, and maneuver of a  target can indicate something about its intent; and therefore a form of target classification is  possible.
Automatic detection and tracking circuitry can aid in this form of discrimination  since it provides a method for obtaining the target track.
The long-range capability of HF  over-the-horizon radar (Sec.
14.2) is also useful for this purpose since it can observe a large  portion of the target track and might even be capable of observing where the target track  originates (airport or seaport), which can be an important classification clue in some  applications.
 REFERENCES  l.
Goldman, S.: "Frequency Analysis, Modulation, and Noise," p.
281, McGraw-Hill Book Company,  New York, 1948.
 2.
Torrieri, D.
J.: Arrival Time Estimation by Adaptive Thresholding, IEEE Trans., vol.
AES-10, pp.
 178-184, March, 197 4.
 3.
Mallinckrodt, A.
J., and T.
E.
Sollenberger: Optimum Pulse-Time Determination, I RE Trans., no.
 PGIT-3, pp.
151-159, March, 1954.
 4.
Gabor, D.: Theory of Communication, J.
IEE, pt.
III, vol.
93, pp.
429-441, 1946.
 5.
Woodward, P.
M.: "Probability and Information Theory, with Applications to Radar," chap.
6,  McGraw-Hill Book Co., New York, 1953.
 6.
Skolnik, M.
I.: Theoretical Accuracy or Radar Measurements, IRE Trans., vol.
ANE-7, pp.
123-129,  December, 1960.
 7.
Barton, D.
K., and H.
R.
Ward: "Handbook of Radar Measurement," Prentice-HalL Inc., N.J.
1969.
 8.
Manasse, R.: Range and Velocity Accuracy from Radar Measurements, unpublished internal report  dated February,· 1955, MIT Lincoln Laboratory, Lexington, Mass.
(Not generally available.)  9.
Slepian, D.: Estimation of Signal Parameters in the Presence of Noise, I RE Trans., no.
PGIT-3, pp.
 68-89, March, 1954.
·  10.
Siebert, W.
McC.: A Radar Detection Philosophy, IRE Trans., vol.
IT-2, pp.
204-221, September,  1956.
 11.
Rihaczek, A.
W.:·" Principles of High-Resolution Radar," McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York,  1969.
 EXTRACTION OF INFORMATION AND WAVEFORM DESIGN 439  12.
Deley, G.
W.: Waveform Design, chap.
J of "Radar Handbook," M, L Skolnik (ed.).
McUraw-llill  Uook Company, New York.
1970.
 I J.
Sinsky, A.
I..
and C.
P.
Wang: Standardization or the Definition or the Radar Ambiguity Function,  IEF.E Trans.
Vol.
AES-IO.
pp.
532 513.
July.
1974.
 14.
Dicke.
R.H.: Object Detection System.
U.S.
Patent no.
2,624,876.
issued Jan.
6.
1953.
 15.
Cook.
C.
E.: Pulse Compression: Key to More Efficient Radar Transmission, Proc.
IRE, vol.
48, pp.
 JIO Jl5.
March.
1960.
 16.
Farnell, E.
C..
T.
B.
Howard, and G.
H.
Stevens: Pulse Compression, chap.
20 of" Radar Handbook,"  M.
I.
Skolnik (ed.).
McGraw-Hill Book Co., New York, 1970.
 17.
Peebles, P.
Z ..
Jr., and G.
H.
Stevens: A Technique for the Generation or Highly Linear FM Pulse  Radar Signals, I £EE Trans ..
vol.
MIL-9, pp.
32-38, January, 1965.
 18.
Eher.
L 0 ..
and H.
H.
Soule, Jr.: Digital Generation of Wideband LFM Waveforms, IEEE 1975  International Radar Conference, pp.
170-175, Apr.
21-23, 1975, IEEE Publication 75 CHO 938-1  AES.
 19.
Upton, L.
0, and G.
J.
Mayer: Charge-coupled Devices and Radar Signal Processing.
RCA Engr ..
vol.
 21.
no.
I.
pp.
30-34, June/July, 1975.
 20.
Holland, M.
G., and L.
T.
Claiborne: Practical Surface Acoustic Wave Devices, Proc.
IEEE, vol.
62.
 pp.
582-611, May, 1974.
 21.
Maines, J.
D., and E.G.
S.
Paige: Surface-Acoustic-Wave Devices for Signal Processing Applications,  Proc.
IEEE, vol.
64, pp.
639-652.
May, 1976.
 22.
Bristol, T.
W.: Surface Acoustic Wave Devices-Technology and Applications.
IEEE 1976 WESCON  Professional Program, Los Angeles, Sept.
14-17, 1976, paper 24/1.
 23.
Lipka.
M.: Pulse Compression Filter and Wideband Receiver Evaluation.
IEEE 1975 International  Radar Conference, pp.
283-287, Apr.
21-23, l975, IEEE Publication 75 CHO 938-1 AES.
 24.
Cook, C.
E., and M.
Bernfeld: "Radar Signals," Academic Press, New York, 1967.
 25.
Ternes.
C.
L.: Sidelobe Suppression in a Range-Channel Pulse-Compression Radar, IRE Trans ..
vol.
 MIL-6, pp.
162-169, April, 1962.
 26.
Thor, R.
C.: A Large Time-bandwidth Product Pulse-Compression Technique, IEEE Trans., vol.
 MIL-6, pp.
169-173, April, 1962.
 27.
Kroszcynski,J.J.: Pulse Compression by Means of Linear-Period Modulation.
Proc.
IEEE, vol.
57, pp.
 1260-1266, July.
1969.
 28.
Rowlands, R.
0.: Detection of a Doppler-Invariant FM Signal by Means of a Tapped Delay Line, J.
 Acoust.
Soc.
Am., vol.
37, pp.
608-615, April, 1965.
 29.
Taylor.
S.
A., and J.
L.
MacArthur: Digital Pulse Compression Radar Receiver, APL Technical Digest,  vol.
6, pp.
2-10, March/April.
1967.
,.
 30.
Golomb, S.
W.: "Digital Communications with Space Applications," Prentice-Hall, Englewood Clirfs,  N.J ..
1964.
 31.
Ackroyd, M.
H., and F.
Ghani: Optimum Mismatch Filters for Sidelobe Suppression, IEEE Trans.,  vol.
AES-9, pp.
214-218, March, 1973.
 32.
Millett, R.
E.: A Matched-Filter Pulse-Compression System Using a Nonlinear FM Waveform, IEEE  Trans., vol.
AES-6, pp.
73-78, January, 1970.
 33.
Nathanson, F.
E.: "Radar Design Principles," McGraw-Hill Book Co., New York, 1969.
 34.
Rihaczek, A.
W.: Radar Waveform Selection-A Simplified Approach, IEEE Trans .• vol.
AES-7, pp.
 1078-1086, November, 1971.
 35.
Mutton, J.
0.: Advanced Pulse Compression Techniques, IEEE N AECON '75 Record, pp.
141-148.
 36.
Welti, G.
R.: Quaternary Codes for Pulsed Radar, IRE Trans., vol.
IT-6, pp.
400-408, June, 1960.
 37.
Golay, M.
J.E.: Complementary Series, IRE Trans., vol.
IT-7, pp.
82-87, April, 1961.
 38.
MacWilliams.
F.
J., and N.
J.
A.
Sloane: Pseudo-Random Sequences and Arrays, Proc.
IEEE, vol.
64,  pp.
1715 -1729, December, 1976.
 39.
Shrader, W.W.: MTI Radar, chap.
17 of" Radar Handbook." M.
I.
Skolnik (ed.), McGraw-Hill Book  Co ..
New York, 1970.
 40.
Ward, H.
R.: Dispersive Constant False Alarm Rate Receiver, Proc.
IEEE, vol.
60, pp.
735 -736, June,  1972.
 41.
Mortley, W.
S .• and S.
N.
Radcliffe: Pulse Compression and Signal Processing, IEEE Conf.
Publica­ tion No.
IOS, "Radar-Present and Future," Oct.
23-25, 1973, pp.
292-296.
 42.
Bogotch, S.
E .• and C.
E.
Cook: Effects or Limiting on the Detectability of Partially Time Coincident  Pulse Compression Signals, IEEE Trans., vol.
MIL-9, pp.
17-24, January, 1965.
 43.
Woerrlein, H.
H.: Spurious Target Generation Due to Hard Limiting in Pulse Compression Radars,  IEEE Trans., vol.
AES-7, pp.
1170-1178, November, 1971.
 44.
Milne, K.: The Combination of Pulse Compression with Frequency Scanning for Three-dimensional  Radars.
The Radio and Electronic E,rgr., vol.
28.
pp.
89-106, A UJ.?USt.
1964.
 440 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  45.
Hynes, R., and R.
E.
Gardner: Doppler Spectra of S Band and X Band Signals, IEEE Tram.
Suppl.,  vol.
AES-3, no.
6, pp.
356-365, Nov., 1967.
Also, Report of N RL Progress, pp.
l-10, January, 1968, PB  177017.
 46.
Copeland, J.
R.: Radar Target Classification by Polarization Properties, Proc.
I RE, vol.
48, pp.
 1290-1296, July, 1960.
 47.
Knott, E.
F., and T.
B.
A.
Senior: Cross Polarization Diagnostics, IEEE Tram., vol.
AP-20, pp.
 223-224, March, 1972.
 48.
Optiz, C.
L.: Metal-detecting Radar Rejects Clutter Naturally, Microwaves, vol.
15, pp.
12-14, August,  1976.
 49.
Shefer, J., and R.
J.
Klensch: Harmonic Radar Helps Autos Avoid Collisions, IEEE Spectrum, vol.
IO,  pp.
38-45, May, 1973.
 50.
Davies, D.
E.
N., and H.
Makridis: Two-Frequency Secondary Radar Incorporating Passive Trans­ ponders, Electronics Letters, vol.
9, no.
25, pp.
592-593, Dec.
13, 1973.
 51.
Lewis, R.
M.: Physical Optics Inverse Diffraction, IEEE Trans., vol.
AP-17, pp.
308-314, May, 1969.
 52.
Kennaugh, E.
M., and D.
L.
Moffatt: Transient and Impulse Response Approximations, Proc.
IEEE,  vol.
53, pp.
893-901.
August, 1965.
.J  53.
Ksienski, A.
A., Y.
T.
Lin, and L.
J.
White: Low-Frequency Approach to Target Identification, Proc.
 IEEE, vol.
63, pp.
1651-1660, December, 1975.
 54.
Moffatt, D.
L., and R.
K.
Mains: Detection and Discrimination of Radar Targets, IEEE Trans., vol.
 AP-23, pp.
358-367, May, 1975.
 55.
Chuang, C.
W., and D.
L.
Moffatt: Natural Resonances of Radar Targets via Prony's Method and  Target Discrimination, IEEE Trans., vol.
AES-12, pp.
583-589, November, 1976.
 56.
Goggins, W.
B., Jr., P.
Blacksmith, and C.
J.
Sletten: Phase Signature Radars, IEEE Trans., vol.
AP-22,  pp.
774-780, November, 1974.
 57.
Berrie, D.
W.: The Effects of Pseudo-Random Noise Upon Radar System Performance, Aeronauticul  Systems Division, Wright-Patterson Air Force Base, Ohio, ASD-TR- 74-23, August, 1974.
(Submitted as  Ohio State University Dissertation), U.S.
Gov.
Printing Office: 1974-657-017/347.
 58.
Caputi, W.
J., Jr.: Stretch: A Time-Transformation Technique, IEEE Trans., vol.
AES-7, pp.
269-278,  March, 1971.
 59.
Hoft, D.
J., and M.
B.
Fishwick: Analog Waveform Generation and Processing, Electronic Progress,  vol.
17, no.
1, pp; 2-16, Spring, 1975.
(Published by Raytheon Co., Lexington, Mass.)  60.
Barton, D.
K.: Sputnik II as Observed by C-Band Radar, 1959 IRE National Conv.
Rec., vol.
7, pt 5,  pp.
67-73.
 61.
Pettengill, G.
H.: Radar Astronomy, chap.
33 of" Radar Handbook," M.
I.
Skolnik (ed.): McGraw- Hill Book Co., New York, 1970.
·  62.
Lin, Y.-T., and A.
A.
Ksienski: Identification of Complex Geometrical Shapes by Means of Low­ Frequency Radar Returns, The Radio and Electronic Engineer, vol.
46, pp.
472-486, October, 1976.
 63.
Frank, R.
L.: Polyphase Codes with Good Nonperiodic Correlation Properties, IEEE Trans., vol.
 IT-9, pp.
43-45, January, 1963.
 64.
Cantrell, B.
H.: Sidelobe Reduction in Polyphase Codes, Naval Research Laboratory Report 8l08,  Washington, D.C., Apr.
13, 1977.
 65.
von Schlachta, K.: A Contribution to Radar Target Classification, International Coriference  RADAR-77, Oct.
25-28, 1977, pp.
135-139, IEE (London) Conference Publication no.
155.
 66.
Lindner, J.: Binary Sequences Up to Length 40 with Best Possible Autocorrelation Function, Elec­ tronics Letters, vol.
11, no.
21, p.
507, Oct.
10, 1975.
 67.
Bahr, A.
J., and J.
P.
Petro: On the RF Frequency Dependence of the Scattered Spectral Energy  Produced by Intermittent Contacts Among Elements of a Target, IEEE Trans., vol.
AP-26, pp.
618-621,  July, 1978.
 68.
Dixon, R.
C.: "Spread Spectrum Systems," Wiley Interscience, N.Y., 1976.
 69.
Newburgh, R.
G.: Basic Investigations of the RADAM Effect, Rome Air Development Center, New  York, Report RADC-TR-78-151, June, 1978, AD A058099.
(Approved for public release.)  CHAPTER  TWELVE  PROPAGATION OF RADAR WAVES  12.l INTRODUCTION  The propagation of radar waves is affected by the earth's surface and its atmosphere.
Complete  analysis or prediction or radar performance must take into account propagation phenomena  since most radars do not operate in "free space" as was as~umcd in the ideal formulation of  the radar equation in Chaps.
1 and 2.
Free-space radar performance is modified by JfJJ.lleri11g  of electromagnetic energy from the surface of the earth, -~tio11 caused by an inhomo­ geneous atmosphere, and airemwti,m by the gases constituting the atmosphere.
Also included -•<s under the subject of propagation is the external noise environment in which the radar finds  itself.
The radar is also affected by the re.flectio11, or backscatter, of energy from the earth's  surface and from rain.
snow.
birds, and other clutter objects; but this subject is-reserved for  Chap.
13.
Ti,e effects of propagation will modify the free-space performance of the radar.
as  well as introduce errors in the radar measurements.
 It is usually convenient to distinguish between two different regions when considering  radar propagation.
One is the optical.
or inte,ference, region, which is within the line of sight  (direct observation) of the radar.
The other is the d([l'raction region, which lies beyond the line  or sight.
or beyond the horizon, of the radar.
Radar energy found in this region is usually due  to diffraction by the curvature of the earth or refraction by the earth's atmosphere.
 Although the basic theory of radar wave propagation may be well understood, accurate  quantitative predictions are not always easy to obtain because of the difficulty in acquiring the  necessary knowledge or the environment in which the radar operates.
In some respects, the  prediction of propagation phenomena is like predicting the weather.
Quite often the radar  system designer must be content with only a qualitative knowledge or" average" propagation  eITecls.
Nevertheless, it is important to know and understand how propagation phenomena  can influence radar performance since it can be a major factor in determining how well a radar  performs·in a particular application.
 441  442 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  12.2 PROPAGATION OVER A PLANE EARTH  Although there are but few situations where accurate predictions of radar propagation effects  can be made by assuming a flat rather than round earth, it is nevertheless instructive to  examine this special case.
The assumption of a flat earth simplifies the analysis and illustrates  the type of changes introduced in radar coverage by a reflecting ground or sea surface.
 Consider the earth to be a plane, flat, reflecting surface with the radar antenna located at  height ha.
The target is at a height h, and at a distance R from the radar.
Figure 12.1 illustrates  that energy radiated from the radar antenna arrives at the target via two separate paths.
One is  the direct path from radar to the target; the other is the path reflected from the surface of the  earth.
The echo signal reradiated by the target arrives back at the radar via the same two  paths.
Thus the received echo is composed of two components traveling separate paths.
The  magnitude of the resultant echo signal will depe~d upon the amplitudes and rylative phase  difference between the direct and the surface-reflected signals.
Modification of the field  strength (volts per meter) at the target caused by the presence of the surface may be expressed  by the ratio  field strength at target in presence of surf ace  '1 = field strength at target if in free space --( 12.
l)  It is assumed in this analysis that the lengths of the direct and the reflected paths are almost  (but not quite) equal so that the amplitudes of the two signals are approximately the same  provided there is no loss suffered on reflection.
Hence, if the amplitudes of the two waves differ  from one another, it is assumed to be due to a surface-reflection coefficient less than unity.
 Although the two paths are comparable in length, they are not exactly equal.
Any difference in  the relative phase between the direct and the reflected ~aves can be attributed to the difference  in the path length and the change in phase that occurs on reflection.
The reflection coefficient  of the surface may be considered as a complex quantity r = pe».
The real part p describes the  change in amplitude, while the argument 1/J describes the phase shift on reflection.
 It is further assumed in the present example that the reflection coefficient r = -1.
The  reflected wave suffers no change in amplitude, but its phase is shifted 180°.
A reflection  coefficient of - 1 applies at microwave frequencies to a smooth surface with good reflecting  properties if the radiation is horizontally polarized and the angle of incidence is small.
 The effective radiation pattern of the radar located at A in Fig.
12.
l may be found in a  manner analogous to that of a two-element interferometer antenna formed by the radar  antenna at A and its image mirrored by the ground at A'.
The difference between the reflected  path AMB and the direct path AB (or A"MB) is i\ = 2ha sin~.
when R ~ha.For~ small, sin~  may be replaced by (ha + h,)/ R so tha~ 'i\ = 2ha(ha + h,)/ R :::::: 21za h, / R.
The latter expression  Figure 12.1 Propagation over a plane reflecting surface.
 PROPAGATION OF RADAR WAVES 443  assumes that h, ~ l,0.
The phase difference .corresponding lo the path-length difference is  (12.2)  To this must be added the phase shift tjf, resulting from the reflection of the wave at M, which is  assumed to be TC radians, or 180°.
The total phase difference between the direct and the ground­ reflected signals as measured at the target is  (12.3)  Tile resultant of two signals, each of unity amplitude hut with phase difference t/1, is  [ 2( I + cos 1/1 )J 111.
Therefore the ratio of the power incident on the target at B to that which  would he incident if the target were located in free space is  2 _ 2( _ 4Tt:lzah,) = 4 .
2 2Tt:lzah,  t7 -1 cos ).R sm ).R (12.4)  Because of reciprocity, the path from target to radar is the same as from radar to target.
The  power ratio at the radar is therefore  4 _ 16 .
4 21tlt0h1 ti -sm ).R ( 12.5)  The radar equation describing the received echo power must be modified by the propagation  factor t74 of Eq.
(12.5).
Since the sine varies in magnitude from Oto 1, the factor t74 varies from  0 to 16.
The received signal strength also varies from O to 16; hence the fourth-power relation  hetween range and echo signal results in a variation of radar range from Oto 2 times the range  of the same radar in free space.
 The field strength is a maximum when the argument of the sine term in Eq.
(12.5) is equal  to n/2, 3rr/2, ...
, (211 + 1 )rr/2, where n = 0, 1, 2, ....
The maxima are therefore defined by  41ta Ii, = 211 + 1  )..R maxima (12.6)  The minima, or nulls, occur when the sine term is zero, or when  i 2h0h, )jf=n mm1ma (12.7)  Thus the presence of a plane reflecting surface causes the continuous elevation coverage to  break up into a lobed structure as indicated in Fig.
12.2.
A target located at the maximum of a  Figure 12.2 Vertical.
lobe structure caused by the presence  of a plane reflecting surf ace.
 444 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  particular lobe will be detected at a range twice that of the same radar located in free space.
 However, at other angles, the radar detection range can be less than the free-space range.
 When the target lies in the nulls, no echo signal is received.
 The angle (in radians) of the first (lowest) lobe is approximately equal to ,l./4h.,.
If low­ angle coverage is desired, the radar antenna height should be high and the wavelength of the  radiated energy small.
The antenna pattern lobes caused by the presence of the ground might  sometimes be of advantage when the longest possible detection range is desired against low­ altitude targets and where continuous coverage is not required.
 The simple form of the radar equation (Eq.
( 1.9)] may be written with the propagation  factor 17 included to illustrate the effect of the plane earth:  for small angles  .J ( 12.8)  The received signal power for targets at low angles (on the lower side of the first lobe) varies as  the eighth power of the range instead of the more usual fourth power.
This phenomenon has  been experimentally verified for ship targets at short ranges where the plane-earth approxima­ tion has some validity.1 Another difference between Eq.
(12.8) and the normal radar equation  is the factor G/)., which appears in place of the factor Gk  The analysis in this section is based on many simplifying assumptions; therefore care  should be exercised in adapting the results and conclusions to more realistic situations.
The  assumption of a perfectly reflecting plane earth applies in but a few cases.
Also assumed was an  omnidirectional antenna pattern in the elevation plane.
Since radars utilize directive antennas,  the idealized antenna lobe structure as given by Eq.
(12.4) must be appropriately modified to  account for the actual antenna radiation pattern.
Theoretically, the nulls in the lobe structure  are at zero field strength since the direct and reflected signals are assumed to be of equal  amplitude.
In practice, ~he nulls are "filled in" and the lobe maxima are reduced because of  nonperfect reflecting surfaces with reflection coefficients less than unity.
The nulls will also be  filled in if broadband signals are radiated by the radar.
 In the above example, the reflection coefficient of the ground was taken to be -1, which  applies for horizontal polarization and a smooth reflecting surface.
The magnitude and phase  of the reflection coefficients of vertically polarized energy behave differently from waves with  horizontal polarization (Fig.
12.3a and b ).
The calculated amplitude and phase of the  reflection coefficient are plotted for a smooth sea surface at 100 and 3,000 MHz.
It is seen that  the reflection coefficient for vertically polarized energy is less than that for horizontally po­ larized energy.
The angle corresponding to the minimum reflection coefficient is called Brew- ster's angle.
.
 The different reflection coefficients with the two polarizations result in different coverage  patterns.
The nulls are not as deep with vertical polarization, nor are the lobe maxima as great.
 Vertical polarization might be preferred when complete vertical coverage is required.
Horizon­ tal polarization might be specified when enhanced range capability is desired and complete  vertical coverage is not necessary.
The theoretical curves of Fig.
12.3 assume a smooth  reflecting surface.
In practice, this condition is seldom met, and the difference in the coverage  diagrams obtained with each of the two types of polarization is often not as pronounced as  might be expected on the basis of theoretical computations.
Roughness is more important than  the electrical properties in determining whether reflection is specular or not.
Measurements  have shown that the reflection coefficient for n~rmal (nonsmooth) ground terrain is in the  range 0.2 to 0.4 and is seldom greater than O.S.
at frequencies above 1500 MHz except for tow  angles of incidence.
2•3 ·,,  PROPAGATION OF RADAR WAVES 445  .,  0 on  : 0 6  9 u .,  ~ () ~l  0  '" 0 4  0  J  ()?  () I ·f!o,,znnfol  · r,olorl1otion  Ver !,col  rflfl}t 1/0l·~fl •  0 L~-'-~.J--~'----'-~-' ,~ ., 160  ~ 140  C: ., Hor i1onlol polorirnt,on  ~ 120 :,-Vertical polori rnfion .,  8  g 100  V  ~  ~ 80  0  :;: nO  £'  Q 3.00() MHl'  100 MH;  0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 10 20 30 40 so 60 10 ao 90  Groz,nq onqlr.
rleq  (al Gro11ng angle, deg  (b)  Figure 12.J (<1) Magnitude of the rellection coefficient as a function of the grazing angle (for sea­ water).
(h) Phase of the rellection coefficient as a function of the grazing angle (for seawater).
Phase of  the rdlcctcd wave lags the phase of thelincidcnt wave.
(From Burrows and Artwood,5 courtesy Academic  f'ress.
Inc.)  For a rough, perfectly conducting surface, such as the sea, Ament 70 derived the reflection  coefficient as  p0 exp [ -2k2h2 s1n2 !/I]  where /lo = complex rellection coefficient for a smooth surface  k 2rr/J  ~ = wavelength  /i2 = mean-square surface height (mean value or lz = 0)  tjJ = grazing angle  Experimental data taken over the sea fit this expression well; except for large values of the  roughness {arameter [(h sin tjl)/)..
~ lnjJ/A.
> 0.11], where the theory underestimates the experi­ mental observations.71.
72  The rcnection of electromagnetic waves from the sea may be separated into a coherent and  an i11colterem component.71 73 The coherent component has a reflection coefficient whose  amplitude and phase are fixed by a given geometry and sea state.
The term "reflection  coefficient" as usually found in the literature is generally that of the coherent component.
The  incoherent, or fluctuating, component of a surface-scattered signal is characterized by a  random phase and amplitude.
The incoherent component of the forward-scattered signal from  a rough surface behaves differently from the coherent component as a function of roughness.
It  increases linearly with increasing surface-roughness parameter (litjl/l), levels off to a maximum  and then decreases as the inverse square root of the roughness parameter.74  The presence of a reflecting surface affects the measurement or low elevation angles as well  as the radar coverage.
When the target elevation angle is less than a beamwidth, the radar  receives both the direct and the ground~reflected waves, and the effective antenna pattern is  altered.
The radar sees the image as well as the target.
Height-finding radars which measure  446 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  elevation angle of arrival by comparing the amplitudes of the signals received at two different  beam ekvation angles (lobe comparison) qrn give erroneous and ambiguous measurements al  low angles.4· 75 Elevation errors near the ground may be considerably reduced in magnitude  and the ambiguities eliminated by surrounding the radar with a metallic fence to remove the  ground-reflected wave.
The fence replaces the gr0tind-rdlccted wave with a diffracted wave of  lesser importance.
The diffraction fence also re.moves objcctionahll! ground clutter.
 Tracking radars also are affected at low elevation angles hy the ground-relkcted wave.
 The tracker might give an erroneous angle measurement just as in the case of the height finder,  or it might track the" image" in the ground instead of the true target.
Tile ovi.:rall effect on lhe  tracker is somewhat analogous to "glint" (Sec.
5.5).
 12.3 THE ROUND EARTH .J  In general.
the curvature of the earth cannot be neglected when predicting radar coverage.
This  is i:specially true for coverage at low elevation angles near the horizon.
The two regions of  interest in radar propagation are the i11ter/ere11ce region and the difl1·actio11 region.
The inter­ ference, or optical.
region is located withi!1 line of sight of tht: radar.
The dirtct and rdkcted  waves interfere to produce a lobed radiation pattern similar to that described for the plane  F ree-spoce coverage contour  90° 30° 50,000 T  I  45,000 I  !  40,000- .:: 35,000 0  C  C  QJ c :':.ODOO ·• 0  QJ  > 0 .Q 25POO · 0  1: g,  QJ 1 o· .c 20,000  <ii c,, a I- Range, nmi  (a) horizontal polarization  Figure 12.4 Example of a vertical-plane coverage diagram for (a) horizontal polarization and (b) vertical  polarization.
Frequency= 1300 MHz, antenna height= 50 ft, antenna vertical beamwidth = 12° with  hcam maximum pointing on the horizon.
sea surrace with 4 rt wave-height and a free space  range = 100 nmi.
· · ·  50.000901  45.000 l  '10 ,OU() l 30° r , F rPe -space coverage contour 7  10°  I I ' I ,  I I I.
 .' I 'I  !  i I /1  ' i I I/ I , ;{ I  I I I !  'I } .
I l  I;: I i/  f I /f'  · i r ' ./.
·.
'·-/J_ I  l' ! •, I I  '-/.
30° " r,  Ronqe, nmi  (b) vertical polarization  Figure 12.4 {c0111i1111ed) PROPMii\TION OF Ri\Oi\R WA YES 447  0 5°  earth.
Lobing.
however.
is not as pronounced in the case of the round earth: the minima are  · not as deep nor arc the maxima as great since a wave reflected from a curved surface is more  divergent than one reHected from a plane.
The other region of interest is that which lies just  heyond the interference region below the radar line of sight and is the diffraction.
or the  shadow.
region.
Here radar signals are rapidly attenuated.
Very few microwave radars have  the capahilit~of penetrating the diffraction region to any great extent because of the severe  losses.
 The effect of the round earth on radar coverage can be predicted by analytical means for  the idealized case of a "smooth" earth of known, uniform properties.
There exist in the  literature the necessary graphs and nomographs which simplify the computation of radar  coverage.
5 9 Computers may be used to perform the calculations and to automatically plot the  coverage patterns by computer-controlled plotting machines.1 ° Figure 12.4 illustrates, for a  particular case.
the computed vertical-plane radar coverage patterns for (a) horizontal polari­ talion and (/,) vertical polarization.
 12.4 REFRACTION  Radio and radar waves travel in straight lines in free space.
However, electromagnetic waves  propagating within the earth's atmosphere do not travel in straight lines but are generally bent  or refracted.
One effect of refraction is to extend the distance to the horizon, thus increasing  448 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  Rodar l \~~-<Radar ray in the presence of refraction  ___ ........
___ -...., .;_ _,,,,/ Rodar roy in the absence 01 retracrion  Rodar horizon in the  absence of refraction  Rodar Rodar horizon in the  presence of refraction  (a)  (b) Apparent  target  position  True  target  pos'ition J  Figure ll.5 {«) Extension of the radar horizon d\1e to refraction of rndar waves hy the atmosphere: (/.}  angular error caused by refraction.
 th1..: radar coverage (Fig.
12.5a).
Another effect is the introduction of errors in the measurement  of elevation angle (Fig.
12.5h) ..
Bending, or refraction, of radar waves in the atmosphere is  caused by the variation with altitude of the velocity of propagation, or the i11di!x of n!{N1etio11.
 defined as the velocity of propagation in free space to that in the medium in question.
 At microwave frequencies, the index of refraction II for air which contains water vapor  is 11.
l 2  (n-1)10~ = N = 77:r + 3.73 x 10\, (12.9)  where p = barometric pressure, mbar (1 mm Hg 1.3332 mbar)  e = partial pressure of water vapor, mbar  T = absolute temperature, K ..
 The parameter N = (n -1)106 is the "scaled-up" index of refraction and is called n:fi·actiPity.
 It is often used in propagation work instead of n because it is a more convenient unit.
The  prime difference between optical and microwave refraction is that water vapor has a negligible  effect on the former; consequently the second term of Eq.
(12.9) may be neglected at optical  frequencies.
Since the barometric pressure p and the water-vapor content e decrease rapidly  with height, while the temperature T decreases slowly with height, the index of refraction  normally decreases with increasing altitude.
A typical value of the index of refraction near the  surface of the earth is 1.0003.
In a standard atmosphere the index decreases at the rate of about  4 x 10-8 m 1 of altitude.
1 •• i1 , :1 ; , " • .
.
·  The decrease in refractive indexrwith altitude means that the velocity of propagation  PROPAGATION OF RADAR WAVES 449  increases with altitude, causing radio waves to bend downward.
The result is an increase in the  effective radar range as was illustrated in Fig.
12.Sa.
(Variations of the refractive index in the  horizontal plane may also exist, but they do not materially alter the bending.)  Refraction of radar waves in the atmosphere is analogous to bending of light rays by an  optical prism.
The path of the radar waves through the atmosphere may be plotted using  ray-tracing techniques, provided the variation of refractive index is known.
 The classical method of accounting for atmospheric refraction in computations is by  replacing the actual earth of radius a (a= 3440 nautical miles) by an equivalent earth of radius  ka and by replacing the actual atmosphere by a homogeneous atmosphere in which electro­ magnetic waves propagate in straight lines rather than curved lines (Fig.
12.6).
It may be  shown from Snell's law in spherical geometry that the value of the factor k by which the earth's  radius must be multiplied in order to plot the ray paths as straight lines is  k=---1 __  l + a(drr/d Ir) ( 12.10)  where d11/d Ii is the rate of change of refractive index 11 with height.
5 The vertical gradient of the  refractive index d11/dh is normally negative.
Ir it is assumed that this gradient is constant with  height and equal to a value of 39 x 10-6 per meter, the value of k isl The use of the j effective  earth's radius to account for the refraction of radio waves predates radar and, because of its  convenience, has been widely used in radio communications, propagation work, and radar.13  It is only an approximation, however, and may not yield correct results if precise radar  measurements are desired, as, for example, in a long-range height finder.
The term standard  refi·actio11 is applied when the index of refraction decreases uniformly with altitude in such a  manner that k = j (Ref.
14).
 The distance d to the horizon from a radar at height /1 may be shown from simple  geometrical considerations to be approximately  d = fi[aii (12.lla)  where ka is the effective radius of the earth and It is assumed small compared with a.
Fork= 4,  Eq.
( 12.
l la) reduces to a particularly convenient relationship if d and hare measured in statute  miles and feet.
respectively.
 or,  or.
 Radius a  l r r  (al d (statute miles) = J21i(ft)  d (nautical miles)= 1.23 jh(ft}  d (km)= 130 Jli(km)  Radius ka  l  J (bl (12.llh)  (12.llc)  (12.lld)  Figure 12.6 (a) Bending of antenna beam due to refraction by the earth's atmosphere; (h) shape of beam in  equivalent-earth representation with radius ka.
 450 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  Equations (12.11) have been used at times as a measure of the line-of-sight coverage of a  ground-based radar viewing a target at a height h.
This may lead to incorrect results in some  cases since the optical line of sight does not necessarily correspond to the radar line of sight, as  explained in Sec.
12.6.
·  The four-thirds earth approximation has several limitations.
It is only an average value  and should not be used for other than general computational purposes.
The correct value of k  depends upon meteorological conditions.
Bean15·16 found that the average value of k  measured at an altitude of l km varies from 1.25 to 1.45 over the continental United States  during the month of February and from 1.25 to 1.90 during August.
In general, the higher  values of k occur in the southern part of the country.
Burrows and Attwood5 state that k lies  between ! and ! in arctic climates.
 The use of an effective earth's radius implies that dn/dh is constant with height, or in other  words, that n decreases linearly with height.
This assumption is in <lisagrt:cdlcnt with the  experimentally observed refractive-index structure of the atmosphere at heights above l km.1 7  The variation of refractivity with altitude is found to be described more nearly by an exponen­ tial function of height rather than the linear variation assumed by the 1 earth model or any  model of constant effective earth's radius.
A more appropriate refractivity model is one in  which the refractivity varies exponentially with height,12•17  · N = N, exp ( -ce(h -h.,)] (12.12)  where N, = refractivity at surface of earth  h = altitude of target  h, = altitude of radar  Ce= ln (N,/ N 1) = a constant which depends upon value of Ns and Ni, the latter being refrac­ tively at altitude of 1 km  It is found that the exponential model gives a more accurate determination of the effects of  atmospheric refraction than does a linear model.
 The use of the correct atmospheric model is quite important in a height-finder radar;  especially for targets at long ranges.12• 17 • 18 Refraction causes the radar rays to bend, resulting  in an apparent elevation angle different from the true one.
In certain radar applications,  corrections must he made to the radar data to obtain a better estimate of elevation angle,  range, or height.19 Surface observations of refractivity often suffice for ascertaining the  effects of refraction.20-22  Refraction is troublesome primarily at low angles of elevation, especially at or near the  horizon.
It can usually be neglected at angles greater than 3 to 5° in most radar applications.
 Although more refined models of.
atmospheric refraction must be considered where  precise radar measurements are important, the simplicity of the usual t earth approximation  makes it attractive for rough predictions.
 The above discussion of refraction has been directed primarily to the aircraft target  located within the lower portion of the atmosphere called the troposphere.
Targets such as  satellites and ballistic missiles operate above both the troposphere and the ionosphere.
The  effects of the entire atmosphere must be considered in such cases.13•14  12.5 ANOMALOUS PROPAGATION  A decrease in atmospheric index of refraction with increasing altitude, as described in the  previous section, bends the radar rays so as to extend the coverage beyond that expected with  a uniform atmosphere.
If the gradient of the index of refraction is strong enough for the rays to  PROPAGATION OF RADAR WAVES 451  have the same curvature as the earth itse\r, it would be possible for initially horizontal rays to  bend around the surface of the earth.
From Eq.
12.10, a gradient dn/dlt = -1.57 x 10-7 m-1  will make the effective earth's radius infinite which allows initially horizontal rays to follow the  curvature of the earth.
Under such conditions, the radar range is significantly increased and  detection beyond the radar horizon can result.
 The abnormal propagation of electromagnetic waves is called superrefraction, trapping,  duct i11g, or mwma/o11s propagat io11.
According to one definition, 25 normal atmospheric re.frac­ t io11 corresponds to the gradient dn/dlz varying from Oto -0.787 x 10-7 m-1, or when the  effective earth's radius (Eq.
12.10) varies from k = l to k = 2.
Superrefraction corresponds to  d11/dlt from -0.787 x 10-1 to -1.57 x 10-1 m-1• or k = 2 to k = oo.
Trapping, or ducting,  occurs when d11/dlt is greater than -1.57 x 10-7 m -1.
The radar ranges with ducted propaga­ tion are greatly extended.
Holes can also appear in the coverage.
If the atmospheric index of  refraction were to increase, rather than decrease, with increasing height, the rays would curve  upward and the radar range would be reduced as compared to normal conditions.
This is  called suhre{raction.
Its occurrence is rare.
The term anomalous, or nonstandard, propagation  applies to any of the above propagation conditions other than normal; but it is almost always  used to describe those conditions where the radar range is extended well beyond normal.
 A superrefracting duct which lies close to the ground is called a ground-based duct, or a  sw(ace duct.
Over water the surface duct is also called the evaporation duct, since it is the result  of water vapor evaporated from the sea.
A duct which lies above the surface is called an  elevated duct.
Surface ducts apparently are more usual than elevated ducts.
To propagate  energy within the duct, the angle the radar ray makes with the duct should be small, usually  less than one degree.26•27 Only those radar rays launched nearly parallel to the duct are  trapped.
With a surface-based radar, ducting is limited to low angles of elevation so that the  chief eITect is to extend the surface coverage.
 Since the angle between the radar beam and the duct direction (as defined by the levels of  constant index of refraction) cannot be greater than about 1 ° if power is to be coupled into an  elevated duct, the radar must usually be at an altitude that permits the required shallow  coupling angles to be achieved.
The radar in this case will be more sensitive to targets within  the duct than those outside it.
 The extension of the radar range within the duct results in a reduction of coverage in  other directions.
The regions with reduced coverage are called radar, or radio, holes.
If, for  example, the radar range is extended against surface targets by the presence of a surface duct,  air targets just above the duct that would normally be detected might be missed.
 Atmospheric ducts are generally of the order of 10 or 20 meters in height, never more than  perhaps 150 to 200 meters.
Propagation within a surface duct is similar to propagation within  a waveguide with a" leaky top wall." A duct supports only certain modes of propagation and  does not readily support propagation below a critical wavelength.
A simplified approximate  model of propagation in atmospheric ducts gives the maximum wavelength·that can be pro­ pagated in a surface duct uf depth d as28  ( 6n) 112 A.mu= 2.5 -6h J3/2 (12.13)  where Amu• 6/1, and dare in the same units.
For example, at X band P-max = 3 cm)1 Eq.
(12.13)  predicts that the duct must be at least 10 m thick; at S band (,l = 10 cm) it must be 22 m; and  at UHF (,l = 70 cm), the duct thickness must be at least 80 m thick.
(The value of -f,.n/t,.h  was taken as 1.57 x 10-7 m-1.) Since atmospheric ducts are not usually deep, extended range  propagation is more likely to be experienced at the higher microwave frequencies than at the  lower frequencies.
Unlike standard waveguide propagation, the cutoff wavelength for ducting  ;/)  (/ ) ·~  ~ .:_  452 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  does not sharply divide the regions of propagation and no propagation, so that radiation  whose wavelength is several times the" cutoff wavelength" may be affected by the duct.
 A duct is produced when the index of refraction decreases with altitude at a rapid rate.
If  the index of refraction [Eq.
(12.9)] is to decrease.with height, the temperature must increase  and/or the humidity (water-vapor content) must decrease with height.
An increase of tempera­ ture with height is cal.led a temperature inversion and occurs when the temperature of the sea or  land surface is appreciably less than that of the air.
A temperature inversion, by itself, must be  very pronounced in order to produce superrefraction.
Water-vapor gradients are more effec­ tive than temperature gradients alone; thus superrefraction is usually more prominent over  oceans, especially in warm climates.
 Ducting occurs when the upper air is exceptionally warm and dry in comparison with the  air at the surface.
There are several meteorological conditions which may lead to the formation  of supcrrefracting ducts.31.32 Over land, ducting is usually caused by radiation>of heat from  the earth on clear nights, especially in the summer when the ground is moist.
The earth loses  heat.
and its surface temperature falls, but there is little or no change in the temperature of the  upper atmosphere.
This leads to conditions favorable to ducting, that is, a temperature inver­ sion at the ground and a sharp decrease in the moisture with height.
Therefore, over land  masses ducting is most noticeable at night and usually disappears during the warmest part of  the day.
 Another common cause of ducting is the movement of warm dry air, from land, over  cooler bodies of water.
Warm dry air blown out over the cooler sea is cooled at the lowest  layers and produces a temperature inversion.
At the same time, moisture is added from the sea  to produce a moisture gradient.
This form of anomalous propagation over the sea tends to be  more prominent on the leeward side of land masses.
Ducting occurs during either the day or  night and can last for long periods of time.
It is most likely to occur, however, in the late  afternoon and evening when the warm afternoon air drifts out over the sea.
B  Thus the character of ducting· is likely to differ over land and sea.
Land masses change  temperature much more quickly than·does the sea.
As a result, there is much more of a diurnal  variation of ducting over land than over sea, where it is likely to be more continuous and  widespread.
32  .
Superrefracting ground ducts may also be produced by the diverging downdraft under a  thunderstorm.31 The relatively cool air which spreads out from the base of a thunderstorm  results in a temperature inversion in the lowest few thousand feet.
The moisture gradient is  also appropriate for the formation of a duct.
Duct formation by thunderstorms may not be as  frequent as other ducting mechanisms, but it is of importance since it may be used as a means  of detecting the presence of a storm.
An operator carefully watching a radar display can detect  the presence of a storm by the sudden inc·rease in the number and range of ground targets.
The  conditions appropriate to the· formation I of a thunderstorm duct are short-lived and have a  time duration of the order of'perhaps 30 min to 1 h.
 With the exception of thunderstorms, ducting is essentially a fine-weather phenomenon.
 As tropical (but not equatorial) climates are noted for their fine weather, it is not surprising to  find the most intense ducting occurring ·in such regions.
32 In temperate climates ducting is  more common in summer than in winter.
It does not occur when the atmosphere is well mixed,  a condition generally accompanying·poor weather.
When it is cold, rough, stormy, rainy, or  cloudy, the lower atmosphere is well1 s'tirred'.
up and propagation is likely to be normal.
Both  rough terrain and high winds tend to· increase atmospheric mixi,ng, consequently reducing the  occurrence of ducting.
Radar propagation is normal whenever the upper air is unusually cold  in comparison with·the earth's surface~=! ,,: '  ! ; I 'r .
.
.
·~ I t'.Ji J (..
'~.
r,i i.
I : • 'l ..
 PROPAGATION OF RADAR WAVES 453  Elcrntcd ducts.
i\n example of propagation in elevated ducts is found in the "tradewin<l  region" between the midoccan.
high-pressure cells and the equatorial doldrums.
Two such  tra<lcwind areas that have been studied lie between Brazil and the Ascension lslands29 and  between Southern California and Hawaii.·'° The tra<lewind temperature inversion is usually  found over the eastern portions of the tropical oceans.
In these regions, there is a slow-sinking  of high-altitude air (large-scale subsidence) which meets low-level maritime air flowing toward  the equator.
The general sinking of air from high altitudes results in adiabatic heating due lo  compression.
and a decrease in moisture content.
Thus this warmer.
drier air lies above the  cooler.
moist ai1 to p1odtH.:e a temperature inversion: i.e ..
a11 increase.in temperature with  height.
This results in a strong duct along the interface of the temperature inversion.
In some  cases.
a stratus cloud layer will form at the hasc of the temperature inversion.27 Thus the dud  altitude can be identified by the height of the cloud tops that arc suppressed by the tempera­ ture inversion.
When the temperature inversion occurs below the altitude at which clouds are  formed, a haze layer in the air below the temperature inversion can be observed.
The altitude  of the tradewind duct varies from hundreds of meters at the eastern part of the tropical oceans  to thousands of meters at the western end.
Thus, the height gradually rises in going from east  to west.
There is also a general decrease of the refractivity gradients to the west.
Off the  southern California coast.
in the vicinity or San Diego, the boundary between moist and dry  air is relatively stable and exists at an average altitude of 300 to 500 meters.
Since the elevated  duct is due to meteorological effects there are seasonal, as well as diurnal, variations.
The  optimum season for duct formation in the tradewind region between Brazil and Ascension  Islands occurs in November.
2 9 ft has been said, however, that elevated ducts giving rise to  strong persistent anomalous propagation occur throughout most of the year over at least  one-third of the oceans.27  To take maximum advantage or propagation in an elevated duct, the radar and target  should be at an altitude near that of the duct.
This is found from both theory and measure­ ments made by aircraft Oying at various altitudes.
It was noted, 30 however, that the propaga­ tion of electromagnetic energy from antennas well below the duct is greater than would be  predicted from classical ray theory.
One explanation postulated for explaining this  discrepancy is that energy can be scattered into and out of the elevated duct by irregularities in  the index-of-refract ion profile.
 E,·aporation duct.
The evaporation duct that lies just above the surface of the sea is a result of  the water vapor.
or humidity, evaporated from the sea.
The air in contact with the sea is  saturated \\tith water vapor.
with a saturation vapor pressure appropriate to the temperature  or the sea surface.
34 The air several meters above the sea is not usually saturated so there will  be a gradual decrease in water vapor pressure from the surface value to the ambient value well  above the surface.
The decrease in water vapor pressure is approximately logarithmic, which  contributes a logarithmic decreasing term to the index of refraction.
 The evaporation duct exists over the ocean, to some degree, almost all of the time.
The  height of the duct, which is usually within the range from 6 to 30 m, varies with the geographic  location.
season, time of day, and the wind speed.
In the North Sea the mean duct thickness is  about 6 m while in tropical regions it is of the order 10 to 15 m.34 In the North Atlantic at  Weather Ship D (44"N, 4 i "W) the median value of duct thickness (half the ducts have thickness  of lesser value) is 10 min the summer and 30 min the winter.
35 In the area offshore of San Diego,  the medium value of the duct thickness as calculated from 5 years of meteorological data is  6 m.
and a similar calculation for the Mediterranean Sea is 10 m.36 Measurements made in the  Atlantic tradcwind area off of Antigua showed ducts averaging 6 to 15 m in height.37 The  454 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTl'MS  height and strength of the duct was found to vary with wind speed.
Stronger winds generally  resulted in stronger signals and lower attenuation rates.
Wind speeds from 8 to IS knots  produced a low, moderately strong duct, and winds from 20 to JO knots product·d a higher,  but weaker duct.
Passing squalls and rain showers did not wipe oul the duct or decrease  the propagated signals.
 The thicker the duct, the lower the frequency that can he propagated, as can be seen from  Eq.
( 12.
IJ).
Thus the lower microwave frequencies (bdow L band) are not usually strongly  affected by the evaporation duct.
The upper frequency limit for ducting is determined by the  increased attenuation due to roughness of the sea and hy ahsorption of ekctromagne~ic energy  in the vicinity of the water vapor resonance at 22 GHz.
Thus there is probably an nptinlllm  frequency for the utilization of ducted propagation.
In a duct with rnmpfrtt !tapping of the  electromagnetic energy, the cylindrical spreading of the energy radiatd.
by a poi'll source  results in the power density decreasing as R-1, where R = range.
instead of R 1 as with free  space propagation.
The energy is seldom completely trapped, however, and thete is attenua­ tion due to the leaking of energy from the upper surface of the duct as well as by scattering and  absorption.
Energy is also scattered out of the duct because of a rough sea surface.70 ll has  heen found experirnentally-'7 that S-hand radiation ( lO cm wavelength) is only partially  trapped by the evaporation duct, with attenuation rates averaging ahout 0.85 d 8/nmi.
Gen­ erally, there is less attenuation at· S band the higher the radar antenna or the target  altitude.30·-'1 At X hand (J cm wavelength).
the coupling to the duct is stronger and the  average (one-way) attenuation was reported as 0.45 dB/nmi.-'7 Unlike S band, the attenuation  at X hand was less at low antenna and target heights (J to 5 m).
giving stronger signals and  greater ranges than antennas and targets at heights up to 30 m: which is a further indication of  effective trapping at the higher frequencies.
 It was observed that with a large enough duct more than one mode can he propagated  and there can be more than one antenna height suitable for low-loss propagation.
For  example,3 7 one set of X-band data showed the minimum attenuation to occur with an antenna  height of 2 m.
Increasing the antenna height increased the loss to a maximum at ahout 10 m  height.
Further increase of height decreased the attenuation until a secondary minimum was  obtained at 20 m height, after which the attenuation again increased (at least to a height of  30 m).
On a ship it might not he practical to site a radar antenna 2 mover the sea.
Instead it  might he sited at 20 m height.
with the slightly greater loss heing a price to pay for the  convenience of the higher antenna location.
The above values apply to a particular experiment  in a particular location.
Hence, the optimum antenna heights might vary.
 Theoretical models of propagation in evaporntion ducts confirm the genaal experimental  ohservations presented above.77 When multiple modes of propagation an; trapped in the duct.
 theory predicts considerable signal fades due to interference between the several modes.
Fades  can he of the order of 20 dB.
In one example.
it was shown that the fading is strongly  dependent on the radar and the target heights, and that for centimeter wavelengths the fading  occurs at intervals of from two to three miles.
 The height of the evaporation duct, from which the propagation conditions can be in­ ferred, can be readily calculated from measurements of the surface water temperature and.
at  some convenient height, the air temp·erature, relative humidity, and wind speed.18 These four  measurements have been found sufficient for the description of ducting conditions.
 The above has been concerned with ,propagation beyond the normal horizon.
Within the  horizon, the refractive· effects of the 'duct can lead to a modification of the normal lobing  pattern caused by the interference of the'.direct ray and the surface-reflected ray.
The relative  phase between the direct and reflected rays can be different in the presence of the duct, and  PROPAGATION OF RADAR WAVES 455  focusing can change the relative amplitudes of the two components.
The focusing effect can  even cause the amplitude of the surface-reflected ray to sometimes exceed that of the direct  ray.-'8 The e!Tect of the duct on the line-of-sight propagation is to reduce the angle of the lowest  lobe.
bringing it closer to the surface.
 Consequences of ducted propagation.
Although both the elevated and the surface (evaporation)  duct can result in extended radar ranges, the consequences of their presence are often bad  rather than good.
The presence of extended ranges cannot always be predicted in advance.
 Furthermore, they cannot be depended upon.
The extension of range along some propagation  paths means a decrease of range along others, or radio holes.
These holes in the coverage can  seriously affect airborne surveillance radars as well as ground-based and ship-borne radars.
 The extended ranges during ducting conditions mean that ground clutter is likely to be present  at longer ranges.
This can put a severe burden on some MTI radars that are designed on the  assumption that clutter will not appear beyond a certain range.
This will be particularly bad  with radars which cannot cancel second-time-around clutter, such as those with pulse-to-pulse  staggered pulse repetition frequencies or those which use magnetron transmitters with random  starting phase pulse to pulse.
The accuracy of precision range measuring systems that utilize  phase measurements.
as in the Tellurometer (Sec.
3.5), also can be affected by the evaporation  duct.JR On the positive side, the evaporation duct, when used with a properly sited antenna,  can provide extended range against surface targets or low-flying aircraft considerably beyond  that which would be expected from a uniform atmosphere.
 Prediction of refractive effects.
The effect of atmospheric refraction on electromagnetic propa­ gation can be determined from a knowledge of the variation of index of refraction with altitude  over the path of propag~tion.
From profiles of index of refraction, classical ray tracing28 can  he applied to determine how the rays propagate.
Generally, it is reasonable to assume that the  properties of the atmosphere vary only with height.
This assumption is made to simplify the  computations.
One of the most accurate methods for obtaining the atmospheric profile of  the index of refraction is with an airborne microwave refractometer.40·41 In one version,39 two  precision microwave transmission cavities are employed, one of which is open to collect a  sample of the atmosphere.
The other is hermetically sealed and acts as a reference.
The two  cavities arc fed hy the same microwave source which is swept in frequency.
The measured  difference in the resonant frequencies of the two cavities is due to the different dielectric  properties (or index of refraction) of the gases within the two cavities.
This frequency difference  can be calibrated in terms of the index of refraction of the atmosphere in the sampling cavity.
 Although the airborne refractometer may give excellent data on the variation of the index of  refraction, it is not always suitable for many applications since it requires an aircraft or  helicopter.
 The index of refraction profile can also be determined by measuring the pressure, temper­ ature, and humidity as a function of altitude and using Eq.
( 12.9) to compute the refrac­ tivity.
The radiosonde is a balloon-borne package of instruments for obtaining such  measurements.40 The data is telemetered back to the ground.
One drawback of the radiosonde  is that it is generally a slow-response instrument, and is not always able to detect with  surtkient accuracy the significant refractive index gradients needed for obtaining an accurate  description of the ray paths.
 In some applications a complete ray trace is not necessary; instead, only the amount by  which the rays are bent might be desired, or the error in elevation angle which occurs.
A  correction to the measured elevation angle can be made using only the value of the index of  456 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  refraction at the surface,20·21 obtained with either a microwave refractometer or from meteor­ ological measurements of temperature, pressure, and humidity.
An improvement to the eleva­ tion angle correction can be had by making a measurement of the brightness temperature of  the atmosphere with a microwave radiometer, along with a surface refractive-index  measurement.22 Since refractive bending and radiometric brightness-temperature measure­ ments both depend on the atmospheric profile, the use of the radiometer provides information  that aids in the correction of elevation angle.
It has been estimated that the brightness­ temperature measurement made with a radiometer operating near the water vapor absorption  line of 22 GHz, along with a measurement of surface refractivity, can result in an improvement  in angle accuracy of almost 50 percent ·as compared with a surface rdractivity measurement  alone.22 The ground-based microwave radiometer can also be used to provide a correction for  the error in time delay introduced by the atmosphere, hy making brightness-tcmpcralure  measurements near the 22-GHz water vapor absorption line and the 60-GHz agsorplion line  of oxygen.42  If no other information is available, a correction for lhe elevation angle can be had on the  hasis of the yearly statistics of the meteorological data that enters into Eq.
( 12.9) for determin­ ing the index of refraction.
22  It is possible to automate, by means of a computer, the necessary calculations for deter­ mining the refractive effects of the atmosphere on the coverage or the radar.
Such computa­ tions could be made at the radar site to provide the operator with the information needed to  know how a radar is affected by the natural environment.
One implementation for naval  application, known as 1R EPS {Integrated Refraction Effects Prediction System), uses a mini­ computer and interactive graphic display terminal to provide ( 1) plots of refractivity as a  function of altitude (which indicate the location of ducts); (2) a plain language narral ive  description of the propagation effects that can be expected over surrace-to-surface, surface-to­ air, and air-to-air paths; (3) vertical coverage diagrams for specific equipments; (4) display of  path loss with range; and (5) a ray-trace used primarily to assess the performance of airborne  systems.'9·80 Input data for IRE PS can be obtained from balloon-borne radiosonde measure­ ments of upper air temperature, pressure, and humidity.
Alternatively, an aircraft-borne  microwave refractometer can be used.
Inputs are obtained from surface meteorological  measurements made on board the ship on which the IREPS is located.
When no other input  data is available, the IREPS utilizes a stored library or historic refractivity and climatology  statistics as a runction of the latitude, longitude, season, and time of day.
When historic data  is used the output is a prediction or propagation performance in probabilistic terms.
Also  stored are the necessary system parameters for the various electromagnetic systems whose  predicted propagation performance is desired.
 12.6 DIFFRACTION  In free space, electromagnetic waves travel in straight lines.
In the earth's atmosphere, radar  waves can propagate beyond the geometrical horizon by refraction.
Another mechanism that  permits radar coverage to be extended beyond the geometrical horizon is ditf'ractio11.
Radar  waves are diffracted around the curved earth in the same manner that light is diffracted by a  straight edge.
The ability of electromagnetic waves to propagate around the earth's curvature  by diffraction depends upon the frequency, or more precisely, upon the size of the object  compared with the wavelength.
The lower the frequency, the more the wave is diffracted.
The  mechanism of diffraction is especially importan~ at very low frequencies (VLF) where it  provides world-wide communications.
However, at radar frequencies the wavelength is small  PROPAGATION OF RADAR WAVES 457  compared with the earth's di1ncnsions and little energy is diffracted.
Thus radar coverage  cannot be extended much beyond the line of sight hy this mechanism.
 Figure 12.7 is a plot of the electric field strength (relative lo free space) at the target as a  function of the distance from the transmitting antenna.
Both the radar antenna and the target  arc assumed to be at a fixed height (100 min this example).
Tl1c computed curves apply to  propagation over an idealized smooth earth in the absence of an atmosphere.
The line or sight  is the straight-line distance hctwccn radar and target that is just tangent to the surface of the  earth.
The distance between radar and target along the line of sight is  do )2kah; + )2kah2 ( 12.14)  where li1• lr2 heights or radar antenna and target.
respectively  a= earth's radius  k = ractor discussed in Sec.
12.4, accounting for refraction due to a uniform gra­ dient of refractivity  The point of tangency of the line of sight with the earth is the geometrical, or optical, lwri:::011.
 At optical frequencies () ~ 0) the field strength within the interference region (that is.
 between the radar and the geometrical horizon) is essentially the same as in free space.
The  field docs not penetrate beyond the horizon.
Thus, for optical frequencies or very short radar  OJ u  0 a.
 "'  OJ  OJ '- 2  <lJ  >  a  ti.J '- "O  "' l.L 50 ····---r- 2.0  t.O  0.5  0.2  0.1 -·  0.05 {  %  ......
 0.02 · i:  <:::,  ,<:;:  b  0.01 ·":!  ~ 'l.)  12  0.005 <:::,  ~  0.002 '>-.=0  0.00 I __ _j_ ____ ...L...
_ __j ____ ____j _____ ~~-~--~  30 40 50 60 70  Distance, km 80 90 100  Figure 12.7 Theoretical field strength (relative to free-space field strength) as a function of the distance  from the transmitting antenna.
Vertical polarization, h0 = h, = 100 m, k = 1, ground conductivity  IO 2 mho/m.
dielectric constant = 4.
(After B111·:ows and Attwood,5 courtesy Academic Press.
Inc.)  458 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  wavelengths, the geometrical horizon represents the approximate boundary between the re­ gions of propagation and no propagation.
As the frequency decreases (increasing wavelength),  Fig.
12.7 indicates that more and more energy propagates beyond the geometrical horizon.
 However, the field strength at, and just within, the geometrical horizon decreases with decreas­ ing frequency.
 It is concluded that if low-altitude radar coverage is desired beyond the geometrical  horizon in the diffraction region, the frequency should be as low as possible.
If, on the other  hand, low-altitude coverage is to be optimized within the interference region and if there is no  concern for coverage beyond the horizon, the radar frequency should be as high as possible.
 (This assumes the absence ofducting.)  The formula for the distance along the line of sight [Eq.
( 12.14 )] should not be used as a  measure of the radar coverage without some reservation.
Figure 12.7 shows that a target  located at the geometrical horizon is not in free space but is definitely within the diffraction  region of the rapar.
The field strength for a target on the radar line of sight might vary from 10  to 30 dB below that in free space.43 The loss of signal strength in the diffraction region can be  quite high.
At a frequency of 500 MHz, the one-way propagation loss is roughly 1 dB/mi at  low altitudes.
It can be even greater at higher frequencies.
Therefore, to penetrate 10 miles  within the diffraction region, the radar power at 500 MHz must be increased by at least 20 dB  over that required for free-space propagation.
 The decrease in radar coverage due to the attenuation of electromagnetic energy in the  diffraction region is illustrated by Fig.
12.8 for a radar operating at a frequency of 500 MHz.
 These curves are theoretical contours of constant radar coverage.
The radar height is assumed  to be 200 ft above the curved earth.
Curve l represents the locus of the geometrical line of sight  as defined by Eq.
(12.14) fork= t, Curv~ 2 is the constant signal contour in the diffraction  region for a signal strength equal to the free-space signal that would be received from a range  of approximately 220 nautical miles; that is, if the radar is to detect a target that lies along this  contour, it must be capable or detecting the same target in free space at a range of 220 nautical  miles.
If the target were at an altitude or 200 ft, the maxinn,m detection range would be  reduced from 220 to about 35 nautical ·miles.
Curves 3, 4, and 5 are similar to curve 2, except  that they apply to a free-space signal of 110, 55, and 27.5 nautical miles, respectively.
Curve 6  ....
....
400  Ii  I, I  I  I  .:u 300 I  I  I  I Figure 12.8 Contours or "radar  coverage" for radar height or 200 ft  above curved earth.
(I) Geometrical  line-of-sight contour for k = J; (2)  constant-radar-signal contour in the  diffraction region, assuming a radar  capable or a free-space range of 220  nmi, vertical polarization, seawater,  k = i,f = 500 MHz; (3) same as (2),  but for 110 nmi free-space range;  (4) same as (2), but for 55 nmi free­ space range; (5) same as (2), but for -0 §  0  100 /  /  / I  6;1 5  / I I  I  o 1.....----l.----"-------'-----'------' 27.5 nmi free-space range; (6) contour o 1 o 20 30 40 50 defining start of diffraction region.
 Range, nautical miles (Courtesy Proc.
IRE.)  PROPAGATION OF RADAR WAVES 459  represents the approximate boundary between the interference· region and diffraction region.
 Any target to the right of curve 6 may be considered to be within the diffraction region.
This  illustrates why most radars operating at microwave or UHF frequencies are limited to cover­ age within the geometrical line of sight.
 12.7 ATTENUATION BY ATMOSPHERIC GASES5•12·28  The attenuation of radar energy in a clear atmosphere in the absence of precipitation is due to  the presence of oxygen and water vapor.
Attenuation results when a portion of the energy  incident on the molecules of these atmospheric gases is absorbed as heat and is lost.
The  reduction in radar signal power when propagating over a distance Rand back (two-way path)  may be expressed as exp ( -2et.R), where a.
is the (one-way) attenuation coefficient measured in  units of (distance) 1.
Instead of plotting a., it is more usual to plot the one-way attenuation in  decibels per unit distance.
This is equivalent to plotting the quantity 4.34a, where the constant  accounts for the conversion from the natural logarithm to the base 10 logarithm.
 Attenuation by oxygen and water vapor is shown in Fig.
12.9.44•45 Resonance peaks for  water vapor occur at 22.24 GHz (1.35 cm wavelength) and at about 184 GHz, while the  10  E  .-,c -CD  "O .
 C 0.1 0 ·.::  0  ::.,  C  ~  <1  0.01  0.00! -- /  2 /  /  / / I  I  I I n  I \  I \  I  4 6 10 20 40 60 100  Frequency, GHz 200  Figure 12.9 Attenuation or electromagnetic energy by atmospheric gases in an atmosphere at 76 cm  pressure.
Dashed curve is absorption due to water vapor in an atmosphere containing l percent water  vapor molecules (7.5 g water/m3).
The solid curve is the absorption due to oxygen.
(From Burrows a11d  Attwood' arid Straiton atrd Tolbert.46)  460 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  0.51--,~~ ~~~~200  0.1 100  0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200 220 240 260 280 300  Rodar-to-target distance, nmi  (a)  5000  3000  2000  0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200 220 240 260 280 300  Radar-to-target distance, nmi  (b) ,,::  u  C  ~  0 !  5 -0  0 a:  N :r  L  ,,::  u  C  (I) :,  0  .f  0  ~  0 a:  Figure 12.lO Attenuation for two-way, radar propagation as a function or range and frequency for (a) zero  elevation angle and (b) S0 elevation angle.
(From Blake.•1)  PROPAGATION OF RADAR WAVES 461  oxygen molecule has resonances at 60 GHz (0.5 cm wavelength) and 118 GHz.46 At frequen­ cies below ahout I GHz (L band) the effect of atmospheric attenuation is negligible.
Above  10 GHz.
it becomes increasingly important.
Tile large attenuations experienced at millimeter  wavelengths is one of the chief reasons long-range, ground-based radars are seldom found  above 35 GHz (Ka hand).
 The attenuation of the atmospheric gases decreases with increasing altitude.
Thus the  atte11ua1ion experienced hy a radar will depend 011 the altitude of the target as well as the  range.
With a ground-based radar the attenuation is greatest when the antenna points to  the horirnn.
and it is least when it points to the zenith.
Figure 12.10 gives examples of  the two-way attenuation for elevation angles of O and 5°.
 12.8 ENVIRONl\lENTAL NOISE  J\t microwave frequencies the normal noise level is relatively low and the sensitivity of conven­ tional radar receivers is usually determined by internal noise.
However, radar receivers with  very low noise input stages sometimes can be affected by the ambient noise from the natural  environment.
This is more likely to occur at both the upper and lower extremes of the micro­ wave frequency region.
Several sources of ambient, or external, noise are de~cribed in this  section.
 Cosmic noise48·49 There is a continuous background of noiselike electromagnetic radiation  which arrives from such extraterrestrial sources as our own galaxy (the Milky Way), extraga­ lactic sources, and "radio stars." ln general, cosmic noise decreases with increasing frequency  and can usually be neglected at frequencies above L band.
It can be a serious limitation,  however.
to those radars operating at VHF or lower.
The magnitude of cosmic noise depends  upon the portion of the celestial sphere in which the antenna points.
It is a maximum when  looking toward the center or our own galaxy, and it is a minimum ·vhen observing along the  pole about which the galaxy revolves.
A plot of the maximum and minimum cosmic-noise  briglitness temperature as a function of frequency is shown by the dashed curves of Fig.
12.11.
 The brightness temperature of an extended source of radiation is the temperature of a black­ body which yields the same noise power at the receiver.
A highly directive antenna viewing a  distributed source of radiation under" ideal" conditions would receive a noise power equal to  k TR B, where k = Boltzmann's constant, TR= brightness temperature of the source, and  B = bandwidth of the receiver.
By "ideal" conditions is meant an antenna with negligible  sidelobes and negligible resistive losses, and which looks at a distributed source of brightness  temperature (the cosmic noise) in the absence of the earth's atmosphere or any other  source of noise.
For a practical antenna the antenna temperature is defined as the integral  of the brightness temperature over all angles, weighted by the antenna pattern.
 Atmospheric absorption noise.
It is known from the theory of blackbody radiation that any  body which absorbs energy radiates the same amount of energy that it absorbs, else certain  portions would increase in temperature and the temperature of other portions would  decrease.56 Therefore a lossy transmission line absorbs a certain amount of energy and rera­ diates it as noise.
The same is true of the atmosphere since it also attenuates or absorbs  microwave energy.
The radiation arising in the atmosphere (or any other absorbing body)  must just compensate for the partial absorption of the blackbody radiation.
 Consider an absorbing atmosphere at an ambient temperature 7;, surrounded by an  imaginary blackbody at the same temperature.
The loss L is the factor by which energy is  462 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  ::x:::  0  X: -L  C, w  E  0 '-'+- C 100 <1)  <lJ  U'I  "' 0  QJ  L :,  0  L  QJ a.
 E  <lJ ....
 .;:;  L)  D 10 a.
 "' ....
 .9.
 "' "' 4.>  C -.t:: c,,  L m  1  100 ~  \  \  \ Mo.r,mum  \  \  \  \  \  \  \  Cosmic noise \  from galactic \  pole \ \ Minimum  \ Cosmic noise from  \ 90/octic center  \  1,000 \0,000  Frequency, MHz _J  100,000  Figure 1:2.l l Maximum and minimum brightness temperatures of the sky as seen by an ideal single­ polarization antenna on earth.
(After Greene and Lebenbaum,50 Microwave J.)  attenuated in passing through the atmosphere.
The noise power available over a bandwidth 811  from the imaginary blackbody is kTa B,.
..
The noise power after passing through the atmos­ phere is kT,,B,JL.
Thus the amount of power absorbed by the atmosphere is k'I;.B,.(l -1/L)  and is equal to the noise power tlN radiated by the atmosphere itself.
From the definition of  effective noise temperature and the fact that 1/L is the" gain" (less than unity), the following  equation is obtained:  AN= kTeB11G-:-kiBn = k'1;,B11( 1 -~)  Hence Te= T.,(L 1) (12.15)  If the atmospheric loss were 1 dB at a temperature of 260 K, the effective noise tempera­ ture would be 68 K; a 3-dB loss results in Te = 260 K, while a 10-dB loss gives Te = 1340 K.
 A plot of the single-polarization brightness temperature or space temperature due to both  cosmic noise and atmospheric· absorption is shown by the solid curves of Fig.
12.11.
An  ambient temperature of 260 K is· assumed in the computation of atmospheric-absorption  noise.
At the higher frequencies (X band or above) atmospheric absorption is the predominant  contributor to the brightness temperature, while at the lower frequencies (L band or lower),  the cosmic noise predominates;' ThercVexists a broad minimum in the brightness temperature  extending from about 1,000 to 10,000'.MHz.
It is in this region that it is advantageous to  operate low-noise receivers to· 'achievtf maximum system sensitivity.
The minimum atmo­ spheric absorption occurs when the·'antenh.a 'is vertical (pointed at the zenith), while the  PROPAGATION OF RADAR WAVES 463  maximum occurs when the antenna is directed along the horizon.
The noise is greater along  the horizon than at the zenith since the antenna" sees" m.ore atmosphere.
The antenna beams  must be oriented at elevation angles greater than about 5° to avoid excessive atmospheric­ ahsorption noise in the main beam.
 The computed hrightness temperatures of Fig.
12.11 do not agree in detail with those  prcscn ted hy others.
4 7 · 5 u 2 The fact that such computations made by different authors do not  always agree precisely need not he a limitation to the radar systems engineer.
Disagreements  often result from the oversimplifying nature of the assumptions or in the model used in  formulating the calculations.
A good radar design is one which is not overly sensitive to small  variations in the model or the assumptions.
 Atmospheric and urban noise.
A single lightning stroke radiates considerable RF noise  power.
At any one moment there are an average of 1800 thunderstorms in progress in different  parts of the world.
From all these storms about 100 lightning flashes take place every second.53  The combined effect of all the lightning strokes gives rise to a noise spectrum which is  especially large at broadcast and short-wave radio frequencies.
Noise that arises from  lightning-stroke radiation is called atmospheric noise (not to be confused with noise produced  by atmospheric absorption as described previously).
The spectrum of atmospheric noise falls  of rapidly with increasing frequency and is usually of little consequence above 50 MHz.54  Hence atmospheric noise is seldom an important consideration in radar design, except, per­ haps, for radars in the lower VHF region.
 Another source of noise predominant at the lower radar frequencies is urban noise, also  known as man-made noise.
Noise from automobile ignition, electric razors, power tools, and  nuorescent lights are examples.
It is of little concern at UHF or higher frequencies.55  Solar noise.
The sun is a strong emitter of electromagnetic radiation, the intensity of which  varies with time.
The minimum level of solar noise is due to blackbody radiation at a tempera­ ture or about 6000 K.56Y7 The solar noise is unlike most other noise mechanisms in that its  power increases with increasing frequency.
Solar storms (sunspots and flares)can increase the  solar-noise level several orders of magnitude over that of the "quiet," or undisturbed sun.
 The solar noise can sometimes be of significant magnitude to affect the sensitivity of low-noise  radar receivers from energy received in the antenna sidelobes.
The sun also can be used  as a source to calibrate the beam-pointing (boresight) of large antennas.58 Discrete radio  sources, call&l radio stars, are too weak at radar frequencies to be a serious source of interfer­ ence, but they have been used in conjunction with sensitive receivers to determine pointing and  focusing corrections for large antennas.59  System noise temperature.
Figure 12.12 illustrates some of the sources of noise which generally  must be considered when computing the system effective noise temperature.
The antenna sees  the cosmic noise at a temperature Tc with an intervening absorbing atmosphere at a tempera­ ture T.1 and a Joss L.,.
The atmosphere may be characterized for present purposes by a single  temperature and a single loss, but it can be subdivided, ir desired, into an ionospheric compo­ nent, an oxygen component, and a water-vapor component.
The combined temperature of  cosmic noise and atmospheric noise [Tc + (La, -l )T.,] is called the space temperature, the  brightness temperature, or the antenna temperature of an ideal antenna.
The RF losses Lrr  indicated in the figure are meant to include the antenna, radome, and duplexer losses, as well  as transmission-line loss.
The effective noise temperature of the receiver is denoted 'f..e .
 If it is assumed that the noise contributions enter the receiver via the main beam only, the  464 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  Cosmic noise  Tc Absorbing  atmosphere  fat, Lat Antenna  RF transmission Receiver  line, etc.
Tre  \ .
fr.t, Lrt  Sidelobe ond bock -lobe  radiation 'iJL  Figure 12.12 Contributions to the total system effective noise temperature.
 effect of the sidelobes may be neglected, and the total system effective noise Temperature 1;.
 may be found from a straightforward application of Eq.
(9.10); therefore  (12.16)  Note that Tc, T.,11, and 'I'rr are actual temperatures while T., and Tr~ are effective noisi.:  temperatures.
 In general, the contributions to the total effective system noise temperature may be  divided into three categories: (1) the effective space noise temperature, (2) the effective noise­ temperature contributions due tp RF lossy components, and (3) the effective noise tempera­ ture of the receiver itself.
 Equation (12.16) applies to an ideal antenna with no sidelobes.
In a practical antenna the  noise which appears at the antenna terminals enters via the sidelobe radiation as well as from  the main beam.
In many cases the total noise power due to the sidelobes can be greater than  the noise power in the main beam.
This is especially true when the main beam views the  rel:--tively "cool" sky but the sidelobes view the "hot" earth.
A portion of the lT\ain beam  might also view the relatively "hot" earth if pointed at or near the horizon.
 The amount of noise which enters the antenna depends upon the entire antenna radiation  pattern, including the sidelobes and the type of objects they illuminate.
Land is almost a  complete absorber; hence those portions of the radiation pattern which illuminate the ground  see a noise source at the ambient temperature.
Perfectly reflecting sources, such as a smooth sea  or a road, act as a mirror to reflect the·radiation from the sky or other objects.
Thus the sea or  a metallic object may appear very cold if it is oriented to reflect radiation from the sky to the  antenna.
The choice of polarization· also influences the a·mount of sea or land absorption.
 Vertical polarization is absorbed more than horizontal.
 The total antenna temperature can be found by integrating the temperature" seen" by the  antenna, weighted by the antenna gain over the entire sphere.60  , T, :__· J Ts(fJ, cp )G(O, cp) dQ  a -J G(O, cp) dQ (12.17)  where dQ = solid angle given by sin O dO dcp.
The brightness temperature T8(0, cp) is often a  complicated function, and Ta must be approximated by numerical means.
The antenna tempera­ ture is an average value of the brightness, or space, temperature in the field of the antenna  pattern..
.
: .
di ..
·,, ., •.
·l,,  Figure 12.13 gives.the antenna.noise.temperature computed for a typical IO-ft-diameter  parabolic reflector operating at 1000 MHz as a function of the antenna elevation angle.
61 These  data assume (I) vertical.polarization, (2) the antenna located on a seacoast and looking over  200  (l} 3 150 --0  L..
 (l} a.
 E  (l}  w 100 ·- Vl  0  C  0  C  ~ 50 - C  <! Asymptote  O~~~~~~~~~~~~~  -10 IJ +10 +20  Antenna elevation angle, deg PROPAGATION OF RADAR WAVES 465  Figure 12.13 Computed antenna noise-temperature as a  function of elevation angle for a 10-ft-diameter (3 m)  parabolic-reflector antenna operating at a frequency of  I GHz.
(After Greene,61 courtesy Airborne lnstrumems  Laboratory.)  the sea, (3) the antenna always pointing at the galactic center (4) no intense radio stars in the  antenna pattern, (5) resistive losses in the reflector, feed, and transmission line absorbing 2  percent of the incident power, and (6) the feed producing a parabolic illumination taper.
 12.9 MICROWAVE-RADIATION HAZARDS  High power microwave energy can produce spectacular effects.
It has been reported for  example, that 50 kW of UHF power radiating from the open end of a 6-by 15-in.
waveguide  will cause ordinary light bulbs to explode, fluorescent lamps many feet away to light up, and a  piece of steel wool to explode into arcs.62 It is not surprising, therefore, that microwave  energy, if of sufficient intensity, is a health hazard and can produce biological damage  in humans.
·  Heating is the chief effect of microwave radiation on living tissue.
In controlled dosages,  radiation heating is beneficial and forms the basis of diathermy, a therapeutic heating of the  tissue beneath the skin.
Frequencies ranging from HF to microwaves have been used for  diathermy.63 .-The heating e!Tects of microwave radiation have also been applied commercially  in the form of microwave ovens, used for cooking food rapidly.
 Harmful effects of excessive microwave radiation result from either a general rise in the  total body temperature or from selective heating of sensitive parts of the body.
Exposure of the  whole body will cause the internal temperature to rise and produce fever.
An increase in  the total body temperature of 1 °C is considered excessive,64 and prolonged exposure or too  high a temperature rise can be fatal.
Discomfort resulting from a general rise in body tempera­ ture can be perceived by the victim and serve as a warning.
 The danger of localized heating depends upon whether compensating cooling mechan­ isms exist to dissipate the heat generated at the radiated part of the body.
For example,  localized heating is least serious in muscle tissue which is well equipped with blood vessels  capable of dissipating heat.
Heating is more dangerous in the brain, the testes, the hollow  viscera, and the eyes, where there is little opportunity for the exchange of heat with the  surrounding tissue.
 Many instances have been reported where cataracts have been deliberately formed in the  eyes of animals by exposure to microwave radiation.
The viscous material of the eyeball is  466 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  affected by heat in much the same manner as the white of an egg.
It is transparent at room  temperature but becomes opaque if its temperature is raised excessively.
The process is an  irreversible one.
Although the testes are apparently more sensitive to heat than the eye,  testicular damage is often temporary and reversible.63·65  At frequencies below 400 and above 3000 MHz, the body absorbs less than half the  incident energy.
Lower frequencies pass through, and higher frequencies are reflected at the  skin's surface.
Between 1000 and 3000 MHz the percentage of radiation absorbed can  approach 100 percent, depending on the thickness of skin and subcutaneous layers of fat.65  If the whole body is immersed in microwave radiation, a rise in temperature or a sensa­ tion of warmth serves as a warning before damage to localized parts of the body becomes  severe.
However, if only parts of the body are exposed, there may or may not be a sensation of  warmth, depending upon the frequency.
Heating caused by frequencies penetrating the  interior of the body can be of concern ·because the sparsity or sensory nerves may make it  imperceptible.
Higher frequencies absorbed at or close to the surface of the 6ody are more  likely to be perceived than interior heating.
 There have been few authenticated incidents where radiations have bei:n the cause of  biological damage in humans.
However, as radar powers increase, the likelihood of biological  damage becomes greater, and if serious harm is to be avoided, proper safety precautions must  be observed.
The United States armed services have established63·67 the maximum safe con­ tinuous exposure level to be an average power density or JO mW/cm2• There has been sub­ stantial basis for setting this limit.
However, when working under conditions of moderate to  severe heat stress the maximum exposure level should be reduced appropriately.
66  The criterion of 10 mW /cm2 is based on the experimental observation that thermal effects  are dominant.
However, there is evidence indicating that nonthermal biological effects also  occur from exposure to microwave radiation.68 Pulsed power can produce biological change  · not obtained with CW power of the same average value.
Therefore, the possibility of dan­ gerous effects with excessively high peak ·powers should not be overlooked even if the average  power is less than the safe threshold.
There has been, however, no direct link made between  biological effects attributed to nontherm.al microwave origin and an adverse effect in humans.
 The assumption of hazardous nontherma·l effects at low densities of radiation is a fear that has  not been substantiated.69 The demonstration of a biological effect due to microwaves does not  of necessity demonstrate a peril.
Confusion also can result at times between microwaves and  other more harmful radiations.
Microwave radiation is nonionizing and is vastly difft!rcnt  from ionizing radiations such as X rays.
 As a safety precaution, areas of high power density should be fenced off, lockcd, or  otherwise made inaccessible when transmitting.
Personnel should never look into an open  waveguide or antenna feed horn connected to energized transmitters.
When personnel must  work in areas where the power·ctensity is at a dangerous level, they should be protected with  screened enclosures or with protective apparel made from reflective material.
 Another potential safety hazarcl in working with high power is the generation of X rays  when high voltages are used to operate RF power tubes.
Tubes must be properly shielded with  lead, and X-ray safety badges worn by operating personnel to warn of excessive dosage.
 I · ..
j,  REFERENCES  1.
Ridenour, L.
N.: "Radar System Engineering," MIT Radiation Laboratory Series, vol.
1, sec.
2.12,  McGraw-Hilt Book Company, New York, 1947.
 2.
Bachynski, M.
P.: Microwave Propagation over Rough Surfaces, RC A Rev., vol.
20, pp.
308-335,  June, 1959.
.,' ; er.
 l'IWl'AOA TION OF RADAR WAVES 467  \ Sherwood, E.
M ., and E.
L Ginzton: Rcflectioll Coeflicients of I rregu Jar Terrain at 10 Cm, Proc.
I RE,  vol.
4J.
pp.
877 878.
July.
1955.
 4.
lky.
J S., and S.
J.
Parsons;: The Rridar Measurement of Low Angles of Elevation.
Proc.
l'liys.
Soc.
 scr.
B, vol.
69.
pp.
J2 I J2X.
1956.
 5.
Burrows.
C.
R ..
and S.
S.
Allwood: "Radio Wave Propagation," Academic Press.
Inc ..
New York,  1949.
 6.
Reed.
H.
R ..
and C.
M.
Russell:" Ultra High Frequency Propagation," John Wiley & Sons, Inc ..
New  York.
195.l  7.
Norton.
K.
A.: The ( 'alculation of Ground-wave Fick! Intensity over a Finitely Conducting Spherical  Earth.
/'me.
IRE.
vol.
29.
pp.
6n 6J9.
Dec ..
1941.
 8.
Domh.
C..
and M.
II.
L Pryce: The Calculation or Field Strengths over a Spherical Earth.
J.
IEE.
 vol.
94.
pl.
Ill.
pp.
325 JJ9.
1947.
·  9.
Senior.
T B.
i\.: Radio Propagation over a Discontinuity in the Earth's Electrical Properties.
Proc.
 IEE.
pt C ,ol.
104.
pp.
43 5l 139 147, Mar..
1957.
 Ill.
Blake.
L V.: Machine Plotting of Radio/Radar Vertical-Plane Coverage Diagrams, Nara/ Research  Lahonlfor_r.
ll'ashi11gto11, D.C..
Report 7098, June 25, 1970 (AD 709897).
 11.
Smith.
E.
K ..
and S.
Weintraub: The Constants in the Equation for Atmospheric Refractive Index at  Radio Frequencies.
Proc.
IRE.
vol.
41.
pp.
1035-1037, August, 1953.
 12 Hean.
R.
R.
E.
J.
Dutton.
and 8.
D.
Warner: Weather Effects on Radar, chap.
24 of" Radar Hand­ book." M.
I.
Skolnik (ed.), McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York, 1970.
 1.1 Sclll'l[iug.
J.C ..
C.R.
Burrows.
and F B.
Fcrn:11: Ultra-short Wave Propagation.
Proc.
IRE.
vol.
21.
 pp.
427 463.
March.
193:l  14.
Jay.
F.
(editor in chief): "IEEE Standard Dictionary of Electrical and Electronic Terms," 2d ed.
John  Wiley & Sons.
Inc., New York.
1977.
 15.
Bean.
B.
R.: The Geographical and Height Distribution of the Gradient of Refractive Index, Proc.
 IRE.
vol 41.
pp.
549 550.
April.
1953.
 I 6.
Bean.
B.
R ..
B.
A.
Cahoon.
C.
A.
Samson.
and G.
D.
Thayer: "A World Atlas of Atmospheric Radio  Rdractivity." U.S.
Dept.
of Commerce.
ESSA {\fonograph I.
1966.
 17.
Bean.
U.
R., and G.
D.
Thayer: Models of Atmospheric Radio Refractive Index.
Proc.
I RE.
vol.
47.
 rr 740 755.
May.
1959.
·  lX.
Fannin.
B.
M.
and K.
H.
Jelm: A Study or Radar Elevation-angle Errors Due to Atmospheric  Refraction.
I RE Trans ..
vol.
AP-5.
pp.
71-77.
January.
1957.
 19.
Ala kc.
L V.: Ray Hei~ht Computation for a Continuous Nonlinear Atmospheric Refractive-Index  Profile.
Radio Science.
vol.
3, pp.
85 92, January.
1968.
 20.
Bean.
B.
R.
and B.
/\.
Cahoon: The Use of Surface Weather Observations to Predict the Total  Atmospheric Bending of Radio Rays al Small Elevation Angles, Proc.
IRE, vol.
45, pp.
1545-1546.
 November.
1957.
 21.
Bean.
B.
R ..
G.
D.
Thayer.
and 8.
A.
Cahoon: Methods of Predicting the Atmospheric Bending of  Radio Rays.
Natl.
Bur.
S1w1d(lrds (U.S.) J.
Researc/1, vol.
64D.
pp.
487-492, September/October.
1960.
 22.
Gallop.
M.A., Jr .• and L.
E.
Telford: Estimation of Tropospheric Refractive Bending from Atmos- pheric Emission Measurements.
Radio Science, vol.
8, pp.
819-827, October, 1973.
·  23.
Millman.
y.
H.: Atmospheric Effects on VHF and UHF Propagation, Proc.
I RE, vol.
46.
 pp 1492 l~OI.
August.
1958.
 24 Crane.
R.
K.: Ionospheric Scintillation.
Proc.
IEEE.
vol.
65.
pp.
180-199.
February, 1977.
 25.
Meteorological Aspects of Radio-Radar Propagation.
Nary Weather Research Facility, Norfolk, VA.
 NWRF 31-0660-035, 1960.
 26.
Hattan.
L.
J.: "Radar Meteorology." University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 1959.
 27.
Purves.
C.
G.: Geophysical Aspects or Atmospheric Refraction, Nai,al Research Laboratory, Washing­ ton.
O.C.
Report 7725, June 7.
1974.
 2X.
Kerr.
D.
E.
(ed.):" Propagation of Short Radio Waves," MIT Radiation Laboratory Series, vol.
D.
 Mc{jraw-llill Book Company, New York.
1951.
 29.
Ringwalt.
D.
L..
and F.
C.
Macdonald: Elevated Duct Propagation in the Tradewinds, I RE Trans.,  vol.
AP-9, pp.
377-383, July, 1961.
 .,o.
Guinard.
N.
W., J.
Ransone, D.
Randall, C Purves, and P.
Watkins: Propagation Through an  Flcvated Ouct: Tradewinds Ill, IEEE Trans., vol.
AP-12, pp.
479-490, July, 1964 .
 .l 1.
Hattan.
L.
J.: "Radar Observation of the Atmosphere." University of Chicago Press.
Chicago.
1973 .
 .'2.
Booker, H.
G.: Elements of Radio Meteorology: How Weather and Climate Cause Unorthodox  Radar Vision beyond the Geometrical Horizon.
J.
I EE, vol.
93, pt IHA, pp.
69-78, 1946.
 J3.
Saxton.
J.
A.: The lnnuence of Atmospheric Conditions ·on Radar Performance, J.
Inst.
Navigation  (Lo11do11).
vol.
11.
pp.
290 303.
1958.
 468 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  34.
Rotheranr, S.: Radiowave Propagation in the Evaporation Duct, The Marconi Review, vol.
37,  pp.
18-40, First Quarter, 1974.
 35.
Schneider, A.: Oversea Radar Propagation Within a Surface Duct, IEEE Truns., vol.
AP-I 7,  pp.
254-255, March, 1969.
 36.
Hitney, H.
V.: Radar Detection Range Under Atmospheric Ducting Conditions, IEEE 1975-ltiterna­ tional Radar Conference, Arlington, Va., pp.
241-243, lEEE Publication 75 CHO 938-1 AES.
 37.
Katzin, M., R.
W.
Bauchman, and W.
Binnian: 3-and 9-Centimeter Propagation in Low Ocean Ducts,  Proc.
IRE, vol.
35, pp.
891-905, September, 1947.
 38.
Friichtenicht, H.
W.: Notes on Duct Influences on Line-of-Sight Propagation, IEEE Trans.,  vol.
AP-22, pp.
295-302, March, 1974.
 39.
Stewart, C.H., and G.
J.
Vincent: Radar-Tracking Accuracy lncrcast:d, Electro11ics, vol.
37, pp.
73 75.
 May 4, 1964.
 40.
Bean, B.
R., and E.
J.
Dutton:" Radio Meteorology," National Bureau of Standards Monograph 92,  Mar.
I, 1966.
 41.
Crain, C.
M.: Survey of Airborne Microwave Refractometer Measurements, Proc.
I RE, voL 43,  pp.
1405-1411, October, 1955.
 42.
Schaper, L.
W., Jr., D.
H.
Staelin, and J.
W.
Waters: The Estimation of Tropospheric Electrical Path  Length by Microwave Radiometry, Proc.
IEEE, vol.
58, pp.
272-273, February, 1970.
 43.
Skolnik, M.
I.: Radar Horizon and Propagation Loss, Proc.
IRE, vol.
45, pp.
697-698, May, 1957.
 44.
Van Vleck, J.
H.: The Absorption of Microwaves by Oxygen, Phys.
Rev., vol.
71, pp.
413 424, Apr.
I.
 1947.
 45.
Van Vleck, J.
H.: The Absorption of Microwaves by Uncondenscd Water Vapor, Phys.
Rev., vol.
71.
 pp.
425-433, Apr.
l, 1947.
 46.
Straiton, A.
W., and C.
W.
Tolbert: Anomalies in the Absorption of Radio Waves by Atmospheric  Gases, Proc.
IRE, vol.
48, pp.
898-903, May, 1960.
 47.
Blake, L.
V.: Prediction of Radar Range, chap.
2 of" Radar Handbook," M.
I.
Skolnik (ed.), McGraw­ Hill Book Company, New York, 1970.
 48.
Ko, H.
C.: The Distribution of Cosmic Radio Background Radiation, Proc.
IRE, vol.
46, pp.
208-215,  January, 1958.
 49.
Menzel, D.
H.: "The Radio Noise Spectrum," Harvard University Press, Cambridge, Mass., 1960.
 50.
Greene, J.C., and M.
T.
Lebenbaum: Letter in Microwave J., vol.
2, pp.
13-14, October, 1959.
 51.
Hogg, D.
C.: Effective Antenna Temperature Due to Oxygen and Water Vapor in the Atmosphere, J.
 Appl.
Phys., vol.
30, pp.
1417-1419, September, 1959.
 52.
Hogg, D.
C., and W.W.
Mumford: The Effective Noise Temperature of the Sky, Microwave J, vol.
3,  pp.
80-84, March, 1960.
 53.
Schonland, 8.
F.
J.: "The Flight of Thunderbolts," 2d ed., Oxford, Clarendon Press, London.
1964  54.
Crichlow, W.
Q., D.
F.
Smith, R.
N.
Morton, and W.
R.
Corliss: Worldwide Radio Noise Levels  Expected in the, Frequency Band 10 Kilocycles to 100 Megacycles, Natl.
Bur.
Standards (U.S.) Cin:.
 557, Aug.
25, 1955.
 55.
Spaulding, A.
D.: The Electromagnetic Interference Environment: Man-Made Noise, pt.
1: Estima  lion of Business, Residential and Rural Areas, Office of Telecomm11nicatio11s, U.S.
Departmet1t vf  Commerce, 1974.
 56.
Pawsey, J.
L., and R.
N.
Bracewell:" Radio Astronomy," Oxford University Press, London, 1955.
 57.
Wild, J.
P.: Observational Radio Astronomy, Advances in Electronics and Electrott Physics, vol.
7,  1955.
 58.
Graf, W., R.
N.
Bracewell, J.
H.
Deuter, and J.
S.
Rutherford: The Sun as a Test Source for Boresight  Calibration of Microwave Antennas, IEEE Trans., vol.
AP-19, pp.
606-612, September, 1971.
 59.
Baars, J.
W.
M.: The Measurement of Large Antennas with Cosmic Radio Sources," I £EE Trans.,  vol.
AP-21, pp.
461-474, July, 1973.
 60.
Staelin, D.
H.: Passive Remote Sensing at Microwave Wavelengths, Proc.
IEEE, vol.
57, pp.
427-439,  April, 1969.
 61.
Greene, J.: Antenna Noise Temperature, AIL Advertisement, Proc.
IRE, vol.
46, p.
2a, May, 1958.
 62.
Salisbury, W.
W.: The Resnatron, Electronics, vol.
19, pp.
92-97, February, 1946.
 63.
Mumford, W.
W.: Some Technical Aspects of Microwave Radiation Hazards, Proc.
I RE, vol.
49,  pp.
427-447, February, 1961.
 64.
Schwan, H.
P., and K.
Li: Hazards Due to Total Body Irradiation by Radar, Proc.
IRE, vol.
44,  pp.
1572-1581, November, 1956.
 65.
Leary, F.: Researching Microwave Health Hazards, Electronics, vol.
32, no.
7, pp.
49-53, Feb.
20,  19.59.
 PROPAGATION OF RADAR WAVES 469  66.
Mumford, W W.: Heat Stress Due to RF Radiation, Proc.
IEEE; vol.
57, pp.
171-178, February,  1969.
 67.
Setler, L R ..
D.R.
Snavely, D.
L Solem, and R.
F.
Van Wye:" Regulations, Standards, and Guides for  Microwaves.
Ultraviolet Radiation, and Radiation from Lasers and Television Receivers-An An- 11olaled Bihliography," U.S.
Dept of Health, Education, and Welfare, Public Health Service Publica­ tion no.
999-R H-35.
April.
1969.
 68 Srecial lsmc 011 Biological Effects of Microwaves, IEEE Trans., vol.
MTT-19, February, 1971.
 69 Justesen.
I> R.: Diathermy Versus the Microwaves and Other Radio-frequency Radiations: A Rose by  lrnotl1er N:unc is a Cahhage.
Radio Science, vol.
12, pp.
355 364, May-June.
1977.
 70.
Ament, W.
S.: Toward a Theory of Reflection by a Rough Surface, Proc.
IRE, vol.
41, pp.
142 146.
 January, 195.l  71.
Beard, C.
I.
I.
Kat1, and L.
M.
Spetner: Phenomenological Vector Model of Microwave Reflection  from the Ocean, I RE Trans., vol.
AP-4, pp.
162-167, April, 1956.
 72.
Beard.
C I.: Coherent and Incoherent Scattering of Microwaves from the Ocean, I RE Trans.,  vol.
t\P-9, pp.
470-483, Sept., 1961.
 D.
Beard, C.
I., D.
L.
Drake, and C.
M.
Morrow: Measurements of Microwave Forward Scattering from  the Ocean al L-Band, IEEE NA ECON '74 Record, pp.
269-274, 1974.
 74.
Spetner, L.
M.: Incoherent Scattering of Microwaves from the Ocean, Radio Science, vol.
10,  pp.
585--587, June, 1975.
 75.
Brown, B.
P.: Radar Height Finding, chap.
22 of" Radar Handbook," M.
I.
Skolnik (ed.), McGraw­ Hill Rook Company.
New York.
1970.
 76.
Kanevskii, M.
B.: The Propagation of Millimeter and Centimeter Waves in Tropospheric Waveguides  Close to the Sea, S<wiet Radiophysics, vol.
9, no.
5, pp.
867-875, l 966.
 77.
Joseph, R.
I., and G.D.
Smith: Propagation in an Evaporation Duct: Results in Some Simple Analytic  Models.
Radio Science, vol.
7, pp.
433-441, April, 1972.
 78.
Richter, J.
H..
and H.
V.
Hitney: The EITect of the Evaporation Duct on Microwave Propagation,  Nai•al Electronics Lahoratory Center, San Diego, California, Technical Report 1949, Apr., 17 1975.
 79.
Hitney.
H.
V., and J.
H.
Richter: Integrated Refractive Effects Prediction System (IREPS), Naval  Engineers Jo11mal, vol.
2, pp.
257 262, April, 1976.
 80.
Hitney, H.
V., and J.
H.
Richter: Integrated Refractive Effects Prediction System (IREPS).
URSI  Commission F Open Symposium, Propagation in Non-Ionized Media, La Baule, France, Apr.
28 to  May 6.
1977.
 {  CHAPTER  THIRTEEN  RADAR CLUTTER  13.1 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR CLUTfER  Clutter may be defined as any unwanted radar echo.
Its name is descriptive of the fact that  such echoes can ••clutter" the radar output and make difficult the detection of wanted targets.
 Examples of unwanted echoes, or clutter, in a radar designed to detect aircraft include the  reflections from land, sea, rain, birds, insects, and chaff.
Unwanted echoes might also be  obtained from clear~air turbulence and other atmospheric effects, as well as from ionized  media such as the aurora and meteor trails.
Clutter is generally distributed in spatial extent, in  that it is usually much larger in physical size than the radar resolution cell.
There are also  "point" clutter echoes, such as towers, poles, and similar objects.
The echo from a single  bird is also an example of point clutter.
When clutter echoes are sufficiently intense and  extensive, they can limit the sensitivity of a radar receiver, and thus determine the range  performance.
In such circumstances, the optimum radar waveform and receiver design can be  quite different than when receiver noise alone is the dominant effect.
 Radar echoes from land, sea, rain, birds, and other such objects are not always undesired.
 Reflections from storm clouds, for example, can be a bother to a radar that must see aircraft.
 but storm clouds are what the radar meteorologist wants to see in order to measure rainfall  rate over a large area.
The backscatter echoes from land can degrade the performance of many  radars; but it is the target of interest for a ground-mapping radar, for remote sensing of the  earth resources, and for most synthetic-aperture radars.
Thus the same object might be the  desired target in one application, and the undesired clutter echo in another.
 In this chapter, the echoes from land, sea, and weather will be considered only for their  harmful effects; that is, as clutter to be avoided or eliminated.
The characteristics of clutter will  be described as well as the various methods for reducing their harmful effects when they  interfere with the detection of desired targets.
 Echoes from the )and or the sea are known as surface clutter, and echoes from rain or  other atmospheric phenomena are known as volume clutter.
Because of its distributed nature,  the measure of the backscattering echo from such clutter is generally given in terms of a  470  RADAR C'LllTTFR 471  radar-cross-section dl'11sity rather ·than the radar cross section as was described for conven­ tional targets in Sec.
2.7.
For surface clutll:r a cross section per unit area is defined as  (I  (I = (LU)  where r,c is the radar cross section from the area :lc.
The symbol l'T0 is spoken.
and sometimes  written.
as si411w :ero.
The advantage of using an expression such as Eq.
( 13.1) to describe  distributed surface clutter is that it is usually independent of the area Ac.
For volume dis­ tributed clutter a cross section per unit volume.
or reflectivity, is defined as  (TC  If= 1 ·  ( (IJ.2)  where l'Tc in this case is the radar cross section from the volume V,..
 IJ.2 SURFACE-CLUTl'ER RADAR EQUATIONS  Consider the geometry of Fig.
13.1 which depicts a radar illuminating the surface at a grazing  angle </>.
It is assumed that the width of the area Ac is determined by the azimuth beamwidth  On, but that the dimension in the range dimension is determined by the radar pulse width r  rather than the elevation beamwidth.
Using the simple radar equation of Sec.
1.2, the power  C received from the clutter is  Radar(.
 (a)  Rodar  ~ 69  (bl P, GA,.ac C = ---------(4rr)2 R4  Clutter  0 0 0 0  0 0  0  0 0 0  0  0 0 0 0  0  R68 ( 13.3)  0 0  0 0  0 0 0  0 0 0 0  0  Figure lJ.I Geometry or radar clutter.
(a) Elevation view showing the extent of the surface intercepted by  the radar pulse, (b) plan view showing clutter patch consisting of individual, independent scatterers.
 472 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  where P, = transmitter power  G = antenna gain  Ae = antenna effective aperture  R = range  <J, = clutter cross-section, which is equal fO  <Ic= a0Ac= a0ROB(cr/2)sec <P ( 13.4)  where c = velocity of propagation.
With this substitution the radar equation for surface clutter  IS  C = !\lrA.,a00'!.{~r/2) sec 1p  (4n:)2R3  Thus the echo from surface clutter varies inversely as the cuhe of the rangi/,  inversely as the fourth power as is the case for point targets.
 The signal power S returned from a target with cross section a1 is  S _ -~1GA.,a!  -(4n:)2 R4 (IJ.5)  rather than  ( 13.6)  Combining Eqs.
(13.5) and (13.6), the signal-to-clutter ratio for a target in a background of  surface clutter at low grazing angle is  s d,  sec <P ( 13.7)  If the maximum range Rmax corresponds to the minimum discernible signal-to-clutter ratio  (S/C)min, then the radar equation can be written  cr1  Rmax = (S/C)min cr00B(cr/2) sec <P (13.8)  In this equation, the clutter power C is assumed large compared to receiver noise power.
This  is an entirely different form of the radar equation than when the target detection is dominated  by receiver noise alone.
The range in Eq.
(13.8) appears as the first power rather than as the  fourth power in the usual radar equation of Eq.
(13.6).
This means there is likely to be greater  variation in the maximum range of a clutter-dominated radar than a noise-dominated radar.
 For example, if the target cross section in Eq.
(13.8) were to vary by a factor of two, the  maximum range would also vary by a factor of two.
However, the same variation in target  cross section would only cause a variation in range of a factor of 1.2 when the radar perfor­ mance is determined by receiver noise.
 There are other significant differences in Eq.
(13.8) that should be noted.
The transmitter  power does not appear explicitly.
Increasing the transmitter power will indeed increase the  target signal, but it will also cause a corresponding increase in clutter.
Thus there is no net gain  in the detectability of desired targets.
The only demand on the transmitter power is that it be  great enough to cause the clutter power at the radar receiver to be large compared to receiver  noise.
If otherwise, Eq.
(13.8) would not apply.
 The antenna gain does not enter, except as fr is affected by the azimuth beam width 08.
 The narrower the pulse width the greater the range.
This is just opposite to the case of  conventional radar detection of targets in noise.
A long pulse is desired when the radar is  limited by noise in order to increase the signal-to-noise ratio.
When clutter dominates noise, a  long pulse decreases the signal-to-clutter ratio.
(When pulse compression is used, the pul1:,e  RADAR CLUTIER 473  width r in Eq.
( I 18} is that of the comprcssccf pulsc.f If the statistics of the clutter echoes arc  similar to the statistics of receiver noise, then the signal-to-clutter ratio in Eq.
(13.8) can be  selected similar lo that for signal-to-noise ratio as described in Chap.
2.
(It will be seen in  Sec.
13.3 that a decrease in pulse width can change the nature of the clutter statistics in some  cases and might negate the benefits or the greater signal-to-clutter ratio obtained with the  short pulse.) The improvement in range due to the integration or n pulses is not indicated in  this equation.
There can be a considcrahlc difference in the integration improvement when  clutter-limited from when noise-limited.
Clutter echoes, unlike receiver noise, might be cor­ related pulse to pulse.
especially if the clutter is stationary relative to the radar.
Receiver noise  is usually decorrelated in a time equal to 1/B, where B = receiver (IF) bandwidth.
The decor­ relation time of clutter is usually much greater than this.
 Next consider the case where the radar observes surface clutter near perpendicular  incidence.
(At perpendicular incidence the grazing angle¢, is 90°.) The clutter area viewed by  the radar will be determined by the antenna beamwidths 08 and </>8 in the two principal planes.
 The area Ac in Eq.
(13.l) is (n/4)R0 8R</>8 sin¢, where¢, grazing angle.
The factor rri4  accounts for the elliptical shape of the area.
Substituting A, into Eq.
( 13.3) and taking  G = n2/08</J8,69 the clutter radar equation is  C = 3_~r__Aea0  64R2 sin <p ( 13.9)  The clutter power is seen to vary inversely as the square of the range.
Equation (13.9) applies.
 for example, to the signal received from the ground by a radar altimeter.
An equation for  detecting a target in this type of clutter background could be derived, but it is a situation not  often found in practice.
 In describing the geometry or surface clutter, the incidence angle and the depression angle  are sometimes used instead of I he grazing angle.
These are shown in Fig.
13.2.
The incidence  angle is defined relative to the normal to the surface; the grazing angle is defined with respect to  the tangent to the surface, and the depression a11gle is definecj with respect to the local horizon­ tal at the radar.
When the earth's surface can be considered flat, the depression angle and the  grazing angle are the same.
When the earth's curvature must be considered, these two angles  are not equal.
The incidence angle is preferred when considering earth backscatter effects from  near perpendicular incidence, as in the case of the altimeter.
The grazing angle is the preferred  measure in most of the other radar applications, and will be the angle used in this chapter.
 Descriijtions presented in this chapter of radar scattering from the land and the sea are by  no means complete.
Perhaps the chief difficulty in trying to understand the nature of clutter is  the lack of adequate quantitative descriptions of the nature of the scattering objects.
In this  respect, the information regarding radar scattering from the sea is probably better understood  than radar scattering from the land.
The state of the sea is determined primarily by the  Rodar /:.
 ·, ··, Dep,ess,on  angle  '·  Grazing ··,,  angle·-· Incidence angle  Figure 13.2 Angles used in describing geometry of  the radar and surface clutter.
 474 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  strength of the wind and the distance and time over which the wind has been blowing.
Thus the  sea in the North Atlantic is not that much different from the sea in the South Pacific if the wind  conditions are the same, Land clutter, on the other hand, is highly dependent on the nature of  the terrain and the local conditions.
Urban areas, cultivated fields, forests, mountains, desert,  and tundra all can produce different radar echoes.
Furthermore, radar scattering from land is  affected by rain, snow cover, the type of vegetation or crops, the time of year, the presence of  streams and lakes, and man-made objects interspersed among the terrain.
There can be  considerable variability in both land and sea clutter.
This inherent variability must be under­ stood and properly accounted for in radar system design.
 13.3 SEA CLUTI'ER  The echo from the surface of the sea is dependent upon the wave height, wind speed, the length  of time and the distance (fetch) over which the wind has been blowing, direction of the waves  relative to that of the radar beam, whether the sea is building up or is decreasing, the presence  of swell as well as sea waves, and the presence of contaminants that might affect the surface  tension.
The sea echo also depends on such radar parameters as frequency, polarization,  grazing angle, and, to some extent, the size of the area under observation.
Although there is  much that is known about the nature of sea clutter, the quantitative, and sometimes even the  qualitative, effects of many of the 'above factors are not known to the degree often desired.
The  relative uniformity of the sea over the oceans of the world makes it easier to deal with sea  clutter than with land clutter, but it is difficult to collect data at sea under the controlled and  reproducible conditions necessary to establish quantitative causal relationships.
In spite of the  limitations, there does exist a body of information regarding the radar echo from the sea, some  of which will be reviewed· briefly in this section.
 Average value of a0• A composite average of sea clutter data is shown in Fig.
13.3.
1 This is a  plot of the mean cross section per unit area, a0, as a function of grazing angle for various  frequencies and polarizations.
It does not correspond to any particular set of experimental  l l •1 ,  data, but it represents what might be typical of" average" conditions.
It was derived from a  body of data that extended from JO: to 20-knot wind speeds.
(The uncertainty of the data  ought to have been indicated in tl1i& figure by making the vertical thickness of each curve at  least ± 3 dB wide.
Th~s was not done so as to avoid the confusion that would be caused by the  wide overlap of the curv~s.) .
.
' .
 The sea state is a measure o(the wave height, as shown in Table 13.l.
Although the sea  state is commonly used to describe radar sea-clutter measurements, it is not a complete  measure in itself since, as 'mentioned above, the radar sea echo depends on many other factors.
 Sea clutter is also sometimes described by the wind speed, but likewise it is not a suitable  measure by itself.
Unfortunately, the reporting of radar sea echo measurements is sddorn  accompanied by a complete description of the sea and wind conditions.
 Variation with grazing angle.
There are usually identified three scattering regions according  to the grazing angle.
At near vertical incidence (4> ~ 90°) the radar echo is relatively large.
 This is called the quasi-specular region and seems to be the result of specular scatter from  facetlike surfaces oriented perpendicular to the direction of the radar.
At the other extreme,  when the grazing angles are.
low, of the order of several degrees or less, a0 decreases very  rapidly with decreasing angle.
This is called the interference region since the direct wave and i  m  0  -10  --20  ITJ  -~~ ()  b -30  40  50  -60  -70 X ANDL  iVERT.ANDH7  X(VF.RT POL)  10 L(HOR.
POL.}  220MHz.
(HOR.
POL.)  20 30 40 50 60  GRAZING ANGLE (degrees) 70 80 RADAR CLUTIER 475  90  Figure LU Composite of r1° data for average conditions with wind speeds ranging from 10 to 20 knots.
 the wave scattered from the sea surface are out of phase and produce destructive interference.
 (The interference region is not well defined at the higher microwave frequencies plotted in  Fig.
I .1 .
.1.) The angular region hetween the interference region and the quasi•specular region  is the plateau, or ditfi,se, region.
The chief scatterers are those components of the sea that are  of a dimension comparable to the radar wavelength (Bragg scatter).
Scattering in this region  i, similar to that from a rough surface.
 r  Table 13.1 World Meteorological· Organization sea  state  ····················--- Wave height  Sea stale Feet Meiers Descriptive term  0 0 0 Calm, glassy  I 0 i 0-0.1 Calm, rippled  2 ! ·· 1 j 0.1 0.5 Smooth, wavelets  _:\ 2-4 0.6-1.2 Slight  4 4-R l.2-2.4 Moderate  5 8·-13 2.4-4.0 Rough  6 13-20 4.0-6.0 Very rough  7 20 JO 6.0 9.0 High  8 30-45 9.0-14 Very high  9 over 45 over 14 Phenomenal  476 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  Variation with frequency and polarization.
From Fig.
13.3, the value of a0 is seen to be  essentially independent of frequency for vertical polarization, except at low grazing angles.
 With horizontal polarization, the clutter echo decreases with decreasing frequency.
This is  most pronounced at the lower grazing angles.
The effect of polarization on a0 also depends on  the wind, as mentioned below.
 Variation with wind.1-4 Except at grazing angles near normal incidence, the value of a0  increases with increasing wind speed.
The backscatter is quite low with winds less than about  5 knots, increases rapidly with wind speeds from about 5 to about 20 knots, and increases  less rapidly at higher wind speeds.1 An example is shown in Fig.
13.4.3 This is a composite·  plot of experimental X-band data obtained at three different locations and at three different  times for a grazing angle of 10°.
(The data represented by the solid circles were obtained  in the Bermuda area; the x's in the North Atlantic; and the triangles, off .Puerto Rico.)  The dashed curve in each figure is drawn as if all three sets of data were from a single  population.
This curve is of the form exp ( -c/ U) where c is an arbitrary constant and U is  the wind speed.
When all three sets of data are considered as one, the dashed curve shows a  saturation of a0 with wind speed above about 20 knots.
However, conclusions drawn from  viewing the three sets of data as a whole may not be fully valid because of the accuracy with  -30 - -40 in u  0  b -50  -60 X ---•-----·-x-7-=- • ,t X X X  -?oo~~~5~~-10~~~15~~2~0~~2~5~~3~0~~3~5~~4~0~~4~5~~50  W,nd velocity {knots)  -30>- -40- CD u  15' -50 - -60-(a)  A A X  6 6 A_-------.-.!..--x-x---x-x-----x-- A,  A ,;/.;,.
...
•--e e X  / .
/x  I - cJ I• I  A I - -70~~~'~~~~~·~~~·~~~·~~~'~~~1~~~1~~·~~  0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50  Wind velocity (knots)  (bl  Figure 13.4 Median value of u0 as a function of wind speed, for X band and 10° grazing angle.
(a) Vertical  polarizarion, (b) horizontal polarization.
(After Daley, et al.3) ._;)  RADAR CLUTTER 477  which such measuremen ls can be made.
The solid curves of Fig.
13.4a, therefore, are drawn  for each separate set of data.
(A similar set could be drawn for (b).) There is also a saturation  effect evident when the three sets of data are considered separately, but it is not as  pronounced as when the three sets of data are considered as one.
Over the range from lO  to 20 knots, a0 increases at a rate of about 0.5 dB/kn.
Above 30 knots the increase is about  O.
l dB/kn.
Similar behavior is exhibited at 30° grazing angle.
The effect of wind at C band is  like that at X band.
At lower frequencies, however, the variation of <1° with wind is less  pronounced.
 The energy backscattered from the sea will depend on the direction of the wind relative  to the direction of the radar antenna beam.
It is generally higher when the radar beam looks  into the wind than when looking downward or crosswind.
There might be rrom 5 to to dB  variation in a0 as the antenna scans 360" in azimuth.
ft has been found4 that the backscatter  is more sensitive to wind direction at the higher radar frequencies than at the lower frequencies,  that horizontal polarization is more sensitive to wind direction than is vertical polarization,  that the ratio of a0 measured upwind to that measured downwind decreases with increasing  grazing angle and sea state, and that at UHF the backscatter is practically insensitive to  wind direction at grazing angles greater than ten degrees.
 When viewing the sea at or near vertical incidence the backscatter is greatest with a calm  sea and decreases with increasing wind.
One set of c.lata5 gives the value of a0 at short wave­ lengths to be proportional to u-0·6, where U is the wind speed.
 The wind has hccn assumed here to he a driving force in determining the radar back­ scatter from the sea.
It is indeed, hut the relation between the wind and the sea conditions is  complex: hence.
so will be the relation between the ·wind and the radar backscatter.
The  capillary waves and the short gravity waves build up quickly with the wind so that· the value  of a0 measured with radars at the higher microwave rrequencies should be quite responsive to  wind conditions.
The longer gravity waves require a finite time to build up and reach  saturation: hence, the wind alone might not be a true measure of sea conditions unless account  is taken of the length of time and the distance (fetch) over whic11 the wind has been blowing.
 Thus radars at the lower frequencies which are more responsive to the longer gravity waves  might experience a value of <r0 that does not seem responsive to the immediate value or wind  speed.
Another complicating factor is tile breaking or waves and the generation of spray, foam,  or whitecaps which have an effect on the radar backscatter.
The presence of swell waves  along with the wind-driven sea can also affect the radar backscatter.
Still another important  factor when attempting to understand the effect of the wind on sea clutter is the difficulty  in accuratelf estimating wind speed at sea.6 .
 Effect of pulse width.
In principle, the value of 0'0, the sea backscatter per unit area, is  imkpcndcnt of the illuminated area.
In practice, the area illuminated by the radar does affect  the nature of the backscatter.
This is especially so with short-pulse radars.
When the radar  resolution is suniciently small it is found that the sea echo is not spatially uniform, but is  composed or"occasional" individual targellike echoes of short duration that result in a spiky  appearance on a radar display.
On an A-scope display it is found that $ea clutter appears more  spiky ror horizontal than ror vertical polarization, when the radar looks up or downwind  rather than crosswind, at low radar frequencies rather than for high, and for low grazing angles  rather than for high grazing anglcs.7 To resolve the individual spikes the' radar pulse width  should he several tens of nanoseconds rather than microseconds.
An individual spike might  have a radar cross section at X hand of the order of magnitude of one square meter (more  or less).
and can often last for several seconds.8 10 Spikes can give rise to excessive false  alarms in some radar applicatiPns.
These spikes seem to he associated with breaking waves.
 478 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  According to Long,9 about half the time the whitecap forms either simultaneously with  the appearance of a radar spike or a fraction of a second thereafter, leading to the conclusion  that the whitecap occurs after the radar spike develops.
The greater the duration of the spike,  the greater the size and duration of the whitecap.
A spike echo can appear without the  presence of a whitecap, but no whitecap is observed in the absence of a spike.
The spike echo  at X band is amplitude modulated with frequencies of the order of 50 Hz and with a high  modulation index.
The spiky nature of sea echo indicates that the breaking of water waves  plays an important role in producing backscatter.
119  ln addition to changes in clutter characteristics with narrow pulse widths, changes are  also noted with narrow beamwidths.
It has been reported 11 that at X hand, small ships stand  out much better with a 2° horizontal beamwidth antenna than when illuminated by a 0.85°  beamwidth antenna.
This is contrary to what would normally be expected if the clutter were  uniform.
J  Thus, as the resolution cell size is decreased the nature of the sea clutter changes.
The  changes can have a profound effect on radar performance.
The individual resolved spikes can  cause false alarms.
Raising the receiver threshold level to reduce the false alarms can result  in a significant loss in sensitivity to desired targets.
This negates the benefit of the increased  signal-to-clutter ratio achieved by high resolution as expressed by Eq.
(13.8) for the detection  of targets in clutter.
(As will be discussed in Sec.
13.4 there are techniques for receiver  detector-design that can avoid ~uch of this loss.) A corollary consequence of high resolution  is a change in the probability density function of the sea echo, as described next.
 .·,,;  Probability density function of sea .clutter.
The amplitude of sea clutter is characterized by  statistical fluctuations which.must:be described.in terms of the probability density function.
 When the echo from the sea can be.
modeled as that from a number of independent, random  scatterers, with no one individual scatterer producing an ec:ho of magnitude commensurate  with the resultant echo from all scatterers, then the amplitude fluctuations of the sea echo is  described by the gaussian probability density function, [Eq.
(2.15)].
The statistical fluctuations  of the envelope v of such an echo at the output of the envelope detector in the radar receiver  is given by the Rayleigh probability density function (pdf), which is  '  .
~(v) ~ !~ exp (-;: ) ( 13.10)  where a is the standard deviation of the enve~ v, which for the Rayleigh pdf is proportional  to the mean value.
(The median value is vln 2 a.) Clutter which conforms to this model is  called Rayleigh clutter.
The Rayleigh pdf applies to sea clutter when the resolution cell, or  area illuminated by the radar, is·relatively large.
Experimental data show, however, that this  distribution does not apply with a high-resolution radar which illuminates only a small area  of the sea.
The probability density function deviates from Rayleigh when the area illuminated  by the radar has a dimension (usually the dimension determined by the pulse width) which  is com parable to, or smaller· than; the water wavelength.' 3 There does not seem to exist any  single analytical form of probability density function that fits all the observed data.
The actual  form of the pdf will depend on the ,size of the· radar.
resolution cell and the sea state.
An  example of sea clutter -statistics is shown :jn Fig.
13.5, which plots the probability that the  clutter will exceed the abscissa, rather than the probability density function.
(The two are  related, however.) It is seen that actual clutter has a greater probability of a large value of sea  clutter than does· Rayleigh clutter~Statcd in other terms, the actual distribution has higher  "tails" than the Rayleigh.,This means that clutter seen by a high-resolution radar will have a  greater likelihood of false alarm' than ·.Rayleigh clutter if the receiver.
is designed in the  a,  C 05  04  0.3  02  01  g 005  <IJ u  >< i O O?  >-0 01  ii 0005  0 E 0002  a._ 0 001  0005 RADAR CLUTIER 479  l.og ·normol  Clutter cross section in dB lo on arbitrary scale  Figure 13.5 Experimental statistics of vertical polarization, X-band sea clutter for two sea states.
Pulse  width= 20 ns.
bcamwidth = 0.5°.
grazing angle= 4.7", range== 2 nmi.
The Rayleigh distribution is  shown for comparison.
Dashed curve shows attempt to fit the sea state 2-3 data to log-normal distrihu­ tion.
(Alier Trunk and Georgc.12)  customary way based on gaussian noise.
To avoid false alarms, the threshold detector at the  output of such a receiver must be set to a higher value than when the clutter is Rayleigh.
 The increased threshold needed to avoid false alarms is significant ( 10 to 20 dB, or more, in  some cases).
 The log-normal probability density function has been proposed to model the clutter  echo with very high-resolution radar and at the higher sea states.
If the clutter cross section  is log normal, the probability density function describing its statistics is  p(oJ = -.~ · exp [----~2 ( In <le )2 ] .,/ 21[ (J(j C 2a (J' m <Jc> 0 (13.lla)  where <J, clutter cross section  a,., median value of a,  a itandard deviation of In <re (natural logarithm)  The probability density function that describes the statistics of the voltage amplitude at the  output of the envelope detector when Eq.
(13.l la) is the clutter input, is given by  (13.llb)  where ,,,,, is the median value of v and u remains the standard deviation of ln <1, .114 A fit  of the Jog~normal probability density function with a = 6 dB to actual data for sea state 2  to 3 is shown in Fig.
13.5.
12 The median value of the theoretical distribution in this case  was equated to the median of the actuaJ data and the O' was selected to minimize the maximum  difference in dB between the theoretical curve and the actual data.
 With many radars that operate in the presence of sea clutter the Rayleigh pdf generally  underestimates the range or values obtained from real clutter, and the log-normal pdf tends to  overestimate the range of variation.
Several other analytical probability density functions that  lie between these two extremes have been suggested for modeling the actual statistical  480 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  variations received from clutter.
One of these is the contaminated-normal pdf which consists  of the sum of two gaussian pdfs of different standard deviations and different relative  weightings.
12 This pdf can be fitted to the data of Fig.
13.5 for sea state l by proper  selection of the parameters.
Other pdf's that have been suggested for approximating non­ Rayleigh sea clutter include the Ricean 13 [Eq.
(2.27) ], the chi-square 1 3 [Eq.
(2.40) ], and a class  of pdf's called the" K-distributions" based on modeling the clutter as a finite two-dimensional  random walk.29 The Weibull pdf has also been examined for modeling sea clutter.14• 15 It is a  two-parameter pdf, like the log normal, but is intermediate between the Rayleigh and the  log normal.
In the Weibull clutter model the amplitude probability density function of the  voltage v out of the envelope detector is  (V)a-1 [ (l')a] p(v) = ex In 2 ~,: exp -In 2 vm (13.12)  .)  where ex is a parameter that relates to the skewness of the distribution (sometimes called the  Weibull parameter), and vm is the median value of the distribution.
By appropriately adjusting  its parameters, the Weibull can be made to approach either the Rayleigh or the log-normal  distributions.
The Rayleigh is actually a member of the Weibull family, and results when  ex= 2.
The exponential pdf is also a member of the Weibull family when ex= 1.
(Further  discussion of the Weibull pdf is given in Sec.
13.5.)  A knowledge of the statistics of the clutter is important in order to properly design a  CF AR (constant false-alarm rate) receiver 115 and to avoid the loss associated with a receiver  detector designed on the basis of the improper statistical model of clutter.
 Theory ofsea clutter.
In the past, attempts were made to exp lair: the mechanism of sea clutter  by reflection from a corrugated surface, 16 by backscatter from the droplets of spray thrown by  the wind into the air above the sea surface, 16• 1 7 or by backscattering from small facets, or  patches, on the sea surface.18 None of these models were able to explain adequately the  eAperimental observations.
The composite surface model, in which the sea is recognized as  composed of a number of waves of different wavelengths and amplitudes, has been more  successful than previous models for describing the mechanism of sea clutter.19·20•118 It is based  on the application of classical scattering theory to a "slightly rough surface" which is  described by the mean-squared-height spectrum of the sea surface.
(By a slightly rough surface  is meant one whose height variations are small compared to the radar wavelength and whose  slopes are small with respect to unity.) The resultant radar backscatter can be interpreted as  that obtained from the component of the sea spectrum which is "resonant" with the radar  wavelength.
That is, the radar wavelength l, is related to the water wavelength .A..., by the  relation  (13.13)  where ¢ = grazing angle.
This is sometimes called the Bragg backscattering reso11a11ce condi­ tion because of its similarity to the X-ray scattering in crystals as observed by Bragg.2 Thus  the radar is responsive only to those water waves which satisfy Eq.
( 13.13 ).
An X-band radar  (l = 3 cm) at zero degrees grazing angle would backscatter from water waves of length 1.5 cm.
 These short water waves are known as capillary waves.
An X-band radar when viewing large  swell waves at low grazing angles in the absence of wind would receive little or no back­ scatter since there would be no capillary waves present, even though the swell might be  large.
As soon as wind appears, capillaries are formed, and the X-band radar will see back­ scatter since water waves are now present that are resonant to the X-band wavelength.
A  RADAR CLUTTER 481  Figure 13.6 Composite rough-surface model of the sea  with the small resonant water waves riding on top of the  larger water waves, resulting in a tilting of the resonant  waves from the horizontal.
 UHF radar (...l.
= 70 cm) at zero degrees grazing angle responds to water waves of length  35 cm.
These are known as gravity waves.
 The effect of the large water waves is to cause a tilting of the scattering surface or the  smaller water waves, as in Fig.
13.6.
The radar wavelengths are usually too short to be  responsive to these long water waves, but the effect of such waves is noted by the tilting  of the smaller water waves which are resonant with the incident radar energy.
The tilting  effect of the large waves is especially important at low grazing angles since the grazing angle  is determined not only by the angle the radar energy makes with the mean sea surface, but  also by the angle of the resonant waves that ride on the large wave structure.
 The composite-model theory of sea clutter seems to account for the experimental results  obtained with vertical polarization better than with horizontal polarization.19 Also, il is more  applicable to the midrange of grazing angles than to very low grazing angles or to near normal  inciucncc.
 There are other effects that should probably be part of any complete theory of sea  clutter.
Such factors include: the shadowing of the waves when the surface is viewed at low  grazing angle; the specular reflection from plane facets when viewed at near normal incidence:  the effect of breaking waves, whitecaps, and foam, especially when the winds are greater than  about 15 to 20 knots; and the presence of refraction effects, such as that due to the evaporation  duct over the surface of the sea, which enhance the propagation of radar waves near zero  grazing angle so that sea clutter is increased at the longer ranges compared to normal  propagation conditions.
 Backscatter from sea ice.
At low grazing angles, as might occur with a shipboa~d radar, there  is little backscattered energy from smooth, flat ice.
On a PPI or similar display the areas of  ice will be dark except perhaps at the edges.
If areas of water are present along with the ice,  the sea clutter seen on the display will be relatively bright in contrast to the ice.
Backscatter  from rough ice, such as floes and pack ice, can produce an effect on the radar display similar  to sea clutter.
However, the backscatter from rough ice can be distinguished from sea clutter  since its patfern on the display will remain stationary from scan to scan but the sea clutter  pattern wilt change with time.33 Measurements made over ice fields in the region of Thule,  Greenland,4 7 indicated the radar backscatter (a0) to :vary linearly with frequency over a range  of grazing angles from I to 10°.
It was also found that a0 was proportional to the elevation  angle over grazing angles from 2° to 10°, but was inversely proportional to grazing angle over  the region from 1 ° to 2°.
(The increase of a0 with decreasing grazing angle is similar to the  behavior of land clutter but not sea clutter.) The scatterometer, a radar which measures cr0 as  a function of incidence angle in the region near vertical incidence, has been used as an ice sensor  and to differentiate between first-year and multi-year ice.65  Radar can also detect large icebergs, especially if they have faces that are nearly per­ pendicular to the radar direction of propagation.33 Icebergs with sloping faces can have a  small echo even though they may be large in size.
Growlers, which are small icebergs large  enough to be of danger to ships, are poor radar targets because of their small size and shape.
 They seem to be more detectable with radar having a moderate resolution rather than a high  resolution.
66  482 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  The backscatter from ice at high grazing angles is complicated by the relative ease of  penetration of radar energy into the ice.
The reflection from the air-ice interface may be  accompanied by a reflection from the underlying ice-water or ice-·land interface.
These reflec­ tions from the two interfaces, as well as multiple internal reflections, can result in radar back­ scatter that varies with the ice thickness, water content of the ice, and radar wavelength.
The  penetration properties of radar energy in ice and snow, especially at UHF or lower frequencies,  can result in serious errors in the height measurement of radar altimeters.67 Under some  conditions, there might be no echo from the top surface of the ice, and if the ice is thick enough  there might be no reflection from the bottom.
When there is a recognizable reflection from  the bottom, the distance measured by an altimeter calibrated on the assumption that propaga­ tion is in air, can be erroneous because the velocity of propagation in ice is 0.535 times that in  air, and in snow it is less by a f~ctor of 0.8.67 Altimeters at the higher microwave frequencies  are less affected by penetration into the ice and are more likely to indicate the air-ice inter- face than UHF altimeters.
.J  Oil slicks.
Oil on the surface of the sea has a smoothing effect on breaking waves, and damps  out the capillary and short gravity waves normally generated by the wind.
Thus oil slicks  appear dark on a radar PPI compared to the surrounding sea and are readily detectable.
 High~resolution X-band radar, for example, can sometimes detect the oil leaking from the  engine of a small boat at anchor, Airborne synthetic-aperture radar has been demonstrated to  locate and map oi\ slicks over a large area.
It is found that vertical polarization produces  higher contrast than horizontal polarization.
At low sea-state and wind it is possible to image  an oil spill of less than 400 liters during the period of spillage.
68  13.4 DETECTION OF TARGETS IN SEA CLUTTER  The ability of a radar to detect targets on or above the sea can be limited by sea clutter as well  as by receiver noise.
The magnitude and extent of the sea clutter seen by the radar will depend  not only on the sea state and wind, but on the radar height.
Radar is used to detect at kast  three different classes of targets over the sea: aircraft, ships, and small objects such as buoys.
 (Navigation radars must also see land-sea boundaries in addition to buoys.) The detection of  such targets in the presence of sea clutter generally requires a different design approach for )  each, although there are similarities among them.
In brief, a radar required to detect aircraft in  the presence of sea clutter would likely employ MTI (moving target indication); a radar for the  detection or buoys and other small objects on the sea would generally be of high resolution  and employ techniques to prevent receiver saturation by large clutter; and a radar designed to  detect ships could be of moderate resolution since the radar cross section of ships is relatively  large.
In the remainder of the section, the various techniques for detecting targets in clutter will  be reviewed.
 MTI.
As mentioned, MTI can be used to separate the moving aircraft targets from the  relatively stationary sea clutter.
Except for some naval applications for the detection of very  low-flying aircraft, the normal detection of aircraft over the sea does not usually represent a  severe MTI design'problem.
Sea clutter is not as strong and does not usually extend to as great  a range as does land clutter.
Thus high-flying aircraft over the sea can be detected at long range  with relatively conventional radar with only a minimal MTI, or even with no MTI in some  cases.
A more severe problem occurs ·when a seaborne radar must operate near land.
Land  clutter can be so large that clutter echoes might enter the radar receiver via the antenn.i  RADAR CLUTTER 483  sidelobes.
In this case, when strong land clutter is a problem, a good MT{ or pulse-doppler  radar is required.
MTI or pulse-doppler radar is also necessary in radar carried by high-nying  aircraft that must detect other aircraft masked by sea clutter.
 Although ships arc moving targets that might be candidates for MTI radar, it is not often  that MTI is needed for this application.
The large cross section or ships generally results in  suitahlc targeHo-clutter ratios with conventional radars.
 Frequenc)·.
The plot of a0 vs.
grazing angle for various frequencies (Fig.
13.3) indicates that  the lower the lrc4ucncy.
the less the sea clutter.
This applies at the lower grazing angles and  with horizontal polarization.
Thus, to reduce clutter, the radar should be at a low frequency.
 There arc some reservations, however.
that would tend to favor the higher frequencies in many  applications.
The lower the frequency, the more difficult it is to direct the radar energy at low  angles.
This is illustrated in Sec.
12.2, which gives the elevation angle of the lowest interference  lobe as )./41,a, where A = wavelength and Ira = antenna height Thus if targets low on the water  are to be seen, higher frequencies may be preferred even if the clutter is greater.
Another  reason for preferring the higher frequencies in some applications, in spite of the larger clutter,  is that greater range-resolution and azimuth-resolution (shorter pulse width and narrower  beam widths) are easier to obtain than at lower frequencies.
The higher resolution usually  results in greater target-to-clutter ratio.
Civil marine radars are available at both S band  ( 10 cm wavelength) and X band (3 cm).
Although both bands have distinctive advantages for  ship application.
when only a single radar is employed it is usually at X band for the reasons  given above.
21 Thus the fact that sea clutter is less at the lower frequencies is but one of several  factors to be considered in the selection of the optimum frequency for a particular radar  application.
 Polarization.
Figure 13.3 indicates that horizontal polarization results in less sea clutter than  vertical, for the sea conditions which apply to that data.
The majority of radars that operate  ov<>:r the sea usually employ horizontal polarization.
Air-surveillance radars with horizontal  polarization achieve greater range than with vertical polarization because of the higher  renection coefficient of horizontal polarization (Sec.
12.2).
A firm conclusion in favor of one  polarization or the other is difficult to make for a civil marine radar, but most sets use  horizontal polarization.21 At high sea states the difference between horizontal and vertical  polarization is said to disappear.
22  Horizontal polarization, as was mentioned in Sec.
13.3, has a probability density functicn  which deviates from Rayleigh more than does vertical polarization when the pulse widths are  short.
The non-Rayleigh nature of the clutter must be properly considered in the detector  design if large increases in the minimum detectable signal-to-clutter ratios are to be avoided.
 Pulse width.
The radar equation that applies to the detection of targets in surface clutter at low  grazing angles (Eq.
13.8) shows that, all other factors remaining constant, the shorter the pulse  width the greater will be the maximum· range.
Decreasing the pulse width decreases the  amount of clutter with which the target must compete.
There are three cautions to remember,  however, when considering the use of Eq.
(13.8).
First, the clutter echo power must be large  compared to the receiver noise power for Eq.
( 13.8) to be valid.
Thus the energy within the  pulse must not be too low.
H the peak power is limited, a short pulse might not have enough  energy to make clutter, rather than receiver noise, dominate.
Pulse compression (Sec.
11.5) can  overcome this limitation of a short pulse since it can achieve a resolution equivalent to that of  a short pulse, but with the energy of a long pulse.
Second, the required signal-to-clutter ratio  depends on the pulse width because of the change in clutter statistics (probability density  484 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  function) with short pulse widths, as discussed in Sec.
13.3.
The changes in clutter statistics  must be accounted for in the detector design, else the large signal-to-clutter ratios required of a  conventional threshold detector might negate any benefit of the shortened pulse.
As mentioned  previously, a radar with a very short pulse (or narrow beamwidth) might prove to be worse  than one with a longer pulse (or a wider beamwidth) because of the change in clutter  statistics.
(Receiver detection-criteria for compensating the effects of a change in clutter sta­ tistics with high resolution are discussed later in this section.) Third, if the pulse is too short, it  might encompass only part of a large target such as a ship, and the target cross section might  be reduced.
However, if the echoes from the various parts of a large target are displayed  without collapsing loss and if the operator knows the general shape of the target, there will be  little, if any, loss in detectability.
 Antenna beamwidth.
The discussion above regarding the benefits and limitations of the short  pulse also apply to the azimuth beamwidth.
The use of high resolution in angle{nd/or range  is the principal method available for detecting a fixed target in clutter, assuming the target  "cross section per unit area" is greater than that of clutter a0.
Too narrow a beamwidth, just  as too narrow a pulse width, is not desired since it can also alter the clutter statistics in an  unfavorable manner.
31  Antenna scan rate.
The sea clutter background does not change significantly during the time  the usual civil-marine radar antenna (with a 20 rpm rotation rate) scans by a particular  clutter patch.
That is, the sea can be considered" frozen" during the observation time.
For a  medium-resolution X-band radar at low grazing angles, the time required for the sea clutter  echo to decorrelate is about 10 ms.16•21 Any pulses received from sea clutter during this time  will be correlated and no improvement in signal-to-clutter ratio will be obtained by intl.!gra­ tion.
(This is unlike receiver noise since integration of signal pulses and noise can provide  significant improvement in signal-to~noise ratio, as described in Sec.
2.6.) Although the clutter  received during a single scan past a target wilt be correlated, the sea surface will usually chang~  by the time of the next antenna scan so that the clutter will be decorrelated from scan to scan.
 Thus scan-to-scan integration can usually result in an improvement of target-to-clutter ratio.
 To make available more independent clutter echoes, the antenna rotation rate can bl.!  increased.21•23 If, for example, the radar antenna has a 2° beamwidth, a pulse repetition  frequency of 3600 Hz, and a 20 rpm rotation rale, there will be 60 pulses returned from a  target on each scan of the antenna.There is little integration improvement obtained from these  60 pulses since they occur within a time (ins) comparable to the decorrelation time for  X-band sea clutter.
If the antenna rotation rate is speeded up to 600 rpm, there will be 2  pulses received during a scan past a target.
(There should be at least 2 pulses per scan rather  than one, in order to avoid a large scanning loss.) On the next scan, one-tenl.h second later, two  additional pulses are received that are decorrelated from the previous two pulses so that an  integration improvement can be obtained.
The number of pulses processed by the slow-speed  and the high-speed antennas are the same.
The 20 rpm antenna receives 60 pulses per scan  with a 3-second rotation period.
In the same 3 seconds, the 600 rpm antenna scans by the  target JO times, receiving two pulses on each scan.
A scan-to-scan integration improvement  can be achieved with the high-speed antenna if the storage properties of the CRT screen permit  efficient integration (as with a storage tube) or if some form of automatic integration is used.
 Experimental measurements using civil-marine radar with a 1 ° beam width and 5000 Hz  pulse repetition frequency show that increasing the antenna rotation rate from 20 to  420 rpm improves the target-to-clutter ratio from about 4 to 8 dB depending on the sea  state.
24 (The smaller improvement corresponds to the higher sea state.) An attempt was also  RADAR CLUTIER 485  made to decorrelate the two pulses received from a target with the high-speed rotation rate by  transmitting each of the two pulses·at a different frequency.
Unex.pectedly, no discernible  improvement was noted when the two frequencies were used instead of a single frequency, even  though the two frequencies were 60 MHz apart.
This would indicate that there is a slowly  fading component of the clutter echo which cannot be decorrelated and is probably similar to  the clutter spikes discussed in Sec.
13.3.
 The decorrelation time of the clutter is approximated by the reciprocal of the width of the  clutter doppler spectrum.
It is found that the width of the frequency spectrum decreases with  decreasing frequency so that the decorrelation time is greater at the lower frequencies than at  the high frequencies.
Normally it would be expected that the decorrelation time would be  linearly proportional to the frequency, since the doppler-frequency shift is also linearly related  to the frequency.
However, experimental measurements show that the ratio of the decorrela­ tion time at L band lo that al X band is less than would be expected if the linear relation  applied.
For example, if the decorrelation time at X band were 10 ms, then it would be about  60 ms at L band, instead of the 70 to 75 ms predicted on the basis of a linear law.
Therefore,  when the clutter spectra are given in units of velocity rather than frequency, the velocity  spectra arc slightly broader at the lower frequencies, an unexpected result.25 The spectra arc  broader for horizontal than for vertical polarization, and increase in width as the square root  of the wave height for both polarizations.
 Observation time.
In the above, a rapid antenna-rotation rate takes advantage of the fact that  the clutter echo changes with time, but the target echo does not.
With a high-resolution radar  (nanoseconds pulse width) the individual sea-clutter spikes, as mentioned in Sec.
13.3, can  persist for several seconds, which is much greater than the to ms decorrelation time quoted for  X-band sea clutter.
The persistence of these sea-clutter spikes makes difficult the detection of  small targets.
such as buoys and small boats.
A single "snapshot" of a PPI would not likely  differentiate the echo of a small target from that of the sea spikes.
The individual sea spikes,  however, will disappear with time and new spikes will appear at other locations.
If it is possible  to observe the radar display for a sufficient period of time, the small targets can be recognized  since they will remain relatively fixed in amplitude while the sea spikes come and go.
The  penalty paid for this procedure is a long observation time.
 Frequency agility.
If the frequency of a pulse of length t is changed by at least 1/t, the echo  from uniformly distributed clutter will be decorrelated.
Thus pulse-to-pulse frequency changes  (frequency .agility) of I /t or greater will decorrelate the clutter and permit an increase in  target-to-clutter ratio when the decorrelated pulses are integrated.
With a high-resolution  radar in which the persistent sea-clutter spikes appear, the benefit of frequency agility is  decreased since the sea spikes are correlated over a relatively long period of time and appear  similar to target echoes.
Thus frequency agility will be of less value the more non-Rayleigh the  clutter statistics.
(If the radar is on a rapidly moving platform, the clutter might also be  decorrelated as the radar resolution cell views a different patch of clutter.)  Receiver detection criteria.
In Chap.
2 the receiver detection criterion was based on the  methods of Marcum and Swerling.
Relationships between threshold levels, probabilities of  detection and false alarm, signal-to-noise ratio, and number of pulses integrated were obtained  using as a model a receiver with the following characteristics: (1) the envelope of the receiver  noise at the output of the IF filter was described by the Rayleigh probability density function  (pdf); (2) the envelope detector had either a linear or a square-law characteristic; (3) the  integrator consisted of a linear addition of the pulses in the video portion of the receiver; and  486 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  (4) the detection decision was determined hy whether or not the receiver output crossed a  threshold that depended on the desired probability of false alarm.
When the noise, or clutter,is  not described by a Rayleigh pdf, the receiver model of Chap.
2 is not optimum and can cause  degraded performance.
The higher" tails" of the probability density function of non-Rayleigh  clutter mean that there will be a greater number of false alarms in the conventional receiver  designed on the basis of Rayleigh statistics.
The false alarms with non-Rayleigh clutter can be  reduced to any desired level by raising the receiver threshold.
Raising the threshold, however,  can require a significantly larger signal-to-noise, or signal-to-i;:lutter, ratio for a given proba­ bility or detection.
 Trunk and George12 were among the first to note that something other than the convi:n­ tional receiver design should be used when the clutter pdf is not Rayleigh.
They showed that  the median detector gave better performance in non-Rayleigh clutter than the conventional  receiver (which can be called a mean detector).
In this detector, the median v,lue of the 11  received pulses is found and compared against a threshold.
This requires that the amplitudes  of the II individual samples (pulses) be stored and then arranged (ranked) in order of amplitude  to find the median.
An alternate approach, which is usually easier to implement, is to employ  the m-out-of-n detector (the double threshold or binary integrator of Sec.
10.7) with the second  threshold set at m = (n -l )/2.
The median detector is "robust," in that the threshold values  and the detection probabilities do not depend on the detailed shape of the clutter pdf, but only  on the median value.
 The conventional receiver may be considered as comparing the 111ra11 value of the II pulses  to a predetermined threshold.
Trunk has shown that the trimmed-mean detector ~an be better  than either the mean or the median detectors.26·27 If there are II pulses available from which to  make a detection decision, the trimmed-mean detector discards the smallest and the largest of  the II pulses berore· taking the mean.
Although its performance may be good.
it is difficult to  implement in practice because the 11 pulses must be rank-ordered to find the smallest and the  largest.
 Although the median detector is superior to the mean detector (conventional receiver), it  is inferior to both the m-out-of-n detector and the logarithmic receiver when clutter can he  described by the log-normal28 or the' Weibull14 models.
The m-out-of-11 detector, or binary  integrator, was originally employed in radar as an automatic integrator, hut it has other  properties of interest.
The optimum number m (or the second threshold) will depend on the  nature of the pdf.
When the optimum m is used with non-Rayleigh-clutter, the 111-out-of-11  detector seems to be better than the other receiver criteria.
14·28  The logarithmic receiver has an output voltage whose amplitude is proportional to the  logarithm of the input envelope.
A logarithmic characteristic provides a constant false alarm  rate (CFAR) when the input clutter or noise has a Rayleigh pdf.
The performance of the log­ arithmic receiver in non-Rayleigh clutter is almost as good as the m-out-of-11 detector and is  probably easier to implcment.14·28  A comparison of the performance of the various receivers for a specific case is shown in  Fig.
13.7.
 Log-FTC and log-log receivers.
The techniques discussed thus far attempt to improve the  detection of targets in clutter by increasing the target-to-clutter ratio.
There arc also sevaal  techniques found in radars for the detection of targets in clutter whose purpose is to prevent  the clutter from saturating the display or the receiver, or to maintain a constant false-alarm  rate (CF AR).
They have no subclutter visibility in that they offer no ability to see targets  masked by clutter, but they do permit targets large compared to the clutter to be detected that  might otherwise be lost because of the limited dynamic range of the receiving system.
An \ l  C:  Q  ti  !l.l v " 0  C:  Q u  Q)  Qi  "Cl  0  f .0  C  D  0  a:: 995  99 ..
 98 - 95 ..
 90  80 - 70  60  5()  40 ·  30 - 20 Chernoff  bound~  Roylergh  lrnear envelope  deleclor "  Binary  inlegrolor ,  m= 7 '--Linear  .
,,.,envelope  K detector  '°[ _L 5o 2 _ _,_.___....,,_._ _ _,_...___  999  998  995 ·  99  98  95 - 90  80  70  60 - 50  40 - 30  20  10  5 -4 6 8 10 12 14  Signal/ median clulter (dB)  (o)  ·,----- T  Rayleigh Che mo ff  hneor bound  detec!or line or  envelope  defector  Median  detector  Log  envelope  detec:lor 16 18  2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20  Signo1 I median cluller (dB}  (b) RADAR CLUTTER 487  Figure 13.7 Comparison of various  detectors in (a) log-normal clutter  with a mean-to-median ratio of 1  dB, a== 0.693 and (b) Weibull  clutter with a = 1.2 in Eq.
( 13.
I 2 ).
 Probability of false alarm = 10-6,  10 hits integrated.
The curve labeled  "Rayleigh linear detector" applies  to the conventional receiver with  Rayleigh clutter or noise.
The curve  labeled" Chernoff bound" provides  an upper bound to the optimum  detector for the particular clutter  model indicated.
 (After Scl1lelier,14•18 courtesr  IEEE.)  example of one such technique is the Jog-FTC receiver.
32 This is a receiver with a logarithmic  input-output characteristic followed by a high-pass filter (one with a rast time-constant.
or  FTC).
The log-FTC has the property that when the input clutter or noise is described by a  Rayleigh pdf, the output clutter or noise is a constant independent or the input amplitude.
 Thus the log-FTC receiver has a constant false-alarm rate.
As with any CF AR, the false-alarm  rate is maintained constant by a sacrifice in the probability of detection.
(A further description  as to why the log-FTC receiver is CF AR when the input is Rayleigh clutter is given m  Sec.
13.8.)  488 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  Sea clutter has a Rayleigh pdf when the resolution is low.
(A low-resolution radar in this  case might have a 5° beamwidth and 1-JlS pulse width.30) With better resolution the pdf of sea  clutter deviates from Rayleigh and the log-FTC receiver is no longer CF AR.
A variant  sometimes useful for reducing the false-alarm rate in non-Rayleigh clutter is the log-log  receiver.
This is a logarithmic receiver in which the slope of the logarithmic characteristic  progressively declines by a factor of 2 to 1 over the range from noise level to + 80 dB.
30·3 1  (This assumes that the normal log-FTC has a logarithmic characteristic from -20 d 8 below  the receiver noise to + 80 dB above noise.) In the log-log receiver the higher clutter values  (tails of the distribution) are subjected to greater suppression.
 Adaptive video threshold.
Other receiver techniques than the log-FTC were discussed in  Sec.
10.7 for achieving CFAR.
One example suitable for a clutter environment is the adaptfoe  video threshold (AVT) which sets the threshold according to the amount of clutth (or noise)  in a number of range cells ahead of and behind the particular range cell of interest.
This form  of CFAR is popular in automatic detection and track (ADT) systems since it is not strongly  dependent on the type of clutter and can provide CF AR with land and weather clutter as well  as sea clutter.
 Other methods to avoid clutter saturation.
The dynamic range of a radar display, whether PPI  or A-scope, is far less than the range of echo-signal amplitudes that can be expected from  clutter.
It is necessary, therefore, to keep the large clutter echoes from saturating the display  and preventing the detection of wanted targets.
Echoes from the various sources of clutter  experienced by a civil-marine radar might be 80 dB greater than receiver noise, yet the receiver  might only be able to display without saturation signals that are less than about 20 to 25 dB  above noise.
22 Sensitivity time control (STC), or swept gain, is widely used to reduce the  large echoes from close-in clutter.
STC is a time variation of the receiver gain.
At tht! end of  the transmission of the radar pulse the receiver gain is made low so that large signals from  nearby clutter are attenuated.
Echoes from nearby targets will also be attenuated; but because  of the inverse fourth-power variation of signal power with range, they will usually be large  enough to exceed the threshold and be detected.
The receiver gain increases with time until  maximum sensitivity is obtained at ranges beyond which clutter echoes are expected.
Ideally,  STC should make the average clutter power always equal to the noise power.
Thus its range  variation should be identical to the clutter-power range variation.
It has been suggested that  STC for a civil-marine radar have a gain proportional to R -3 out to a range of 8h0 hw /3J.., after  which it is proportional to R-7, where R = range, h0 = radar antenna height, hw = wave  height from peak to trough, and J..
= radar wavelength.34 STC may be implemented in the IF  of the receiver, but it can also be incorporated at RF by inserting variable-attenuation micro­ wave diodes ahead of the receiver.
A particular STC characteristic can be limited by changes in  clutter due to changes in ambient conditions (such as wind speed and direction, or by anoma­ lous propagation), and by the nonuniformity of clutter with azimuth.
Clutter-CF AR  techniques that are" adaptive" do not have this limitation.
(STC is also sometimes employed  in radar not bothered by clutter to make more uniform the target echo power with range.)  Another technique for reducing saturation is instantaneous automatic gain control (IAGC)  based on negative feedback controlling the gain of the IF amplifier.
The response time of the  IAGC is adjusted so that echo pulses from point targets pass with little attenuation, but longer  pulses such as those from extended clutter are attenuated.
That is, the automatic gain control  is made to act within the time of a few pulse widths: The IAGC acts something like a  pulse-width filter, permitting target pulses to pass and attenuating the longer pulses from  RADAR CLUTTER 489  clutter.
Other means for attenuating long pulses from distributed clutter, yet pass the echoes  from point targets, include the high-pass filter and various forms or pulse-width discriminators  that inhibit echo signals not of the correct pulse width.
 13.5 LAND CLUlTER  The clutter from land is generally more of a problem than the clutter from sea.
both in theory  and in practice.
Tile backscatter from land is significantly greater than from sea except in the  vicinity of near vertical incidence.
Therefore.
over the grazing angles or usual interest.
a radar  which must detect targets over land has a more dirficult task than one which must detect  targets over the sea.
Even though a radar at sea might not be bothered by sea clutter.
nearby  land clutter can be so large that it can enter the radar via the antenna sidelobes and degrade  performance.
At vertical incidence there is less backscatter from land than from sea, but this is  usually undesirable since it reduces the range of radar altimeters over land.
 Land clutter is difficult to quantify and classify.
The radar echo from land depends on the  type of terrain.
as described by its roughness and dielectric properties.
Desert, forests.
vegeta­ tion, hare soil, cultivated fields.
mountains, swamps, ·cities.
roads, and lakes all have different  scattering characteristics.
Furthermore, the radar echo will depend on the moisture content of  the surf ace scatterers.
snow cover.
and the stage or growth of any vegetation.
Buildings, towers.
 and other structures give more intense echo signals than forests or vegetation because of the  presence of nat reflecting surfaces and "corner reflectors." Bodies or water, roads, and airport  runways backscatter little energy but are recognizable on radar PPI displays as black areas  amid the brightness of the surrounding ground echoes.
A hill will appear to stand out in high  relief on a PPI.
The near side of the hill will give a large return, while the far side, which is  relatively hidden from the view of the radar, will give little or no return.
The radar cross  section of a farmer's field will differ before and after ploughing.
as well as before and after  harvesting.
It will also depend on the direction of the radar beam relative to the direction of  the ploughed furrows.
The echo from forests differs depending on the season.
By contrast.
sea  echo is more uniform over the oceans of the world.
providing the wind conditions arc the  same.
Although knowledge of sea clutter is far from complete, it is better understood than is  the knowledge of land clutter.
 Information about the radar backscatter from land is required for several different appli­ cations, each of which has its own special needs.
These applications include:  ' The detection of' aircraft 01•er land, where the clutter echoes might be as much as 50 to 60 dB  greater than aircraft echoes.
MTI or pulse-doppler radar is commonly used for this  application to remove the background clutter.
 The detection ofs11~(ace targets over land, where moving vehicles or personnel can be separated  from clutter by means of MTI.
Fixed targets require high resolution for their detection.
 Altimeters which measure the height of aircraft or spacecraft.
Large clutter energy is desired  since the "clutter" is the target.
 The detection a( terrain featllres such as hills and mountains ahead of an aircraft to warn of  approaching high ground (terrain cwoida11ce) or to allow the aircraft to follow the contour  oft he land (terrai11_followi11g ).
 Mapping.
or imaging.
radars that utilize higl_1 resolution.
Ground objects are recognized by  their shape and contrast with surroundings.
 Remote sensing with imaging radars, altimeters, or scattcrometers to obtain specific informa­ tion about the nature of the surface characteristics.
 490 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  Examples of land clutter.
There exist many measurements of land clutter, but there has been  relatively little codified and condensed information.
References 9, 35, and 36 summarize much  of what has been published regarding land clutter.
Not only is there a lack of published data  for the various types of land clutter, but there is not always agreement among similar data  taken by different investigators.
Long9 points out that "two flights over apparently the same  type of terrain may at times differ by as much as IO dB in a0." Such variation and uncertainty  in the value of land clutter must be accounted for by conservative radar design.
 The data for land clutter is usually reported in terms of a0, the cross section per unit area,  just as for sea clutter.
However, it is sometimes given by a parameter y which equals a0 /sin ¢,  where <J, is the grazing angle.
For ideal rough terrain, y is approximately independent of the  angle <J,, except at low grazing angles and near perpendicular incidence.
 An example of clutter cr0 for several broad classes of terrain is shown in Fig.
13.8.
This  applies to X-band clutter.
The boundaries of the various regions are wide to indicate the wide  variation of the data within the classes of terrain.
Figure 13.9 illustrates airborni./data at X and  L bands obtained by the Naval Research Laboratory.37 The azimuth beamwidth was 5° and  the pulse width was 0.5 µs at each frequency.
The lack of smoothness of the data is due, in  part, to the fact that the data was not all taken at the same time.
For a particular grazing angk  the two frequencies had to be obtained by reflying the aircraft along the same flight path.
 Different grazing angles also required reflying the aircraft over the same area.
Each point on  the curve is an average over 1 to 2 miles of ground track.
 The curve of Fig.
13.10 illustrates the behavior of land clutter at \ow grazing angles.
38 The  value of a0 decreases with decreasing grazing angle until, in this case, at about 3.5° the value of  a0 actually increases as the grazing angle is lowered.
This behavior is said to be due to the  stronger backscatter from vertically oriented structures (trees, buildings, crops) as the grazing  angle approaches zero.
Other reported measurements at low grazing angles of heavily wooded,  rolling hills typical of New England show a0 at these angles to be unaffected by changes in  season or weather.
39  There also exists much experimental data of the cr0 of crops such as corn, soybeans, milo,  alfalfa, and sorghum.48-53 The radar backscatter depends not only on the type of crop, and  frequency, but also on the state of its growth, the moisture content of the soil, and the time of  day.
 There is wide variability in the clutter measurements made by different experimenters .
 under supposedly similar conditions.
Some of these differences are due to lack of adequate  ground-truth data, accurate system calibration, or accurate data processing.54 There is usllally  a practical limit as to how well the significant ground-truth can be measured and how accurate  a system can be calibrated.
 The backscatter from snow-covered terrain depends on the nature of the underlying  surface as well as the depth and wetness of the snow.
Radar energy can propagate in snow with  but moderate attenuation so that the backscatter will be determi_ned by the energy rcflcctc<l  from the snow's surface as well as the energy reflected from the surface beneath the snow.
The  amount of attenuation in propagating through the snow will also be important.
The backscat­ ter from snow-covered terrain is dependent on the wetness, or amount of liquid and solid  water in the snow, more so than the thickness of the snow.
It was found,46 for example, that  15 cm of dry powderlike snow had no effect on the measured backscatter over the frequency  range 1 to 8 GHz.
Any backscatter contribution by the snow was completely dominated by  the contribution of the underlying soil.
With 12 cm of wet snow, a0 decreased approximately 5  to IO dB at grazing angles between 30 and 80°.
At 30° grazing angle, for example, the variation  of a0 as a function of the water content of the snow is in the range -0.3 to -0.6 d B/0.1 g/cm 2  over the frequency range from L to C bands.
Other measurements indicate that the presence of  20  10  0  10  (Il  ~ -20  0  b  in  ~  0  b -30  -40  50  60  0  20  10  0  10  20  -30  -40 - -50 HORIZONTAL POLARIZATION  ~CITY  EZ2Z2J CULTIVATED  TERRAIN  G"Z1S] ASPHALT  [:::=J CONCRETE  .J ···---·.
L .-.
L.
L ......
__ L __ _______L__-1- -~-~  10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80  GRAZING ANGLE (degrees)  VERTICAL POLARIZATION  CITY  CULTIVATED  TERRAIN  l=/=:::,;,:,::l ASPHALT  t C::=J CONCRETE 90  -60 ~-~-'--~-'-~-'--~-L~-'-~~~~~---''-----'  0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 BO 90  GRAZING ANGLE (degrees) RADAR CLUTTER 491  Figure 13.8 Boundaries of measured  radar return at X band from various  land clutter.35 (Courtesy of 1.
Katz.)  a soft.
wet snowcover on vegetation tends to lower the return by as much as 6 dB.40 Measure­ ments made over snowfields near Thule, Greenland, showed the backscatter to be propor­ tional lo the square of the frequency over the frequency range from UHF to X band and at  grazing angles from 5 to 20°.47  Frequency dependence.
Figure 13.
l 1 shows an example of the frequency dependence of land  clutter for a particular grazing angle.37 Clutter from urban areas in these measurements is  independent of frequency; rural terrain shows no frequency dependence from L to X band;  492 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  10  0  ID  ~ -10  0 b  0  <U 0 -20  ·c ::,  ~ 0.
 C -30 .Q  ~  "' V)  "' e -40 u  -50  -60  10  10  0  m .:g-10- 0  b  0  f  0 -20 e :,  t a.
 C -3Q Q  t;  <U  "'  ~ -40 -u  -50 Delaware Boy  50  Phoenix 10°  Grazing angle  (al  Arizona mountainous  Arizona deser I ,..,___.~i::;::ci;;::;,;;:,,-­ N.
J.
marshland  Delaware Bay  Grazing angle  (b) J  30° 50° 90°  Figure 13.9 Median values of cr0 for various terrain: (a) X band, vertical polarization, (b) L band, vertical  polarization, (c) X band, horizontal polarization, (J) L band, horizontal polarization.
(From Dalt!}\ i:t  a/.:n)  iD  ::?.
 0  b  ci  (1)  0  E.
:::,  a,  n  C:  Q  ti  QJ  "' V)  "' e u  0  <I)  0 10  0  -10  -20  -30  -tl()  -so  10~--- 0  -= -20  §  a:; a.
 ~ -30  It:  "'  "' ~ -40 u  -50  -60 10 RADAR CLUTIER 493  NJ residential/'~'- ~:~'.:'-nix  x x~~ ~-ll~:-,,~Rurol  Phoenix -x,~Marsh  'I _x ,.,,..,-_ -----1<...._ 'Mis  NJ rurolx ...
x--x~---v-~ ·-.
Desert ----~ X .
Arizona deserix------..--:::.X"·,; /  Arizona moun!a,nous ,..~--- NJ marshland ..-/x  ------< DeloworP Eloy -_x_.-:<  "L ·-· __ [ _____ J.
___ --~~--~~-~-----~-------~~-~~~J........O  3° 10° 30° 60°  Grazing angle  (c)  X  N J residential -r~x  / x~ -x-x-x  Phoenix x "-x.--><..x ---x-x-x  NJ rural ~x __:.._-.---x x /  Arizona mountainous x---x ..e:=.(/x  Arizona desert x--;.::::::---x:>'/x  N J marshland x~ /x  x_x  Delaware Boy ~  10"  Grazing angle  (d) 90°  494 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  II) ~ 0 f----+-------+---t·-- 1---+--------t-----··-- --· ·---··---·  0  b  g -JO - I .-- 0 -- · § -2 o /  aj /' ~ I  ~ -30 V l  : I l3-40 -+-----+---+--~--+---1-----t---~ --· -----·- u  I  -5ot__--"-----'----'---~1--~-~--~-~-~  0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 .J  Grazing angle  Figure 13.10 Cross-section per unit area of cultivated terrain illustrating the increase of a0 with decreasing  grazing angle for small values of grazing angle.
X band, horizontal po\ariLation.
(from Kut: u11d  Spetner,38 Courtesy J.
Res.
Nat.
Bur.
Stds.)  mountainous terrain also shows no frequency dependence rrom L to X hand hut is con­ siderably lower at UHF; rough hills, desert, and cultivated farmland show a linear depen­ dence with frequency; and the backscatter from marsh varies as the~ power of frequency.
The  frequency dependence indicated by the data of Ref.
37 is independent of the polarization and  of the angle of incidence (at least over the range from 8 to 30°).
 Measurements of crops40 and dry trees41 indicate that above X hand, a0 varies approxi­ mately linear with frequency, even up to 3.2-mm wavelength.
The frequency dependence for  concrete, asphalt, and cinder and gravel roads varies approximately as the square of the  frequency.40  Effect of resolution.
The use of a0, the cross section per unit area, to describe the radar  scattering from clutter, implies that the clutter is uniform and independent of the radar­ resolution-cell area.
In reality, land clutter is not uniform.
Radars with high resolution might  actually he capable of better performance than predicted on the basis of a Rayleigh cluiter  model and a cr0 independent of radar resolution.
A radar with a narrow pulse width or narrow  beamwidth not only sees less land clutter than a radar with larger pulse width or beam­ width, but it can see targets in those areas where clutter is less than the average, if these areas  can be resolved.
Jn practice, there are regions of land where the clutter might be considerably  greater than the average and regions where it is considerably less than average.
If the resolu­ tion of the radar is great enough to resolve the areas of lower clutter from the areas of greata  clutter, targets within the clear areas can often be detected and tracked even though it might be  predicted on the basis of the average clutter a0 that it would not be possible.
 The ability of some radars to resolve the strong clutter regions into discrete areas, be­ tween which targets may be detected, is called i11Cercl11tta uisihility.
It is difficult to establish a  quantitative measure of this effect; but it has been suggested~2 that the improvement in target  detectability can be approximated by the ratio of the average clutter level to the median  clutter, which can be as much as 20 dB for a medium-resolution radar (for example,6~ one with  a 2 ,,s pulse width and a 1.5° beamwidth).
Thus a medium resolution radar might have a  20 dB advantage over low-resolution radars in the detection of targets in land clutter.
The  RADAR CLUTTER 495  10  o- Downtown phoenix  Highest median vofue  in SS :1QOO  .:9 -10 0  b  ci Phoernx 55 >25,000  f!  0 N J residenlial -20 c :;, NJ rural ...
 (I) 0.
 C -30 I ltlls, low rough 0 .: u Arizona mountainous (I)  V)  VI Defowore Boy V) e -40 - Arizona deserl u  N J marshland  -50  -60 UHF 1000 L C X 10,000  Frequency (MHz)  (al  Downtown phoenix x  0-Highest median value x----------------..._  SS WOO x --..__x ·- @  .:9 -10 - Phoeai,, SS > 25,000 I~~:~ 0  b  0 NJ residential  (I) o -20 X X X  ~ NJ rnrnl ,---::::::::1 i~ g 30 _Arizona hills, low rough )(~------=::::~~x  fj Arizona mountainous x~x---- ~ Ar,zonodeserfX~  ~ -40 -Arizona cullivoled x x----x  u formfond ------- (" N.J marshland x ------ -50 ·· Delaware Boy x  I -GQL-~~~~~~-U-H~F~~~~-1-0~0~0~L~~~~~~~~C::--~~~~X~10,000  Frequency_ (MHz)  (bl  Fi~ure B.11 Medi:in values of <T0 as a function of frequency.
Grazing angle= 8°.
(a) Vertical polarization.
 (h) horizontal polarization.
Two curves are shown for Phoenix: one is for a sample size of 1000 and  corresponds to the downtown area.
the other is for a sample size of 25.000 which represents a larger area  and includes a smaller density of point targets than the smaller sample.
(From Daley, et af.31)  496 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  effectiveness of interclutter visibility has been exploited in MTI radar and in non-MTI radar  with log-FTC receiver characteristics.
 As an example of the effects of high resolution on land clutter, measurements have been  reported with a horizontally polarized C-band radar having a 15-ns pulse width (3 m resolu­ tion) and a 1.5° beamwidth.43 A rural region in England consisting of woods, fields, buildings,  villages, small towns, and structures such as pylons, was examined at ranges from 7 to 11 km.
 It was found that 65 percent of the clutter exceeded 0.
t m 2, 18 percent exceeded l m 2, and less  than 1 percent exceeded 10 m2• The clutter with radar cross sections greater than lO m2 was  limited to 6 m in length and was found to be associated with man-made objects such as  electricity pylons and buildings.
The separations between clutter larger than 10 m2 was be­ tween 135 and 675 m.
For clutter which was greater than 0.1 m2, the patch sizes varied from  2 m to well over 300 m in length.
The majority of these clutter-patch separations were less  than 30 m but a few exceeded 110 m.
For this terrain, it was concluded thatjf a minimum  clutter patch separation of 75 m (0.5 µs) were necessary for target tracking, a 10 m2 target  could be tracked 99 percent of the time, but a 1 m2 target could be tracked only 55 percent of  the time.
 In the above example of C-band data, the ec;:hoes from man-made objects were "point"  targets of radar cross sections greater than 10 m2.
At the lower microwave frequencies, the  echoes from the strong point-scatterers can be several orders of magnitude greater.
They are  often so large that they might not be completely removed by MTI.
Thus it is not uncommon  for MTI radar to have at its output many fixed point-scatterers that must be recognized so as  not to be confused with desired targets.
 Probability density function for land clutter.
Much of the discussion regarding the statistics of  sea clutter applies as well to land clutter, except that the physical mechanisms may be different.
 The statistical variation of a0 from homogeneous terrain such as deserts and some types of  farmland can sometimes be described by the gaussian probability density function (pdf ), so  that the envelope of the radar receiver output is given by the Rayleigh pdf (Eq.
13.10).44 Some  urban areas, rural areas with buildings and silos, and mountainous terrain approximate the  log-normal pdf (Eq.
13.11 ).44·45 In general, neither the Rayleigh nor the log-normal pd f's  accurately describe the statistics of real clutter, which usually lies between the two.
The  Weibull pdf (Eq.
13.12), which is intermediate between the Rayleigh and the log normal, has  been suggested as applicable to land clutter.
Table 13.2 lists examples of the Weibull parameter  ex (in Eq.
13.12) for several types of clutter and sea state.
 Land clutter models.
The wide variety and complexity of terrain and what grows or is built  upon it, makes it difficult to formulate a satisfactory theoretical model to describe the back­ scatter from land.
Adding to the difficulty are the effects of weather, time of day, and season, as  Table 13.2 Weibull clutter parameters 14  ------------------- ------~~----···"·----------·--- - Beam width Pulse width Grazing Weihull  Terrain/Sea state Frequency (deg) (JIS) angle paramctn  ----~-·----- Rocky mountains s 1.5 2 .........
0.52  Wooded hills .L.
1.7 3 ~0.5 0.63  Forest X I .4 0.17 0.7 0.51 0.53  Cultivated land X I .4 0.1 7 0.7-5.0 0 61 2 ()  Sea state I X 0.5 002 4.
7 145  Sea state 3 K" 5 01 J.O 30.0 I 16 1.78  RADAR CLUTTER 497  well as the fact that radar waves can penetrate the surface and can be scattered from discon­ tinuities underneath the surface.
 Land clutter has been modeled as a Lambert surface with <1° varying as sin2 <j,, where  <j, = grazing angle55; as assemblies or spheres, hemispheres, hemicylinders55•56; as specular  renection from small Oat-plate segments, or facets, which backscatter radar energy only when  the facets are oriented perpendicular to the radar line of sight57; as a slightly rough surface  (similar to the model used to describe sea clutter) to describe scattering from concrete and  asphalt40; as an application of the Kirchhoff.
Huygens principle which makes the assumption  that the current flowing at each point in a locally curved surface is the same as would flow in  the surface ir it were flat and oriented tangent to the actual surface58; and as a model consist­ ing of long, thin, lossy cylinders randomly distributed to describe certain types of vegetation  such as grass, weeds, and flags.40 None or these have been too successful as a general model;  however, they do provide some guidance for the understanding of specific land clutter.
35  13.6 DETECTION OF TARGETS IN LAND CLUTTER  Many of the techniques discussed in Sec.
13.4 for the detection of targets in sea clutter have  application for land clutter as well.
MTI and high resolution are two important examples.
 High-resolution results in a probability density function that is non-Rayleigh for both land  and sea clutter, but the spatial distribution of land clutter provides interclutter visibility that  permits the detection of targets that lie outside the separated clutter patches of large <1°.
The  non-Rayleigh pdf, however, limits the utility of the log-FTC receiver and frequency agility in  land clutter.
 There are two clutter reduction techniques, peculiar to land clutter, which will be men­ tioned briefly in this section.
These are the clutter fence and the Kalmus clutter filter.
 Kalmus clutter filter.59 This is a technique for extracting moving targets, such as a walking  person or a slowly moving vehicle, from land clutter whose doppler-frequency spectrum masks  that of the moving target.
A moving target will produce a doppler-frequency shift that is either  at a lower or a higher frequency than the transmitted signal.
Vegetation or trees will have a  back-and-forth motion due to the wind; hence, the doppler spectrum from such clutter will be  distributed on both sides of the transmitted frequency, especially if observed over a sufficie1;t  period of tirpe.
By splitting the received spectrum into two halves about the transmitted carrier  and subtracting the lower part from the upper part, the symmetrical clutter spectrum will  cancel and the asymmetrical target spectrum will not.
This method of suppressing the clutter  relative to the target has been called the Kalmus clutter filter.
The separation of the receding  doppler signals from the approaching doppler signals may be accomplished with a technique  similar to that shown in Fig.
3.8.
Quantitative measurements of the target-to-clutter enhance­ ment of this technique are not known, but it has been said 59 that" small targets moving in one  direction could be easily detected in the presence of clutter signals exceeding the target return  by many orders of magnitude." The effectiveness of this technique is limited by the degree of  symmetry of the clutter spectrum, the need for a sufficient averaging time, and by the assump­ tion that the clutter fluctuations are large compared to other factors that might affect the  symmetry of the receiver spectrum.
 Clutter fence.
Reflections from nearby mountains and other large clutter can sometimes be of  such a magnitude that it is not practical to completely suppress their undesirable effects by  either MTI or range gating.
One technique for reducing the magnitude of such large clutter  498 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  seen by a fixed-site radar is to erect an !!lectromagnetically opaque fence around the radar (or  simply between the radar and the clutter source) to prevent the radar from viewing the clutter  directly.
The two-way isolation provided by a typical fence with a straight edge might be about  40 dB, where the isolation is given by the ratio of the clutter signal in the absence of a fence to  that in the presence of the fence.
The isolation is limited by the diffraction of the electromag­ netic energy behind the fence.
Greater isolation than that provided by a straight-edged fence  can be had by incorporating two continuous slots near to, and parallel with, the upper edge of  the fence to cancel a portion of the energy diffracted by the fence.
The double-slot fence can  increase the two-way isolation by 20 dB or more.62  A fence can suppress the clutter seen by the radar, but it produces other effects not always  desirable.
For example, it will limit the accuracy of elevation-angle measurement because of  the blockage of the fence and the error caused by the energy diffracted by the fence.
Energy  diffracted by the fence also interferes with the direct path from the radar to cadse multipath  lobing of the radiation pattern in the angular region just above the fence.
Radar energy  backscattered from the fence can sometimes be large enough to damage the receiver front-end.
 In one design, the fence was tilted 15° away from the radar to prevent this from happening.60  Fences also can serve to prevent high power densities from existing in areas where per­ sonnel might be located.61 A fence can also suppress the ground-reflected multipath signal that  causes radiation-pattern lobing and elevation-angle errors, but the design of fences for this  purpose is different from the design of a clutter-suppression fence.61.63  13.7 EFFECTS OF WEATHER ON RADAR  On the first page of the first chapter it was stated that radar could see through weather effects  such as fog, rain, or snow.
This is not strictly true in all cases and must be qua lifted.
as the  performance of some radars can be stongly affected by the presence of meteorological particles  (hydrometeors).
In general, radars at the lower frequencies are not bothered by meteorological  or weather effects, but at the higher frequencies, weather echoes may be quite strong and mask  the desired target signals just as any other unwanted clutter signal.
 Whether the radar detection of meteorological particles such as rain, snow, or hail is a  blessing or a curse depends upon one's point of view.
Weather echoes are a nuisance to the  radar operator whose job is to detect aircraft or ship targets.
Echoes from a storm, for  example, might mask or confuse the echoes from targets located at the samt! range and  azimuth.
On the other hand, radar return from rain, snow, or hail is of considerable impor­ tance in meteorological research and weather prediction.
Radar may be used to give an up-to­ date pattern of precipitation in the area around the radar.
It is a simple and inexpensive gauge  for measuring the precipitation over relatively large expanses.
As a rain gauge it is quite useful  to the hydrologist in determining the amount of water falling into a watershed during a given  period of time.
Radar has been used extensively for the study of thunderstorms, squall lines,  tornadoes, hurricanes, and in cloud-physics research.
Not only is radar useful as a means of  studying the basic properties of these phenomena, but it may also be used for gathering the  information needed for predicting the course of the weather.
Hurricane tracking and tornado  warning are examples of applications in which radar has proved its worth in the saving of life  and property.
Another important application of radar designed for the detection of weather  echoes is in airborne weather-avoidance radars, whose function is to indicate to the aircraft  pilot the dangerous storm areas to be avoided.
 RADAR CLUTTER 499  Radar equation for meteorological echoes.69 71 The simple radar equation is  P,G2).2a p -·--···---- r -(4n)3R4 (13.14)  The symbols were defined in Sec.
l.2.
In extending the radar equation to meteorological targets.
 it is assumed that rain.
snow, hail.
or other hydrometeors may be represented as a large number  of independent scatterers of cross section a1 located within the radar resolution cell.
Let La;  denote the average total backscatter cross section of the particles per unit of volume.
The  indicated summation of <T; is carried out over the unit volume.
The radar cross section may be  expressed as a = Vm Lai, where Vm is the volume of the radar resolution cell.
The volume Vm  occupied by a radar beam of vertical beam width ¢8, horizontal beamwidth 08, and a pulse  of duration r is approximately  (13.15)  where c = velocity of propagation.
In the radar-meteorology literature, the radar pulse-extent I,  (in units of length) is often used instead of er in this equation.
The factor n/4 is included to  account for the elliptical shape of the beam area.
In some instances this factor is omitted for  convenience; however, radar meteorologists almost always include it since they are concerned  with accurate measurement of rainfall rate using the radar equation.
In the interest of even  further accuracy, a correction is usually made to Eq.
(13.15) to account for the fact that the  effective volume or uniform rain illuminated by the two-way radar antenna pattern is less than  that indicated when the half-power beamwidths are used to define the volume.
Assuming a  gaussian-shaped antenna pattern, the volume given by Eq.
(13.15) must be reduced by a factor  of 2 In 2 to describe the equivalent volume that accounts for the echo power received by the  two-way antenna pattern from distributed clutter.69 Thus the radar equation of Eq.
(13.14)  can he written  (13.16)  In the above.
the relationship G = n2/0n<Pn for a gaussian beamshape69 was substituted.
The  har over 11.
denotes that the received power is averaged over many independent radar sweeps  to smooth tht signal fluctuations.
This equation assumes that the volume of the antenna  resolution cell is completely filled with uniform precipitation.
If not, a correction must be  made by introducing a dimensionless beam-filling factor tjJ which is the fraction of the cross­ sectional area of the beam intercepted by the region of scattering particles.
It is difficult to  estimate this correction.
The resolution cell is not likely to be completely fiiled at long range or  when the beam is viewing the edge of a precipitation cell.
If the" bright band" (to be described  later) is within the radar resolution cell, the precipitation also will not be uniform.
 When the radar wavelength is large compared with the circumference of a scattering  particle or diameter D (Rayleigh scattering region), the radar cross section is  (13.17)  where I K j2 = (£ -I)/(£ + 2), and l = dielectric constant of the scattering particles.
The value  of I K 12 for water varies with temperature and wavelength.
At l0°C and 10 cm wavelength, it is  500 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  approximately 0.93.
Its value for ice at all temperatures is about 0.197 and is independent of  frequency in the centimeter-wavelength region.
Substituting Eq.
(13.17) into (13.16) yields  p -_nsP,G~_ I 12 "D6  ' -1024(ln 2)R2 l 2 K 7 (13.18)  Since the particle diameter D appears as the sixth power, in any distribution of precipitation  particles the small number of large drops will contribute most to the echo power.
 Equation (13.18) does not include the attenuation of the radar energy by precipitation,  which can be significant at the higher microwave frequencies and when accurate measure­ ments are required.
The two-way attenuation of the radar signal in traversing the range Rand  back is exp (-2tXR), where a is the one-way attenuation coefficient.
If a is not a constant over  the path R, the total attenuation must be expressed as the integrated value over the two-way  path.
.J  Scattering from rain.
Equation (13.18), which applies for Rayleigh scattering, may be used as a  basis for measuring with radar the sum of the sixth power of the raindrop diameters in a unit  volume.
The Rayleigh approximation is generally applicable below C band (5 cm wavelength)  and, except for the heaviest rains, is a good approximation at X band (3 cm).
Rayleigh  scattering usually does not apply above X band.
Another complication at frequencies above X  band is that the attenuation due to precipitation precludes the making of quantitative measure­ ments conveniently.
 The sum of the sixth power of the diameters per unit volume in Eq.
(13.18) is called Z, the  radar reflectivity factor, or  Z= L D6 (13.19)  i  In this form Z has little significance for practical application.
Experimental measurements,  however, show that Z is related to the rainfall rate r by  (13.20)  where a and hare empirically determined constants.
With this relationship the rcccivcJ echo  power can be related to rainfall rate.
A number of experimenters have attempted to determine  the constants in Eq.
( 13.20), but considerable variability exists among the reporteJ results.
70  Part of this is probably due to the difficulty in obtaining quantitative measurements and the  variability of rain with time and from one location to another.
One form of Eq.
( 13.20) that has  been widely accepted is  Z = 200r1·6 ( 13.21)  where Z is in mm6/m3 and r is in mm/h.
This has been said to apply to stratiform rain.
For  orographic rain Z = 31r1·71 and for thunderstorm rain Z = 486r1·37.
Thus a single expres­ sion need not be used, and the choice of a Z-r relationship can be made on the basis of the type  of rain.
70 Substituting Eq.
( 13.21) into ( 13.18) with I K j2 = 0.93 yields  j5 _2.4P 1Grr1.6  10_8 ,-R2A2 X ( 13.22)  where r is in mm/h, R and ,1.
in meters, r in seconds and P1 in watts.
This indicates how the  radar output can be made to measure rainfall.
 The backscatter cross section per unit volume as a function of wavelength and rainfall  ~,  !'  "E 101 ,,  C ::,  :ii io-2  Q  C  0  ~ 10·3  V)  "' <" 0  b 10-4  L  Cl) --CJ  v-; 10-5 .x u  CJ rn  w-1  0.1 /  ..,.,-::  I 10  r, rainfall role.
mm/hr /  /  /  100 RADAR CLUTIER 501  Figure 13.12 Exact (solid curves} and  approximate (dashed curves} back­ scattering cross section per unit volume  of rain at a temperature of l8°C Exact  computations obtained from F.
T.
 Haddock, approximate curves based  on the Rayleigh approximation.
(From  Gunn and East,71 Quart.
J.
Roy.
 Meteor.
Soc.}  rate is shown plotted in Fig.
13.12.
The dashed lines are plotted by summing the Rayleigh  cross section or Eq.
(13.17) over unit volume and substituting Eq.
( 13.21) to give  '1 =La;= 7J4rt.6 x 10 12 m2/m3  i (13.23)  where f is the radar frequency in GHz and r the rainfall rate in mm/h.
The solid curves are  exact valuescomputed by Haddock.71•72 The Rayleigh scattering approximation is seen to be  satisfactory over most of the frequency range of interest to radar.
 The reflectivity factor Z of Eq.
(13.19), which was defined as the sum of the sixth power or  the particles' diameter per unit volume, was based on the assumption of Rayleigh scattering.
 When the scattering is not Rayleigh, a quantity similar to Z is defined, which is called the  eq11il•a/e11t radar reflectil'ityfactor Zr given by70·73  (13.24)  where 11 is the actual radar reflectivity, or backscatter cross section per unit volume, and I K 12  is taken as 0.93.
 Instead of the rainfall rater, the intensity of precipitation is sometimes stated in terms of  the dB rellcctivity factor Z 200ru\ or d Bz = 10 log z.
A rainfall rate of I mm/h equals  2J dBz, 4 rnm/h equals D dBz.
and 16 mm/h equals 42 dBz.
(This may be an incorrect usage  of the precise definition of decibels as a power ratio, but it is the jargon used by the radar  meteorologist.)  502 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  Scattering from snow.
Dry snow particles are essentially ice crystals, either single or ag­ gregated.
The relationship between Zand snowfall rater is as given by Eq.
( l 3.20) for rain, but  with different constants a.
and b.
There have been less measurements of the Z-rrelationship for  snow than for rain, and there have been several different values proposed for the constants a  and b.
The following two expressions have been suggested  z = 2000,2  z = t 780r2·21 ( lJ.25a)74  (l3.25h}75  Measurements show a correlation between surface temperature and the coefficient a of the  Z = arb relationship, which suggest the following 76  z = 1050r2 for dry snow (ave temp.
< 0°C)  z = 1600r2 for wet snow (ave temp.> 0°c) .J (13.26a)  (13.26b)  A lower surface temperature results in a lower value of the coefficient a.
Still another value that  has been suggested is 77  z = 1000,1.6 ( 13.27)  There does not seem to be any agreed-upon value; the reader can take his pick.
In all of the  above, the snowfall rate rat the ground is in millimeters per hour of water measured when the  snow is melted.
 A radar is usua11y Jess affected by snow and ice than by rain because the factor I K 12 in  Eq.
{13.18) is less for ice than for rain, and snowfall rates are generally less than rainfall rates.
 Scattering from water--coated ice spheres.
Moisture in the atmosphere at altitudes where the  temperature is below freezing takes the form of ice crystals, snow, or hail.
As these parlicks fall  to the ground they melt and change to rain in the warmer environment of the lower altitudes.
 When this occurs, there is an increase in the radar backscatter since water particles reflect  more strongly than ice.
As the ict(particies, snow, or hail begin to melt, they first become  water-coated ice spheroids.
At radar wavelengths, scattering and attenuation by water-coated  ice spheroids the size of wet snowflakes is similar in magnitude to that of spheroidal water  drops of the same size and shape.
Even for comparatively thin coatings of water, the composite  particle scatters nearly as well as a similar all-water particle.
 Radar observations of light precipitation show a horizontal" bright band" at an altitude  at which the temperature is just above 0°C.
The measured reflectivity in the center of the bright  band is typically about 12 to 15 dB greater, than the reflectivity from the snow above it and  about 6 to 10 dB greater than the rain' below.70 The center of the bright band is generally from  about 100 to 400 m below the 0°C :isotherm.
Although the bright band is relatively thin,  considerable attenuation can occur' when radar observations are made through it at low  elevations.
 The bright band is due to changes in snow falling through the freezing level.
71 At the  onset of melting the snow changes from flat or needle-shaped particles which scatter feebly to  similarly shaped particles which, owing to a water coating, scatter relatively strongly.
As  melting progresses, the particles lose their extreme shapes, and their velocity of fall increases  causing a decrease in the number of ·particles per unit volume and a reduction in the  backscatter..
, ·; 11 1 •.
 .
·,:.! ' Scattering from clouds.
Most.
cloud· droplets do not exceed 100 µm in diameter ( l ,,m =  10-6 m); consequently Rayleigh scattering may be applied at radar frequencies for the predic­ tion of cloud echoes.
In Rayleigh scattering, the backscatter is proportional to the sixth power  RADAR CLUTIER 503  of the diameter, Eq.
( 13.17).
Since the diameter of cloud droplets is about one-hundredth the  diameter of raindrops, the echoes from fair-weather clouds are usually of little concern.
 It is also possible to obtain weak echoes from a deep, intense fog at millimeter.
 wavelengths, but at wavelengths of 3 cm and longer, echoes due to fog may generally be  regarded as insignificant.
 Attenuation by precipitation.
In the frequency range for which Rayleigh scattering applies  (particles small in site compared with the wavelength) the attenuation due to absorption is  given hy  Attenuation {dB/km)= 0.434 [n:; (~ D3) Im ( (13.28)  where the summation is over 1 nr'.
D is the particle diameter in centimeters.
).
is the  wavelength in centimeters.
Im ( K) is the imaginary part of K, and K is a factor which  depends upon the dielectric constant of the particle.
At a temperature of l0°C, the value of  Im ( -K) for waler is 0.00688 when the wavelength is 10 cm (S band) and 0.0247 for 3.2-cm  wavelength (X band).71 Equation (13.28) is a good approximation for rain attenuation at  S-band or longer wavelengths.
Since rain attenuation is usually small and unimportant at the  longer wavelengths where this expression is valid, the simplicity offered by the Rayleigh  scattering approximation is or limited use for predicting the attenuation through r.ain.
 The computation of rain att,~nuation must therefore be based on the exact formulation for  spheres as developed hy Mic.1 ti The results of such computations are shown in Fig.
I .l 13 as a  function of the wavelength and the rainfall rate.
 The attenuation produced hy ice particles in the atmosphcn:, whether occurring as hail.
 snow.
or ice-crystal clouds, is much less than that caused by raill of an equivalent rate or  precipitation.78 Gunn and East-i1 state that the attenuation in ,;now is  I\ .
(d .k ) 0.00349r1 6 0.00224r tlcnuat1011 at 0°C Bi m = il4 · + A ( 13.29)  where r = snowfall rate (mm/h of melted water content).
and ) = wavelength, cm.
 10  E <10'  CD 'O .
 C  0  10-4.___J, __ .......L..~-'-~-'--~'----'-~"'-'-~-'-~...___.
 0 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10  Wovelenglh, cm Figure 13.13 One-way attenuation (<lB/  km) in rain at a temperature of  l8°C.
(a) Drizzle- 0.25 mm/h; (h) light  rain I mm/h; (c) moderate rain -4  mm/h: (d) heavy rain-16 mm/h; (e)  excessive rain-40 mmlh.
In Washing­ ton.
D.C, a rainfall rate of 0.25  mm/h is exceeded 4',•1 h.'yr, I mm;h is  exceeded 200 h/yr, ,1 mm/h is exceeded  60 h/yr.
16 mm/his exceeded 8 h/yr and  40 mrnlh i exceeded 2 2 : yr.
 504 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  13.8 DETECTION OF TARGETS IN PRECIPITATION  The chief effect of weather on radar performance is the backscatter, or clutter, from precipita­ tion within the radar resolution cell.
Attenuation by precipitation usually has little efkct on  the detection or targets except at frequencies above X band.
Weather clutter, however, can be a  serious factor in limiting the performance of microwave radars even at frequencies as low as L  band.
Good radar design must include methods for maintaining performance in the presence  of precipitation.
 The most effective method for reducing the effects or precipitation is to operate at a low  frequency to'take advantage or the significant decrease in backscatter from precipitation with  decrease in frequency.
The backscatter cross section or a particle in the Rayleigh region, as  shown by Eq.
(13.17) varies as the fourth power of the frequency.
A radar operating at L band  (1.3 GHz), for example, might experience about 34 dB less precipitation cluttcr...than a radar at  X band (9 GHz).
Thus when precipitation is of concern, the lower frequencies are to be  preferred.
 Al the higher microwave frequencies, precipitation clutter can be reduced by means of  high resolution in range and in angle.
Since rain is relatively uniform, the statistics or the  backscatter are described by the Rayleigh probability density function, even when the radar is  of high resolution.
Therefore the problem of non-Rayleigh statistics with its deleterious effect  on the false-alarm probability as occurs with high-resolution radar viewing sea clutter and  land clutter (Secs.
13.3 and 13.5), does not usually occur with precipitation clutter.
 Moving target indication (MTI) radar can provide some improvement in the detection  of moving targets in precipitation if the MTI is properly designed to attenuate the doppler­ shifted precipitation echoes.
Unlike land clutter, storm clouds are not stationary and usually  have a nonzero relative velocity that results in a doppler-frequency shift.
The internal motions  of the storm can also widen the spectrum of the precipitation clutter.
At the higher microwave  frequencies, where precipitation can be a bother, it is difficult to achieve effective MTI because  of the reduced blind speeds (Sec.
4.2) and the increased spread of the clutter spectrum.
The  Moving Target Detector, described in Sec.
4.7, is an example of an MTI radar designed  specifically to cope with the special problems or precipitation clutter.
 Polarization.
Raindrops are spherical, or nearly so, but aircraft are complex targets.
Thus the  backscattered energy from rain and aircraft will be affected differently by the polarization of  the incident radar energy.
Advantage can be taken of this difference to enhance the target-to­ clutter ratio when the clutter background is precipitation.
This is accomplished hy utilizing a  radar with circular polarization or with crossed linear polarization.
 A circularly polarized wave incident on a spherical scatterer is reflected as a circularly  polarized wave with the opposite sense of rotation and is rejected by the antenna that orig­ inally transmitted it.
With a complex target such as an aircraft the reflected energy is more or  less equally divided between the two senses or rotation so that some target-echo energy is  accepted by the same radar antenna that transmitted the circularly polarized signal.
This is the  basis for target-to-clutter enhancement using circular polarization.
 A circularly polarized wave is one in which the electric field vector rotates with constant  amplitude about the axis of propagation at the radar frequency.
To an observer looking in the  direction of propagation, a clockwise-rotating electric field is known as right-hand circular  polarization, and a counterclockwise rotation is known as left-hand circular polarization.
 Right-hand and ]eft-hand circular polarization are said to be orthogonal polarizations since an  antenna capable of accepting one wil1 not accept the other.
Similarly, horizontal and vertical  linear polarizations are orthogonal.
If the radar radiates one sense of circular polarized energy,  RADAR CLUTTER 505  it cannot accept the backscattered echo signal from a sphere or a plane sheet, since the direction  of the polarization is reversed on reflection; that is,.if right-hand circular polarization is trans­ mitted, spherical raindrops reflect the energy as left-hand circular polarization.
If the same  antenna is used for both transmitting and receiving, the antenna is not responsive to the  opposite sense or rotation and the echo energy will not appear at the receiver.
A target such as  an aircraft, however, will return some energy with the correct polarization as well as energy  with the incorrect polarization.
Energy incident on the aircraft may be returned after one  "bounce," as from a plane sheet or a srherical surface; or it might make two or more bounces  between various portions or the target (similar to a corner reflector) before being returned to  the radar.
On each bounce the direction of polarization rotation is reversed.
Signals which  make single reflections (or any odd number) will be rejected by the circularly polarized antenna  that transmitted it, but those which make two reflectioris (or any even number) will be  accepted.
In addition to the mechanism or the double bounce, depolarization (or generation  of the orthogonal component) can occur when the objects causing the scattering are not sym­ metrical.
With most targets of interest, the scatterers are asymmetricaJ and backscatter energy  appears in both orthogonal polarization components.
 Raindrops may not always he perfect spheres.
Their deviation rrom the symmetrical shape  of a sphere will result in the rellected signal containing some energy in that polarization  component accepted by the antenna.
This limits the ability of circular polarization to reject  precipitation clutter.
 The rejection or rain echoes by a circularly polarized radar depends on the purity with  which circular polarization can be generated by a practical antenna, as well as the deviation  of the precipitation particles from a spherical shape.117 The cancellation or the orthogonal  polarization by an exceptionally well-designed, well-maintained antenna might be limited to  about 40 dB.79 To achieve 40 dB of cancellation the voltage ellipticity ratio of the antenna  (ratio of the minor axis to the major axis of the polarization ellipse) must be 0.99, a difficult  value to achieve.
For 24 dB cancellation, the ellipticity ratio must be 0.94.
Cancellations in  excess or 30 dB have been achieved in light rain and in dry"snow.79 However, cancellations of  only IS dB or Jess are obtained from nonspherical precipitation such as heavy rain, from the  melting layer, and from large wet snowflakes.
79•80·82 In some heavy rains and thunderstorms,  the cancellation might be only 5 dB.82  It has been found that better cancellation of precipitation is obtained when the polariza­ tion is not quite circular.
That is, there is a particular elliptical polarization which produces the  hest cancellation.
The optimum elliptical polarization depends on the nature of the rain.
This  effect is due to the nonspherical raindrops which cause the phase shirt and attenuation of the  radar energy to be different depending on the direction of polarization.
As the radar energy  propagates through the rain, the differential phase shift and the differential attenuation results  in the circular polarization being converted to elliptical polarization.
By selecting the optimum  elliptical polarization, it has been said that the cancellation in some regions of" heavy rain"  might be increased by as much as 12 dB over that obtained with circular polarization.81  However, the polarization that is optimum for one particular region might actually prove to  be worse than the cancellation obtained with circular polarization in some other region.
The  optimum polarization thus depends on the distance traveled in rain, so that the antenna  polarization needs to be continuously adjusted.
79 The greater the penetration into a rain­ storm, the more elliptical will become the polarization of an originally circular polarized wave.
 Thus to maintain the improvement in rain cancellation with elliptical polarization, the polar­ ization on receive should be made variable with range (time).
With such adaptive polarization  it has been suggested that an improvement in cancellation of 6 to 9 dB might be obtained  consisten!Jy.
82  506 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  Still another factor which reduces the effectiveness of circular polarization in rain clutter  is the different reflection coefficients experienced· by the horizontal and vertical polarization  components on reflection from the surface of the land or the sea.
This results in a change of  polarization and a degradation of the rain cancellation.
82 86 It will he recalled from Sec.
12.2  that it is possible for a portion of the transmitted energy to arrive at the target via a surface­ reflected path as well as by the direct path.
Similarly, precipitation clutter can result from a  surface-reflected path as well as the direct path.
On reflection from the surface the vertically  polarized component is attenuated more than the horizontal component, and it experiences a  different phase shift (Fig.
12.3).
The result is that the horizontally polarizi:d component is  cancelled to a greater extent than the vertical component so that the original circular polariza­ tion is converted to elliptical polarization with the vertical component predominating.82  Assuming a 3.2° vertical beamwidth with cosecant-squared shaping up to 10°, theoretical  calculations give the following maximum cancellation ratios as limited by surface rdlcctions:  20.2 dB for sea, 23.6 dB for marsh, 27.2 dB for average land, and 34.1 dB for ctdert.8~ Other  calculations for ground-mapping radars, such as those used for airport surface-tralhc control,  indicate significantly worse cancellation limitations.
A 3° vertical beamwidth, pointed 0.7°  below the horizon, with cosecant-squared shaping up to 30° will result in the cancellation ratio  being limited to about 13 dB over water and 17 dB over moist soil.86 To minimize the  problem, narrow vertical beamwidths should be employed.
 The radar cross section of aircraft targets is, in general, less with circular polarization than  with linear polarization.
Experimental measurements87 indicate that when an aircraft is illu­ minated with one sense of circular polarization, the echo power on a statistical hasis is divided  more or less equally between right-hand and left-hand circular polarization.
With linear  polarization, the amount of energy converted to the orthogonal polarization is about 0.5 dB.
 Thus the net loss of aircraft-echo power· on changing from linear to circular polarization is  about 2.5 dB.
In some cases, however, a· greater value of radar cross section may be obtained  with circular polarization rather.
than with linear.79  An alternative to circular polarization is to transmit any linear polarization and receive  on the orthogonal linear polarization.79.!H Spherical raindrops will give no return in the  orthogonal channel if no cross-polarization distortion takes place in the radar or the propaga­ tion medium.
There is some evidence to indicate that crossed linear polarization may give  better rain rejection than conventional circular polarization.
 I .og-FTC receiver.
A receiver with a logarithmic input-output characteristic followed by a  high-pass filter (fast-time-constant, or FTC, circuit), will provide a constant false-alarm rate  (CF AR) at the output when the input clutter or noise is described by the Rayleigh probability  density function.
CF AR is important since, without it, clutter can excite the radar display and  obscure the presence of desired targets even if the targets are of greater strength than the  clutter.
CF AR prevents obscuration of detectable targets by weaker clutter by maintaining  the clutter output from the receiver at a constant ·value well below the saturation level of  the display.
This is especially important in track-while-scan, or automatic detection and  tracking (ADT) syste·ms, where even small increases in background clutter could result in  excessive false alarms that overload the capacity of the tracking computer.
As with any CF AR,  the constant false-alarm rate is maintained at the expense of the probability of detection.
With  log-FTC there is no improvement in target-to-clutter ratio and there is no subclutter visibility.
 The log-FTC, or similar CF AR, is necessary, however, in order to extract the target informa­ tion contained in the radar signal that otherwise would be undetected if displayed along with  the clutter, or which would be lost because of computer overload in an automatic system.
 Although one of the first applications considered for the log-FTC receiver was the detec- RADAR CLUTTER 507  tion of targets in sea clutter.RR.HQ it is probably more useful for operation in precipitation  clutter.
Such clutter is more likely to he Rayleigh than sc,t clutter (Sec.
13.3) or land clutter  (Sec.
13.5) that often exhibit non-Rayleigh characteristics.
especially with high-resolution  radar.
The log-FTC has sometimes hccn called W<'af/r('rfix.
 The Rayleigh probability density fu11ctio11 as was given in Sec.
13.3 is  21· ( ,,2 ) 11(1·) = exp -· (Tl (Tl {I>(} ( IJ.JO)  where <r2 is the mean square value of 11.
The Rayleigh pdf has the property that the rms  amplitude of the lluctuations about the mean (denoted by c'>11;0) is proportional to the mean f•;0•  or ,51·111 = kt\11• I\ logarithmic receiver has the characteristic  """' = ll log hv;n (13.31)  The slope of the logarithmic receiver characteristic at i\0 is  !}1•ou1 a  !}vin i\n (13.32)  If the input clutter fluctuations c'h:;0 arc small compared to the total range of the logarithmic  characteristic.
the output lluctuations ,51•0111 arc approximately  (I  1)!'ou1 = slope X <)!';0 = _ <)V;0 = ak  V;n  Thus the output fluctuations arc constant, independent of the input mean.
(13.33)  /\!though the output fluctuations about the mean arc constant, the output mean is not.
A  high-pass filter removes the mean value of the output, leaving the fluctuation of the clutter at a  constant level on the display.
The high-pass filter is equivalent to a differentiation, or to  a circuit with a fast time-constant (FTC).
The noise or clutter fluctuations that appear at the  output of a logarithmic receiver are not symmetrical since the large amplitudes are suppressed  due to the nature of the logarithmic characteristic.
To make the output more like that of a  linear receiver, the log-FTC may he followed by an amplifier with the inverse of the logarith­ mic characteristic (antilog).
This restores the contrast of the display and eliminates the loss in  detectability associated with the logarithmic characteristic.
 A true (logarithmic characteristic cannot be maintained down to zero input since  r.,01 --oo as 1';11 -0.
At some point the receiver characteristic must deviate from logarithmic  and go through the origin.
The practical logarithmic receiver will have a law given by  1·001 = a log ( l + ht';0).
The receiver characteristic is linear at low signal levels and logarithmic  at large signals.
This is called a lin-log receiver.
The logarithmic characteristic must be main­ tained to about 20 dB below therms noise level.88 A variation of the log-FTC is the log-CF AR  receiver in which the order of 10 resolution cells containing clutter are averaged by a narrow­ hand video filter with a symmetrical impulse rcsponse.90  Although the logarithmic receiver acts similarly to an automatic STC, it does not  suppress properly, as does STC, the nearby clutter echoes which enter via the sidelobes.
STC  turns down the gain at close ranges, thereby reducing sidelobe clutter signals.
Clutter large  enough to appear in the sidelobcs of a logarithmic receiver might not be suppressed and may  confuse the radar display.
For this reason STC and logarithmic receivers are sometimes used  together.
The STC action should be in the RF portion of the receiver rather than in the  logarithmic amplifier.
 508 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  13.9 ANGEL ECHOES  Radar echoes can be obtained from regions of the atmosphere where no apparent rdkcting  sources seem to exist.
These have been called by various names, but they are commonly called  olwsts or angels.
They can take several different forms and have been attributed to various  causes.
There are two general classes of angel echoes: dot angels, which arc point targets due to  birds and insects, and distributed angels, which have substantial horizontal or vatical extent  and are due to inhomogeneities of the refractive index of the atmosphere.
Birds and insects in  substantial number can also appear as distributed angels, and can have a degrading effect on  radar.
Since they are moving clutter to an MTI radar they are difficult to remove by dopplt:r  filtering.
Sensitivity time control (STC) has proven a satisfactory method, in many cases, for  reducing the effect of such clutter.
Operation at UHF can reduce the backscatter from insects  and, to some extent, birds because of the fourth-power relationship between crots section and  frequency of a scatterer in the Rayleigh region (Eq.
13.17).
Inhomogeneities oft he atmospheric  index of refraction generally do not produce strong enough backscatter to be a serious source  of clutter to most radars.
 Birds.
Probably the most prominent source of angels is birds.
Although the radar cross section  of a single bird is small compared with that of an ordinary aircraft, the backscatter echo from a  bird can be readily detected by many radars, especially at the shorter ranges, because of the  inverse-fourth-power variation of echo signal with range.
If, for example, the cross section of a  bird the size of a sea gull were 0.01 m2, it would produce as large an echo signal al a range of  10 nmi as would a 100 m2 radar cross-section target at 100 nmi.
When birds travel in flocks.
 the total cross section can be significantly greater than that of a single bird.
Because the radar  screen collapses a relatively large volume of space onto a small radar screen, the display can  appear cluttered with bird echoes even though only a few birds can be seen by visual examina­ tion of the surrounding area.
If there were, on the average, only one bird per square mile, more  than 300 echoes would be displayed on the PPI within a 10-mile radius from the radar.
This  represents a significant amount of clutter.
It has been said that as few as eight birds per square  mile can completely blank a PPI screen.
Increased echoes from birds are to be expected during  migratory periods (spring and fall) and during those times of day when bird activity is large  (sunrise and sunset).
 Birds typically fly at speeds of from 15 to 40 knots,92 and some can fly 50 knots or greater.
 These speeds are usually too high to be completely rejected by most microwave MTI radars.
 Most birds fly at altitudes below about 2500 m, with peak numbers between 300 and l 200 m,  or even lower.95•96  Table 13.3 gives some examples of the radar cross sections of birds taken at three frequen­ cies with vertical polarization.91 The largest values occur at S band.
Other examples of cross  section are given in Fig.
13.14, which plots the average radar cross section as a function of the  weight of the bird.
The solid circles are the averages over a ± 20° sector around the broadside  aspect.92 The x's are the average of the ± 20° head-on and ± 20° tail-on aspects.92·93 (Note  that the values given for the pigeon in Fig.
13.
JO differ from those given in Table 13.3.
The two  sets of values are from different sources.)  The radar cross section of birds does not show a simple wavelength or size dependence.
91  There are resonant effects, as illustrated by the measured cross section of a 2!-lb duck at UHF  being nearly twice that of a 4!-lb duck.94 (The median value of the 4!-Ib duck head-on was  600 cm2, and 24 cm2 tail-on.) The backscatter from birds fluctuates over quite large values  with the maximum and minimum differing at times by more than two orders of magnitude.91  Thus it is difficult to describe the radar cross section by a single value.
It should properly be  RADAR CLUTIER 509  Table 13.3 Radar cross sections of birds91  Frequency Mean radar Median radar  Bird band cross sect ion (cm2) cross section (cm2)  (irackle X 16 6.9 s 25 12  UHF 0.57 0.45  Sparrow X 1.6 0.8 s 14 l l  UflF 0.02 0.02  Pigeon X 15 6.4 s 80 32  UHF I I 8.0  described statistically.
There is some evidence to indicate that the probability density function  for the radar cross section of (or received power from) a single bird in flight is log-normal.
The  mean-to-median ratio of the cross section.
which is a measure of the amount of fluctuation in  the cross section, is found to be independent of the magnitude of the radar cross section but is  a function of the physical size of the bird relative to the radar wavelength.91 Thus measure­ ments of the mean-to-median ratio might be used to determine the size or the bird b':'ing  observed.
The fluctuations in the radar cross section have been attributed to the relative  motions between the various parts of the bird and to changes in aspect, as well as to the  wing-beat frequency.
For example, spectral measurements of a small nocturnal migrant (a  pipit) showed a wing-beat frequency of J 5.8 Hz; and a migrating rapit (a honey buzzard) gave  a rrcqucncy or 3.2 Hz.92 J\ mallard produced a frequency of 6.5 Hz, plus harmonics at 13 and  N  E u  ~ u  QJ  V,  "' "' e u  0 u 0 er 100 -·---•--,-r--·-~----------~ 90 .
 80  70  60  50 ·  40 ("  30  20  10  9 • 8  7  r, ry  5 i;:  ~  4 (/)  ,,  b{.) ----· •  ----x  ~ (l  0 _, \  \ \ x---x - \ I  \ I  \ I - \ I "3  \ I CJ'>  '\ I g' .x I .
;: \ g I cu \ er, :r  \ I  "  Weight of bird, g figure 13.14 Radar cross section of birds  (with closed wings) at S band.
Vertical  polarization.
Solid circles apply to average  values t 20° around broadside, x's apply to  the avf"tafle' of the ± 20" sector about the  head and the ± 20° sector about the tail.
 (Afcer Ho11yhtm1 arui Smith.93)  510 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  19.5 Hz.97 The wing-beat frequency fin hertz and the length I or the wing in millimeters are  found98 to be related byjl0·827 = 572.
The term bird actitiitymod"lation (BAM) has been applied  to the distinctive waveforms obtained from hirds.92 The spectral components of the BAM  pattern or a bird in flight are said to be remarkably stable97 and suited for dekrmining  identity.
 Insects.
120 Even though they are small, insects are readily detected by radar, and in sufficient  numbers can clutter the display and reduce the capability or a radar to detect desired targets A  radar cross section or 0.1 cm 2, which might correspond to an insect the size of a housetly at K,.
 band (8.6 cm wavelength),99 can be detected at a range of about 11 nmi by a radar capable of  seeing a 1 m2 target at 200 nmi.
Even modest insect concentrations (one insect in 104 mj) can  cause angel activity which can be classed as moderate.100  At X.
band, radar cross section measurements of a variety of insects rangc>from 0.02 to  9.6 cm2 with longitudinal polarization, and from 0.01 to 0.96 cm2 for transverse  polarization.101 A desert locust102 or a honeybee101 might have a cross section of about l cm2  at X band.
At S band the cross section of a cabbage looper moth is about 2 x 10-l cm2, and  for an adult field cricket it is 0.1 cm2 .103 The cross section of insects bdow X band is  approximately proportional to the fourth-power of the frequency.
104· 1°5 Appreciable echoes  are obtained only when insect body lengths are greater than a third of the radar wavelength.
 Insects observed broadside have echoes 10 to 1000 times greater than when viewed  end-on.116  Heavy angel activity can be readily produced by insect concentrations that would scarcely  cause visual awareness.
Insects can be carried by the wind; therefore angels due to insects  might be expected to have the velocity of the wind.
Insect echoes are more likely to be found a1  the lower altitudes, near dawn and twilight.
The majority of insects are incapable of flight at  temperatures below 40°F (4.5°C) or above 90°F (32°C); consequently.
large concentrations of  insect angel echoes would not be expected outside this temperature range.
As with clutter due  to birds, sensitivity time control (STC) can reduce the adverse effects of clutter due to insects.
 Clear-air turbulence.
Some types of angel echoes which are nonpoint targets are attributed 10  atmospheric effects rather than to birds or inst!cts.
Early attempts to account for such echoes  assumed specular reflection from gradients in the refractive index (dielectric constant) of the  atmosphere.
Theoretical calculations of the necessary gradients required to account for the  observed angel reflections were excessively large compared to what is found in the real atmo­ sphere.
Instead.
it is believed that the observed backscattering can be explained as reflections  from atmospheric turbulence associated with inhomogeneities in the refractive index These  inhomogeneities might be caused by differences in the water vapor.
temperature, and pressure.
 At low altitude, variations in the water-vapor pressure (humidity) are probably the dominant  effect.
At high altitude, there is little water vapor, and changes in temperature have the mosl  effect on the refractive index.
 Reflections from clear-air turbulence are thus a potential source of radar angel echoes.
 Turbulent motion is characterized by a variable velocity field and lhL· pn.:sencc of nonu111for­ mities, or eddies, that produce mixing.
The atmosphere can be assumed to bi.! turbulent  everywhere, but its intensity varies widely both in space and time.
It is only when turbulence is  concentrated into regions of greater or lesser intensity than its surroundings that it is of  interest as an electromagnetic scatterer.
There are at least two types of turbulent atmospheric  formations that can result in angel activity.
One is the co,wective all or p/11me 1ha1 occurs in  the lower part of the atmosphere.
The other is the atmospheric hori::011ta/ layer that can occur  at any altitude.
The latter is the form of turbulent effect that aircraft encounter at the higher  RADAR CLUTIER ~;f I  altitudes.
The convective cell is generally of greater turbulent intensity than the layer, but it  does not extend over as wide an area of space and is not present as often as layers seem to be.
 Convective cells, which are also called thermals, are the mechanism by which birds and  gliders soar.
When the surface of the earth is heated sufficiently so that the air becomes hotter  than its surroundings, the buoyancy of the heated air will cause it to rise.
If the source of heat is  fixed, the rise of buoyant air is called a thermal plume.
When the rising buoyant air is  separated from the ground it may break away and form a freely floating thermal (convective  cell).
especially if there is a wind.
Near the ground the convective cells might he a few tens of  meters in diameter.
As they rise, they grow in size and can reach a diameter of 1 to 3 km.
They  rise until they lose buoyancy or until they reach a level where condensation takes place.
The  tops of the cells might be at altitudes from I lo 2 km.
An individual cell might have a life of  from 15 to 30 minutes.
The cells can drift with the wind and align themselves in "streets."  Much of the knowledge of the hehavior of convective cells has been obtained from radar  measurements.70·10~ inR  An atmospheric layer is a stratum within which the mean vertical gradient and/or the  variance of rdractive index arc much greater than elsewhere.
Layers may be from a few meters  to more than a hundred meters in vertical thickness and might extend in the horizontal from  about one kilometer to several tens of kilometers.
Layers have been observed from altitudes of  ahout 0.3 to more than 22 km.
with the greatest number appearing in the vicinity of 1 to  2 km.107·109 A typical layer associated with a subsidence inversion might exhibit a decrease of  about 20N units in a thickness of30 to 50 m110 [where N = (n -1)106, n = refractive index].
 The echoes from clear-air turbulence are quite weak and are seen only by high-power  radar.
The basic theory for scattering from homogeneous and isotropic turbulent media was  first given by Tatarsk i.111 · 112 The scattering mechanism from turbulent media is similar to  Bragg scatter in that a radar of wavelength A.
scatters from that particular component of the  turbulence with eddy sizes equal to ,l../2.
The volume renectivity, or radar cross section (m2) per  cubic volume.
from a turbulent medium is  11 = 0.38C~,l..
-113 (13.34)  where C~.
the structure constant.
represents a measure of the intensity of the refractive-index  fluctuations.
and A is the radar wavelength.
At altitudes of several hundred meters.
values of C;  arc between 10 q and 10 11 m ·· 2'3• which correspond to a volume retlcctivity of about  0.82 x 10 9 to 0.82 x 10 11 m -1 at S band (A.= 10 cm).
This is quite low as can be seen by  comparison of the volume reflectivity for rain in Fig.
13.12.
At 10 km altitude C; is approxi­ mately 10 O m 2 -'.
An S-band radar with one degree beamwidth and 1 11s pulsewidth  viewing a turbulent medium with 11 = 10-10 m-1 yields a radar cross section at 10 km of  about J x 10-4 m2.
Thus.
angel echoes from.
clear-air turbulence are not likely to bother most  radars.
 Ocher angel echoes.
It has been suggested that other forms of meteorological angels are the  mantle-shaped echoes (inverted U-or V-shape) associated with the upper surfaces of cu­ mulus clouds.
and echoes believed to be produced by the boundary surfaces between differen­ tially moistened surface air over adjacent cold and warm water.113 Radar also can detect the  passage of an invisible sea breeze as it moves toward the shore.70·100 Occasionally radar  echoes may be obtained from large mineral or organic particles carried into the air by heavy  winds or thundcrstorms.100 Echoes have also been received from the vicinity of forest fires and  from the smoke plumes of dump fires.100 The reflectivity of smoke particles is too small to  account for these rcnections, but the echoes might be due to the numerous large particles and  debris sometimes present in the air above the fires.
The heat from the fire also might cause  512 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  atmospheric turbulence which is detectable by radar.
"Ring echoes " have been observed on  PPI displays that start at a point and form a rapidly expanding ring.100 After one ring grows  to a diameter of several miles, a second -ring forms.
Other rings can form similarly.
They  expand at velocities ranging from 20 to 30 knots and can attain diameters of 30 km or more.
 These ring-angels are associated with birds flying away from roosting areas.
Angels can also be  caused by second-time-around echoes or large signals that enter the radar via the antenna  sidelobes.
 REFERENCES  1.
Skolnik, M.
I.: Sea Echo, chap.
26 of "Radar Handbook," M.
I.
Skolnik (ed.) McGchw-Hill Book  Company, New York, 1970.
 2.
Guinard, N.
W., J.
T.
Ransone, Jr., and J.C.
Daley: Variation of the NRCS of the Sea with Increasing  Roughness, J.
Geophys.
Res., vol.
76, pp.
1525-1538, Feb.
20, 1971.
 3.
Daley, J.
C., J.
T.
Ransone, Jr., and J.
A.
Burkett: Radar Sea Return-JOSS I, Naval Research  Laboratory Report 7268, Washington, D.C., May 11, 1971.
 4.
Daley, J.
C., J.
T.
Ransone, Jr., J.
A.
Burkett, and J.
R.
Duncan: Upwind-Downwind-Crosswind  Sea-Clutter Measurements, Naval Research Laboratory Report 6881, Washington, D.C., Apr.
14, 1969.
 5.
Daley, J.
C., J.
T.
Ransone, Jr., and W.
T.
Davis: Radar Sea Return-JOSS II, Nal'al Research  Laboratory Report 7534, Washington, D.C., Feb.
21, 1973.
 6.
Moskowitz, L.
I.: The Wave Spectrum and Windspeed as Descriptors of the Ocean Surface, N,,val  Research Laboratory Report 7626, Washington, D.C., Oct.
30, 1973.
 7.
Macdonald, F.
C.: Characteristics of Radar Sea Clutter, pt !-Persistent Target-Like Echoes in Sea  Clutter, Naval Research Laboratory Report 4902, Washington, D.C., Mar.
19, 1957.
 8.
Lewis, B.
L., and I.
D.
Olin: Some Recent Observations of Sea Spikes, International Confert111ce  RADAR-77, pp.
115-119, Oct.
25-28, 1977, IEE (London) Conference Publication no.
155.
 9.
Long, M.
W.: "Radar Reflectivity of Land and Sea," Lexington Books, D.
C.
Heath and Co.,  Lexington, Mass., 1975.
 10.
Lewis, B.
L., J.P.
Hansen, I.
D.
Olin, and V.
Cavaleri: High-Resolution Radar Scattering Character­ istics of a Disturbed Sea Surface and Floating Debris, Naval Resarcl1 Ltihorutory Report 813 I,  Washington, D.C., July 29, 1977.
 11.
Williams, P.
D.
L.: Limitations or Radar Techniques ror the Detection of Small Surface Targets in  Clutter, The Radio and Electronic Engineer, vol.
45, pp.
379-389, August, 1975.
 12.
Trunk, G.
V., and S.
F.
George: Detection of Targets in Non-Gaussian Sea Clutter, IEEE Trw1s., vol.
 AES-6, pp.
620-628, September, 1970.
 13.
Trunk, G.
V.: Radar Properties or Non-Rayleigh Sea Clutter, I EU:: Trw1s., vol.
Al:S-8, pp.
I% 204,  March, 1972.
 14.
Schleher, D.
C.: Radar Detection in Weibull Clutter, IEEE Trans., vol.
A ES-12, pp.
736-743, Novem­ ber, 1976.
 15.
Fay, F.
A., J.
Clarke, and R.
S.
Peters: Weibull Distribution Applies to Sea Clutter, lnter11acio11al  Co,!ference RADAR-77, pp.
101-104, IEE Conference Publication no.
155.
 16.
Kerr, D.
E.
(ed.): "Propagation of Short Radio Waves," MIT Radiation Laboratory Series, vol.
13,  McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York, 1951.
 17.
Goldstein, H.: Frequency Dependence of the Properties of Sea Echo, Phys.
Rm, vol.
70, pp.
938-946,  Dec.
1 and 15, 1946.
 18.
Katzin, M.: On the Mechanisms of Radar Sea Clutter, Proc.
IRE, vol.
45, pp.
44-54, January, 1957.
 19.
Wright, J.
W.: A New Model for Sea Clutter, IEEE Trans., vol.
AP-16, pp.
217-223, March, 1968.
 20.
Guinard, N.
W., and J.C.
Daley: An Experimental Study of a Sea Clutter Model, Proc.
I EE£, vol.
58,  pp.
543-550, April, 1970.
 21.
Croney, J.: Civil Marine Radar, chap.
31 of" Radar Handbook," M.
I.
Skolnik (ed.), McGraw-Hill  Book Company, New York, 1970.
 22.
Paoli, L.: Sea Clutter Cancellation & Attenuation in Modern Marine Radars, Rivista Tecnia Selenia,  (Rome, Italy), vol.
3, no.
4, pp.
1-9, 1976.
 23.
Croney, J.: Improved Radar Visibility of Small Targets in Sea Clutter, The Radio w1d Eleccro11ic  Engineer, vol.
32, pp.
135-148, September, 1966.
 RADAR CLUTIER 513  24.
Croney, J., and A.
Woroncow: Dependence of Sea Clutter Decorrelation Improvements Upon Wave  Height, I EE JIit.
Cm1fonAdt•ances in Marine Navigational.Aids, July 25-27, 1972, IEE (London)  Conference Publication no.
87, pp.
SJ-59.
 25.
Valcn7llela.
G.
R ..
and M.
R.
Laing: Study of Doppler Spectra of Radar Sea Echo.
J.
Geopl1ys.
Re.~ .•  vol.
75, pp.
551 563, Jan.
20.
1970.
 26.
Trunk, G.
V.: Trimmed-Mean Detector for Noncoherent Distributions.
Na11al Researd, Lahoratorr  Report 6997.
W Jshington.
D.C.
Dec.
11, 1969.
 27.
Trunk.
(j.
V.: Fmthcr Rl•sults on the Detection of Targets in Non-(iaussian Sea Clutter, IEEE  Tra11s .• vol.
AES-7.
pp.
553 556, May.
1971.
 28.
Schlcher.
D.
C.: Radar Detection in Log-Normal Clutter, IEEE 1975 lntemationa/ Radar Confere11ce.
 Arlington.
Va .• Apr.
21 23.
1975.
pp.
262 267.
 29.
Jakeman.
E ..
and P.
N.
Pusey: A Model for Non-Rayleigh Sea Echo, IEEE Trans .• vol.
AP-24.
pp.
 R06 814.
November.
1976.
 30.
Croney.
J.: Clutter and Its Reduction on Shipborne Radars.
J11ternatio11al Conference 011 Radar  Pr!'se11t and F11wre.
Oct.
23-25, 1973.
IEE (London) Conference Publication no.
105.
pp.
213 220.
 31.
Croney.
J..
A.
Woroncow.
and B.
R.
Gladman: Further Observation on the Detection of Small  Targets in Sea Clutter, The Radio and Electronic E11gi11ecr, vol.
45, pp.
105--115, March.
1975.
 32.
Croney.
J.
· Clutter on Radar Displays, Wireless Engr., vol.
33, pp.
83--96.
April, 1956.
 3:t Wylie.
F.
J.: "The Use of Radar at Sea," Hollis and Carter.
Ltd., London.
1968.
 34.
Harrison.
A.: Marine Radar Today -A Review, Tlie Radio and Eleclronic Engineer, vol.
47.
pp.
 177 183.
April.
1977.
.
 35.
Moore.
R.
K.: Ground Echo, chap.
25 of" Radar Handbook," M.
I.
Skolnik (ed.).
McGraw-Hill  Rook Co ..
New York, 1970.
 36.
Harton.
D K : "Radars.
vol.
5, Radar Clutter." Artech House, Inc., Dedham.
Mass ..
1975.
(A collec­ tion of 3R reprints on sea, land, and atmospheric clutter.)  37.
l)aky.
J.
C ..
W.
T.
Davis.
J.
R.
Duncan, and M.
B.
Laing: NRL Terrain Clutter Study.
Phase II.
 Narn/ Research Lahoratory Report 6749, Washington, D.C..
Oct.
21, 1968.
 3H.
Kat7.
I..
and L.
M.
Spetner: Polarization and Depression-Angle Dependence of Radar Terrain  R~turn.
J.
Res.
Nat.
Bur.
Stds ..
vol.
64D, pp.
483-486, September/October, 1960.
 39.
Krason.
II ..
and G.
Randig: Terrain Backscattering Characteristics at Low Grazing Angles for .\'­ and S-Band.
Proc.
IEEE.
vol.
54, pp.
1964-1965, December, 1966.
 40.
Cosgriff.
R.
L.
W.
H.
Peake.
and R.
C.
Taylor: Terrain Scattering Properties for Sensor System  Design (Terrain Hand hook II).
E11gi11eeri11g Experiment Station Bulletin 110.
181.
The Ohio State  University.
Columbus, Ohio, May, 1960.
(Reprinted in ref.
36.)  41 Dyer.
F.
B ..
N.
C Currie.
and M.
S.
Applegate: Radar Backscatter from Land, Sea.
Rain, and Snow at  Millimeter Wavelengths.
International Co11fere11ce RADAR-77, pp.
559-563, 25-28 Oct., 1977.
JEE  (London) Conference Publication no.
155.
 42.
Barton.
D.
K ..
and Shrader, W.
W.: lnterclutter Visibility in MTI Systems, IEEE Eascon Record.
 1969.
pp.
294 297.
.
 4J.
Rigden.
C.
J.: High Resolution Land Cluller Characteristics, IEE Conf.
Pub!.
No.
105.
Radar.
 Pn·se11t a11d f11t11re.
London, Oct.
23-25, 1973, pp.
227-232.
·  44.
Valenz~la.
G.
R., and M.
B.
Laing: Point-Scatterer Formulation of Terrain Clutter Statistics, Nara/  Resmrcl, Lahoratory Report 7459.
Sept.
27, 1972, Washington.
D.C.
 45.
Warden, M.
P.: An Experimental Study of Some.Clutter Characteristics, AGARD Co,!( Proc.
110.
66  011 Adranced Radar Systems, November, 1970.
 46.
Ulaby.
F.
T ..
W.
H.
Stiles.
L.
F.
Dellwig, and B.
C.
Hanson: Experiments on the Radar Backscatter of  Snow.
IEEE Trans ..
vol.
GE-15.
pp.
185-189, October, 1977.
 47.
Ringwalt.
I) L.
and F.
C.
MacDonald: Terrain Clutter Measurements in the Far North.
Report o{  NRL l'royress.
Naval Research Laboratory, Washington.
D.C., pp.
9-14, December.
1956.
 48.
Ulahy.
F.
T.: Radar Response to Vegetation, IEEE Trans .• vol.
AP-23.
pp.
36-45.
January, 1975.
 49.
lllahy.
F.
T..
T.
F.
Bush, and P.
P.
Datlivala: Radar Response to Vegetation II: 8-18 GHz Band.
 IEEE Trans, vol.
AP-23.
pp.
608 618.
September, 1975.
 50.
Ulahy.
F.
T..
and P.
P.
Batlivala: Diurnal Variations of Radar Backscatter from a Vegetation Canopy,  IEEE Trans., vol.
AP-24, pp.
11 17.
January.
1976.
 51.
Bush.
T.
F ..
and F.
T.
Ulaby: Radar Return from a Continuous Vegetation Canopy, IEEE Trans ..
 vol.
AP-24, pp.
269 276, May.
1976.
 52.
Ulaby, F.
T..
and T.
F.
Bush: Corn Growth as Monitored by Rada1.
IEEE Trans .• vol.
AP-24.
pp.
 819-828.
November.
1976.
 5-1.
clcloor.
G.
P., A.
A.
Jurriens.
and H.
Gravestein: The Radar Backscatter from Selected Agricultural  Crops.
IEEE Trans., vol.
GE-12, pp.
70-77, April, 1974.
 514 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  54.
Bush, T.
F., F.
T.
Ulaby, and W.
H.
Peake: Variability in the Measurement of Radar Backscatter,  IEEE Trans., vol.
AP-24, pp.
896-899, November, 1976.
 55.
Clapp, R.
E.: A Theoretical and Experimental Study of Radar Ground Return.
,\f/T Radiation  Laboratory Rept.
1024, April.
1946.
 56.
Twersky, V.: On Scattering and Rdlection of Electromagnetic Waves hy Rough Surface~.
IR I:."  Trans., vol.
AP-5, pp.
81-90, January, 1957.
 57.
Katz, I., and L.
M.
Spetner: Two Statistical Models of Radar Return.
I RE Trw1s ..
vol.
A P-K.
pp.
 242-246.
May.
1960.
 58.
Beckmann, P ..
and A.
Spizzichino: ..
The Scattering of Electrom,ignetic Wav.:s from Rough Sur­ faces," The Macmillan Company, New York.
1963.
 59.
Kalmus, H.
P.: Doppler Wave Recognition with High Clutter Rejection.
I £EE Tra11s., vol.
A ES-3  Supplement, no.
6, pp.
334-339, November, 1967.
 60.
Ruze, J., F.
I.
Sheftman, and D.
A.
Cahlander: Radar Ground-Clutter Shields.
Proc.
I£££.
vol.
54.
 pp.
1171-1183, September, 1966.
 61.
Becker, J.
E., and J.-C.
Sureau: Control of Radar Site Environment by Use of Fences.
I£££ Trans.
 vol.
AP-14, pp.
768-773, November, 1966.
J  62.
Becker, J.E., and R.
E.
Millett: A Double-Slot Radar Fence for Increased Clutter Suppression, I £EE  Trans., vol.
AP-16, pp.
103-108, January.
1968.
 63.
Albersheim.
W.
J.: Elevation Tracking Through Clutter Fences.
I EE£ Tra11s.
vol.
AES-3.
no.
6  (EASTCON Suppl.), pp.
366-373, November, 1967.
 64.
Shrader, W.W.: Moving Target Indication Radar, IEEE NEREM 74 Record.
pt 4: Radar Syst.:ms  and Components, Oct.
28-31, 1974, pp.
18-26, IEEE Catalog no.
74 CHO 934-0 NEREM.
 65.
Parashar, S.
K., R.
M.
Haralick, R.
K.
Moore, and A.
W.
Biggs: Radar Scatterometer Discrimination  of Sea-Ice Types, IEEE Trans., vol.
GE-15, pp.
83-87, April.
1977.
 66.
Williams, P.
D.
L.: Detection of Sea Ice Growlers by Radar, I EE Co,!( Puhl.
no.
105, Radar· Prt'St'lll  and Fut11re, London, Oct.
23-25, 1973, pp.
239-244.
 67.
Waite, A.
H., and S.
J.
Schmidt: Gross Errors in Height Indication from Pulsed Radar Altimetas  Operating over Thick Ice or Snow, Proc.
IRE, vol.
50, pp.
1515-1520, June, 1962.
 68.
Pilon, R.
0., and C.
G.
Purves: Radar Imagery of Oil Slicks, I £EE Trans., vol.
AES-9.
pp.
630 636,  September, 1973.
 69.
Probert-Jones, J.
R.: The Radar Equation in Meteorology, Quart.
J.
Ro_v.
Mer.:or.
Soc., vol.
88, pp.
 485-495, 1962.
 70.
Battan, L.
J .: "Radar Observation of the Atmosphere," Vnil'.
of Chicago Press, Chicago, Ill., 1973.
 71.
Gunn, K.
L.
S., and T.
W.
R.
East: The Microwave Properties of Precipitation Particks.
Quart.
J.
 Roy.
Meteor.
Soc., vol.
80, pp.
522-545, October, 1954.
 72.
Haddock, F.
T.: Scattering and Attenuation of Microwave Radiation Through Rain.
Nat•al Research  Laboratory, Washington, D.C.
(unpublished manuscript), 1948.
 73.
Smith, P.
L., Jr., K.
R.
Hardy, and K.
M.
Glover: Applications of Radar to Meteorological Opera­ tions and Research, Proc.
IEEE, vol.
62, pp.
724-745, June, 1974.
 74.
Gunn, K.
L.
S., and J.
S.
Marshall: The Distribution with Size of Aggregate Snowflakes, J.
Meteor.,  · vol.
15, pp.
452-466, 1958.
 75.
Sek hon, R.
S., and R.
C.
Srivastava: Snow Size Spectra and Radar Reflectivity, J.
Atmos.
Sci., vol.
27,  pp.
299-307, 1970.
 76.
Puhakka, T.: On the Dependence of the Z-R Relation on the Temperature in Snowfall, Preprints 1611,  Radar Meteorology Conference, Am.
Meteor.
Soc., Apr.
22-24, 1975, Houston, Texas, pp.
504 507.
 77.
Austin, P.
M.: Radar Measurements of the Distribution of Precipitation in New England Storms,  Proc.
10th Weather Radar Conj., pp.
247-254, 1963.
 78.
Saxton, J.
A.: The Influence of Atmospheric Conditions on Radar Performance, J.
Inst.
Navigation  (London), vol.
11, pp.
290-303, 1958.
 79.
Schneider, A.
B., and P.
D.
L.
Williams: Circular Polarization in Radars, Radio w1d £/t'Ctronk  Engineer, vol.
47, no.
1/2, pp.
11-29, January/February, 1976.
 80.
Offutt, W.
B.: A Review of Circular Polarization as a Means of Precipitation Clutter Suppression and  Examples, Proc.
Natl.
Electronics Conf (Chicago).
vol.
11, pp.
94-100, 1955.
 81.
Hendry, A., and G.
C.
McCormick: Deterioration of Circular-polarization Clutter Cancellation in  Anisotropic Precipitation Media, Electronics Letters, vol.
10, no.
10, pp.
165-166, May 16, 1974.
 82.
Nathanson, F.
E.: Adaptive Circular Polarization, IEEE 1975 International Radar Con./i.•r.:11c.:, A pr.
 21-23, 1975, pp.
221-225.
 83.
White, W.
D.: Circular Polarization Cµts Rain Clutter, Electronics, vol.
27, pp.
158-160, March,  1954.
 84.
McFee, R., and T.
M.
Maher: Effect of Surface Reflections on Rain Cancellation of Circularly  Polarized Radars, IRE Trans., vol.
AP-7, pp.
199-201, April, 1959.
 RADAR CLUTIER 515  85.
Beasley.
E.W.: Effect of Surface Reflections on Rain Cancellation in Radars Using Circular Polariza­ tion.
Proc IEEE.
vol.
54.
pp.
2000--2(X)I.
December: 1966.
 86.
Kalafus.
R.
M.: Rain Cancellation Deterioration Due lo Surface Retleclions in Ground-Mapping  Radars Using Circular Polarization.
IEEE Trans .• vol.
AP-23, pp.
269-271.
March.
1975.
 87.
Gent.
H ..
I.
M.
Hunter.
and N.
P.
Robinson: Polarization of Radar Echoes, Including Aircrart.
 Precipitation.
and Terrain.
Proc.
IEE.
vol.
I lO.
pp.
2139--2148, December.
1963.
 88.
Croney.
J.: The Reduction of Sea and Rain Clutter in Marine Radars, J.
111st.
Nc.wigatio11 (Lv11do11),  vol.
7.
pp 175 IXO.
190 192.
1954.
 89.
Croney.
J : Clutter 011 Radar Displays.
Wireless E11w .• vol.
.'\3, pp.
83 96.
April.
1956.
 90.
Taylor J W ..
Jr..
and J.
Mattern: Receivers.
chap.
5 of Radar lla11dhook.
M.
I.
Skolnik (ed.).
 McGraw-Hill Book Company.
New York.
1970.
 91.
Konrad.
T.
< i.
J .
.I.
!licks.
and F.
B.
Dohson: Radar Characteristics of Birds in Flight, Science.
vol.
 159.
pp 274 280.
Jan.19.1968.
.
 92.
Houghton.
F.
W.
F.
Black well.
and T.
A.
Wilmot: Bird Strike and the Radar Properties of Birds,  l11tcmt1tio11c1I Co11( 011 Rc1dc1r l'resellf a11d Future.
Oct.
2J 25.
1973.
pp.
257 262.
I EE Conference  Puh.
no.
105.
 93.
Houghton.
F.
W.
and N.
J.
Smith: Radar Echoing Areas of Birds.
Royal Radar Estahlishmellt  /\fe111ora11d11m no.
2557.
July.
1969, Malvern, England.
 94.
Blacksmith.
P ..
Jr ..
and R.
B.
Mack: On Measuring the Radar Cross Sections of Ducks and Chickens,  Proc.
IEEE.
vol.
53.
p.
I 125, August, 1965.
 95.
Flock.
W.
L.: Monitoring Bird Movements by Radar, IEEE Spectrum, vol.
5, pp.
62-66, June, 1968.
 96.
Eastwood.
L: "Radar Ornithology," Methuen & Co., Ltd., London.
1967.
 97.
Blackwell.
F ..
and E.W.
Houghton: Radar Tracking and Identification of Wild Duck During the  Autumn Migration.
!'roe.
World Con( 011 Bird Hazards co Aircraft, Canada, pp.
359-376, 1969.
 98.
Flock, W.
L..
and J.
L.
Green: The Detection and Identification of Birds in Flight.
Using Coherent  and Noncoherent Radars, Proc.
IEEE, vol.
62, pp.
745-753, June, 1974.
 99.
Tolbert, C.
W ..
A.
W.
Straiton.
and C.
0.
Britt: Phantom Radar Targets at Millimeter Radio  Wavelengths.
I RE Trans ..
vol.
AP-6, pp.
380-384, October, 1958.
 100.
Plank.
V.
G.: A Meteorological Study of Radar Angels.
U.S.A.F.
Camhridge Researclt Cellter Geophys.
 Research Papers, no.
52.
July; 1956, AFCRC-TR-56-21 l.
AD 98752.
 IOI.
Hajovsky.
R.
G ..
A.
P.
Deam.
and A.
H.
LaGrone: Radar Reflections from Insects in the Lower  Atmosphere, IEEE Trans., vol.
AP-14, pp.
224-227, March, 1966.
 102.
Riley.
J.
R.: Angular and Temporal Variations in the Radar Cross-Sections of Insects, Proc.
I EE.
vol.
 120.
pp.
1229 1232.
October, 1973.
 103.
Richter, J.
H ..
and D.R.
Jensen: Radar Cross-Section Measurements of Insects, Proc.
IEEE, vol.
61,  pp.
143 · 144.
January, 1973.
 104.
Glover, K.
M ..
K.
R.
Hardy, T.
G.
Konrad, W.
N.
Sullivan, and A.
S.
Michaels: Radar Observations  of Insects in Free Flight.
Science.
vol.
154, pp.
967-972, 1966.
 105.
Hardy, K.
R., and I.
Katz: Probing the Clear Atmosphere with High Power, High Resolution  Radars, Proc.
IEEE.
vol.
57, pp.
468-480, April, 1969.
 106.
Konrad, T.
G.: The Dynamics of the Convective Process in Clear Air as Seen by Radar, J.
Atm.
Sci.,  vol.
27.'pp.
1138-1147, November, 1970.
 107.
Gossard.
E.
E., D.
R.
Jensen.
and J.
H.
Richter: An Analytical Study of Tropospheric Structure as  Seen by High-Resolution Radar, J.
Atm.
Sci., vol.
28, pp.
794-807, July, 1971.
 108.
Gossard, E.
E., and W.
H Hooke:" Waves in the Atmosphere," Elsevier Scientific Publishing Co.,  New York, 1975.
 109.
Saxton J.
A., J.
A.
Lane, R.
W.
Meadows, and P.A.
Matthews: Layer Structure of the Troposphere,  !'roe.
IEE.
vol.
Ill, pp.
275-283, February, 1964.
 110.
Lane, J.
A.: Radar Echoes from Clear Air in Relation to Refractive-Index Variations in the Tropo­ sphere, Proc.
IEE, vol.
116, pp.
1956-1660, October, 1969.
 111.
Tatarski, V.
I.:" Wave Propagation in a Turbulent Medium," McGraw-Hill Book Co., New York,  1961.
 112.
Tatarski, V.
I.: The Effects of the Turbulent Atmosphere on Wave Propagation, TT68-50464, Na­ tional Technical Information Service, Springfield, VA, 1971.
 113.
Atlas, D.: Meteorological "Angel" Echoes, J.
Meteorol., vol.
16, pp.
6-l l, February, 1959.
 114.
George, S.
F.: The Detection of Nonnuctuating Targets in Log-Normal Clutter.
Naval Research  l.alwracorJ' Report 6796, Washingto11, D.C., Oct.
4, 1968.
 115.
Goldstein.
G.
B.: False-Alarm Regulation in Log-Normal and Weibull Clutter, IEEE Trans., vol.
 AES-9, pp 84 -92.
January.
1973.
 116.
Schaerer, G.
W.: Radar Observations or Insect Flight, chap.
8, of" Insect Flight," R.
C.
Rainey (ed.),  Blackwell Scientific Publications.
London.
1976.
 516 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  117.
Peebles, P.
Z ..
Jr.: Radar Rain Clutter Cancdlation Bounds Using Circular Polari.rntion.
/1:.f.f /1)75  lmer11atio11al Radar C01!f"em1ce, Apr.
21-23, 1975, Arlington, Va, pp.
210 214, IEEE Publication 75  CHO 938-1 AES.
 118.
Bass.
F.
G., I.
M.
Fuks, A.
LKalmy"kov,l:E.
Ostrovsky, and A.
D.
Rosenberg: Very High Frequency  Radiowave Scattering by a Disturbed Sea Surace, /EE£ Trans., vol.
AP-16, pp.
554· 568.
Scp1cmh1:r,  1968.
 119.
Kdlmykov.
A.
I., and V.
V.
Pustovoytcnko: On Polarilation Features of Radio Signals Scattered  From the Sea Surface at Small Grazing Angles, J.
Geopli;•s.
Res., vol.
81.
no.
12.
pp.
1960 1964.
Apr.
 20.
1976.
 120.
Greneker, E.
F., and M.
A.
Corbin: Radar Reflectivity of Airborne Insects, A Literalurc Survey.
 Georgia lmtitllte qf' Teclmolog,I' Radar and Instrt11w!t11arion Lahoratory, Atlanta, Ga., sponsored by  Western Cotton Research Laboratory, U.S.
Dept.
of Agriculture.
 ..}  CHAPTER  FOURTEEN  OTHER RADAR TOPICS  14.l SYNTHETIC APERTURE RADAR 1 3  A synthetic aperture radar (SAR) achieves high resolution in the cross-range dimension by  taking advantage of the motion of the vehicle carrying the radar to synthesize the elTect or a  large antenna aperture.
The imaging or the earth's surface by SAR to provide a maplike  display can be applied to military reconnaissance, measurement of sea state and ocean wave  conditions.
geological and mineral explorations, and other remote sensing applications.98  The resolution in the cross-range dimension of a conventional antenna is  ( 14.1)  where R is the range and On is the beamwidth.
The narrower the beamwidth, the better the  resolution (smaller ,\, ).
There is a limit, however, to the minimum beam width of a practical  microwave antenna because of the difficulty of achieving and maintaining the necessary  mechanical and electrical tolerances (Secs.
7.8 and 8.8).
If the antenna beamwidth were a~  small as 0.2°,the resolution <>c, at a range of 100 km would be about 350 m, which is far larger  than the fraction or a meter resolution possible in the range coordinate with the use of  pulse-compression radar.
SAR permits the attainment of high resolution by using the motion  oft he vehicle to generate the antenna aperture sequentially rather than simulta11eo11sly as with a  conventional array antenna.
In this section, the radar may be thought of as carried by an  aircrart.
but similar arguments apply for satellites or other moving vehicles.
 Figure 14.1 shows an aircraft traveling with a constant velocity v along a straight path.
Jts  radar antenna is mounted so as to radiate in the direction perpendicular to the direction of  motion.
Such a radar is known as a sidelooking radar, or SLR.
The x's in the figure represent  the position of the ra<lar a11tc1111a each time a pulse is transmitted.
If the echo received at each  position is stored and if the last II pulses are combined (added together), the effect will be  similar to a linear-array antenna whose length is the distance traveled during the transmission  of the n pulses.
The "clement" spacing of the synthesized antenna is equal to the distance  traveled by the aircraft between pulse transmissions, or de vTP = v/f~, where TP is the pulse­ repetition period and./~ is the pulse-repetition frequency.
 517  518 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  ,,  Figure 14.l Geometry of the synthetic aperture radar  traveling with a velocity v.
The radar transmits a pulse at  each position marked by an x.
f P = pulse repetition  frequency.
 Resolution of the SAR.
The beam width of a conventional antenna of width D at a wavelength  ).
is  (14.2)  where k is a constant that depends on the shape of the current distribution across-{he aperture.
 (The constant k might vary from 0.9 to 1.3 or greater.) For convenience of analysis, take k = 1.
 Substituting Eq.
(14.2) into (14.1) gives the cross-range resolution as  bcr = R)./D  The beamwidth of a synthetic aperture antenna of effective length Le is similarly  () s = kA./2Le ( 14 3)  (14.4)  The factor 2 appears in the denominator because of the two-way propagation path from the  .1ntenna "element" to the target and back as compared with the one-way path of a conven­ tit,nal antenna.
As a consequence of the two-way path the phase difference between the equally  spaced elements of a synthetic array is twice that of a conventional array with the same  spacing.
(The terms synthetic array and synthetic aperture are used interchangeably here.)  Again the factor k will be taken to be unity.
 There are two fundamental limits to the maximum effective length of the synthetic aper­ ture.
One limit is determined by the width of the region illuminated at the range R by the real  antenna.
The length of the effective aperture Le can be no greater than the width of the  illuminated region as given by Eq.
(14.3).
Thus Le~ R()8.
Note that the maximum effective  Jengt h varies directly as the range.
The other limit is determined by the far field of the synthetic  apaturc:; i.e., by the need to restrict the aperture size so that the phase front can be considered  as a plane wave.
When this condition applies, the SAR is called unfocused.
Figure 14.2 defines  the maximum aperture of an unfocused SAR s,t.:h that the difference between the minimum  and maximum (two-way) paths is a quarter wavekngtl; From this geometry it can be derived  that the eITective length Le of the synthesized antenna h jRJ.., so that the cross-range resolu­ tion for the unfocused synthetic antenna is  '5cr = jRJ../2 (14.5)  Figure 14.2 Geometry of the unfocused SAR.
 OTHER RADAR TOPICS 519  The resolution or the unfocused SAR does not depend on the size of the real antenna.
(In a  sidelooking SAR the cross-range resolution is also called the ,along-track or azimuth  resolution.)  The limit on resolution due to operation in the far field can be overcome by correcting the  received signal for the curvature of the spherical wavefront experienced when the target is  within the Fresnel region of the synthetic array.
At each "element" of the synthetic array  antenna a phase correction A</> = 2nx2 / lR is applied, where x is the distance from the center of  the synthetic aperture.
Note that a different correction must be applied for each range R.
When  this correction is applied at each element of the synthetic array, the antenna is said lo be  focused at a distance R and all the received echo signals from a target at that range are in  phase.
The angular resolution when the antenna is focused in the Fresnel region is equivalent  to that in the far field.
Hence,the cross-range resolution of the focused synthetic aperture using  Eq.
(14.4) with L" = RJ/D is  D dcr = R(J, = 2 (14.6)  The resolution of the focused SAR is independent of the range and the wavelength, and  depends solely on the dimension D of the real antenna.
 An example comparing the resolution of the conventional antenna and the two types of  synthetic aperture antennas is shown in Fig.
14.3.
 l' was mentioned that the factor of 2 in the denominator of Eq.
(14.4) was a consequence  of the relative phase shift between elements of the synthetic array antenna being due to the  two-way propagation path, instead of the one-way propagation path as in the conventional  array antenna.
This results in the synthetic aperture radar having a two-way antenna pattern  E  Focused SAR Fipre 14.3 Comparison of the resolution of a  synthetic aperture radar and a radar with a con-1,.~~~~·~~~~~~~~~~~  10 100 ventional antenna, assuming an X -band antenna  Ronge.
km with dimension D == 3.
m.
 520 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  equal to the one-way pattern of the conventional antenna of the same length, but with one-half  the beamwidth.
The two-way patterns with uniform weighting, assuming small angles, are  approximately  SAR-+ sin [2n(Lef).) sin 8]  2n:( Le/ A.) sin 8 sin2 [n(L/l) sin 8]  real array-+ [n(L/1) sin 8J2  Thus the two-way beam width of the SAR antenna is narrower than a real radar antenna of the  same aperture size (if it could be built), but the sidelobes are not as low and do not drop off  with increasing angle as fast.
Two-way sidelobes of 13.2 dB in the SAR are not satisfactory for  most purposes.
Weighting of the received signals, similar to the weighting of the aperture  illumination of a real antenna, is often applied to reduce the sidelobe levels.
 Constraint on resolution and swath.
Ambiguities can arise when signals are samyled, rather  than continuous.
As discussed in Sec.
2.10, the radar pulse repetition frequency (prf) must be  low enough to avoid range ambiguities and multiple-time-around echoes.
An additional con­ straint on the prf occurs in a synthetic aperture radar.
The prf must be high enough to avoid  angle ambiguities and image-foldover that results from grating lobes produced when the  spacing between the elements of the synthetic array is too large.
These two conflicting require­ ments on the prf of a SAR mean that the resolution and the coverage (swath) cannot be  selected independently.
 To avoid grating lobes in a phased-array antenna of isotropic radiating elements (with  the main beam perpendicular to the aperture), the element spacing must be less than the  wavelength A.
(Sec.
8.2).
A similar condition for a synthetic aperture antenna is that the  distance traveled by the radar between pulse transmissions should be less than )./2.
(The  factor of! appears here for the same reason it was included in Eq.
(14.3).) When a" directive"  element-pattern is used the spacing necessary between elements to avoid grating Jobes can he  much greater than J../2.
In the SAR, the directive pattern of the real antenna can be considered  as the element pattern of the synthetic array.
By making the angular location of the first  grating lobe coincide with the first null of the el~ment pattern (that of the real antenna),  grating lobes can be attenuated to a small value.
The position of the first grating-lobe maxi­ mum of the synthetic array is  (J = J_ = ).jp  (i 2de 2v (14.7)  where de = v/fp = spacing between elements of the synthetic array  v = velocity of vehicle carrying the radar  fp = pulse repetition frequency  The position of the first null of the real antenna is approximately On= J./D, where D width of  the antenna.
Since Og must be greater than or equal to On to avoid grating lobes, the following  condition is obtained  (14.8)  The right-hand portion of the equation applies for a focused SAR, since be, D/2.
 Combining the restriction on prf due to unambiguous range Ru with that of Eq.
(14.8)  yields  ( 14.9)  This leads to the condition  Ru C -<­<\, -2v OTHER RADAR TOPICS 521  (14.10)  Thus the unamhiguous range and the resolution cannot be selected independently or one  anol her.
 The condition given by Eq.
( 14.10) is optimistic in that there are at least two factors which  result in the right-hand portion heing red·uced.
One such condition results rrom the use or  actual antenna patterns rather than idealized patterns.
The unambiguous regions must be  smaller than assumed in the ahove to allow for the fact that antenna patterns are not zero  outside the mapped rcgion.4· 16 For a uniform aperture illumination of the real antenna,  Eq.
( 14.9) becomes4  or V C 1.53 --s; (p s; ---- c5cr · 1.53 X 2Ru  R C -~<-­ <)er -4.7v (14.lla)  (14.llh)  Essentially the same result is obtained for a cosine-weight aperture illumination.
It has been  suggested4 that a practical procedure ror estimating the required aperture and prris to size the  antenna such that the required swath and processed doppler bandwidth are within the 6-dB  two-way antenna pattern, and the prf is such that the unambiguous time-delay and doppler  intervals are within the 16-dB response.
 There is another ractor which reduces the right-hand side of Eqs.
(14.10) or (14.l lb) when  optical processing or similar processing is used.
As will be explained later, this increases the  right-hand side of Eq.
(14.8) by 2 so that Eq.
(14.10) becomes  R C  u < - <)., -4!1  Similarly, the right-hand side of Eq.
(14.1 lh) is also reduced by a factor of 2.
( 14.12)  When a synthetic-aperture radar images the ground from an elevated platform, the unam­ biguous range can correspond to the distance between the forward edge and the far edge of the  region to be mapped.
This requires that the elevation beamwidth be tailored to illuminate only  the swath S,..
that is to be imaged by t_he radar.
The swath Sw is often much smaller than the  maximum range so that the prf can be increased to allow the umambiguous range Ru to  encompass ft1e distance S,..
cos 1/1.
where 1/1 is the grazing angle.
Equation (14.12) becomes  Sw C -<----­<\, -4v cos 1/J (14.13)  Equation 14.l lh would also be modified accordingly.
The condition given by Eq.
(14.13), and  similar relations, represent an upper bound on the capabilities of an SAR to achieve a resolu­ tion ,\, over a swath S,...
 Radar equation for SAR.
Each particular application has its own form of the radar equation.
 The S/\ R has a particularly interesting form.
especially when the relationships derived a hove  arc taken into account.
In the literature on S/\R, the radar equation is usually written with the  signal-to-noise ratio (S/N) 011 the left-hand side.
we· start with the following  p A ian S/N = ----' -"--- (14.14) 4rr}..2kT 0 BF" R4  522 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  where P, = peak transmitted power  Ae = effective aperture of the real antenna  a = target cross section  n = number of pulses integrated (coherently)  l = wavelength  kT0 = 4 x 10-21 W/Hz  B = receiver bandwidth  Fn = receiver noise figure  R = range  This equation is modified by substituting P, = Pav!T.I~.
where Pa"= average power, r = pulse  width~ 1/B, and JP= pulse repetition frequency.
Also 11 =.f~t0, where t0 = L.,/l' = time  required to generate the synthetic aperture whose length is given by L., = R)./D, v = velocity of  the vehicle carrying the radar, and D = real-antenna dimension.
For low -grazing angle  a= a0 bcr b, sec tjJ where (Jo = radar cross section of the ground per unit area illuminated,  c5cr = along-track, or cross-range, resolution (equal to D/2 for a focused SAR), b, = range  resolution, and t/J = grazing angle.
Substituting the above relations into Eq.
(14.14) yields  Pav A;a0 b, sec t/J S/N = -8n:).kT0 Fn vR3 (14.15)  This is essentially the same equation as given by Cutrona2 and Harger.3  Equation (14.15) does not include the ambiguity constraints described previously.
To use  the equality of Eq.
(14.13) in Eq.
(14.15), write Ae = Pa A, where Pa= antenna aperture  efficiency, and A= physical aperture area assumed to be rectangular of width D and height H.
 The height H must produce a vertical beamwidth which illuminates only the swath S.., that is  to be covered.
With such constraints, Eq.
(14.15) becomes  S/N = 2Pav p;(J0 bcr b;  nf kTo Fn RS.., sin t/J (14.16)  where!= radar frequency.
This equation applies for pulse compression if tJ, is the resolution of  the compressed pulse.
It is seen from Eq.
(14.16) that for a fixed signal-to-noise ratio, the  average power must be increased if the resolution in range or azimuth are decreased, or if the  range or swath are increased.
 Equipment considerations.
The synthetic-aperture radar requires a coherent reference signal  and means for storing and processing the radar echoes.
The coherent reference is necessary  since an angle measurement is a measurement of phase from spatially separate positions.
The  effective length of the synthetic aperture can be limited by the stability of the transmitter or the  receiver.
 The heart of the SAR is the processor which must provide the proper amplitude and phase  weights to the stored pulses, and sum them !O obtain the image of the scene.
Optical processors  and digital processors have both been used.
 Angular motions in yaw, roll, and pitch of the aircraft carrying the radar will cause the  real antenna beam to point incorrectly.
To avoid degradation of the SAR due to angular  motions, the antenna must be stabilized.1.18 Roll and pitch angles can be stabilized by means  of gyroscopes.
Yaw angle can be compensated by reference to a gyroscope or by" clutter-lock"  in which the antenna position is adjusted so as to maintain a symmetrical doppler spectrum  about zero frequency.
 Atmospheric·turbulence as well as deliberate maneuvers result in the aircraft trajectory  OTHER RADAR TOPIC'S ,2J  deviating from a straight line.
These deviations must be sensed and proper compensation  applied to the received~signal phase so-as to "straighten uut""the syntheticantenna.19 The  required phase correction is a function of range with the more rapid corrections required at  steep depression angles.
Thus both motion compensation and antenna stabilization are neces­ sary to achieve the resolution inherent in an SAR.
 Optical processing.1--3•92 In a synthetic aperture radar the coherent echo signals S" from each  range interval must be stored, without loss of phase, over the time interval required to form the  synthetic aperture.
An amplitude weighting W" is usually applied to each of the signals to taper  the "illumination" of the synthetic aperture so as to achieve lower sidelobes than given by a  uniform illumination.
In a focused SAR, a phase weighting exp (j</>n) also must be applied to  compensate for the spherical wavefront when the scene to be imaged lies within the Fresnel  region of the synthesized aperture.
Then the signals at each range interval must be summed, as  expressed by the operation LS" J¥,.
exp (j<J,").
The processing is complicated by the fact that  " the number of puls_es to be summed is proportional to the range.
Furthermore, the phase  correction in a focused SAR also depends on the range.
Adding to the complication of  processing is the large bandwidth and high information content of synthetic-aperture radar.
 Optical processing has proved to be well suited to the needs of SAR, except that it is seldom  done in real time.
The radar output is usually stored photographically and processed later on  the ground.
 In optical processing, the electrical signals at the radar output are converted to optical  images on film.
The weighting, filtering, and summation of signals are accomplished with the  proper :optical lenses and transparencies.
Optical processing is basically two dimensional so  that processing in the range coordinate is possible with the same apparatus.
The output of the  optical processor is a maplike photographic film of the terrain, as in Fig.
14.4.
The SAR  produces images without the slant-range distortion that occurs with the photographic camera.
 The radar output is stored on film as depicted in Fig.
14.5.
The output of the radar  receiver is applied to the "z axis" of a cathode-ray tube so as to produce an intensity­ modulated vertical sweep.
The vertical deflection or the CRT is in synchronism with the range  sweep of the radar.
I\.
lens focuses the CRT output on a moving strip of film whose rate of  travel is proportional to the speed of the vehicle carrying the radar.
The vertical dimension on  the film represents the range and the horizontal dimension represents the cross-range, er  along-trac~coordinate.
Returns from a single point-target fall on a horizontal tin~.
Since film  records light intensity, the sign of the signal amplitude will be lost if the signal alone is  recorded on the film.
To retain the sign of the amplitude, a de bias equal to or greater than the  most negative signal excursion is added to the signal.
(It is this bias, plus the offset frequency  described below, which causes the factor of 2 to be inserted in Eq.
(14.12).)  The signal received from a single scatterer will appear as a varying doppler-frequency due  to the relative motion as the antenna scans by.
The_doppler frequency is initially of high value,  decreases to zero beat, and then increases again.
When this signal is recorded on film the  resulting intensity modulation is a one-dimensional hologram, or Fresnel zone-plate, and has  focusing properties.
If the film were illuminated by a coherent, collimated beam of light like  that from a laser.
a focused target-image will be obtained.
Figure 14.6 shows the basic arrange­ ment of an optical processor.
The film contains the superposition of the holographic signals  from all the individual scatterers illuminated by the radar.
It is sometimes called the phase  l1istory or siqnal history.
The image that r-esults by illuminating the film is focused on a tilted  plane since the curvature of the wavefront is proportional to the range.
(This is somewhat like  an optical analog of the radar itself.) Since it is undesirable to operate with the image focused  524 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  (a)  (b)  figure 14.4 (a) Synthetic aperture radar image of San Diego, California obtained with the X -band GEMS  (Goodyear Electronic Mapping System) radar.
Resolution= 12 m; aircraft altitude= 40,000 ft (12 km)  This is a mosaic covering approximately 19 by 32 km.
(Courtesy Goodyear Aaospace a11.d Litco11 Aero  Service.) (b) A bend in the Huron river (center)just east of Ann Arbor, Michigan.
Note football stadium  (with lights) top left center, and large orchard in upper right center.
South is in the up direction.
 Resolution is 5 ft (l.5 m) in azimuth and 7 ft (2.l m) in range.
(Courtesy £1wiro11.me11tal Research lnstit11te  of Michigan.)  E'  Colhode roy lube Intensity modified  vertical sweep  J  /  /  Lens  Reel OTHER RADAR TOPICS 525  ~ Recorded  signals  Fiaure 14.5 Recording of SAR signal on photographic film with the aid of a CRT.
 on a tilted plane, the different phase-front curvatures are corrected and the image is erected by  insertion of a conical lens placed at the phase-history film located in plane P 1• This erect image  has its focus at infinity.
The one-dimensional hologramlike signals recorded along the horizon­ tal dimension on the phase-history film provide focusing in the horizontal plane.
A cylim!rical  lens is used to focus the image in the vertical plane.
The front focal-plane of the cylindrical lens  coincides with that of the phase-history film.
(A lens has the property that a Fourier transform  relation exists between the amplitude distribution of the illumination at the front and back  focal planes.5)  With the conical and cylindrical lens.
inserted, the image is erect and is simultaneously  focused in the range and cross-range dimensions, but it lies at infinity.
To bring the image to  some conveniently located plane, a spherical lens is inserted.
A vertical slit in an opaque screen  placed in the focal plane of the spherical lens displays all ranges in a particular direction.
The  slit is offset from the origin because of the de bias that had to be added to the signal at the  input to the CRT in order to record on film.
If the slit were placed on the optical axis,  the presence of the de bias will cause a degraded image because the energy from the bias  overlaps the desired image.
This is avoided by placing the input signal on a residual carrier  r  Conical  lens  Signal hislory film  and weighting lronsporancy  Figure 14.6 Optical processor for synthetic aperture radar.
Spherical  Slit  526 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  frequency, called the qffset frequency, along with the de bias.
(The offset frequency is equal to  the doppler frequency shift associated with a scatterer located at the edge of the real antenna  beam.) The result, which is similar to reconstructing the image of a hologram, is that the  desired real image can then be separated from the energy associated with the bias and the  virtual image.
The slit is displaced from the optical axis at the place where the offset frequency  focuses the real image.
A recording film in the output plane P2, when moved with a speed  proportional to that of the vehicle carrying the radar, produces a map of the scene originally  viewed by the radar.
 If amplitude weighting of the synthetic aperture is desired to reduce the sidelobes, a  shaded transparency with uniform phase thickness can he inserted adjacent to the data film in  plane P1•  Digital processing.
The recirculating delay-line integrator, range-gated filti.:r bank, and  storage-tube integrator all have been used in the past for the electronic professing of un­ focused SAR.1 The optical processor was used for focused systems.
Digital processing is also  practical and has the advantage of real-time operation as compared with optical processing.
 The digital processor has I and Q channels with a high-speed A/D convenor in each channd.
 The sampling rate of the A/D 1s determined by the radar signal bandwidth, and the number of  bits is set by the dynamic range desired.
Motion compensation for azimuth and range slip  (range walk) can be applied, as well as phase corrections for focusing.
Semiconductor devices  are used for memory and arithmetic.
When the swath is significantly less than the unambig­ uous range, a buffer can be inserted after the A/D convertors to read the data out at a slower  speed so as to process at a lower data rate than if the entire unambiguous range had to be  imaged.
Digital processing also allows the use of a nonlinear sweep to convert slant range to  ground distance so as to make distances correct on the image.
 Doppler-frequency model.
The synthetic aperture radar may be considered as a vector summa­ tion of synthetic-array elements (which is the model generally taken in this section), or it may  be considered in terms of doppler filtering.
In fact, it was originally conceived by Carl Wiley of  Goodyear Aircraft Corporation in 1951 as a doppler-filtering process rather than as a syn­ thetic antenna.
The two models are sometimes used interchangeably, depending upon which  describes more clearly a particular effect.
The basic difference between the two is that the  coordinate system moves with the radar in the doppler description, while in the synthetic­ aperture model the coordinate system is fixed to the ground.9  Consider the geometry of Fig.
14.1 in which an aircraft with a sidelooking SAR travels at  a velocity v.
(The effect of the elevation angle is neglected in this simple analysis but must be  included in more precise considerations.) When a point scatterer just enters the forward edge  of the beam, it has a doppler frequency 2(v/tl) cos (08/2).
For small beamwidths, the doppler  frequency decreases linearly as the point-scatterer position changes relative to the radar and  goes to zero when the scatterer is at the center of the beam, after which the frequency increases.
 The time-varying doppler frequency can be shown to be approximately1  (14.17)  where t0 is the time when the point scatterer is at the center of the beam, and R is the range lo  the scatterer at that time.
The total width !l.fd of this doppler signal as the scatterer progresses  through the beam is 2v2Tj/lR, where Ta is the time during which the scatterer is within the  beam.
By analogy to the linear-FM pulse-compression waveform, the linearly varying doppler  signal can be passed through a matched filter to produce a pulse of duration 1/t::..jj.
This  OTHER RADAR TOPICS 527  corresponds to a cross-range.
or along-track, resolution or v/llfd, or  ).R ).R  ,5 = -~· = --= D /2  er 211Tj 2L~ (14.18)  which is what was obtained in Eq.
( 14.6) frqm the synthetic aperture model.
(In the above, the  relations t''lj = L., = R).JD were employed.)  Range rl'Solution.
In mapping or imaging.
it is usually desired to have the range resolution  equal to the along-track.
or cross-range resolution.
When optical proces-;ing is employed, the  linear FM.
or chirp.
pulse-compression waveform readily lends itself to the same type or  processing as described for the cross-range signal.7 The form or the linea· FM signal in the  range dimension is similar to the form or the signal in the cross-range dim~nsion.
The linear  FM signal has a phase that varies as t2 (t = time), and the cross-range signal has a phase that  varies as x2 (x = distance along the ground track).
Just as the phase history -)fthe cross-range  signal records on film as a Fresnel zone-plate, which then has a focusing action when iHu­ minatcd hy coherent light, so does the signal of the linear FM waveform also record as a  Fresnel zone-plate.
The range and the cross-range recorded signals may be treated as orthog­ onal aspects of a single two-dimensional filtering operation.
Although the mual SAR optical  processing provides dechirping (matched filtering) or the linear FM pulse-compression  waveform.
the chirp modulation of the transmitter is accomplished as in other pulse­ compression radars.
 Other aspects of SAR.
The SAR has been described as a side-looking radar wi,h the antenna  beam directed perpendicular to the path of the vehicle such that the dopplcr frequency of  scatterers illuminated by the center of the antenna beam is zero.
It is possible.
however, to  operate with the antenna beam pointed either forward or art of broadside.
Tlfr: is called the  squint mode.
The signal processor must be modified to account for the average doppler fre­ quency not being zero.
Recorders and dis plays must bei designed to account for t lw geometry  of the offset beam.
Compensation might also be necessary ror '' range walk•· which is the result  of the target·· walking" through one or more range-resolution cells during the time or observa­ tion.
The achievable cross-range.
or along-track, resolution worsens as the squint angle in­ creases from broadside (,5cr ~ 1/sin 0, where O = angle between aircraft heading and squinted  antenna beam direction).
 The sqtfu1t mode produces a strip map just as does the sidelooking SAR.
Th•.; doppler  heam-sharpeni11y mode is used with a circularly scanning antenna and a normal PP! display.
As  the squint angle of the doppler beam-sharpening mode varies, the integration time ,.:hanges to  keep the resolution constant.1 The along-track resolution for either the squint mnd, or the  doppler beam-sharpening mode is  J.R  '5a = 2 T .
0 v sm ( 14.19)  where the symbols have been defined previously.
As O decreases in the doppler beam­ sharpening mode.
Tis made to increase.
As O approaches O degrees, the required in•egr ttion  lime T becomes loo large to provide beam sharpening so that improved resolution is not  obtained in a finite angular sector about the direction of the vehicle velocity.
 In the telescope, or spotlight, mode very high resolution of a particular patch on the  ground is obtained by steering the real antenna aperture to dwell longer than is possibk with a  fixed antenna.
Theoretically, resolutions better than D/2 can be obtained.
Another benefit of  528 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  this mode is that the scene to be imaged is observed over a range of incidence angles which  averages the speckle and makes a smoother image.
 Since the synthetic-aperture radar is coherent, the image produced will have speckle; i.e.,  there will be constructive and destructive interference which results in a "break up" of dis­ tributed scatterers.
To reduce the effect of speckle and make a more "filled-in" image, the  same scene can be viewed from different aspects or at different frequencies, or both, and the  several images superimposed.
The multiple looks can be obtained as in the searchlight mode  by dwelling with a positionable antenna on the same area.
Another approach, applicable with a  fixed antenna, is to not use the full synthetic antenna length Le to achieve a resolution Jcr, but  to break up the synthetic length into m subsections and look at the scene from slightly different  aspects each with a resolution m c:5cr ..
The m independent images are then combined non­ coherently into a single image.
It has been suggested that the noncoherent combining of  images o.f lesser resolution produces a better image with less speckle than a ~ngle image of  greater resolution.11' 17  If the SAR is mapping a scene in which there are moving objects such as cars or trains, the  resulting image will be smeared in range and shifted in the along-track dimension due to the  radial motion of the object.
The image also will be defocused in the along-track dimension  because of radial acceleration or cross-range velocity of the object.8 These effects can cause a  distortion and displacement of the moving-target image.
A reduction in signal strength will  also occur if the target doppler shift is sufficiently large to be outside the passband of the  along-track-dimension processor.
When the SAR is located on a satellite, the effect of earth  rotation must be properly compensated since it results in the earth's surface appearing as a  moving target.10•91  The difference in signal characteristics from a moving target as compared to that from a  stationary target can be used as a basis for combining AMT[ (airborne moving target indica­ tion) with SAR.8 The moving-target doppler shift can be detected when it exceeds the clutter  doppler-spectrum width.
It is also possible to use a dual sidelooking antenna pattern and  detect the phase difference between the two mutually coherent observations of a target  separated in time.
The phase-detection AMTI method allows slowly moving t'argets to be  detected when the aircraft velocity is large.
 Ground relief, such as due to hills or mountains, stands out on SAR imagery because of  the shadows they form, especially when viewed at low grazing angles.
Shadows help emphasize  topographic and geologic features that permit a trained interpreter to learn much about the  nature of the terrain.
(Optical photographs are generally taken from large grazing angles and  do not show the same shadowing effects produced by radar.) Stereoscopic techniques can also  be applied to SAR to provide a three-dimensional image or the terrain.
This is accomplished  by viewing the same terrain from different aspects, such as by flying two separate flight paths  to produce images from two different elevation angles.
12 It is also possible to generate a pa1 r of  stereo images on a single pass using two vertical fan beams at different azimuth angles, or one  fan beam and a conical beam.13 The stereo processing of SAR images has been successfully  used for mineral exploration.
 At short ranges it is possible to use conventional noncoherent sidelooking radar with a  large antenna aperture and pulse compression to obtain high-resolution terrain imaging.
The  images obtained with conventional noncoherent radar are generally different than those of  coherent SAR in that they are less speckled.
 Inverse SAR.
Instead or moving a radar relative to a stationary object, it is possible to  generate an image by moving the object relative to a stationary radar.
Imaging with a station­ ary radar and moving target is called inverse SAR or range-doppler imaging.
It has been applied  OTHER RADAR TOPICS 529  / I a I ~~\  X""P :  V \ I  ' I  I  ~------···---·-----__.,..
---- Direction of radar  Figure 14.7 Inverse SAR, or range-doppler imaging,  of a rotating object.
 to the imaging of rotating targets,' 4 especially the moon and planets.15 Figure 14.7 shows a  rigid body rotating at an angular speed of ,o, radians per second, with the axis of rotation  normal to the paper.
The dopplcr frequency associated with a point Pon the body located a  distance r from the axis of rotation is  .
2 r cos ex 2(1), r cos ex 2w, x Id = --· --------·· = ------ = · A l l ( 14.20)  where r = velocity of point P.
From this equation, the resolution in the x dimension can be  written  .
A 1 l l 6.x = 6/d - · = ------'--- = ----.
2w, T 2(60/T) 2 MJ (14.21)  where Tis the coherent integration time equal to 1/(6/~), and 60 is the angle through which the  body rotates during the time T.
It does not take much of an angular rotation to produce good  resolution at microwave frequencies.
The contours of constant doppler are perpendicular to  the x axis, and contours of constant range lie parallel to the x axis.
 If the angle of target rotation over which the doppler is observed is too short, the doppler  spectrum is broad and the resolution is low.
Increasing the observation time narrows the  spectrum and the resolution will increase.
However, if the time of observation is too long, the  doppler frequency of a point P on the rotating target will not be constant and the doppler  spectrum wpt broaden with a consequent reduction in resolution.
That is, there is ~n apparent  target acceleration which limits the resolution.
The result is that there will be an optimum time  of ohservation, or aspect angle change, when attempting to image a target with the inverse  SAR technique.101  14.2 HF OVER-THE-HORIZON RADAR20  Frequencies at VHF or lower are seldom used for conventional radar applications because of  their narrow bandwidths, wide beamwidths, high ambient noise levels, and the potential  interference from other users of the crowded electromagnetic spectrum.
In spite of these  limitations, the HF region of the spectrum is of special interest for radar because of its unique  property of allowing propagation to long distances beyond the curvature of the earth by  means of refraction from the ionosphere.
A single refraction allows radar ranges to be ex­ tended to almost 4000 km.
The targets of interest to HF over-the-horizon (0TH) radar are the  530 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  same as those of interest to microwave radar and include aircraft, missiles, and ships.
In  addition, the long wavelengths characteristic of HF radar also provide distinctive information  regarding the sea, as well as aurora, meteors, and land features.
(Although the HF hand is  officially defined as extending from 3 to 30 MHz, for radar usage the lower frequency limit  might lie just above the broadcast band, and the upper limit can extend to 40 MHz or more.)  The ability to see a target at long range by means of ionospheric refraction depends on the  nature of the ionosphere (the density of electron concentration) and the radar frequency, as  well as the normal parameters that enter into the radar range equation.
Unlike conventional  microwave radar, the specific frequency to be used by an 0TH radar is a function of the range  that is desired and the character of the.
ionosphere.
Since the ionosphere varies with time of  day, season, and solar activity, the optimum radar frequency will vary widely.
Such radars  must therefore be capable of operating over a wide portion of the HF hand, as much as three  octaves (4 to 32 MHz for example).21 The ionosphere often consists of more than one refract­ ing regiorr.
The highest region, denoted F 2, and the most important for HF proBagation, is at  altitudes of from 230 to 400 km.
It provides the greatest·ranges for a single refraction and can  support the highest usable frequencies.
The F 1 region, from about 180 to 240 km, is observed  only during the day and is more pronounced during the summer than the winter.
The E region,  which lies between 100 and 140 km, can also support.
refraction.
At these heights there can  appear at times patches of high-density ionization called sporadic E which, when available,  can be quite effective in providing stable propagation.
The multiple refracting regions give rise  to multipath propagation which can result in degraded performance because of the simulta­ neous arrival of radar energy at the target via more than one propagation path, each with  different time delays.
The effects of multipath can be reduced by the proper selection of  frequency and by use of narrow elevation beamwidths which allow the energy to travel to the  target via only a single path.
The presence of the various refracting regions with different  ionization densities at different altitudes requires good frequency management if an 0TH  radar is to operate with reliability.
 The minimum range to which'HF1energy can be propagated by ionospheric refraction is  determined by the lowest frequency at which the radar can operate.
A nominal value for the  minimum range (or skip distance) is about 1000 km.
 The backscatter from the earth's surface is generally many orders of magnitude larger  than the echo from desired moving targets.
Thus HF radar must employ some form of doppler  processing such as MTJ, pulse-doppler, FM-CW, or CW radar to separate desired moving  targets from clutter.
The equivalent of a high-pass filter must be used to detect moving airr.raft  and missiles and reject stationary surface clutter.
The detection of ships requires more sophis­ ticated processing since the relatively low velocity of ships produces doppler-frequency shifts  comparable to those of the sea (which is also a moving target).
Even though the radar cross  section of ships is often greater than that of aircraft, longer observation times arc required to  provide sufficient resolution in doppler frequency.
 Character of 0TH radar.
The factors affecting the design of an HF 0TH radar are slightly  different than those affecting conventional microwave radar.
This is illustrated by the simple  radar equation commonly used in 0TH radar analysis, which is  4 P.vG,G,i2<J'F;I'c R =------- (4n)3 No(S/ N)Ls ( 14.22)  where R = range  P.v = average power  G, = transmitting antenna gain  G, = receiving antenna gain  .Jc = wavelength  a = target cross section  F P = factor to account for the one-way propagation effects  T, = coherent processing time  N0 = receiver noise power per unit bandwidth  (S/ N) = signal-to-noise (power) ratio  L, = system losses OTIIF.R RADAR TOPICS 531  The transmitting and receiving antenna gains are shown separately in Eq.
(14.22) since it  is sometimes convenient ii1 0TH radar to have separate antennas for these two functions.
If  narrow beamwidths are to be achieved, the radar antenna must be a physically large phased  array.
A one-degree beamwidth, for example, requires an aperture of about 1200 m at a  frequency of 15 MHz.
Since the transmitting antenna must handle high power, it is more  costly to obtain than large receiving apertures.
In one type of 0TH radar design, a (rela­ tively) small transmitting antenna with broad azimuth beamwidth is used along with a large  receiving aperture consisting of a number of narrow contiguous beams covering the angle  illuminated by the wide transmitting beam.
Thus the complexity of a large transmitting  antenna is traded for a number of parallel receiving channels.
It is also possible to utilize a  common aperture for both transmit and receive, with equal transmit and receive beamwidths.
 Duplexers would be required as in a microwave phased-array radar.
The antenna might also  support several simultaneous, independent radar beams; or multiple beams can be generated  sequentially (a pulse burst).
A narrow, steerable beam in the elevation plane is desired for  0TH radar in order to avoid multipath propagation and to concentrate the energy at the  desired range.
However, the large vertical.
apertures to achieve such a capability are quite  costly, so that HF 0TH radars seldom have as large a vertical aperture, or as narrow an  elevation beamwidth, as might be desired.
 The propagation factor (F ,,).
receiver noise (N 0), and coherent integration time (Yr) of  Eq.
( 14.22) represent major differences between the HF 0TH radar and the conventional  microwave radar.
The factor F P includes the energy loss along the ionospheric path, the  mismatch loss due to a change in polarization caused by the ionosphere, ionospheric focusing  gain or loss, and losses due to the dynamic nature of the path.22•23 The receiver noise N0  includes the ambient noise radiated by natural sources (chiefly lightning discharges from  around the world) as well as the combined interference from the many users of the HF band.
It  is the latter ,vhich generally determines system sensitivity at HF.
The processing ·time T.: is  included to emphasize that an 0TH radar is usually a doppler-processing radar that requires a  dwell time of T, seconds if a frequency resolution of 1/T.: hertz is to be achieved.
 The radar cross section a of targets at HF is often different than at microwaves.
Since  many targets have dimensions comparable to the HF wavelength, or component structures  with dimensions comparable to the wavelength, the target is often in the resonance region  where the radar cross sections are generally larger than at microwaves.
At the lower HF  frequencies where the wavelength is large compared to the target dimensions, the cross section  will be in the Rayleigh region where rr decreases rapidly with decreasing frequency.
If the  frequency is sufficiently low.
the cross section of small aircraft or missiles might be smaller  than their microwave values.
 It was mentioned that external sources of interference from other HF users can limit the  sensitivity of the HF radar receiver.
Thus the design of the radar for maximum performance  will differ from that when receiver thermal noise sets the limit.
In addition to satisfying the  needs for an adequate signal-to-noise ratio, there must be adequate signal-to-clutter ratio.
 532 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  Signal-to-clutter ratio usually can be increased with narrow beamwidths and narrow  pulsewidths.
 An 0TH radar designed for the detection of aircraft at ranges out to 4000 km might have,  for example, an average power of several hundreds of kilowatts or more, antenna gains from  about 20 to 30 dB, and operating frequencies from several megahertz to several tens of  megahertz.
Antennas must be large in order to obtain reasonably narrow beamwidths.
The  antenna horizontal length might be 300 m or greater.
The transmitted waveform can be pulse,  CW, FM-CW, FM (chirp) pulse, or other pulse-compression coded waveforms.
Pulse com­ pression is used for the same reason as in microwave radars.
Spectral bandwidths of from  approximately 5 kHz to 100 kHz might be used, corresponding to effective pulse widths of  200 JLS and 1011s, respectively.
(Actual pulse widths can be much longer, especially if pulse  compression is used.) The lower bandwidth limit of 5 kHz is set by the desire to be able to  operate in the quieter" holes" of the HF spectrum.
The wider the spectral width the less likely  that regions of the spectrum can be found without significant interference.
Evetfif interference  is not a problem, the upper limit of spectral width, about 100 kHz, is set by the dispersive  nature of the ionosphere.
Doppler filter bandwidths for separating targets from clutter in an  0TH radar might range from l Hz down to 0.05 Hz or less, depending on the target's charac- ,,,,  teristics and the stability of the propagation path.
The pulse repetition frequency (prf) of an  0TH radar is generally low to avoid range ambiguities.
A prf of 30 Hz, for example, corre­ sponds to an unambiguous range of about 5000 km.
 The ionosphere is not a benign propagation medium.
As the amount of ionization  changes, the optimum frequency for propagating energy to a particular distance must be  changed accordingly.
The losses in propagating through the ionosphere change with time, and  the transmitter must have sufficient excess power to overcome the maximum loss expected.
 Fading of the HF signals can occur due to the rotation of the plane of polarization over the  ionized region of the propagation path.
Multipath interference from more than one refracting  region, as well as dynamic irregularities in the ionospheric propagation path, are two other  sources of fading.
 The specific region on the earth's surface illuminated by an HF radar depends on iono­ spheric conditions.
A" typical" patch of the ground illuminated by a single frequency might be  about 1000 km in the range coordinate.
The region from 1000 to 4000 km might therefore  require the radiation of three different frequencies for full coverage.
On the other hand, there  might be times when ionospheric.conditions allow this region to be covered by only a single  frequency, while at other times five or six frequencies might be required.
This illustrates the  necessity for flexible management of the radar.
The ionosphere must be sensed and the param­ eters of the radar adjusted to optimum operation.
With proper radar design and manage­ ment it should be possible to achieve a propagation path reliability comparable to that of a  microwave radar.
This requires a large frequency range of operation, high power to overcome  propagation losses, and diagnostics of the ionospheric conditions to determine proper radar  parameters.
 Example capabilities.
The following describe the nominal performance capabilities that might  be achieved with an over-the-horizon radar operating in the HF band :20  Range coverage-1000-4000 km; longer ranges are possible with multihop propagation, but  with degraded performance.
 Angle coverage--can be 360° in azimuth from a single site, if desired; 60 to 120° is more typical.
 Targets-aircraft, missiles, and ships; also nuclear explosions, prominent surface features  (such as mountains, cities, and islands), sea, aurora, meteors, and satr.llites.
 OTHER RADAR TOPICS 533  Range resolution-could be as low as 2 km, but is more typically 20 to 40 km.
 Relative range acc11raq,-typically.2to A km for a target location relative to a known location  observed hy the same radar.
 Ahsolute range acrnracy-- lO to 20 km, assuming real-time analysis of the propagation path is  made.
 Angil' resoilltion determined hy the beam width; it can be less than 1 ° which corresponds to  50 km at a distance of 3000 km.
 An~1lc acnu-acy "beam splitting" of one part in 10 should be possible if the signal-to-noise  ratio is sufficient; ionospheric effects might limit the angle measurement accuracy to some  fraction of a degree.
 Doppler resofotio11-resolution of targets whose doppler frequencies differ by 0.1 Hz or less is  generally possible; at a radar frequency or 20 MHz, 0.1 Hz corresponds to a difference in  relative velocity of about 1.5 knots.
 Although the resolution or an HF radar is poorer in range and angle than that of  microwave radar, its resolution in the doppler-frequency domain is quite good.
Targets not  resolvable in range or angle can be readily resolved in doppler.
After targets are resolved in  doppler, measurements in range and angle can be made to a greater accuracy than given by the  nominal resolution in those coordinates.
 Application to air traffic control.
The order of magnitude increase in range possible with an  IIF 0TH radar as compared with conventional microwave radar makes it attractive for  coverage of those geographical areas where it is not convenient to locate line-of-sight radars.
 The observation of targets over large areas of the sea is an example where HF 0TH radar can  find effective applications.
The unique properties of these radars also make them of interest for  military applications.
To illustrate the types of applications well suited for HF 0TH radar,  two examples will be mentioned: air traffic control over the sea, and remote observation of  sea conditions.
 In the continental United States and similar land areas of the world with large air traffic,  long-range microwave air-surveillance radars can keep track of aircraft for the purpose of  providing sare and efficient air travel.
Such coverage over the ocean is not practical because of  the unavailability of suitable sites for microwave radar.
A shore-based HF 0TH radar can  cover large areas of the ocean and detect and track aircraft so as to provide air-traffic control.
 For example.
an 0TH radar with 120° angle coverage and a range interval extending rrom  1000 to 4~ km can survey an area of almost sixteen million square kilometers·.
Aircraft at  any altitude within this region can be detected, located, and tracked so as to provide a  cost-effective over-ocean air-traffic-control capability.
Target height is not obtained with this  0TH radar.
(Nor is height obtained with the usual microwave air-traffic-control radars.) It is  possible to utilize modified HF communications equipment as transponders on each aircrart  which can relay back to the radar the height of the aircraft as determined by the onboard  altimeter, as well as the identity of the aircraft.
Limited communications also can be effected by  this means.
The cost of an JIF 0TH radar for the detection of aircraft might be expected to be  high relative to the cost of a conventional microwave radar, but on the basis of cost per unit  area of coverage it is quite competitive ..
Its chief advantage is that it can cover areas not  kasiblc with conventional rauars.
 Application lo measurement of sea conditions.
The distinctive nature of the doppler frequency  shill from the sea allows information to be extracted regarding the· sea conditions and the  wm,ls driving the sea.i4·25 The major portion of the doppler-frequency spectrum from th.: <;ca  SJ4 lNTRODUCTlON TO RADAR SYSTEMS  o---- 10 ---------+--·--+------+-- 4i  l 20 a.
 4) .2  ~ 30 -- -·----+---++-----+----#  a::  40  50 --ARW  _}  Figure 14.8 Spectrum llf the radar echo from the ,ea obtained from an area about 9.5 by 7.5 km via  groundwave propag:,tion.
The sea was developed by a 25-lnot approaching ....
ind.
Radar frequency was  · 13.4 MHz producing .t resonant doppler frequency shift of 0.3 7 Ht.
The dopplcr frequency scale has heen  normalized so that tile Jominant components are at ± I.
AR W = approach resonant wave; RR W =  recede resonant wave calibration signal is at left of tigure.
 is not found at zero frequency as is the case for land backscatter, but is centered at two discrete  frequencies symmetrically spaced around zero, Fig.
14.8.
The sea may be thought of as  composed of a large n1Jmbtr of individual wave trains, each with a differl!nt wavelength and  amplitude and traveling in different directions.
This collection of wave trains is described by a  two-dimensional spectrum (wave amplitude as a function of water-wavelength and direction or  travel).
At grazing incidence the radar responds chiefly to the two wave trains which are  traveling toward and aw;1v from the radar, each with a water-wavelength Aw equal to half the  radar-wavelength Ar.
For a grazing angle</>, this condition becomes Aw= (J..r/2) cos <f,.
The  scattering from these two·· resonant" wave component:,; is similar to that from a diffraction  grating.
The term Bragg st:.ttter is sometimes used to describe this form of scattering, by  analogy to the Bragg-scatte.- mode for the X-ray diffraction by crystals.
 The velocity of a water wave (a gravity wave in deep water) is v = (g..l,.,/2n)112, where g is  the acceleration of gravity.
Substituting this velocity into the classical formula for doppler  frequency shift (Eq.
(32)], and u,ing the resonant condition Aw= ).,/2, gives the doppler shift  for the resonant sea waves at gr mng incidence as  ./~ = ± .jg1i[, (14.23)  The plus sign applies to the appr,)arhing resonant wave, and the minus sign corresponds to the  receding resonant wave.
When tl1e wind is hlowing toward the radar the approaching-wav~  spectral line 1s the larger of the two.
When the wind is blowing away from the radar, the  receding-wave spectral line is the larger.
When the wind 1s blowing perpendicular to  the direction of the radar beam, the two spectral lines are equal.
Thus the relative magnitude  of the two major components of the doppler spectrum can provide a measure of the direction  of the wind.
(More /'recisely, it determines the direction of the waves driven by the wind since  the wave and wind directions are not exactly coincident.) Note that in Eq.
(14.23) the doppler  OTHER RADAR TOPICS 535  frequency shift is proportional to the square root of the carrier frequency instead of the linear  dependence normally characteristic of a doppler shift.
 As the wind speed increases, higher-order components appear at fl{d, fi_fd.
etc.
The  appearance of higher-order components can be used as a measure of the wind speed, but a  more useful measure is the magnitude of the continuum about zero doppler relative to the  magnitude of the larger resonant spectral line.
(The continumum between the two spectral  lines is determined by second-order scattering from sets of waves that form corner  retlectors.24) If land clutter is present in the radar resolution cell along with sea clutter, or if it  enters the radar via the antenna sidelobes, there will be a spectral component at zero frequency  which can degrade the usefulness of this measurement.
When the sea is saturated, which is not  111111s11.1I for those waler wavelengths resonant with HF wavelengths.
theory rredicts.
and  exreriments verify, that the cross section per unit area <r0 corresponding to the larger resonant  component is -29 dB, independent or sea state and frequency.
25·26 This allows that compo­ nent to be used as a calibration standard.
 Thus an examination or the doppler spectrum of the sea can give the sea roughness and  direction, from which can he inrerred something about the winds driving the sea.
Swell waves  or shir echoes can be recognized as distinct components.
Surface currents can be noted by the  asymmetrical placement of the two resonant components about zero frequency.
With sufficient  radar measurements the two-dimensional sea spectrum can be derived.
The HF radar repre­ sents a unique tool for measurin~ sea conditions at a distance.
The cost of a radar to measure  sea conditions can be considerably less than the cost of an HF radar to detect aircraft.
It is  interesting lo note that the development of such a capability was originally not as an attemrt  to learn more ahout the sea, but was a byproduct of attemrts to improve the detection of  targets in a sea-clutter background.
 IIF radar equation.
The simple 0TH radar equation of Eq.
(14.22) does not account for the  fact that a surveillance radar must cover a specified angular sector in a specified time.
The  radar equation for a microwave surveillance radar was given by Eq.
(2.57).
This must be  modified for an HF radar since the coherent integration time T.: is fixed in an HF radar by the  doppler processing requirements.
Also in an HF radar, the elevation beamwidth Or is often not  available as a design parameter because of the large cost of high antenna structures.
Substituting  into Eq.
( 14.22) G, = G, = G = n2/000r, where 00 = azimuth beam width; and T.: = ts00/0r, ts=  revisit time (scan time) and Or = total azimuth angle coverage, we get  (" R4 _ ._.
__ 7"!Pa,A2<Jf pts  -64N o000;(S/N)LsOr ( 14.24)  Lumping into a single constant K the constants in this equation and the parameters assumed  to be given (including 0,.) or not under the control of the radar designer, we get  R4 = K !'av  Oa (14.25)  Thus a measure of the perrormance of an HF surveillance radar is the ratio of the average  power divided by the azimuth beamwidth.
When comparing the performance of two radars  with different antenna heights as well as different widths, a measure of relative performance is  Measure of performance= Pa,· wh2 (14.26)  where w = antenna width and It = antenna height.
If separate antennas are used for transmit  and receive, w is the width of the receiving antenna and lt2 is replaced by h, hr where  Ii, = transmitting antenna height and hr = receiving antenna height.
 536 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  A" figure of merit" that has been used in the past for comparison of 0TH radars is the  OBJ value which is defined as the product of Pav G, G, Tc, expressed in dB.
The units are joules  (energy), or dB relative to a joule, hence the name DBJ.
Jt is quite different than the measure of  performance given above.
This figure of merit is more representative of a "search lighting"  radar and not a surveillance radar.
 Ground-wave 0TH radar.
The type of 0TH radar described in the above that propagates via  refraction from the ionosphere is sometimes called a sky-wave radar.
It is also possible at HF  to propagate energy around the curvature of the earth by diffraction.
This is commonly called  ground-wave propagation.
A ground-wave radar can detect the same kind of targets as can a  sky-wave radar.
Detection is somewhat easier than with sky-wave propagation since iono­ spheric e~ects are not present and clutter returns from aurora generally can b~Jeliminated by  time gating.
The ground-wave radar has a far shorter range than can be obtained via sky waw  because of the propagation loss which increases exponentially with range.
A ground-wave  radar of a size and frequency comparable to the sky-wave radar discussed in the abovc might  have a range against low-altitude aircraft targets of perhaps 200 to 400 km.
 The microwave radar that uses the over-ocean evaporative duct (Sec.
12.5) to obtain  extended propagation to detect low-altitude or surface targets beyond the normal line of sight  is also sometimes called an over-the-horizon radar.
It should not be confused with the HF  radars described in this section that operate at much lower frequencies and at much longer  ranges.
 14.3 AIR-SURVEILLANCE RADAR27 29.46 49.io3  The first successful application of radar was for the detection and tracking of aircraft.
Air  surveillance continues to be one of the more important radar applications for both civilian  (air traffic control) and military purposes.
The military employ such radars for general surveil­ lance of the airspace, for providing acquisition information to anti-air-warfare systems, and for  directing aircraft to an interception.
There are two different types of civilian air-survcillanci.:  radars used by the Federal Aviation Administration for the control of air traffic in thc lJnited  States.
One is the S-band 60 nmi airport-surveillance radar (ASR ), Fig.
14.9, which prPvidi.:s  information on aircraft in the vicinity of airports.
The other is the L-band, 200 nmi air-routi.:  surveillance radar (ARSR), Fig.
14.10, that provides coverage between airrorts.
Table 14.1 lists  the major characteristics of these two radars.
 There is no simple formula or step-by-step guide for the design of an air-surveillance  radar.
One place to start, however, is with the proper form of the radar equation, along with a  clear understanding of the task to be accomplished by the radar and knowledge of the con­ straints imposed by the environment.
Quite often there is more than one factor affecting the  selection of a particular radar characteristic, and these factors are sometimes conllicting.
The  designer must then make subjective judgments or even arbitrary choices in order to arrive at  a compromise set of radar characteristics.
Logical design of an entire radar system by com­ puter is therefore difficult and dangerous.
Experience and educated guesses are still necessary  in many cases, just as is true of other engineering disciplines in which reasonable design  decisions must be made on the basis of incomplete information or conflicting constraints.
H is  for these reasons that different design groups, in meeting the same user's requirements, often  produce different radar designs that bear little outward resemblance to one another, yet  accomplish the same objectives.
,_,;,,,;  TRANSMITTtR SITE  CJB ..
VIDE I -..,.._  CO~f1AOL1 -.,.
 APGj,  20 <m FT I  L~NO LI~ 'J' I  R{MOTING I OTHER RADAR TOPICS 537  Figure 14.9 diock diagram of the ASR-8 airport surveillance radar.
APG is the azimuth puise generator  which provides antenna timing information, and CJ B is the cable junction box.
(Courtesy of Texas  J nst rnmcnts.
Inc.)  User's requirements.
Since the design or a radar is strongly influenced by the task it is to  accomplish, the radar designer should start with the user's requirements.
For an air-traffic­ control radar these might include the following: purpose the radar is to serve; types of aircraft  it must detect; maximum range, with a stated probability of detection and average time  between false alarms; coverage; number of aircraft expected within the radar coverage; mini­ m um spacing of targets, which then determines the required resolution; accuracy of target  location, or the accuracy of the target trajectory if a track-while-scan radar; weather and the  environment in which the radar must operate, including restrictions imposed by the site or the  538 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  t' •  .
.
r...
._· ~ ,..
.:-~·:....
 :~_,,;;:;{:: ,f}t)  Figure 14.10 Photograph of the ARSR-3, air route surveillance radar.
(Court<'sy v( Wesli11ylio11se.
Inc.)  Table 14.l Characteristics of two air traffic control radars28•46·56  ARSR-3 ASR-8  Frequency band L s  Frequency 1250-1350 MHz 2700-2900 MHz  Instrumented range 200 nmi (370 km) 60 nmi (Ill km)  Peak power 5MW 1.4 MW  A vcrage power 3.6 kW 875 W  Noise figure 4 dB 4 dB  Pulse width 2 ps 0.6 }lS  Pulse repetition frequency 310-365 Hz 700-1200 Hz  1040 Hz (ave)  Antenna rotation rate 5 rpm 12.8 rpm  Antenna size 12.8 m by 6.9 m 4.9 m by 2.7 m  Azimuth beamwidth 1.25° 1.350  Elevation coverage 40° 30°  Antenna gain 34 dB 33 dB  Polarization hor, vert, or circular vert or circular  Blind speed 1200 knots 800 knots  MTI improvement factor 39 dB 34 dB  OTIIER RADAR TOPICS 539  vehicle on which the radar is carried; reliability (mean time between railures).
availability  (fraction of time the radar works properly).
and maintainability (sometimes these last three are  called RAM): electromagnetic compatibility (EMC) requirements; restrictions on size.
weight,  cost, and delivery: type of prime-power available; restrictions on warm-up time and shut­ down procedures: and the form in which the output information from the radar is desired.
The  user (or buyer) should attempt lo limit the requirements to statements of performance rather  than give them in terms of specific radar characteristics which restrict the radar designer in the  choices availahle.
 Characteristics of a long-range air-surveilla.nce radar.
To illustrate the nature of a long-range  air-surveillance radar.
the ARSR-J (Table 14.1) will be described.
No claim is made that the  rationale given for each characteristic was that which innuenced the original specifications for  this radar.
The brief discussion here is simply meant to convey some of the general philosophy  that might enter into radar design.
 The ARSR-3 has an instrumented range of 200 nmi.
and is required to detect a 2 m2  cross-section target with a single-scan probability of detection of 0.8 and a false alarm proba­ bility of 10-6.
The greater the radar range the fewer the number of radars required lo cover a  specified area.
On the other hand.
the radars cannot be placed too far apart since the curvature  of the earth will limit the minimum altitude al which targets can be seen.
For example.
at  200 nmi.
all targets below 8 km altitude arc beneath the radar line of sight and normally  would not be detected.
Most commercial aircraft have a cross section greater than the 2 m2  specified for this radar.
This low value is necessary.
however.
if small general-aviation aircraft  are also to be detected.
 The 5 rpm rotation rate of the antenna corresponds to a 12-second interval between  target observations (scan time).
This is about the longest interval that can usually be tolerated  between observations of aircraft targets.
A high rotation rate is needed for good target track­ ing.
I\ low rotation rate is desired for more hits on target.
which reduces the requirements for  large transmitter power or antenna aperture.
For a surveil!ance radar the product of average  power.
antenna aperture.
and scan time is a constant.
Eq.
(2.57).
Reducing scan time (increas­ ing rotation rate) requires an increase in the average power and;or antenna size.
Some long­ range military radars have rotation rates of 15 rpm (4-s scan time) because of the likelihood  of target maneuver.
A rapid change of course is less likely for civilian aircraft: hence.
the slower  rotation rate of 5 rpm for the ARSR-3.
 The pul~e width of 2 11s corresponds to a range resolution of about 300 m.
(In practice.
 the resoluticfn is said to be about 500 m.46) If limitations on peak power require a co.nsidcrably  longer pulse width in order to achieve the necessary energy within the pulse.
some form of  pulse compression could be used.
(The ARSR-3 does not have pulse compression.
however.)  FM (chirp) is a common choice of pulse-compression waveform.
 The 12.8 m (42 ft) wide by 6.9 m (22.6 ft) high antenna reflector produces a l.25° azimuth  beamwidth and a shaped elevation beam extending beyond 40° so as to provide coverage to an  altitude of 18.6 km (61 ft).
The upper corners of the antenna aperture have a square rather  than rounded outline.
This causes the underside of the elevation beam to have a sharp drop-ofT  which minimizes the ground-reflected energy that causes a lobed elevation pattern and a  degradation of the rain-rejection capability of circular polarization.
The azimuth resolution  and accuracy obtained by the 1.25° beamwidth is said to be 2° and 0.2°, respectively.46 The  antenna can be housed in a 17.4 m (57 ft) diameter rigid geodesic-radome.
 The ARSR-3 antenna generates two beams slightly displaced in elevation for the purpose  of reducing the echoes from high-speed surface clutter, such as from automobiles and trucks.
 These clutter echoes can be large enough and have a sufficiently high doppler frequency shift  540 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  to not be completely eliminated by MTI doppler processors.
Transmission takes place only on  the lower of the two beams.
At short range, reception is on the upper heam only.
This heam is  tilted to minimize illumination of the ground.
As the transmitted pulse travels beyond the  ground clutter range (typicaJly 50 miles or greater) the receiver is switched to the lower beam  for long-range reception.
In the ARSR-3 the ratio of the lower-beam gain in the direction of  the horizon to that of the upper-beam gain in the same direction is 16 dB.4b (The lower beam  has its half-power point on the horizon.) The antenna elevation pattern is shaped to have at  the higher angles a greater gain than would be normal with a cosecant-squared pattern.
This  permits sensitivity time control (STC) to be used with the radar without a loss of coverage at  high altitudes and short range (Fig.
7.27).
The STC is employed to reduce near-in clutter,  especially from birds and insects.
In this radar the STC is applied in the RF ahead of the  low-noise amplifier.
The advantage of STC in the RF as compared to the IF is that it prevents  saturatio~ of the RF amplifier, as well as the IF amplifier, by close-in clutter.
The.tioise level in  the receiver is but little affected by the_ STC, a condition that is desired for operation of the  log-CF AR receiver.
Four PIN diodes provide an STC range of 63 dB with an insertion loss of  less than 0.6 dB.
 The ARSR-3 is really two separate radars, each at a different frequency, operating into a  single antenna.
Either system can be used separately (simplex operation) or both can be used  simultaneously (diplex operation).
The chief reason for the dual channels in this radar is to  provide greater availability of the radar.
A failure in one channel does not require the radar to  shut down.
The radar operates with a single channel while repairs are being made.
The  availability of dual-channel radars with built-in-test equipment and fault isolation has been  demonstrated to be considerably greater than 99 percent.
High availability also requires that  spare parts be at hand when needed and that maintenance personnel be experienced and  motivated.
In diplex operation the two frequencies are radiated on orthogonal polarizations.
 Frequency and polarization diversity can provide an improved signal-to-noise ratio by con­ verting a Swerling type 1 target (Sec.
2.8) with scan-to-scan fluctuations to a Swerling type 2  with pulse-to-pulse fluctuation.
From 4 to 7 dB improvement in signal-to-noise ratio might be  achieved in the diplex mode as compared with the simplex mode.46  The ARSR-3 utilizes a klystron amplifier to achieve 5 MW peak power and 3.6 kW  average power.
The receiver front-end is a low-noise transistor with 4 dB noise figure.
The  logarithmic receiver is followed by a CF AR which divides the amplitude of each range sample  in the logarithmic output by the average amplitude of the returns within i nmi of that sample.
 A 4-pulse digital canceller is employed with variable interpulse periods to produce a calculated  MTJ improvement factor of 39 dB.
The pulse repetition frequencies range from 310 to  360 Hz.
 The ARSR-3 contains provision for switching in or out various processing features.
A  range-azimuth generator (RAG) permits the selection to be made on the basis of both range  and azimuth.
Among the features that might be selected by range and azimuth are included the  choice of MTJ or normal (Iog-CFAR) video, two STC control curves (one optimized for  terrain clutter, the other for sea clutter), the crossover range in switching from the upper to the  lower beam, fixed pulse-repetition period (for eliminating second-time-around clutter) or  variable pulse periods, different RF receiver gains, and sectors for transmitter blanking to  avoid RFI.
 The digital target extractor provides the radar output in a form suitable for transmission  over narrowband telephone lines rather than require wideband microwave data links.
Sliding­ window detectors .determine the range and azimuth centroid of the radar returns using the  m-out-of-n detection criterion.
.
t.
, ..
 Circular polarization can be selected to reduce weather clutter.
MTI and the log-CF AR  OTHER RADAR TOPICS 541  receivers also reduce weather clutter at the radar output.
However, in air-traffic-control opera­ tions, it is important that the controller know the locations of the bad weather so as noJ to  vector aircraft through it.
In the ARSR-3, the weather information is available at the ortho­ gonal port of the circular-polarization diplexcr and can be viewed by switching this output to  the display.
 Frequency considerations.
The ARSR-3 described above operates al L band (1250 to  1350 MHz).
This is a good compromise frequency for a long-range air-surveillance radar.
 lligher frequencies can provide the same angular beamwidths with smaller antennas, but the  smaller apertures must be compensated by greater power if the maximum ranges are the same.
 Although high-power transmitters are available at S band, the peak power that can he  transmitted is less because of the smaller waveguide sizes.
Pulse compression can be used tu  compensate for the reduced peak power, but at the price of additional complexity.
At the  higher frequencies the backscatter from rain is greater, and the MTI blind speeds are more of a  prohlem.
Because of the smaller apertures and the greater effect of rain clutter, S-band radars  arc likely to have less range capability than radars at lower frequencies.
Frequencies higher  than S band are seldom used for long-range air surveillance.
 High-power, large antenna apertures, and good MTI are easier to achieve at frequencies  below L band.
Also, weather clutter is much less.
The lower the frequency the easier it is to  obtain long range.
However, at the lower frequenci_es, the azimuth beamwidths are broader  and the available bandwidths are narrower than might be desired.
Below UHF, the external  noise increases with decreasing frequency and can limit receiver sensitivity.
The lobing of the  elevation pattern due to ground reflections results in wider elevation nulls at the lower  frequencies and can cause long fade times of the target signals.
The elevation angle of the first  multipath lobe varies inversely with frequency (Sec.
12.2), so that low-altitude coverage is  more difficult lo achieve al the lower frequencies.
In spite of limitations, the lower frequencies  arc attractive when low cost and long range arc more important than other factors.
 14.4 HEIGHT-FINDER AND JD RADARS  1 n many applications a know ledge of target height might not be needed.
An obvious example  is where the target is known to lie on the surface of the earth, and its location is given by the  range and azimuth coordinates.
However, there are other instances in which the target's  position irilthrce dimensions must be known.
In this section, radar methods for o&taining the  elevation angle or height of a target will be discussed briefly.
The height of a target above  the surface of the earth may be derived from the measurement of elevation angle and range.
 The use of height as the third target-coordinate is more desirable than the elevation angle in  applications where the height is apt to be constant.
This is usually true for commercial aircraft  and for satellites with nearly circular orbits.
A radar whose purpose is the measurement of  elevation angle, and which usually does not measure the azimuth angle, is called a height-finder  radar.
A radar which measures the elevation angle along with the azimuth angle (and range) is  called a JD radar.
One which measures the range and one angle coordinate (usually azimuth)  is called a 2 D radar.
 Nodding-beam height finder.
Just as the range-azimuth coordinates of a target can be obtained  with a vertical fan-beam antenna, the elevation coordinate can be obtained with a horizontal  fan beam.
(The three coordinates can thus be obtained with two 2D-radars.) Such a height  finder would be directed by the 2D air-surveillance radar lo the azimuth of the target.
It then  542 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  scans its horizontal fan beam in elevation to make an elevation angle measurement of the  target found at the range designated by the air-surveillance radar.
The nodding-beam height  finder scans its beam in elevation by mechanically rocking the entire antenna.
It is possible to  mechanically slew a nodding-beam height finder a full 180° in a relatively short time (within  two seconds, for example).
With an operator making a height measurement manually, from  2 to 4 measurements per minute might be made.
In one nodding-beam height finder, up to 22  target-heights per minute can be obtained when the slewing is controlled automatically for  maximum data rate by the computer of the associated data-handling system.
29 The absolute  height accuracy ofa nodding-beam height finder can be± 1500 ft (460 m) at 150 nmi (280 km)  range.
 The nodding-beam height finder is one of the oldest techniques for measuring the eleva­ tion angle of aircraft targets.
It is also one of the best.
Its accuracy is probably as good or better  than any ?ther technique.
Even though a separate radar is employed to measureJarget height,  the combined cost of the 20 air-surveillance rada'r and the nodding-beam height finder can be  less than the cost of a comparable single 30 radar.
(It is not always true that two radars cost  more, are more complex, or occupy more volume than a "single" radar designed to do the  same job.) Another advantage of the separate nodding-beam height finder in military applica­ tions is that it generally operates at a higher frequency (S or C bands are common choices)  than does the 20 air-surveillance radar.
This increases the ECCM capability of the system  since a jammer must radiate in both radar bands simultaneously to deny the location of air­ craft targets.
The use of a higher frequency for the height finder is appropriate since it can be of  shorter range than the 20 air-surveillance radar, and the antenna aperture can be of smalkr  size for a given beamwidth.
The height finder can also be made to provide good range  resolution for target counting by utilizing a narrower pulse than might be desired for a  long-range 20 air-surveillance radar operating at a lower frequency.
 Thus there are many reasons for the nodding-beam height finder being a good choice for  obtaining the third coordinate on aircraft.
 Instead of mechanically rocking the entire antenna structure, the horizontal fan beam of a  height finder can be scanned in elevation by electromechanical means, such as with the  Robinson scanner, organ-pipe scanner, or delta-a (or Eagle) scanner.
It is also possible to scan  the beam with electronic phase shifters.
With a scanning phased-array antenna, however, the  radiation pattern, which is a fan beam at broadside, becomes a conical beam when scanned ofT  broadside.
This can cause an error in the elevation measurement if the target is ofT the center of  the beam.
For this reason, height finders which use electronic scan usually radiate r,encil  beams rather than broad fan beams.
 V-beam radar.
This radar generates two fan beams: one vertical and the other slanted at some  angle to the vertical (perhaps at 30 to 45°).
The time separation between the echoes received in  the vertical and slant beams is a measure of the target height.
A short time-separation signifies  low altitude, while longer separations occur with high altitude targets.
Two separate rdkctors  may be used to generate the twoJan beams, 30 the two reflectors might be back to back, a single  reflector with two feeds can: be used.~h36 or the two beams can be generated with a single  phased array antenna., The.
V-beam: radar, is a satisfactory method for obtaining three­ coordinate target information if the number of targets is not excessive.
The larger the number  of targets, the more difficult is the problem of correlating the echoes from each of the two  beams.
The closer the beams, the easier..it is to correlate the echoes, but the less the accuracy.
 Another useful modification is to separate the beams at zero elevation so that the data from  the vertical and the slant beam do not appear close in time.
 OTHER RADAR TOPICS 543  Monopulse.
An elevation angle measurement can be made similar to that of the monopulse  radar described in Sec.
5.4.
Two fan beams arc dis placed ("squinted ..
) in elevation angle and  the sum and dilTercnce patterns are obtained.
The measurement of angle is similar to that of an  amplitude-comparison monopulse tracking radar except that it is made open loop; i.e., the  output voltage from the angle-error detector is calibrated lo read elevation angle.
Two  displaced horns with combining circuitry, or a single multimode horn, is the principle  modification required of the antenna.
Although monopulse tracking radars arc capable of  excellent accuracy, when monopulse is applied to a 20 surveillance radar the angle accuracy is  usually poor.
One reason is the broad elevation beamwidths.
(The rms error of an angle  measurement is proportional to the beamwidth.) Another limitation is the effect of multipath  due to reflection from the earth's surface, also a consequence orthe broad fan beams.
The effect  of multipath is similar lo the cffcc:t of glint discussed in Sec.
5.5 for tracking radars.
The mulli­ pat h error can he quite severe and make the angle measurement in many cases almost useless,  as discussed in Sec.
22.3 of Ref.
32.
This effect will generally be less severe over land than over  water hccause of the smaller reflection coefficient of land.
If the antenna beam can be tilted up  so as to reduce the illumination of the surface, or if the antenna elevation pattern can be  designed to have a sharp cutoff on the underside of the beam, the effect of surface reflections is  reduced and the monopulsc angle measurement is improved.
However, this reduces the cover­ age of targets at low elevation angles.
 Since the problem or multipath errors occurs for antenna beams which illuminate the  surface.
one approach is to use three elevation beams.
The lowest beam is made as narrow as  practical in elevation.
It illuminates the low angles.
No monopulse angle measurement would  be attempted with this beam.
The other two beams cover the higher angles with monopulse  processing.
Since these fan beams do not illuminate the surface they do not suffer from  multipath problems.
 Phase in space.
This technique employs a single rellector with a rather unique type of feed.
The  effect of multiple beams is generated with this feed, but only two receivers plus a phase detector  are needed to determine angular location.3·' 35 ln order to obtain wide coverage in elevation  angle a parabolic-torus reflector is employed rather than a section of a paraboloid.
A curved  piece of waveguide with radiating slots acts as the feed.
The transmitter is fed into one end of  the waveguide feed whose slots are designed to produce a number of contiguous beams in  elevation with amplitudes controlled so a~ to produce a cosecant-squared radiation pattern.
 On reception, a receiver is inserted at each end of the feed.
The echo signal from a particular  direction isfreceived at one of the slots and is divided in the waveguide feed.
The 'two signals  travel in opposite directions and arc received at each end of the feed.
The phase difference  between the two signals (or the difference in travel time) depends on from which slot they  originated.
which in turn depends on the elevation angle of arrival.
Thus a measurement of  phase difference results in a measurement of elevation angle.
 A detailed analysis of the accuracy of the phase-in-space technique is not available, but in  one implementation it has been said34 to have a potential elevation accuracy of about 0.2°.
 Multipath reflections can also degrade the accuracy of this method, but since the phase-in­ space technique employs multiple heams to shape its elevation pattern.
it might be possible to  control the radiation so as to illuminate the surface with less energy than the conventional  fan-beam antenna.
 Multiple elevation (stacked) beams, The use of contiguous beams stacked in elevation has been  employed for 30 radar.
It is sometimes called a stacked-beam radar.
It is a good technique  544 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  from a fundamental point of view since it uses simultaneous pencil-beam radiation patterns  from a single aperture to cover the elevation angles of interest.
Each beam can be considered a  separate radar.
It is, however, costly and complex.
The transmitter radiates a fan beam frotn  the summation of all overlapping pencil beams to give the desired elevation coverage.
A  separate receiver is provided each pencil beam and some means of interpolation between the  beams is used to refine the angle measurement.
If automatic detection, sidelobe cancellation,  or MTI is needeamtfftn'a-rnrr,these must tre-separately employed in each receiving channel,  thus adding to the cost and complexity of the radar.
The individual pencil beams, however,  limit the volume of space observed, which can be an advantage in rain clutter or chaff.
The  MTI in the lower beams can be optimized for surface clutter and MTI in the upper bl!arns, if  used at all, can be optimized for rain and chaff.
The individual pencil beams have a higher gain  than a fan-beam antenna, and can provide a larger number of hits at a higher data rate than  can a 30 radar with a single scanning beam in elevation.
.)  Scanning pencil beam.
Three-coordinate, or 30, information can be obtained on each rotation  of the radar by electronically scanning a single pencil heam in elevation while mechanically  rotating the antenna in azimuth.
The beam..
is rapidly scanned through t~llire elevation  coverage in the time the antenna rotates .on.e.._azim.y~.
The(3!) vnformation is  obtained by the S:?9uential_ scan!)ing__o.[_a single b~Jl.Ill..aS fQ!!lJ2.?_~cd withttfu simultaneous  multiple beams described jn the above.
A relatively simple form of electronic scan in this  application is frequency scan (Sec.
8.4) in which a change in frequency results in a change of  elevation angle.37·38 The beam can also be scanned with phase shifters.39  ~·-~--__./ One of the limitations of a long-range 3 0 radar with a single scanning beam is that the  angular coverage consists of a large number of individual beam positions so that the dwell  time in any one resolution cell is small.
The ~ in -;;ch posil!Onls  <foter~ined by the time it takes for the radar energy to travel to maximum range and hack.
The  number of beam positions multiplied by the dwell ~each equals the scan time.
Long  dwell times and short scan time {high data rate) are not compatible.
For example.
assume that  a 30 radar with a one-degree pencil beam must cover 20 elevation beam positions and 360  azimuth beam positions (a total of 7200 beam positions) every four seconds.
If there is but one  pulse per beam position, the pulse repetition frequency can be no less than 1800 Hz, which  corresponds to an unambiguous range or 83 km.
This is a rather short unambiguous range for  an air-surveillance radar.
A 30 radar that obtains only one pulse per beam position can suffer  a relatively large beam-shape loss.
Generally 2 or 3 pulses are required as a minimum to  reduce this loss.
Also, one pulse pc_i:~it!.tlll posit ion does.-no.t..a!low gnQiJJ~::!.!._I, pro cc~  makes difficult the accurate measurement of elevation angle.
To obtain more than one pulse  per beam position and/or increase the unambiguous range requires some compromises or an  increase in complexity.
The compromises require a faller bcamwidth or a slowi.:r scan rate.
 Some benefit can be obtained by using a pulse repetition frequency (prl) that varies with  elevation angle.
At low angles where the ranges are Jong, a low prl is used.
At the higher angles  where the ranges are short, a high prf can be used.
If an increase in complexity can be tolerated,  a number of multiple elevation beams can be scanned simultaneously to increase the data rate,  unambiguous range, and/or number of pulses per beam position.
A separate receiver is  required for each of the simultaneous beams.
 I)_1<! __ eleY9~1+ae-y--ofstngk~-scauoLn.&_bea!:n JD radars i~usually less than that  of other systems.
This is due to the relatively_Jew pulses (sometimes only one pulse) per-heam  -·•·•··~ •" •.• ,,,m ,,, ,,,, •••  IlQfil.!_i_Q_n_,_as well as the error introduced by the_J.?rgct echo ampJjtude lluct when  sequential rather than simultaneous angle measurements are made.
Changes in ampli- tude cause errors since the sequential measurements are necessarily made at different instants  OTHER RADAR TOPIC'S 545  or time.
This is similar to the effect or amplitude fluctuations on tracking radar, as discussed in  Sec.
5.5.
1f frequency scan is used, there is even more likelihood of echo fluctuations because of  the change in target echo with frequency.
 Another method for obtaining 3D coverage with a scanning pencil beam is to employ  helical scan, as in the renowned SCR-584 or World War II.
A single pencil beam is rotated in  azimuth with its elevation angle increased one beamwidth per revolution so as to trace a  helical pattern.
It is a simple technique, but is not or high accuracy since it is difficult to  interpolate between adjacent elevation beam positions.
 Within-pulse scanning.40·41 In the frequency-scan 3D radar discussed above, a single pencil  beam is step-scanned in elevation.
Each pulse is at a constant frequency but the frequency is  changed every pulse or every few pulses to position the beam at different elevation angles.
 /\not her method of utilizing a rrequency-scan antenna is to sweep the frequency over the entire  frequency range 011 <'ach pulse so that energy is radiated throughout the entire elevation  coverage for the duration of a single pulse.
The frequency or the received echo signal will  depend 011 the elevation angle of the target.
/\ bank or contiguous receivers.
each tuned to a  different frequency.
provides coverage or the elevation sector with the equivalent of parallel  receiving beams.
The elevation angle of the target is determined by which receiver is excited.
 This technique has been called withi11-1wlse scanning.
 The height resolution depends on the antenna beamwidth, as in a conventional frequency­ scan antenna; but the range resolution is determined by the frequency spectral components.
 received from a given elevation angle, that correspond to one beamwidth.
As stated in Sec.
8.4.
 the echo from a target is frequency modulated when illuminated by such a frequency-scanned  beam.
Pulse-compression filtering (similar to chirp) can be used to achieve a range resolution  equal to the reciprocal of the one-way group delay along the dispersive delay line (snake feed)  feeding the frequency-scan array.
 There is another array antenna technique called withi11-p11/se sca1111i11g that is different  from the frequency scan technique described above.
This other technique, which is discussed in  Sec.
8.7.
is a method for generating multiple receiving beams at a single frequency and can be  considered more like the stacked-beam radar than a frequency-scan height finder.
 lnterferometer.42 44 /\n interferometer consists of two individual antennas spaced so as to  obtain a narrow heamwidth for accurate angle measurement.
The phase difference between the  signals of the two antenna elements ol the interferometer provides the elevation angle, as given  by 1:q.
(5~·1 ).
This type of angle measurement is similar to the phase-comparison monopulse  radar.
except that the size of the individual antennas is small compared to the spacing between  them.
Grating lobes (also called interferometer lobes) result from the wide spacing between the  antennas.
These grating lobes can cause ambiguities in the measurement.
The ambiguities can  be resolved by use of more than two antennas with unequal spacings.
The outer two antennas  provide accurate.
but ambiguous, measurement of elevation angle.
The function of the one or  more inner antennas is to resolve the ambiguities.
 In one implementation, an interferometer was attached to the rotating antenna of a 2D  S-hand air-surveillance radar.42 The 20 radar provided the range and azimuth as well as the  transmitted energy for the receiving interferometer.
The interferometer consisted of four linear  horizontally oriented arrays.
or sticks, with one stick mounted below the 2D radar antenna  and the other three sticks mounted above.
 The elevation beamwidths of each of the individual antennas of the interferometer are  generally hroad so that multipath due to ground reOections can cause errors.
Shaping the  underside of tile 2D transmitting antenna to minimize the energy illuminating the surface can  546 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  reduce the angular error.
The effective receiving area of the interferometer is usually less than  that of the conventional radar reflector antenna with which it is used.
Thus, the range capa­ bility of the interferometer angle measurement might be Jess than that of the 2D radar.
This  reduced range capability is acceptable in many situations since the height measurement is  usually of more significance at shorter rather than longer ranges.
 Lobe recognition.
A coarse indication of height sometimes can be obtained hy recognizing the  fading of the echo signal as an aircraft target flies through the multipath lobes of the antenna  pattern.
Measuring the range at which the target is first seen on the bottom lohc, or the range  where it disappears because of the first null of the lobing pattern, can be related to the target  height.
This eITect is more applicable at the lower microwave frequencies and for radars sited  over water.
At the higher frequencies where the lobes are narrow, a count of the lobes per unit  distance can he related to the target height.
Although the technique of lobe rrcognition is  relatively ·simple and has been reported to have been used in World War Jl,45 its poor  reliability, low target capacity, and poor accuracy, make it unattractive.
 Time-difference height finding.
The several height-finding techniques included in this section  were described in terms of a ground-based radar.
Most can be modified to apply to an  airborne radar for the measurement of height of other aircraft or the depression angle if a  ground target.
The time-difference height-finding technique to be described is applicable, in  principle, to almost any radar situation, but in practice it is more applicable to an elevated  radar such as in an aircraft, especially one which operates over water.
It derives the height of a  target from the time difference between the radar signal reflected directly from the target and  the multipath signal that arrives via reflection from the surface of the earth.
 Consider the geometry of Fig.
12.l for propagation over a plane reflecting surfa~e.
There  are four possible paths by which the energy travels to the target and back.
These are:  1.
From radar to target and return by the same path (AB-BA).
 2.
From radar to target and return via reflection from the surface (AB-BMA).
 3.
From radar to target via reflection from the surface and return directly to the radar  (AMB-BA).
(This is the opposite of No.
2.)  4.
From radar to target via reflection from the surface and return hy the same path  (AMB-BMA).
 Path 1 is the shortest, path 4 is the longest and paths 2 and 3 are equal.
Thus, there can be three  separate responses from a target, as illustrated in the idealized sketch of Fig.
14.11.
The  relative amplitudes of the three echoes are in the ratio of 1, 2p and p2, where p = surface  reflection coefficient.
A measurement of the time delay t0 along with the range R to the target  and knowledge of the height ha of the radar antenna yields the height of the target.
This  technique works best over surfaces with large reflection coefficient, and when the pulse widths  2p  1--'o ..
,~ 'o---~ Figure 14.11 Idealized echo response of a point target  located above a reflecting surface, for the case where  the pulse width is less than the time separation 10 be­ tween the direct and surface-reflected signals.
The sur­ face reflection coefficient is p.
 OTHER RADAR TOPICS S47  arc short compared to the time diffen:ncc ,,..
For a llal earth.
I.he l1eighl of the target is  approximately  I _ cRt,,  r, -2/ra ( 14.27)  where r velocity or propagation.
Usually the round-earth geometry must be considerl·d.
 which results in a more complex formulation than the simple expression given above.
 14.3 ELECTRONIC COUNTER-COUNTERl\1EASURES  All radars, civilian and military, must be able to operate in the crowded electromagnetic  environment that results from the transmissions of other radiating sources.
both in the radar's  own band as well as from.
outside the band.50 The radar must be designed to reject these  unwanted radiations and to minimize the likelihood of its own transmissions causing trouble  to other users of the spectrum.
This is the subject of EMC, or electromagnetic compatibility.
It  is important if the electromagnetic spectrum, considered as a natural resource, is to be effec­ tively and efficiently utilized for the benefit of all.
Military radars, however, must also operate  in a hostile environment where they may be subjected to deliberate interference designed to  degrade their performance.
The various methods for interfering electronically with radar arc  cal led elect ro11ic cow1terme£Js11res, or ECM.
Active EC M is sometimes ref erred lo as jammi11y.
 There is also passive ECM.
such as chaff, which reflects radar energy to create clutter and false  targets.
The methods employed to combat ECM are called electronic co1111ter-co1111termcas10-l'S.
 or ECCM.
 The several forms of ECM directed against radac may be categorized as noise jamming,  deception jamming, chaff, and decoys.
Intercept receivers and direction finders (which are  called electronic support measures, or ESM), as well as antiradiation missiles (ARM) are also  aspects of electronic warfare (EW) that must be of concern to the military radar systems  designer.
 If a determined adversary is willing to pay the resultant price, sufficient ECM can be  brought to bear against any single radar to significantly reduce its effectiveness.
This should  not evoke pessimism on the part or the radar designer since it can be said that any military  objective can be accomplished by a determined force if the force is skillful and large enough,  and if cosl is of no consequence.
The goal of ECCM is to raise the cost of ECM.
to the point  where it is prohibitive.
The effect of ECM on a single radar can seldom be considered in  isolation since it is seldom that a single radar acts as an entity in itself.
A military radar is.
 almost always in support of a weapon system.
The question is not whether a single radar can  operate without degradation, but whether the weapon system or which the radar is a part can  fulffll its mission in spite of hostile ECM.
It is easier to ensure the accomplishment of the  weapon system's mission than to guarantee that operation of a single radar will not be  degraded.
This larger and more important goal, that of fulfilling a military mission, is what  should guide the military systems planner and the radar systems designer.
This broader  concept, however, is not appropriate for discussion here.
Instead, a brief review will be given of  the various Tadar-ECCM options that can make the task of ECM more difficult.
 As a general rule, good radar design practice can reduce vulnerability to electronic  countermeasures.
Good design is based on maximizing the ratio of the signal energy to noise  power per hertz tE/ N 0), as well as employing techniques to reduce mutual interference.
It is  important to avoid receiver saturation, or overloading.
A wide dynamic range is desired, and  548 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  linear rather than square-law detectors are prderred.
The radar should he designed conserva­ tively with larger power and larger antenna aperture than the minimum required for marginal  detection.
 One of the better measures against many forms of ECM is an alert, highly motivati.:d, well  trained, and experienced operator.
 Noise jamming.
Receiver noise generally limits the sensitivity of most microwave radars.
 Raising the noise level by external means, as with a jammer, further degrades the sensitivity of  the radar.
Noise is a fundamental limitation to radar performance and therefore can bi: an  dfoctive countermeasure.
The ECCM designer must minimize the amount of noise a jamma  can introduce into the radar receiver.
It is difficult, however, to keep the noise out when the  Jammer is being illuminated by the main beam of the radar antenna.
When this occurs, the  narrow sec!or in the direction of the jam mer will appear as a radial strobe on the rPI display.
 The direction to the jammer can be determined, but its range and the ranges of any targets  masked by the noise strobe is not likely to be known.
If noise enters the radar via the antenna  sidelobes, the entire display can be obliterated and no target information ohtaine<l.
Thus it is  essential that noise be prevented from entering the receiver via the antenna sidelobcs.
 A jammer whose noise energy is concentrated within the radar receiver bandwidth is  called a spot jammer.
The spot jammer can be a potent threat to the radar if it is allowed to  concentrate large power entirely within the radar bandwidth.
The radar systems designer must  prevent this by forcing the jammer to spread its power over a much wider band.
This can be  accomplished by changing the radar frequency from pulse to pulse in an unpredictable fashion  over the entire tuning band available to the radar.
A radar capable of changing its frequency  from pulse to pulse is said to possessji·equency agilit}'.
(Even in the absence of ECM, frequency  agility has advantages in filling in the nulls of the elevation radiation pattern and in decorrelat­ ing target echoes so as to increase the probability of detection.) A jammer can also b1.: forced to  widen its jamming band if there are many radars operating within the same geographic area,  each at a different frequency distributed over the available radar tuning range.
A jammer  which radiates over a wide band of frequencies is called a barmge Jammer.
 To take full advantage of frequency agility, the.
radar should employ a prelook receh•i1r to  examine the jammer's spectrum and 'Select a frequency for the next radar transmission where  the noise is a minimum.
The jamming power is seldom uniform over the band.
Prelook  sampling of the environment can take place during the radar interpulse period just prior to  each transmission, so as to select on a pulse-to-pulse basis that frequency which offers the kast  jamming interference.51  Pulse compression is sometimes credited as causing the jammer to spread its energy over  a wider band than that of a normal spot jammer.
However, pulse compression is seldom  deliberately employed as a prime ECCM technique.
It is almost always used as a means to  achieve good range resolution with a long pulse.
Furthermore, the jammer usually must be  forced to spread its power over a much wider hand than the spectral width of mosl pulse­ compression radars in order to significantly reduce its effectiveness.
Thus pulse compression  should not be given too large a credit as a major ECCM technique, although it is certainly a  posit ivc factor.
 Forcing the Jammer to spread power over the entire band available to a radar is generally  not sufficient in itself.
The jammer also must be forced to spread its available power over more  than one radar band.
This can be accomplished with frequency diversity by using two or more  radars.
A 20 air-surveillance radar in one band used with a height-finder radar in another  band is a good method for achieving frequency diversity.
Both radar bands have to be jammed  simultaneously if target location is to be denied.
 OTHER RADAR TOPICS 549  In general, higher-frequency radars usually are less vunerable to jamming than arc lower­ frequency radars.
One reason is that the bandwidth over which the higher-frequency radar can  operate is greater, thus causing the jammcr to spread its available power over a greater  number of megahertz.
Also, the antenna gain can be greater at the higher frequencies, a factor  often favoring the radar when confronted with jamming, as seen by Eqs.
(14.28) and (14.30).
 Furthermore, at the higher frequencies the antenna sidelobe levels can be lower, making it  more diflicull for sidclohe jamming.
1 lowever, the advantages of operating against jammers al  the higher frequencies arc balanced in part by the disadvantages of the higher frequencies,  especially a hove J, hand, for long-range air-surveillance radar.
 The noise that enters the radar via the antenna sidelobes can be reduced by coherent  sidelohe cancelers.
This consists of one or more omnidirectional antennas and cancelation  circuitry used in conjunction with the signal from the main radar antenna.
Jamming noise in  the omnidirectional antennas is made to cancel the jamming noise entering the side lobes of the  main antenna.52 An antenna can also be designed to have very low sidelobe levels to reduce  the efTcct of sidclobc jamming.
Low sidelobe antennas require unobstructed siting if reflections  from nearby objects arc not to degrade the sidelobe levels.
 By employing some or all of the above techniques, the effect of the sidelobe noise jam mer  can be significantly reduced.
Some of the above techniques can also reduce the jamming that  enters via the main beam.
The effects of main-beam jamming can be further reduced by  employing a narrow beamwidth to limit the region over which the jamming appears.
If the  main beam cannot he made narrow because of constraints on the antenna size, an auxiliary  antenna can be employed to create a notch in the main-beam radiation pattern in the direction  of the jammer.
With adaptive cir~uitry similar to that of the sidelobe canceler, this mai11-hea,11  notch can be automatically adjusted to be maintained in the direction of the jammer.
 Multiple radars viewing the same coverage in a coordinated manner can provide some  benefit against a jammer since it is unlikely that jamming power can be distributed uniformly  in space.
With netting of radars, those radars with less jamming can provide target data for  radars with more jamming.
Multiple radar sites also allow a jammer to be located by tria11g11- latio11 when main-beam jamming denies a direct measurement of range.
This may be a satisfac­ tory tactic for one or a few jammers, but triangulation cannot be used with a large number of  jammers because of the generation of ghost targets.
N jammers can produce N2 -N ghost  targets when two radars attempt triangulation.
 Locating the jammer might not be as important, however, as locating the attacking  missiles or aircraft screened by the jam mer, especially when the jamming aircraft is beyond the  range of (\cfcnsive weapons.
A jammer that operates outside the range of norm~I defenses is  known as a sta11d-of/jammer.
An important ECCM tactic is to engage hostile jammers with  /101111•-011-jam (IIOJ) missile guidance.
If the jammer is radiating, HOJ is generally a better  guidance technique than is radar guidance.
Stand-olT jammers are also subject to direct attack  hy interceptor aircraft.
 Increasing the radar energy in the direction of the jammer in the hope of increasing the  radar echo power above the jamming noise is called bumthrough.
This may be accomplished  with reserve transmitter power or by dwelling longer in the direction of the jammer.
Dwelling  longer on a target reduces the data rate, and thus can degrade the overall radar performance.
A  significant reduction in data rate generally is not desirable.
Dependence on burnthrough as a  major FCCM lactic is questionable.
It should be used where cost-elTectivc and where the  reduction in data rate is tolerable.
 Impulsive noise, that can shock-excite the" narrow-band" radar receiver and cause it to  ring, can be reduced with the Lamb noise-silencing circuit,53 or Dicke fix.54 This consists of a  wideband IF filter in cascade with a limiter, followed by the normal IF matched filter.
The  550 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  wideband filter is designed to include most of the spectrum oft he i nterforing signal.
Its purpose  is to preserve the short duration of the narrow impulsive spikes.
These spikes are then clipped  by the limiter to remove a considerable portion of their energy.
If the large noise spikes arc not  limited and arc allowed to pass they would shock-excite the narrowband IF amplifier and  produce an output pulse much wider in duration than the input pulse.
Therefore the interfer­ ence would be in the receiver for a much longer time and at a higher energy level than when  limited before narrowbanding.
Desired signals which appear simultaneously with the noise  spike might not be detected, but the circuit does not allow the noise to influence the receiver  for a time longer than the duration of a noise spike.
This device depends on the use of a limiter.
 Limiters, however, can generate undesired spurious responses and small-signal suppression.
 and reduce the improvement factor that can be achieved in MTI processors.
It should therefore  be used with caution as an ECCM device.
If incorporated in a radar, provision should be  included for switching it out of the receiver when it does more harm than good.J  A co11stallt false-alarm rate (CF AR) receiver is used with automatic detection systems to  keep the false-alarm rate constant as the noise level at the receiver varies (Sec.
HU).
Without  CF AR the computer in automatic systems can quickly become overloaded and cease to  function.
CF AR is sometimes classed as an ECCM, but in reality it is not in the same category  as other ECCM.
CFAR does not give immunity to jamming; it merely makes operation in the  presence of jamming more convenient by automatically reducing the effective sensitivity of the  receiver.
If the jamming is severe enough, CFAR can produce almost the same effect as turning  off the receiver.
In a jamming environment, it can lull the radar operator into a false sense of  security since the ideal CF AR, by maintaining the output noise level constant no matll!r what  the level of the input noise, provides no indication that jamming is present.
Additional means  must be incorporated into a CF AR to provide the operator with warning of the presence of .
.
.
noise Jamming.
 A sensitive receiver with a low noise figure may be desirable in many civilian applications  of radar, but in military applications it is not always an asset since it makes the receiver more  vulnerable to jamming.
Most low-noise receivers also have less dynamic range than one with a,  mixer front-end.
 Since the jammer power received at the radar varies inversely as the square of the distance  between radar and jammer (one-way propagation), while the radar echo power varies with  distance inversely as the fourth power (two-way propagation), there will be some distance  below which the radar echo will exceed the jammer signal.
This is called the se((scrce11i11g  range, or the crossover range, and is approximately  where P,, = radar transmitter power  J>,j = jammer transmitter power  G, = radar antenna gain  Gi = jammer antenna gain  a = target cross section  Bi = jammer bandwidth  B, = radar signal bandwidth ( 14.28)  J /S = jammer-to-radar signal (power) ratio at the output of the IF required to mask the  radar signal  A jammer located on a target of cross section a will overpower the radar if the jammer is at a  range Rss or greater.
 OTHER RADAR TOPICS 551  A radar equation for detecting a target in the presence of jamming noise large compared  to receiver noise can be derived by substituting the jammer noise power per hertz received at ·  the radar for the receiver noise power per hertz, or kT0 F".
The jammer noise power per hertz  at the radar is  (14.29)  where A,.= effective receiving aperture of the radar antenna and R = range of jammer from  radar.
Suhstituting Eq.
(14.29) for k1;)Fn in Eq.
(2.54), the radar equation for asearchlighting  or tracking radar.
yiekls  1 /\,.G,t 0E;(11) rr Bj  Rmax = 4 (S/N).
j> .(;.
Tr I IJ J (14.30)  where t 11 = 11r'.fr = integration time.
The system losses have been omitted.
The remaining sym­ bols have been defined ahovc or in Sec.
2.14.
Making the same substitution of Eq.
(14.29) into  the surveillance radar equation, L:q.
(2.57), gives  R 2 = ~'~~i({i_l<!_ !! __!!j__  max (S/N)1 QPrjGi (14.31)  For jamming which enters via the antenna sidelobes rather than via the main beam, the  right-hand side of the above surveillance radar equation would be multiplied by the ratio of  maximum antenna gain to the gain of the si<lelobe in the direction of the jammer.
 Repeater jamming.
A target under observation by a radar can generate false echoes by delay­ ing the received radar signals and retransmitting at a slightly later time.
This is accomplished  in a rq1earcr Jammer.
Delaying the rel rans.mission causes the repeated signals to appear at a  range and/or azimuth different from that of the jammcr.
Thus the signal from the repeater  generates a false target echo at the output of the radar receiver which, in principle, cannot be  distinguished from a real target.
A rr11c re{'eater is one which retransmits the same signal that a  target would reradiate.
 I\ tr1111s11011d!'I' repeater plays hack a stored replica of the radar signal after it is triggered  by the radar.
The transmitted signal is made to resemble the radar signal as closely as  practicable.
The transponder might also radiate a noise pulse.
It can be programmed to remain  silent whe,{ illuminated by the main radar beam and to transmit only when illumihated by the  sidelohes.
creating spurious targets on the radar display at directions other than that of the  true target.
 A rcmyc-yate .Healcr is a repeater jammer whose function is to cause a tracking radar to  ·· break lock" on the target.
It will be recalled from Sec.
5.6 that a tracking radar can track a  target in range by generating a pair of range gates within the radar receiver and adjusting these  gates to center on the target.
The tracking radar is said to be" locked on" the target when the  echo is maintained between the two range·gates.
As the target moves, the range gates automat­ ically follow.
The range-gate stealer operates by initially transmitting a single pulse in synchro­ nism with each pulse received from the radar, thereby strengthening the target echo.
The  repeater slowly shifts the timing of its own pulse transmissions to cause an apparent change in  the target range.
If the jamming signal is larger than the echo signal, the radar tracking circuits  will follow the false signal from the jammer and ignore the weaker echo from the target.
In this  manner.
the repeater" steals" the radar tracking circuits from the target.
The delay between  the true echo and the false echo can be lengthened or shortened to such an extent that the  552 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  range servo limits in the radar receiver are exceeded, or else the repeater can be turned off,  leaving the tracker without a target and forcing it to revert to the search mode.
 CW radars sometimes employ a tunable filter called a velocity gate to track the dopplcr  frequency shift.
A velocity=gate stealer transmits a signal which falsifies the target's speed or  pretends that it is stationary.
 Repeater jammers may also be designed to break conical-scan angle track by transmitting  a signal at the conical-scan frequency.
This will either confuse the operation of the radar  antenna servo or prevent it from following the target.
 A repeater can be very effective against an unprepared radar system.
Repeater jamming,  however, is generally easier to counter than is noise jamming.
Against a properly prepared  radar, repeater jamming can be made to have only minimal effect.
It is difficult to design a  repeater jammer that wil.l play back an exact reproduction of the radar signal.
The radar echo  from a target can be considered as being linear, but the signal from a repeater is generally not  linearly related to that which was transmitted by t.he radar.
Thus one strategy fcir defeating  repeater jamming is to utilize radar transmissions with a form of identification difficult to  mimic by the "nonlinear" repeater.
Repeater "false echoes" can be unmasked as such hy  utilizing in an unpredictable manner different pulse repetition frequencies, rf frequencies, pulsc  widths, internal pulse modulations, or polarizations.
Sidclohe hlankers can prevent repeater  signals from entering the radar via the antenna sidelohes and appcaring on the display in  directions different from that of the jammer.
In a tracking radar, circuitry can hc dcviscd to  prevent range-gate stealers from capturing the range gate.
Monopulsc tracking radar can he  employed to avoid the vulnerability of conical-scan tracking radars to modulations that cause  it to break lock in angle.
 Passive ECM.
The noise jammer and the repeater jammer were examples of active ECM.
 They internally generate or amplify electromagnetic energy, which is then radiated.
Passive  electronic countermeasures do not generate or amplify electromagnetic radiation.
They act in  a passive manner to change the energy reflected back to the radar.
Examples of passive ECM  are chaff, decoys, and radar cross-section reduction.
 One of the earliest forms of countermeasures used against radar was cJu~ft: Chaff consists  of a large number of dipole reflectors, usually in the form of metallic foil strips packaged as a  bundle.
The many foil strips constituting the chaff bundle, on being released fr9m an aircraft,  are scattered by the wind and blossom to form a highly reflecting cloud.
A relatjvely small  bundle of chaff can form a cloud with a radar cross section comparahlc to that of a large  aircraft.
 Chaff is used either to deceive or to confuse.
S1,ot chqf/'is thc name usually associated with  thc dcception role, while corridor clu~ff'is a confusion countermcasure.
Spot chaff is dropped as  individual bundles which appear as additional targets on the radar in an effort to dcceivc the  operator as to their true nature.
 A chaff corridor is produced by air.craft continuously releasing chaff to form a long  corridorlike cloud through which following aircraft can fly undetected.
The effect is to mask  the aircraft, much like a smoke screen.
 Chaff is a relatively slow moving target compared with aircraft.
Its vertical descent is  determined by gravity and by the drag characteristics of the individual foil strips.
Its horizon­ tal component of velocity depends on the wind.
Chaff may be distinguished from moving  aircraft targets on the basis of its slower velocity.
Discrimination is performed either by thc  radar operator or automatically with MTI.
 Chaff dropped from an aircraft can also be used to" break lock" on tracking radars; that  is, if a tracking radar is" locked on" and fol.lowing a particular target, the dropping of chaff  might cause the tracker to follow the chaff and not the target.
 OTHER RAIJAR TOPICS 553  Chaff was a very effective countermeasure when used with the relatively slow bomber  aircraft of World War II.
With modern high-speed aircraft, a bundle of chaff quickly separates ·  from the dispensing aircraft and makes the job of discriminating between target and chafT  easier.
However, chaff need not be simply dropped from the target.
Jt can be dispensed from  aerial rockets and fired ahead, behind, above, or below the target aircraft.
Forward-shot chalT  can deceive the range and velocity tracking gates of tracking radars.
 The effects of cha IT can be reduced by a properly designed MTI.
The design of an MTI to  detect moving targets in chaff is different from the design of an MTI for surface clutter since  the chaff is generally in motion.
The MTI must be capable of coping with moving, rather than  stationary, clutter.
In this regard the MTI design is more like that for detecting targets in  weather clutter.
The MTI design is further complicated if the moving chaff appears in the same  resolution cell as stationary surface clutter.
The MTI must then be made to cancel simulta­ neously both stationary surface clutter and moving volume clutter.
High range and angle  resolution is another technique effective in reducing the amount of clutter with which the  target must compete.
 /\ decoy is a small aircraftlike vehicle made to appear to the radar as a realistic target.
If  the decoy and the aircraft are made indistinguishable to the radar, the radar operator may be  deceived into thinking the decoy is hostile and commit a weapon to attack.
If sufficient decoys  arc present, the defense system could be overloaded.
 /\ small aircraft or missile decoy can be designed to have a radar cross section comparable  with that of a large aircraft by fitting it with radar signal enhancement devices such as corner  rcOcctors, Luneburg renectors, or active repeaters.
The decoy could also be outfitted with a  small jammer to mimic jammers on the target aircraft in order to make the two appear  identical.
 Decoys might be carried on board attacking bomber aircraft and launched outside the  normal radar detection ranges.
Since decoys can be made to closely resemble real targets, and  since a decoy might conceivably carry a bomb, one defensive strategy would be to destroy all  unfriendly targets, including known decoys.
 Reducing the radar cross section of the target by proper shaping is another possible  passive countermeasure.
A target with doubly curved surfaces (curvature in two dimensions)  will have small cross section.
It should not have any flat, cylindrical, or conical surfaces which  might be illuminated by the incident radar wave from a direction along the normal to the  surface.
The cone-sphere, described in Sec.
(2.
7), is a good example of a target shape that yields  a low value of cross section over a wide range of angles.
 I • The radar cross section of a target can also be reduced by electromagnetic absorbent  materials.
5 5 One type of electromagnetic absorber is based on destructive interference.
It is a  quarter wavelength thick and designed so that energy reflected from the front surface cancels  the energy which enters the material and is reOected from the inner surface.
A destructive  interference absorber is analogous to the antiretlection coatings applied to optical lenses.
It is  inherently narrowband.
 Another type of absorber is one which internally dissipates the energy incident upon it.
It  is usually much thicker than the destructive interference absorber but has the advantage of  being broadband.
Relatively thin absorbers, however, can be obtained with magnetic materials  having appropriate dielectric properties.99·100-104  14.6 BISTATIC RAOAR57·58  Throughout this book, it has been assumed that a common antenna is used for both transmit­ ting and receiving.
Such a radar is called monostatic.
A bistatic radar is one in which the  tran,mitting and receiving antennas are separated by a considerable distance (Fig.
14.12).
If  554 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  ---------- ob -------··-------1  Figure 14.11 Geometry of a bistatic radar.
,)  many separated receivers are employed with one transmitter, the radar system is called multi­ slatic.
Some of the characteristics, capabilities, and limitations of the bislatic radar will be  described in this section and compared with the more usual monostatic radar.
 Any radar which employs separate antennas for transmitting and receiving might he  called bistatic, but for purposes of this discussion a bistatic radar is assumed to be one in which  the separation between transmitter and receiver is comparable with the target distance.
For  aircraft targets, the separations might be of the order of a few miles to as much as several  hundred miles.
For satellite targets the separation might be hundreds or even thousands of  miles.
A distinction is made between radars with closely spaced antennas and radars with  widely spaced antennas because the former resemble the conventional monostatic radar more  than the type of bistatic radar to be discussed here.
 Description.
The bistatic radar is not a new concept.
Its principle was known and  demonstrated many years before the development of practical monostatic radar.
In Sec.
l.S it  was mentioned that the first "radar" observations in both the United States and in Great  Britain were made with separated CW transmitters and receivers.
These early radars were  known as wave-interference equipments but were the same as what would now be called  bistatic radar.
Taylor and Young of the Naval Research Laboratory first demonstrated bistatic  radar for the detection of ships in 1922.
Their work was disclosed in a patent issued in 1934.
59  The early experiments with wave-interference (bistatic) radar led to the development of mono­ static radar in the late 1930s in both this country and abroad.
Further development was put  aside after the demonstration of the more versatile monostatic-radar principle.
Bistatic radar  lay dormant for about fifteen years until it was" reinvented" in the early 1950s and received  new interest.60  Separating the transmitter and receiver in the bistatic radar results in considerably differ­ ent radar characteristics than those obtained with the monostatic radar.
The physical  configuration of a bistatic radar is closer to that of a point-to-point microwave communica­ tions system than to the usual scanning monostatic radar.
In fact, histatic-radar detection of  aircraft with poinHo-point communications systems has often been reported in the literature.
 Perhaps the most common manifestation of the principle of the histatic radar is the rhythmic  flickering observed in a TV picture when an aircraft passes overhead, especially if the television  receiver is tuned to a weak channel.
 The inherent geometry of the bistatic radar is more suited to a fixed (nonscanning)  fencelike coverage as in Fig.
14.12, as is obtained with fixed antennas generating fan beams.
 OTHER RADAR TOPICS 555  The fence coverage of the bistatic radar is seen to be quite different from the hemispherical  coverage or the monoslatic radar.
Similar coverage can also be obtained with the monostatic  radar by operating with fixed, rather than scanning, antennas.
 The radiated signal from the bistatic transmitter as shown in Fig.
14.12 arrives at the  receiver via two separate paths, one being the direct path from transmitter to receiver, the  other being the scattcr!'d path which includes the target.
The measurements which can be  made at the bistatic receiver arc:  t.
The total path length ([), + D,).
of· transit time, of the scattered signal.
 2.
The angle of arrival of the scattered signal.
 3.
The frequency of the direct and the scattered signals.
These will be different if the target is in  motion (dopplcr effect).
 A knowledge of the transmitted signal is necessary at the receiver site if the maximum  information is to be extracted from the scattered signal.
The transmitted frequency is needed to  determine the doppler frequency shirt.
A time or phase reference is also required if the total  scattered path length (D1 + D,) is to be measured.
The frequency reference can be obtained  from the direct signal.
The time reference also can be obtained from the direct signal provided  the distance D,, between transmitter and receiver is known.
If the separation between transmit­ ter and receiver is sufficiently large.
the direct signal will be highly attenuated by propagation  losses and might be too weak to be detected at the receiver.
(The signal scattered by the target  will not be highly attenuated if the target lies above the radar line of sight, but the direct signal  must overcome the losses due to its over-the-horizon path.) Wheri the direct signal is not  available at the receiver.
its function may he performed by a stable clock or reference oscillator  synchronized to the transmitter.
It will be assumed, therefore, that a knowledge of the trans­ mitted signal is always available at the receiver, whether from the direct signal or from a  suitable reference clock.
 The bistatic radar can be operated with either a pulse modulation or CW, just as can a  monostatic radar.
The simplicity of CW or modulated CW has an advantage in the bistatic  radar.
not usually enjoyed by monostatic radar.
A CW radar requires considerable isolation  hetween transmitter and receiver to prevent the transmitted signal from leaking into the  receiver.
Isolation is ohtainc<l in the bistatic radar because of the inherent separation between  transmitter and receiver.
 (  Information available from the bistatic-radar signal.
Radar, whether bistatic or monostatic, is  capable or determining (1) the presence of a target (of sufficient size) within the coverage of the  radar.
(2) the locarion of the target position in space, and (3) a component of velocity (doppler)  relative to the radar.
 The method of locating the target position is similar in either radar.
Both require the  measurement of a distance and the angle of arrival in two orthogonal angular coordinates.
The  distance measured by the histatic radar is the sum S = D, + D,, the total scattered path.
 The sum D, + D, locates the target somewhere on the surface of a prolate spheroid (an ellipse  rotated about its major axis) whose two foci are at the location of the transmitter and receiver.
 To further localize the target position the scattered-signal angle of arrival is required at  the receiver.
The intersection of the ray defined by the angle of arrival and the surface of  the prolate spheroid determines tbe position of the target in space.
 Applying the law of cosines to the geometry of Fig.
14.12 gives  02 + D2 r b 2D,Db cos t/1 ...
(14.32)  556 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  where lj;,.
is the angle of arrival measured in the plane of the fence, here assumed to he vertical.
 The bistatic radar can measure Vie and S = D1 + D,.
The separation Db between transmitter  and receiver is assumeq kn.9wn ..
Equation (14.32} may he.
written  S2 -Dl D =---- r 2(S -Db cos ljl.,) (14.33)  The above equation locates the target in the plane of the angle t/J, ..
The location of the target in  the third dimension is found from the measurement of the orthogonal angle coordinate t/10  (not shown in Fig.
14.12).
 When the sum S = D, + Dr approaches the base-line distance Db, the prolate spheroid  degenerates into a 'straight line joining the two foci.
Under these conditions, the location of the  target position is indeterminate other than that it lies somewhere along the line joining the  transmitter and receiver.
.)  Locating a target with bistatic radar is not unlike locating a target with monostatic radar.
 The latter measures the total path length from radar to target to receiver jusl as doi.:s thi.:  bistatic radar.
Since the two parts of the path are equal, the distance to the target is one-half  the total path length.
The distance or range measurement in the monostatic radar locates the  target on the surface of a sphere.
(The sphere is the limiting case of the prolate spheroid when  the separation between the two foci becomes zero.) Hence the target position is found with  monostatic radar as the intersection of a ray (defined by the angle of arrival) and the surface of  a sphere.
 The doppler beat frequency j~ between the scattered and direct signals in the bistatic radar  is proportional to the time rate of change of the total path length of the scattered signal.
 fd = 11:l (D, + Dr) I (14.34)  where A is the wavelength of the transmitted signal.
The doppler frequency shift provides a  means for discriminating stationary objects from moving targets, but it is not a measure of the  radial velocity as with the monostatic radar.
In principle, it is possible to determine the  trajectory of the target from dopplcr measurements only.57  Bistatic radar measurements.
The measurements made with a bistatic radar are similar lo  those of the conventional monostatic radar except they are usually more complicated and  difficult to accomplish.
The measurement of distance relative to one of the.
sites requires a  knowledge of both the angle of arrival at the receiving site and the distance between transmit­ ter and receiver, as was indicated by Eq.
(14.33).
Any of the methods for measuring range with  a monostatic radar can be applied to bistatic radar, including pulse and FM-CW modulations.
 If the direct signal from the transmitter is available at the receiving site, it can be used as a  reference signal to extract the doppler frequency shift.
However, the direct signal can seriously  interfere with the measurement of the angle of arrival, just as does a multipath signal.
To  extract the angular location of the target, the direct signal must be separated in some manner  from the target signals.
This is not an easy task since the angles of arrival of the direct and  scattered signals are generally close to one another when the bistalic radar is arrnnged to  provide fence coverage.
 Bistatic Radar equation.
The simple form of the radar equation for monostatic radar is given  by the familiar expression  P,G2 l2am  (4n)3R4L;L, monostatic (14.35)  where Pr = received signal power, W  P, transmitted power, W  G = antenna gain  J..
= wavelength.
m  a111 monostatic cross section (backscatter).
m2  R = range to target, m  L,, one-way propagation loss  L., system losses  The corresponding equation for the bistatic radar is  I 'r histatic  whnc < ;, -,--transmitting antenna gain in direction of target  (i, = receiving a11te1111a gain in direction of target  n,.
= histatic cross section.
m2  IJ, = transmitter-to-target distarn..:c.
m  I).
= receiver-to-target distance.
m  L,,{t) = propagation loss over transmitter-to-target path  LP(r) = propagation loss over receiver-to-target path OTIIER RADAR TOPl('S 557  (14.36)  Equations (14.35) and (14.36) represent but one of the several forms in which the radar  equation may be written.
They are not meant to be complete descriptions of the performance  of radar systems since they do not explicitly include many important factors, but they are  suitable if only relative comparisons are to be made.
 Target cross section.
The radar cross section ab of a target illuminated by a bistatic radar is a  measure of the energy scattered in the direction of the receiver.
81static radar cross sections for  various-shaped objects have been reported in the literature.60 68 Two cases of bistatic radar  cross section will be considered.
In one the scattering angle fJ (defined in Fig.
14.12) is exactly  equal lo 1800.
In the other.
f1 can take any value except 180".
 Consider first the case where {J =f= 180°, for which the following theorem applies:" In the  limit of vanishing wavelength the bistatic cross section for the transmitter direction k and  receiver djrection ;10 ~s equal to the monostatic cross section for the transmitter-recei~er  direction k + ir0 with k =f= ir0 for bodies which are sufficiently smooth." In the preceding, k is  the unit vector directed from the transmitter to the target and ii0 is the unit vector directed  from the receiver to the target.
The target is assumed to be located at the origin or the  coordinate system.
This theorem permits bistatic cross sections to be determined from mono­ static cross sections provided the conditions under which the theorem is valid are met.
 It may be concluded from the above theorem that as long as f3 =f= 180° the range of values  of bistatic cross section for a particular target will be comparable with the range of values of  monostatic cross section.
This does not necessarily imply that a monostatic radar and a  bistatic radar viewing the same target ·will see the same cross section.
In some cases the  monostatic cross section will be greater; in others, the bistatic cross section will be greater.
But  on the average, the two will vary over comparable values.
 The case where p = 180° (forward scatter) is not covered by the above theorem.
The  forward-scatter cross section can be many times the monostatic (backscatter) cross section.
 Siegel has shown that the forward-scatter cross section of a target with projected area A is  <J 1 4nA 2 / ,,1.
2, where )., the wavelength of the radiation, is assumed sma11 compared with the  558 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  target dimension.60 If a bistatic radar can be designed to take advantage of the large forward­ scatter cross section, a significant improvement in detection capability can be had, or for the  same detection capability as a radar with P + 180°, less power need be radiated.
However:  the radar application~ in whkhJ1d.vantage can .be.
taken of the large forward-scatter signal are  limited.
The scattering ang)e fJ must be exactly, or reasonably close to, 180° in order to obtain  forward scatter.
Therefore the target must lie along the line joining the transmitter and receiver.
 Thus the transmitting and receiving antennas must be within line of sight of each other or  nearly so.
(The forward-scatter beamwidth from a sphere of radius a is approximately 2)./na,  when a/A~ t.60)  Another consequence of a bistatic radar designed to take advantage of the large forward­ scatter cross section is the loss of doppler and target-position information.
When p = 180°, the  doppler frequency is zero; therefore moving targets cannot be discriminated on the basis of  +20  CD  "O  10 -ka 20  20L-..J._______L__L__J~..J..-.....,__,___,_~,__~~~~~~~~~~  0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180  Scattering angle /1, deg ; '  Figure 14.13 Bistatic cross section ab of a sphere as a function of the scattering angleµ and two values of  ka = 2r<.a/A, where a is the sphere radius and l is the wavelength.
Solid curves are for the E plane ({J  measured in the plane of the E vector); dashed curves are for the H plane (fl measured in the plane of the 11  vector, perpendicular to the E vector).6u9  OTHER RADAR TOPICS 559  frequency alone and the radar has no MTI capability.
Also, the location of the target position  from the measurement of the total scattered ·path length S is indeterminate, as mentioned  previously.
 It is concluded that the conditions for obtaining the large forward-scatter signal are too  restrictive to be applicable in most radar situations.
In general, the bistatic radar does not  possess an exploitable advantage over the monostatic radar because of any cross-section  enhancement.
When conditions permit the utilization of the enhanced forward-scatter cross  section.
it is obtained at the expense of position location and moving-target discrimination.
 Examples of the theoretical bistatic cross section of a sphere are shown in Fig.
14.13.
 Comparison of bistatic and monostatic radars.
It is difficult to make a precise comparison of  bistatic and monostatic radars because of the dissimilarity in their geometries.
The coverage of  a monostatic radar is basically hemispherical.
while the bistatic radar coverage is more or less  planar.
The monostatic radar is the more versatile of the two because of its ability to scan  a hemispherical volume in space and because of the relative ease with which usable target  information can be extracted from the received signal.
Another advantage of monostatic radar  is that only one site is required as compared with the two sites of the bistatic radar.
Thus a  bistatic-radar system might be more expensive than a monostatic radar of comparable detec­ tion ability since the cost of developing the additional site (building roads, sleeping quarters,  mess facilities, etc.) can be a significant fraction of the total.
 Although the bistatic radar cannot readily imitate the hemispherical coverage of mono­ static radar, it is possible for the monostat.ic radar to give fence coverage by using fixed, rather  than rotating.
antennas.
In order to compare the two on the basis of similar coverage, it will be  assumed that a nonscanning monostatic radar is operated at each end of a radar fence.
The  monostatic radar requires two transmitters, two receivers, and two antennas to generate the  fence.
The bistatic radar also needs two antennas, but only one transmitter and one receiver.
If  similar equipment is used in the two types of radars, that is, the same antenna, same transmit­ ter, etc ..
and if for the sake of analysis it is assumed that ab= am, Eqs.
(14.35) and (14.36) show  that the echo signals from the monostatic and the bistatic radars will be equal when the target  is at the mid-point of the fence (R = D1 = D,).
For targets at locations other than midway, the  detection capahility of both radars improves.
within the limits of the antenna coverage.
The  monostatic-radar signal increases quite rapidly as the target approaches the radar because of  the inverse relationship between the echo signal P, and R4 [Eq.
(14.35)].
The bistatic radar  signal also _increases as either end of the fence is approached since the echo signal is inversely  proportiorial to DfD; [Eq.
(14.36)].
However, the total variation (dynamic range) of the  received signal with target position is not as pronounced with bistatic radar as with monostatic  radar.
In bistatic radar.
as either D1 or D, decreases, the other increases.
Thus the bistatic radar  does not ..
overdetect" at short ranges as does monostatic radar.
 The monostatic radar is well suited to volumetric coverage.
If the bistatic radar were to  provide volumetric coverage with directive antenna beams, the transmitting and receiving  heams would have to he scanned in synchronism.
If the receiving beam is always to observe the  volume of space illuminated by the transmitted pulse packet, the receiving beam must he  scanned rapidly.
Since the pulse packet travels at the speed of light, the receiving beam  sometimes must be scanned more rapidly than possible by mechanical means.
This is called  pulse clrasing.
If the receiving antenna uses a broad fixed beam.
the problem of pulse chasing is  alleviated.
However.
the smaller effective antenna aperture associated with the broad receiving  beam results in less echo signal.
This must be compensated by greater transmitter power.
In  short.
the use of bistatic radar to obtain other than fence coverage usually results in more  complicated and less efficient systems.
 560 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  Although the bistatic radar has many interesting attributes, it cannot compete with  monostatic radar in most radar system applications.
The history of radar substantiates this  conclusion.
The monostatic radar is the more versatile.of the two.
because of its ability to scan  a large volume in space and because of the relative ease with which usable information  concerning the target's position and relative velocity can be extracted from the received signal.
 The superiority of the monostatic radar even seems to extend to the application of the radar  fence.
Although less equipment is needed with the bistatic-radar fence, this advantage is offset  to a large extent by the difficulties involved in extracting the target's position.
 The bistatic radar deserves credit for its historical role in the early days of radar in leading  to the development of monostatic radar.
It should be given consideration, along with other  possible radar techniques, in those applications where some inherent characteristic may he a  desirable attribute or when the application does not require complete target information.
But  as a means for the general detection and location of targets, it is overshadowed hy)its offspring,  the monostatic radar.
··  14.7 MILLIMETER WAVES AND BEYOND  Radar has been applied primarily in the microwave portion of the electromagnetic spectrum,  with Ka band (35 GHz) representing the nominal upper limit for traditional radar applica­ tions.
There has been continual interest, however, in the extension of radar to higher frequen­ cies in the millimeter wave portion of the spectrum.
Figure 14.14 illustrates the  electromagnetic spectrum above the microwave region, showing the place of millimeter waves  in relation to the infrared and visible regions.
The millimeter region is defined from 40 GHz  (7.5 mm wavelength) to 300 GHz (LO mm wavelength).70 Although Ka band (35 GHz)corre­ sponds to a wavelength of 8.6 mm, and radars at that band might qualify by some definition as  belonging to the millimeter wave region, the technology at Ka band is basically that of the  microwave region.
At frequencies above Ka band most microwave techniques are inadequate,  so that new technology is required.
Thus Ka band should not usually be included as part of  the millimeter-wave region.
 Advantages of millimeter waves.
Interest in millimeter-wave applications stems from the  special properties exhibited by radar at these frequencies, as well as from the challenge of  exploiting a region of the spectrum not widely used.
The major attributes of the mlllimeier­ wave region of interest to radar are the large bandwidth, small antenna size, and the character­ istic wavelength.
Large bandwidth means that high range-resolution can be achieved.
It also  reduces the likelihood of mutual interference between equipments, and makes more difficult  Frequency.- GHz  30 300 3000 3 X 104  , ...
Millime1er -+-Submillimeler--+f+---Far infrared·+  60 GHz 02  resonance  Ka i 94 GHz band window It t  1.0 cm 10 mm 01 mm  Wavelength 10J-Lm 3 X 105  ··Infrared· ~1 , ..
 Visible  1 OJ-Lm  Figure 14.14 The electromagnetic spectrum of frequencies above the microwave region.
3 X 106  01 J-Lm  OTHER RADAR TOPICS 561  the effective application of electronic countermeasures.
The short wavelengths allow narrow  beamwidths of high directivity with physically small antennas.
Narrow beam widths are impor­ tant for high-resolution imaging radar and to avoid multipath effects when tracking low­ altitude targets.
The short wavelengths of millimeter waves are also useful when exploring  scattering objects whose dimensions are comparable to the millimeter wavelengths, such as  insects and cloud particles.
These are examples of scatterers whose radar cross sections are  greater at millimeter wavelengths than at microwaves since they are generally in the resonance  region (Fig.
2.9) at millimeter wavelengths, but in the Rayleigh region at microwaves (where  the cross section varies as the fourth power of the frequency).
Another advantage of the short  wavelengths is that a dopplcr-frcqucncy measurement of fixed accuracy gives a more accurate  velocity measurement than at lower frequencies.
The large attenuation of millimeter waves  propagating in the clear atmosphere sometimes can be employed to advantage in those special  cases where it is desired to reduce mutual interference or to minimize the probability or the  radar being intercepted by a hostile intercept (elint) receiver at long range.
 The above attributes of the millimeter-wave region suggest as potential applications  low-angle tracking, interference-free radar, ECCM, cloud-physics radar, high-resolution radar,  f uzes, and missile guidance.
These, as well as other applications.
have not been widely  employed because or the concomitant limitations that occur with operation at millimeter  waves.
 Uniitations of millimeter waves.
The application of millimeter wavelengths has been limikd  hy the availability of suitable components.
Transmitter powers are low, receiver noise figures  are high, transmission lines lossy.
and equipment generally costly and unreliable.
There is  reason to believe, however, that this is not fundamental and that equipment shortcomings  eventually can be overcome with sufficient effort.
There exists adequate technology to either  side of the millimeter wave spectrum: at the longer wavelengths (microwaves) and at the  shorter wavelengths (IR and visual).
Also, there are component developments at millimeter  wavelengths which indicate that technology is not basically limited.
For example, high power  has been demonstrated with the gyrotron, or electron cyclotron maser, comparable to that  achieved with microwave devices.
Kilowatts of CW power can be obtained in the vicinity of  I-mm wavelength and several tens or kilowatts at 3-mm wavelength.
72 Over a megawatt of  pulse power is claimed at J-mm wavelength.
Millimeter-wave gyrotrons require extremely  high voltages (the electrons travel at relativistic velocities) and superconducting magnets.
 Receivers with mixer front-ends using Schottky-barrier diodes at room temperature have  demonstrhted respectable noise figures.
Double-sideband noise figures of 6.5 dB can be ob­ tained at 94 GHz, 8.5 dB at 140 GHz, and 11 dB at 325 GHz.
(It has been suggested that a  7-dA single-sideband noise figure is achievable over these wavelengths.)73 Even lower noise  figures are possible with supercooled J.osephsonjunctions operating at liquid-helium tempera­ tures.
There has also been significant development of high-gain antennas at millimeter wave­ lengths, especially for radio astronomy.
74 Unconventional transmission lines have also been  developed.95 97  Thus the advances in components made in the past as well as technology evident to either  side of the millimeter region give reason to believe that Nature has not ruled out attainment or  adequate capabilities at millimeter wavelengths.
 Unfortunately, the limited availability of suitable millimeter wave components is not the  major reason for the lack of significant applications.
The problem with millimeter wavelengths  is that several of its favorable characteristics are also factors that limit its performance; in  particular, the small antenna size and the consequences of its characteristic wavelengths.
 The physically small antenna sizes at millimeter wavelengths result in high gain, but the  562 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  small area means that less of the echo energy will be collected by the antenna.
A large antenna  aperture is important for long-range surveillance radars, as was shown by Eq.
(2.57).
The  capability of a surveillance radar is proportional to the prQduct .of its average power and  antenna aperture.
Thus a small antenna requires a large transmitter power.
Since large power  is not easy to achieve at millimeter wavelengths, it is not likely that radars in this portion of the  spectrum wi11 find wide application for long-range surveillance.
 The characteristic wavelengths of the millimeter region are responsive to individual scat­ terers of size comparable to the wavelength.
Hence.
information might be obtained about  some targets that cannot be as readily obtained at lower frequencies (long wavelengths).
Also  the cross sections will be greater for those scatterers which are comparable in size to the radar  wavelength.
In the millimeter region, however, resonances of the atmospheric constituents are  excited (in particular oxygen and water vapor) which result in attenuation that can be  relatively high, even in the clear atmosphere.
High attenuation might be a desira~e attribute  for a short-range radar that is required to avoid mutual interference with distant radars or to  avoid being detected at long range (if a military radar).
However, the relatively high attenua­ tion in this part of the spectrum is a serious ohstaclt! to achieving long-range radar.
 The attenuation of electromagnetic energy in the portion of the electromagnetic spectrum  above 10 GHz is shown in Fig.
14.15.
The absorption due to oxygen at 60 GHz (5-crn  wavelength) in the clear atmosphere is quite large (about 16 dB/km).
Operation at that  frequency is almost useless for radar applications within the earth's atmosphere.
The same  10 mm 1 mm O 1 mm 10 1 µm  100~~~~1-rr---r-.-rT,r--,.---,-~1,--,---.-,...,...,..,.,-~--,--,-1--,--.-rrTTr--~~..-,.-,-,--,-,-~~-,,-----r-l ....,-.,-.-,·TT"\  10 · 35 GHz  Clear  atmosphere N  0 g  0  <.D N  94140 220i3  I  I  I LO x ~  I!) = = S:J 1111  I  I  I  I  I Clear almoS{i\ere attenuation  greater than 30 dB/km in ..\  this region 1  Rain Smm/hr  Kain O 25 mm I hr V1s1ble  region  t--...
1  QLL--'L--'-LL.J...l...w..L.L'~~_,.L_..LJ.-l-LJ....LL~--'---''--'--1-L...L.L~:,-_L..--.L ....
.J..-.,__._~~~~-·"---'..--~~~~.Ob  10 100 1.000 1  Frequency -GHz  Figure 14.15 One-way attenuation of electromagnetic energy propagating in the clear atmosphere87  (oxygen and water vapor at 7.5 g/m3, 1 atmosphere pressure, and absolute temperature equal 293 K),  rain88 at 293 K, the total attenuation of fog with a visibility or 300 m and at 293 K (includes attenuation  through a clear standard atmosphere), and fair weather cumulus cloud with a mode radius of 4 ,,m, a  water content of 0.063 g/mJ, and a drop density of i00/cm3.~9•90  OTHER RADAR TOPICS 563  applies for the region around 183 GHz.
The relative minimum at 94 GHz with an attenuation  of 0.3 dB/km is a likely frequency for millimeter radar applications.
Note, however, that the  94-G Hz" window" has even greater attenuation than the 22-GHz water-vapor absorption line  (0.16 dB/km).
Rain adds to the absorption and eliminates the regions of relatively low attenu­ ation.
For example, a rain of about 5 mm/h increases the attenuation of the 94-GHz window  by almost an order of magnitude.
Figure 14.15 shows that a rain of 0.25 mm/h would not  significantly increase the clear-air attenuation.
(At microwave frequencies the backscatter from  rain has far greater effect on radar performance than the attenuation.
The opposite is true in  the millimeter-wave region.) The effect or a fog with 300-m visibility is seen to increase slightly  the clear-air attenuation.
A fair-weather cumulus cloud has low attenuation at millimeter  wavelengths.
 A one-way attenuation or 0.3 dB/km at 94 GHz might not be significant for short-range  radar, but it can be overwhelming for long-range radar.
For example, a 5-km radar will  experience a two-way attenuation of 3 dB, which is tolerable in most situations.
A 50-km  radar, however, will have 30-dB attenuation, which is usually intolerable.
Thus long-range  radar is not likely at millimeter wavelengths under normal circumstances.
Although the atten­ uation at millimeter wavelengths is far greater than that at microwave wavelengths, the losses  incurred in propagating millimeter wavelengths through fog, haze, and smoke is less than at  infrared or visible wavelengths.
 Another example where a particular property of millimeter-wave radar has both favor­ able and unfavorable aspects is that of the doppler frequency shift.
It was shown in Sec.
3.1  that the c.loppler frequency shift was proportional to.the carrier (rf) frequency.
This results in  more accurate relative-velocity measurements with millimeter wavelengths than at lower  frequencies.
The large doppler shifts at millimeter wavelengths, however, can sometimes result  in the echo signal being outside the receiver bandwidth, which complicates the receiver design.
 Also, the large doppler frequencies at millimeter wavelerigths cause the blind speeds of MTI  radars to appear at lower velocities than at microwaves, an undesirable property.
 Thus, a frustrating paradox of the millimeter-wavelength region is that some of its  claimed good points are also its weaknesses.
 Clutter at millimeter wavelengths.
In chap.
13 it was implied that knowledge of radar clutter  characteristics at microwaves was less than desired.
There is even less information on clutter at  frequencies above 10 GHz.
Details wiJI not be given here, but the general trends will be  summarized for the several types of clutter that have been measured.
 The a~·rage clutter cross section per unit area ror one set of measurements of trees and  vegetation at millimeter wavelengths is given by 75•102  o-0(dB) = -20 + 10 log (0/25) -15 log ...1.
(14.37)  where O is the grazing angle in degrees and ,l is in centimeters.
Thus, a-0 increases with  increasing frequency.
Vertical polarization produced echos 3 to 4 dB greater than horizontal  polarization.
These measurements were made in Georgia during the summer and fall months  and included deciduous trees and pine trees.
The grazing angles were from 2 to 25°.
The pulse  width was.
100 ns and the antenna beamwidth was in the vicinity of one degree.
 The value of <1° for sea clutter at low grazing angle and low winds has been reported 76 to  "not increase with frequency much above X band," but also 77 the "trend of increasing  reflectivity with decreasing wavelength also holds for sea clutter although the effect is not  nearly as pronounced as for land clutter." However, both references state that for higher sea  states (the maximum wind speed was 14 knots) the value of a0 at 94 GHz is less than that at X  hand.
Another observation is that vertical polarization seems to produce lower values of a0 at  564 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  94 GHz by about 5 dB (on average) than horizontal polarization, which is the opposite to the  experience at microwaves.
(It should be cautioned that the few measurements available were  taken at low grazing angle and over a limited range of wind speeds.)  As with ·trees and grass, the value of a0 for snow increases with frequency and grazing  angle.77•78•102 Crusted snow (that which has melted and refrozen), produces higher values of  a0 at 35 GHz and 94 GHz than wet snow, grass, or trees.
 At microwaves the backscatter from rain can be explained according to the Rayleigh  scattering model with the reflectivity varying as the fourth power of the frequency (Sec.
13.7).
 In the millimeter-wave region, the drop sizes of the raindrops span both the Rayleigh and the  Mie scattering regions so that a dirference in behavior can be expected.
Experimental measure­ ments indicated that, on the average, the radar backscatter at 9.4 and 35 GHz appeared to  follow the Rayleigh scattering law.
79· 1°2 Deviations from Rayleigh were found at 70 and  95 GHz.
and the backscatter at 95 GHz was observed to be less than at 70 GHz.
The back­ scatter ~t ..
millimeter waves was found to depend on the drop size distrib~tion of the  pricipitation.102 Even though the rain rates were the same, the backscatter from rain contain­ ing drops 2 to 6 mm in diameter was approximately 10 dB greater than rain containing drops  1 mm in diameter or less.
The amplitude fluctuations of the rain backscatter were approxi­ mated by a log-normal probability distribution over the range from 9.4 to 94 GHz and at rain  rates from I mm/h to 60 mm/h.
The variance (and standard deviation) of the log-normal  distribution was independent of rain rate and decreased with increasing frequency.
The decor­ relation times at 95 GHz varied from about 3.4 ms at 5 mm/h rain rate to 1.4 ms at 100 mm/h.
 At X band the decorrelation times were longer and varied from 14 ms at 5 mm/h to 5.4 ms at  100 mm/h.
 Utility of millimeter waves.
Experimentation with millimeter wavelength radiation and  microwave radiation both date back to the end of the nineteenth century.
The first microwave  experiments were those of Hertz in 1886.
Experiments at 6-mm wavelength occurred in 1895.
80  In the early 1920s, millimeter-wave research was reported in the United States, Germany, and  Russia, with wavelengths as short as 0.22 mm.81 Although many important applications of the  microwave region have been developed, there has been almost no comparable activity in the  millimeter-wave region.
There are many possible reasons for this lack of activity, including  lack of adequate millimeter-wave components, small antenna sizes, and difficult MTI.
But  the most restricting of all has been the relatively large attenuations experienced when propa­ gating through the clear atmosphere, as well as the added attenuation during rain.
The large  attenuations are likely to limit millimeter radar to short-range applications where the total  attenuations are tolerable or to applications where the atmos'phere is absent, such as in space  or at very high altitudes.
Millimeter wavelengths might also find application when the propa­ gation path does not traverse a large part of the earth's atmosphere, as when a ground-based  radar directs its energy at or near the zenith.
(At 94 GHz the two-way loss in transiting  the entire atmosphere is about 1.7 dB at zenith, 3.5 dB at 60° from the zenith, and IO dB at 80°  from the zenith.)82  Submillimeter wavelengths.83·84 The advantages of high resolution, wide bandwidth, and  small antenna aperture are even more prevalent in the submillimcter proportion of the electro­ magnetic spectrum than at millimeters.
The attenuation in the clear atmosphere, however, is  far worse than at millimeters and varies from about 10 dB/km at 1-mm wavelength to more  than lOOO dB/km at 0.1-mm wavelength.
 Laser radar.
The large attenuations experienced in clear air in the millimeter (60 GHz) and  submillimeter regions are not present in the infrared and visible regions of the spectrum  OTHER RADAR TOPIC'S 565  (Fig.
14.15).
(The attenuation in rain.
however, is still large.) Thus laser radars operating in the  infrared and visihle regions achi'cve·the advantages of high angular resolution, wide bandwidth, ·  and doppler frequency sensitivity without the accompanying disadvantage or high attenuation  as experienced in the submillimeter region.
Because or its small physical aperture a laser radar  is not suited for most surveillance applications.
It is, however, well suited for precision measure­ ment and target imaging.
_The design or a laser radar follows the same general principles as  other radars.
hut with some exceptions.85·93·94·105  In addition to using a transmitter unlike those found at microwave frequencies, the laser  radar ex Iii bits other differences that must be accounted for when considering radar design.
For  example.
the receiver sensitivity is not determined by thermal noise as at microwaves, but by  quantum effects.
The noise power per unit bandwidth at most laser frequencies is given by  No= hf (14.3R)  where h = Planck's constant = 6.626 x 10--'4 J · s, andf = rrequcncy.
The ramiliar expression  for thermal noise power at microwave frequencies (N0 = kT, where k = Boltzmann's constant  and T = absolute temperature) does not apply when kT ~ hf lt is the coarseness of the laser  signal itself.
due to its quantized nature, that ultimately sets the limit to sensitivity as given by  Fq.
(14.38).
By scttingk'(.
= ht: an "equivalent noisetemperature"can be obtained rora laser  receiver.
At the CO2 laser wavelength of 10.6 µm, I;.= 1360 K and at 1.0 µm wavelength  1;.
= 14.400 K.
which indicates that laser radar receivers are generally or greater effective  temperature (or noise figure) than low-noise microwave receivers.
 The laser radar can employ the equivalent of either the microwave video receiver or the  superheterodyne receiver.
The former is called an incoherent (envelope) receiver or direct  photodctection.
The latter is called a coherent (heterodyne) receiver or photomixer.
When the  background noise is low and for short-pulse modulation the laser envelope detector can  operate as a quantum-limited device and give essentially the same detectivity (inverse of the  noise equivalent power) as heterodyne detectors.85 (This is unlike microwaves where the video  detector is far less sensitive.) The heterodyne, or photomixing, receiver can have a narrow  passband and significantly reduce the effects or background noise.
Its sensitivity also can  approach that of an ideal quantum detector.
The photomixing receiver is more complicated  than the direct photodetection receiver and it requires a stable transmitter and local oscillator.
 When the target is in motion relative to the radar a large doppler frequency shift occurs which  can place the echo signal outside the receiver passband.
For example, with a relative velocity of  5 m/s ( 10 kt) the doppler rrequency shift at l-1,m wavelength is 10 MHz.
A rapidly tuning laser  local oscihator or a large bank of IF filters are necessary to compensate for the farge doppler  frequency shirt.
 When the target is in the rar field of the laser antenna, and ir the antenna beam is larger  than the target, the usual form of the simple radar equation of Sec.
1.2 applies.
However.
the  beamwidth rather than the antenna gain is usually measured at laser frequencies so that  (i, = rr2 ;oi may he substituted into the radar equation.
The minimum detectable signal for  quantum-limited detection is85  s .
= ~~{!__'1.
min ,,r (14.39)  where "r = required number of signal photoelectrons, 11 = quantum efficiency of the detector,  and r = observation time.
With these substitutions, and with 2B = 1/r (assuming a video  receiver) the radar equation can be written  ( 14.40)  5(;6 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  If the target is much larger than the laser beam, as can happen in some situations, 1he radar  equation becomes  R2 _ rcP, A,:11p c°-~ p  max -3 211 p 11/B (14.41)  In the above the surface is assumed to be a diffuse (Lambert) scatlerer with cross section  <J = 4p(n/4)R28} cos </>, where p = surface reflectivity and </> angle between the surface  normal and the incident radar energy.
These are only approximate equations.
Losses should  be included for propagation through the atmosphere and in the system optics.
 If a quantum-limited laser must search a given solid angle O in a time ts, tht! following  relationship can be obtained85  n P A A = canst -· av e ls ,> (14.4~)  Thus the higher the frequency (shorter the wavelength) the more difficult it is for a laser to  search a large solid angle in a short time.
The limited search capability of a laser means that  some sort of other cueing sensor, either electro-optical and/or radar, may be ncl.!dc<l in order  for the laser radar to acquire a target.86  The fundamental measurement capabilities of a properly designed laser radar cannot he  equalled with a microwave radar.
Thus laser radars are used for those special applications  where its exceptional measurement capabilities are required, and where the need to search a  large solid-angle and an-weather operation are not important.
 REFERENCES  t.
Kovaly, J.
J.: "Synthetic Aperture Radar," Artech House, Inc., Dedham, Mass., 1976.
(A colkction of  33 reprints covering the development, theory.
performance, effect of errors, motion compensation,  processing, and application of SAR.)  2.
Cutrona, L.
J: Synthetic Aperture Radar; chap.
23 or" Radar Handbook," M.
I.
Skolnik (ed.).
 McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York, 1970.
 3.
Harger, R.
0.: "Synthetic Aperture Radar Systems: Theory and Design," Academic Press.
New  York.
1970.
 4.
Bayma, R.
W., and P.A.
Mcinnes: Aperture Size and Ambiguity Constraints for a Synthetic Aperture  Radar, IEEE 1975 International Radar Conference, pp.
499-504, IEEE Publication 75 CHO 931:i-l  AES.
(Also available in ref.
1.)  5.
Cutrona, L.
J.: Optical Computing Techniques, IEEE Spectrum, vol.
1, pp.
IOI 108, October, 1964.
 6.
Kirk, J.
C., Jr.: A Discussion of Digital Processing in Synthetic Aperture Radar, I £EE Trans.,  pp.
326-337, May, 1975.
(Also available in ref.
1.)  7.
Leith, E.
N.: Optical Processing Techniques for Simultaneous Pulse Compression and Beam Sharp­ ening, IEEE Trans., vol.
AES-4, pp.
878-885, November, 1968.
(Also available in ref.
I.)  8.
Raney, R.
K.: Synthetic Aperture Imaging Radar and Moving Targets, IEEE 1·runs., vol.
AES-7,  pp.
499-505, May, 1971.
(Also available in ref.
1.)  9.
van de Lindt, W.
J.: Digital Techniques for Generating Synthetic Aperture Radar Images, I B,\1 Jo11r.
 of Research and Development, vol.
21, no.
5, pp.
415-432, September, 1977.
 to.
Tomiyasu, K.: Phase and Doppler Errors in a Spaceborne Synthetic Aperture Radar Imaging the  Ocean Surface, IEEE lour.
of Oceanic Engineering,\vol.
OE-I, no.
2, pp.
68 71, November, 1976.
 1 L Moore, R.
K.: Trade-Off Between Picture Element Dimensions and Non-Coherent Averaging in  Side-Looking Airborne Radar, IEEE Trans., vol.
AES-15,, pp.
697-708, September, 1979.
 12.
Graham, L.
C.: Stereoscopic Synthetic Array Application in Earth Resource Monitoring, I EE£  NAECON '75 Record, pp.
125-132, 1975.
 13.
Bair, G.
L., and G.
E.
Carlson: Comparative Evaluation of Stereo Radar Techniques Using Com­ puter Generated Simulated Imaginary, IEEE NAECON '74 Record, pp.
220-227, 1974.
 OTHER RADAR TOPIC'S 567  14.
Brown, W.
M ..
and R.
J.
Fredricks: Range-Doppler Imagining with Motion Through Resolution  Cells.
IEEE Trans..
vol.
AES-5.
pp.
98 102.
January.
1969.
 15.
Pettengill.
G.
H.: Radar Astronomy.
chap.
33 or ..
Radar Handbook." M.
I.
Skolnik (ed.).
McGraw­ Hill Rook Company.
New York.
1970.
 16.
Jlidayel.
M ..
and P.A.
Mcinnes: On the Specilkation of an Antenna Pattern for a Synthetic Aperture  Radar.
/11tt·n111cio11al C1111/cr<'IIC<' R,.1/JAR-77.
pp.
391 J95.
Oct.
25 28.
1977.
IEE (London) Conf.
 Puhl ..
no.
155.
 17.
Sondergaard.
I-'.: A Dual Mode Digital Processor for Medium Resolution Synthetic Aperture  Radars.
l11t<'l'IIC1tio1111I Cm1fcn·11c·<' /U/UR-77.
pp.
JX4 390.
Oct.
25 28.
1977.
IEE (London) Conf.
 Puhl.
no.
155.
 IX.
Thraves.
J.: A Yaw Stahili,cd S./\.R.
Aerial.
/11t<'r11t1tio11al C1111ft•n•11c<' R,I/JAR-77.
pp.
423 426.
Oct.
 25 28.
1977.
IFF {London) Conf.
Puhl.
no.
155.
 19.
Kirk.
J.
C..
Jr.: A Discussion of Digital Processing in Synthetic Aperture Radar.
IEEE Trans ..
 vol.
/\FS-11.
pp.
326 3.'7.
May.
1975.
(Also availahlc in ref.
I.)  20.
Headrick.
J.M ..
and M.
I.
Skolnik: Over-the-Horizon Radar in the HF Band.
Proc.
/EfE.
vol.
62.
 pp.
664 673.
June.
1974.
 21.
Fenster.
W.: The Application.
Design.
and Performance of Over-the-Horizon Radars.
l11tcmati,111al  Co11frrc11cc R:1/J:1R-77.
pp.
36 40.
Oct.
25 28.
1977.
IEE (London) Conf.
Publ.
no.
155.
 22.
Davies.
K.: ..
Ionospheric Radio Propagation," National Bureau of Standards Monograph XO.
 I\ pr.
I.
1965.
(/\ vailahlc from lJ .S.
( iovcrnrnent Printing Office.)  2J.
/\!'pert.
Ya.
L.: ..
Radio Wave Propagation and the Ionosphere." Consultants Rureau.
New York.
 1973.
.
 24.
Trirna.
D.
B.
J.C.
Moore.
J.M.
Headrick.
and R.
W.
Bogle: Directional Sea Spectrum Determina­ tion Using HF Doppler Radar Techniques.
IEEE Trans ..
vol.
AP-25, pp.
4-11.
January.
1977.
 25.
Barrick.
D.
E ..
J.
M.
Headrick.
R.
W.
Bogle.
and D.
D.
Crombie: Sea Backscatter at HF: Interpreta­ tion and Utilization of the Echo.
Proc.
IEEE.
vol.
62, pp.
673-680.
June.
1974.
 26.
Barrick.
D.
E.: First-Order Theory and Analysis of MF/HF/VHF Scatter from the Sea.
I £EE Trans .•  vol.
AP-20.
pp.
2 10.
January.
1972.
 27.
Taylor.
J.
W ..
Jr..
and G.
Brunins: Long Range Surveillance Radars for Automatic Control Systems.
 IEEE 1975 l11cen1<1timwl Radar Conference.
Arlington, Va .• Apr.
21-23, 1975.
pp.
312-317.
 28.
Shrader.
W.
W.: Radar Technology Applied lo Air Traffic Control.·/£££ Trans .• vol.
COM-21.
 pp.
591 605.
May.
1973.
 29.
Sutherland.
J.
W.: Marconi S600 Series of Radars.
lmerar.:ia.
vol.
23.
pp.
73-75.
January.
1968.
 JO.
Ridenour.
L.
N.: "Radar System Engineering." vol.
I.
MIT Radiation Laboratory Series.
McGraw- Hill Book Company.
New York.
1947.
sec.
6.12.
·  31.
Vadus.
J.
R.: A New Tactical Radar.
Ordnance, vol.
49.
pp.
80-83, July-Aug., 1964.
 32.
Brown.
B.
P.: Radar Height Finding.
chap.
22 of" Radar Handbook." M.
I.
Skolnik (ed.).
McGraw­ Hill Book Company, New York.
1970.
 :n Fvanzia.
W.
J.: Faster, Lighter 3-D Radars in Sight for Tactical Warfare.
Electronics.
vol.
39.
 pp.
80 87, June 27.
1966.
 34.
Mavroides.
W.
G ..
L.
G.
Dennett.
and L.
S.
Dorr: 3-D Radar Based on Phase-in-Space Principle.
 IEEE,Trans .• vol.
/\ES-2.
pp.
323-331.
May, 1966.
 35.
Mavroides.
W.
G.: Weather Tracking with the AFCL Experimental 3-D Radar, AFCRL-70-0006.
Air  Force Camhridge Research Lahoratories.
Instrumentation Papers no.
163, January, 1970.
 36.
Holl.
F.
S ..
H.
M.
Johanson.
C.
F.
Winter.
R.
B.
Mack.
C.
J.
Sletten.
W.
G.
Mavroides.
and R.
H.
 Beyer: V-Beam Antennas for Height Finding, AFCRC-TR-56-115, Air Force Cambridge Nesearch  Center, December.
1956.
AD 117015.
 37.
Hammer.
I.
W.: Frequency-scanned Arrays.
chap.
13 of" Radar Handbook," M.
I.
Skolnik (ed.).
 McGraw-Hill Book Company.
Nef York.
1970.
 38.
Skolnik.
M.
I.: Survey of Phased Array Accomplishments and Requirements for Navy Ships.
 "Phased Array Antennas." ed.
by A.
A.
Oliner and G.
H.
Knittel, Artech House, Dedham, Mass.,  1972.
 39.
Lain.
C.
M ..
and E.
J.
Gersten: AN{fPS-59 Overview, IEEE 1975 International Radar Conft,rena.
 Arlington, Va., Apr.
21 2J.
1975.
pp.
527-532.
IEEE Publ.
75 CHO 939-l AES.
 40.
Milne, K.: The Combination of Pulse Compression with Frequency Scanning for Three-Dimensional  Radars, Radio and Electronic Engineer, vol.
28.
pp.
89-106, August, 1964.
 41.
Motk in, D.
L.: Three-dimensionai Air Surveillance Radar.
Systems Technology.
no.
21.
pp.
29 -33,  June, 1975.
(Plessey Co., llford, England.)  42.
Watanabe, M., T.
Tamama, and N.
Yamauchi: A Japanese 3-d Radar for Air Traffic Control.
 Electronics, vol.
44.
pp.
68-72, June 21, 1971.
 568 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  43.
McAulay, R.
J.: Interferometer Design for Elevation Angle Estimation, IEEE Tram., vol.
Al·S-1  pp.
486-503, September, 1977.
 44.
Potter, K.
E.: Experimental Design Study of an Airborne Interferometer for Terrain Avnidam:c,  International Cm!ference RADAR-77, pp.
508 512, IEE (London) Conf.
Puhl.
no.
155.
 45.
Ridenour, L.
N.: ..
Radar System Engineering," MIT Radiation Laboratory Series, McGraw-Hill  Book Company, New York, 1947, sec.
(6.11).
 46.
Westinghouse Brochure: The ARSR-3 Story, no date.
 47.
Hartley-Smith, A.: The Design and Performance of a Modern Surveillance Radar System.
I EE£ J 975  International Radar C01!f"erence, Arlington, Va ..
Apr.
21-23, 1975, pp.
306--311.
 48.
Edgar, A.
K., E.
J.
Dodsworth, and M.
P.
Warden: The Design of a Modern Surwillancc Radar,  Radar-Present and Future, IEE Conf.
Pub!.
no.
105, pp.
8--13, 1973.
 49.
Di Nardo, U.: Adaptivity Criteria of a Modern Air Traffic Control Radar, RiPista Ternirn Sele11ia  (Rome), vol.
2, no.
4, pp.
l 7-32, 1975.
 50.
Murray, J.P.: Electromagnetic Compatibility, chap.
29 of" Radar Handbook," McGraw-Hill Book  Company, New York, 1970.
 51.
Johnson, M.A., and D.
C.
Stoner: ECCM from the Radar Designer's Viewpoint, If.EE Eleccro 76,  Boston, May 11--14, 1976, paper 30-5, Reprinted in Microwm•e Journal, vol.
21.
pp.
59 63.
March.
 1978.
 52.
Howells, P.
W.: Explorations in Fixed and Adaptive Resolution at GE and SlJRC.
/Et:£ Trnns.
 vol.
AP-24.
pp.
575-584, Septemher, 1976.
 53.
Lamb, J.
J.: A noise Silencing 1.F.
Circuit for Superheterodyrn: Receivers, QST, vol.
2ll.
p.
11.
h:hlll·  ary, 1936.
 54.
Carpentier, M.
H.: "Radars: New Concepts," Gordon and Breach, New York, 1968, sec.
4.6.
 55.
Severin, H.: Nonretkcting Absorbers for Microwave Radiation, I RE Tra11s., vol.
AP-4.
pp .ms llJ2.
 July, 1956.
 56.
A Brief Description of the ASR-8 Airport Surveillance Radar, Tl',CJS lllsrrnme11rs, /11£' ..
SPOSA-Hi76,  Equipment Group, August, 1976.
 57.
Skolnik, M.
I.: An Analysis of Bistatic Radar, IRE Trans., vol.
ANE-8, pp.
19 27, March.
1961.
 58.
Caspers.
J.
W.: Bistatic and Multistatic Radar, chap.
36 of" Radar Handbook," M.
I.
Skolnik (ed.).
 McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York, 1970.
 59.
"System for Detecting Objects by Radio," U.S.
Patent 1.981.884.
granted Nov.27.1934, to A.
H  Taylor.
L.
C.
Young, and L.
A.
Hyland.
 60.
Siegel, K.
M.: Bistatic Radars and Forward Scattering, Natl.
Con( Proc ..
-frrmwut.
Electro11ic.s  (Dayton.
Ohio), pp.
286-290, 1958.
 61.
Siegd, K.
M., H.
A.
Alperin, R.
R.
Bronski, J.
W.
Crispin, A.
L.
Moffett, C.
E.
Schenstcd, and I.
V.
 Schensted: Bistatic Radar Cross Sections of Surfaces of Revolution.
J.
Appl.
P/1\·s., vol.
26.
 pp.
297-305, March, 1955.
 62.
Koch, W.
E ..
J.
L.
Stone, J.E.
Clark, and W.
D.
Friedle: Forward Scatter of Electromagnetic Waves  by Spheres.
IRE WESCO N Com,.
Rt>eord, vol.
2, pt.
I.
p.
86, 1958.
 63.
Kock, W.
E.: Related Experiments with Sound Waves and Electromagnetic Waves.
Proc.
IRE.
 vol.
47, pp.
1200-1201.
July, 1959.
 64.
Crispin.
J.
W., R.
F.
Goodrich, and K.
M.
Siegel: A Theoretical Method for the Calculation of the  Radar Cross Sections of Aircraft and Missiles, U 11i1>.
Michigan Radiation Lah.
Re11t ., 2591-1-H on  Contract AF 19(604)-1949.
July, 1959.
 65.
Weil, H., M.
L.
Barasch, and T.
A.
Kaplan: Scattering of Electromagnetic Waves hy Spheres.
ll11i1· .
 .
H ichigan Radiation Lah.
Swdies in Radar Cross Sections X, Rept.
2255-20- T on Con! racl :\ F  30(602)-1070, July, 1956.
 66.
Schultz, F.
V ..
R.
C.
Burgener, and S.
King: Measurement oft he Radar Cross-section of a Man.
!'rue.
 IRE.
vol.
46, pp.
476 481, February, 1958.
 67.
Hiatt.
R.
E., K.
M.
Siegel.
and H.
Weil: Forward Scattering by Coated Ohjects Illuminated hy Short  Wavelength Radar.
Proc.
IRE, vol.
48, pp.
1630-1635, September, 1960.
 68.
Crispin, J.
W ..
Jr ..
and K.
M.
Siegel:" Methods of Radar Cross-Section Analysis." Academic Press.
 New York.
1968, chap.
5.
 69.
King, R.
W.
P., and T.
T.
Wu:" The Scattering and Diffraction of Waves," Harvard University Press.
 Cambridge.
Mass., 1959.
 70.
IEEE Standard Letter Designations for Radar-Frequency Bands,/£££ Std 521-1976, Nov.30.1976.
 71.
Skolnik.
M.
I.: Millimeter and Submillimeter Wave Applications.
"Submillimeter Waves." vol XX.
 Microwm·e Rest!arch Institute Symposia Series, Jerome Fox (ed.), Polytechnic Press, Brooklyn.
New  York.
1971, pp.
9-25.
 OTHER RADAR TOPICS 569  72.
Godlove, T.
F., V.
L.
Granatstein.
and J.
Silverstein: Prospects for High Power Millimeter Radar  Sources and ComponenJs.'.' IEEE EASCON-77 Record, pp.
16-2A to 16-2F.
Sept.
26-28.
1977.
 Arlington, VA, IEEE Publication 77 CH 1255--9 EASCON; see also Microwave System News, vol.
7,  pp.
75-82, November 1977.
 73.
Waldman, J.: Millimeter and Submillimeter Wave Receivers, U.S.
Army Missile Research and  Det•elopme11t Command.
Technical Report TE-77-17.
July 14, 1977, Redstone Arsenal, Alabama.
 (Distribution unlimited.)  74.
Cogdell, l R ..
et al.: High Resolution Millimeter Reflector Antennas.
IEEE Trans ..
vol.
AP-18.
 pp.
515-529.
July, 1970.
 75.
Hayes, R.
D., f.
H.
Dyer.
and N.
C.
Currie: Backscatter from Ground Vegetation at Frequencies  Between lO and 100 GHz.
/976 IEEE Antennas and Propagation Society Sj•mposi11m.
Oct 11 15.
 1976.
pp.
93 -96, IEEE Cat.
no.
76 CH l l21-3AP.
 76.
Dyer.
F.
B..
M.
J.
Gary, and G.
W.
Ewell: Radar Sea Clutter at 9.5.
16.5, 35, and 95 GHz, /974 IEEE  A111!wws and Propagation Society Symposium, June l0-12.
1974, pp.
319-322, IEEE Cat.
no.
74  CHORSI-JAP.
 77.
Dyer.
F.
B ..
N.
C.
Currie, and M.
J.
Applegate: Radar Backscatter from Land, Sea, Rain.
and Snow at  Millimeter Wavelengths.
l11tcrnatia11ai Cm1(i!re11ce RADAR-77, pp.
559-563.
IEE (London) Conf.
 Puhl.
no.
155.
 78.
Currie: N C., F.
B.
Dyer and (i.
W.
Ewell: Characteristics of Snow at Millimeter Wavelcngtlts, IV76  IEEE A11te1111as a11d Propagation Sodef}' Symposium, Oct.
11 15, 1976.
pp.
589 582, IEEE Cat.
no.
76  CH l 121-3AP.
 79.
Currie, N.
C..
f.
B.
Dyer, and R.
D.
Hayes: Some Properties or Radar Returns from Rain at 9.375, J5.
 70.
and 95 Gllz, IEEE 1975 111/('/'llatimwl Radar Confi_,rence, Apr.
21-23.
1975.
Arlington, VA.
 pp.
215 220, IEEE Cat.
no.
75 CIIO 938-1 AES.
 80.
Meyer, J.
W.: Millimeter Wave Research: Past, Present.
and Future, 1\1/T Unco/11 Lah.
Tl'cli.
 Rept.
389, May 17.
1965.
 Rl.
Kaurman.
I.: The Band Retween Microwave and Infrared Regions.
Proc.
IRE.
vol.
47.
pp.
381 396.
 Mar..
1959.
 82.
Blake, L.
\'.: Prediction of Radar Range, chap.
2 of "Radar, Handbook," M.
I.
Skolnik (ed.).
 McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York.
1970, fig.
30.
 83.
Fox, J.
(ed.): "Proceedings of the Symposium on Submillimeter Waves," Polytechnic Press of the  Polytechnic Institute of Brooklyn, Brooklyn, New York, 1971.
 84.
Batt, R.
J..
and D.
J.
Harris: Submillimeter Waves, Tlie Radio and Electronic Engineer, vol.
46,  pp.
379 392.
August/September 1976.
 85.
Johnson.
C.
M.: Laser Radars.
chap.
37 of" Radar Handbook," M.
I.
Skolnik (ed.).
McGraw-Hill  Book Company, New York.
1970.
 86.
Mendez.
A.
J ..
A.
C.
Layton.
and P.
K.
Schcfel: A Quasi Linear FM/CW Laser Radar, IEEE 1975  lmernational Radar Co11/en!11ce.
Apr.
21-23.
1975, Arlington, VA, pp.
128-131, IEEE Cat.
no.
75  CHO 938-1 AES.
 87.
Guenther.
B.
D ..
J.
J.
Bennett, W.
L.
Gamble, and R.
L.
Hartman: Submillimetcr Research: A  Propagation Bibliography, U.S.
Arm_v Missile Command, Redstone Arsenal, Alabama, Tedmical  Rer.ort RR-77-3.
November, 1976.
(Distribution unlimited.)  88.
Rogers.
D.
V., and R.
L.
Olsen: Calculation of Radiowave Attenuation Due to Rain at Frequencies  up lo IOOO GHz.
Comm1111icatio11s Rl!search Centre (Ottawa, Canada, CRC Rcpt.
no.
1299, Novem­ ber, 1976.
 89.
Gamble.
W.
L., and T D.
Hodgens: Propagation of'Millimeter and Submillimeter Waves, U.S.
Anny  Missile Research and Der·elopment Command.
Tec/1.
Rept.
TE-77-14, June, 1977.
 90.
Deirmendjian.
D.: Far-Infrared and Subrnillimeter Wave Attenuation by Clouds and Rain.
J.
Appl.
 Meteorology.
vol.
14.
pp.
1584-1593.
December, 1975.
 9 I.
Tomiyasu.
K.: Tutorial Review of Synthetic-Aperture Radar (SAR) with Applications to Imaging of  the Ocean Surface.
Proc.
IEEE.
vol.
66, pp.
563-583, May, 1978.
 92.
Cindrich.
L.
J.
Marks.
and A.
Klooster: Coherent Optical Processing or Synthetic Aperture Radar  Data, Proc.
Soc.
Plwto-Optical Instrumental ion Engineers, vol.
128.
"Effective Utilization of Optics in  Radar Systems." pp 128-143.
1977.
 93.
Cooke, C.R.: Laser Radar Systems, Some Examples.
Proc.
Soc.
Pl10to-Optica/ Instrumentation Engi­ neers, vol.
128, "Effective Utilization of Optics in Radar Systems," pp.
!03-107, 1977.
 94.
Fitzmaurice, M.
W.: NASA Ground-Based and Space-Based Laser Ranging Systems.
Proc.
Soc.
 Photo-Optical /11s1rumen1atio11 Engineers, vol.
128, "Effective Utilization of Optics in Radar  Systems," pp.
155-164, 1977.
 570 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  95.
Tischer, F.
J.: The Groove Guide, a Low-loss Wavbguide for Millimeter Waves, IEEE Tra11s .•  vol.
MTT·l I.
pp.
291-296, September, 1963.
 96.
Tischer, F.
J.: H Guide and laminated Dielectric Slab.
IEEE Trans .• vol.
MTT-18, pp.
9-15.
Janu·  ary, 1970.
 97.
Millimeter Waveguide Systems, Microwave J., vol.
20, pp.
24 and 26, March, 1977.
 98.
Skolnik, M.
1.: A Perspective of Synthetic Aperture Radar for Remote Sensing.
Naval ReSt?arch  Laboratory Memorandum Rept.
3783, May, 1978, Washington, D.C.
 99.
Weston, V.
H.: Theory of Absorbers in Scattering, Trans.
IEEE, vol.
AP·l I.
pp.
578-584, September,  1963.
 100.
Crispin, J.
W., Jr., and K.
M.
Siegel:" Methods of Radar Cross-Section Analysis." Academic Press,  Inc., New York, 1968, chap.
7.
 101.
Graf.
G.: On the Optimization of the Aspect Angle Windows for the Doppler Analysis of the Radar  Return of Rotating Targets, IEEE Trans., vol.
AP-24, pp.
378-381.
May, 1976.
 102.
Trebits, R.
N., R.
D.
Hayes, and L.
C.
Bomar: mm-wave Reflectivity of Land and Sea, Microw,we J.,  vol.
21, pp.
49-53, 83, August, 1978.
·.
 103.
Giaccari, E., and G.
Nucci: A Family of Air Traffic Control Radars, IEEE Trans., ;,iol.
AES-15,  pp.
37a;,396, May, 1979.
,  104.
Wickenden, B.
V.
A., and W.
G.
Howell: Ferrite Quarter Wave Type Absorber, Conference Proceed­ ings Military Microwave, London, 1978, Microwave Exhibitions and Publishers Ltd., pp.
310-317.
 105.
Bachman, C.
G.: "Laser Radar Systems and Techniques," Artech House, Inc., Dedham, Ma, 1979.
 A posteriori probability, 377-378  A priori probability, 378  A sandwich radome, 267  A-scope, 6, 354  Absorbers, and radar cross section, 553  Accuracy, FM-CW altimeter, 86-87  Accuracy, radar measurement, 400-411  Acoustic delay lines, MTI, 126  Acquisition radar, 153  Acquisition, in tracking radar, 177-178  Active-switch modulator, 215  AID converter, in MTI, 120  Adaptive antennas, 332-333  Adaptive array, in MTJ, 145  Adaptive' MTI, 142  Adaptive tracking, 180, 18S  Adaptive threshold, in MTD, 128  Adaptive video threshold (A VT), 392, 488  ADT, 153, 183-186, 392  Air-supported radomes, 265  Air-surveillance radar, 536-541  Air traffic control radar, 536-541  HF 0TH, 533  Aircraft, radar cross sections of, 39-44  Aircraft radomes, 267-268  Alpha-beta (11.-/J) tracker, 184-185  Altimeter, FM-CW, 84-87  Altimeter, and snow, 482  Altitude return, in pulse doppler radar, 145  Ambiguity diagram, 411-420  Amplitron, 209.
212 INDEX  Amplitude-comparison monopulse, 160-165  Amplitude fluctuations, in tracking radar,  167-168  AMTI, 140-147  and SAR, 528  AN/FPS-85, 213  computer control of, 324, 328  AN/SPS-48, 301-302  AN/SPY-1, 309  AN/TPN-19, 259-260  AN/TPS-59, 219  Angel echoes, 508-512  Angle fluctuations, 168-169  Angular accuracy, 409-411  of tracking radar, 167-172  Anomalous propagation, 450-456  Antenna scanning modulation, in MTI,  134-136, 144  Antenna temperature, 461, 464  Antennas, 223-337  adaptive, 332-333  aperture blocking in, 223-224, 239, 241, 266  aperture efficiency of, 288, 232  artificial dielectric lens, 249-252  Bayliss pattern for, 258  beam shape loss of, 58-59  az-el mount for, 271  Bootlace, 316  Butler beam-forming, 311-314  Cassegrain, 73, 240-242  constrained lens, 251  572 INDEX  Antennas:  cosccant-squared, 55-56, 258-261  coverage patterns of, 446-447  cross level of, 273  delta-a scanner, 298  dielectric Jens, 248-250  directive gain of, 224  double-curvature reflector, 259  Eagle scanner, 298  effective aperture of, 226-227  errors in, 262-264  far field of, 229  f/D ratio of, 239  reeds for, 236  field-intensity pattern of, 229  Fraunhofer region of, 229  Fresnel region of, 229  gain of, 224-226  ice, effect of, 240  lenses as, 248-254  low sidelobe, 227-228, 333, 549  Luneburg lens, 252-253  metal-plate lens, 250-252  mirror-scan, 242-244  motor drives for, 273  Mubis, 316  multimode feeds for, 164  multipath in, 442-447  n-bar scan, 178  near field of, 228  offset feed for, 239  organ-pipe scanner, 247-248  parabolic cylinder, 235-236  parabolic reflector, 235-243  parabolic torus, 236, 246-247  paraboloid, 235  pattern synthesis for, 254-258  polarization of, 227  polarization twist, 242-243  power gain of, 54, 225-226  radiation pattern of, 224, 228-235, 280-282  radomes for, 264-270  random errors in, 262-264  resonant frequency of, 179  scanning feed, 244-248  sidelobe radiation from, 227-228  sidelobes, in MTI, 145  in pulse doppler, 145-146  stabilization of, 270-273  surfaces for, 239-240  synthetic aperture, 517-529  systematic errors in, 262  Taylor illumination for, 257-258  torque fins for, 269 Antennas:  transreflector, 242  twist reflector, 242-243  Aperture blocking, 223-224, 239  in Cassegrain antenna, 241  by radomes, 266  Aperture efficiency, 228, 232  Aperture illuminations, 228--235  Area MTI, 148  Array antennas, 278-337  Array factor, 281-282  Arrays:  beam steering of, 282-285  beam steering computer for, 323 >  Blass beam-forming, 311-312  computer control of, 322-328  constrained feed for, 306-308  conformal, 3 30-3 31  corporate feed for, 285  digital phase shifters for, 287-288  diode phase shifters for, 288-291  Dolph-Chebyshev, 257  dome, 329-330  dual-mode ferrite phase shifter for, 295-296  electromechanical phase shifters for, 297-298  elements for, 305-306  endfire, 279  errors in, 318-322  feeds for, 306-310  ferrimagnetic phase shifters for, 291-297  ferroelectric phase shifters for, 297  flux drive ferrite phase shifter for, 295  Fox phase shifter for, 296-297  frequency-scan, 298-305  grating lobes in, 281, 283, 300, 332  hemispherical coverage, 328-329  Huggins phase shifters for, 303-305  hybrid-coupled phase shifter for, 289  latching ferrite phase shifter for, 293-294  lens, 308-309  limited scan, 334  linear, 279  loaded-line phase shifter for, 289  mixer-matrix feed for, 305, 308  MOSAR, 315  multifunction, 323  multiple beam, 310-318  mutual coupling in, 306  parallel-fed, 283, 285  parallel-plate feed for, 309  phase-frequency, 303, 334  phase-phase, 335  phase shifter quantization in, 321-322  phase shifters for, 286-298  Arrays:  postamplification beam forming, 310-311  quantization in, 321-322, 334  radiation pattern of, 280-282  random errors in, 318-322  reflect array.
309  Reggia-Spcnccr phase shifter for, 291-293  series-fed, 285  signal management in, 324  snake feed for.
30 I  space-fed.
308 309  suharrays in, 309 3 IO  switched-line phase shifter for, 288  thinned, 309, 319, 331-332  triangular element spacing in, 333-334  twin-slab phase shifters for, 294  unequally spaced, 331-332  ARSR-3, 538-541  Artificial dielectric lenses, 249--252  ASR, 536-537  Asymmetric monopulse, 175  Atmospheric attenuation, 459-461  Atmospheric noise, 461-463  Attenuation in waveguides, 57  Automatic detection, 183-184, 388-392  Automatic detection and track (ADT), 153,  183-186, 392  Automatic gain control, 157-158  and amplitude fluctuations, 168  and angle fluctuations, 169  in monopulse, 164  Automobile, radar cross section of, 44  Az-el mount, 271  B sandwich radome, 267  Balanced duplexers, 360-361  Balanced mixers, 348-349  RAM, 510l  Bandwidth:  CW radar, 75-76  effective, 404-405  klystron, 203  noise, 18  tracking, 178  Barker code, 428-429, 432  Bayes' rule, 377-378  Bayliss pattern, for monopulse, 258  Beam shape loss, 58-59  Beam-sharpening mode, SAR, 527  Beam splitting, 184, 390, 392, 400  Beam steering.
array, 282-285  Beam-steering computer, 323  Bed of spikes ambiguity diagram, 418-419  Binary moving-window detector, 388-390 Binomial coefficients, in MTI, 110  Bipolar video, 103-104  Birds, 508-510  Bistatic radar, 553-560  Black-hole effect, in MTI, 137  Blass beam-forming array, 311-312  Blind phases, MTI, 119  Blind speeds, MT[, 108  Blip-scan ratio, 63 INDEX 573  Blocking, of antenna aperture, 223-224, 239  Bootlace antenna, 316  Boxcar generator, 117, 156  Bragg scatter, 480, 534  Branch-type duplexer, 360  Brewster's angle, 444  Bright band, 502  Bright displays, 357-358  Brightness temperature, 461-462  Burnout, diode, 350  Burnthrough, 549  Butler beam-forming array, 311-314  C sandwich radome, 267  Cancellation ratio, MTI, 130  Canonical MTI comb filter, 112  Capillary waves, 480  Cassegrain antenna, 240-242  in Hawk system, 73  Cathode-driven CF A, 212  Cathode pulsing, of CF A, 210  Cathode ray tube display, 353-359  Cell-averaging CFAR, 392-393  CFAR, 392-395  in ECCM, 550  log-FTC, 506  and pulse compression, 433  Chaff, 552-553  Channel tuning, klystron, 204  Charge transfer device (CTD}, for MTI, 126  Chi-square probability density function, 49-51  Chirp pulse compression, 422--427  Circular polarization, and rain, 504-506  Circulator, in duplexer, 365  Clear-air turbulence, 510-511  Clouds, scattering from, 502-503  Clutter, 470-512  angel, 508-512  land, 489-498  at millimeter wavelengths, 563-564  sea, 474-489  weather, 498-508  Clutter attenuation, MTI, l lJ, 130  Clutter doppler spread, AMTI, 142-145  Clutter fluctuations, MTI, 131-134  574 INDEX  Clutter-Jock MTI, 142  Clutter map, 184  in MTD, 127  Coaxial magnetron.
193-198  Coaxitron, 213  Coded pulse, 428-43 l  Coherent detector.
385-386  Coherent reference, in MTI.
102  Coho, 105, 141  Cold-cathode emission.
210  Collapsing loss.
59-60  Color CRTs, 357  Complex angle monopulse, 176  Computer control of array radar, 322-328  Cone sphere1 radar cross section of, 35-37  Conformal arrays, 330-331  Conical scan.
155--159, 182-183  Conopulse, 164  Constant-false-alarm-rate receiver (see CF AR)  Constrained feed, 306-308  Constrained lens, 251  Control electrode, CF A, 211  Convective cell.
510  Conversion efficiency, 19 l  Conversion loss, mixer, 347  Cookie cutter tuner, 199  Corporate feed, 285  Correlation detection, 375-376  Correlation function, 373  Correlation time, sea echo, 484-485  Cosecant-squared antenna, 55-56, 258-261  Cosmic noise, 461  COSRO, 159  Coupled cavity TWT, 207  Coverage pattern, elevation, 446-447  Cross-correlation receiver, 375  Cross level, antenna, 273  Cross section (see radar cross section)  Cross talk, in tracking radar, I 58  Crossed-field amplifiers, 208-213  Crossed linear polarization, 506  Crowbar, for tube protection, 216  Crown-of-thorns tuner, 199  CRT screens, 355-357  Cumulative probability of detection, 64  CW radar, 68-81  CW wave-interference radar, 9  Data stabilization, antenna, 270  d-c operation, of CF A, 211  Decorrelation time, sea echo, 484-485  Decoy, 553  Delay-line canceler, 104, 106-114  Delay lines, pulse compression, 424-426 Delta-a scanner, 298  Density modulation.
213  Density taper, 332  Detection criteria, 376-382  with non-Rayleigh clutter, 485-486  Detector characteristics, 382-386  Dicke fix, 394, 549-550  Dielectric lenses, 248-250  Diffraction, it56-459  Digital phase shifters, 287 -288  Digital processing:  MTI.
t 19-125  SAR, 526  Diode burnout.
350  Diode phase shifters, 288-291  Diodes, microwave, 217  Directive gain, antenna.
224  Dispersive delay lini.:s, 424 426 .)  Displaced Phase Center Antenna (DPCA).
 143 144  Displays, 353 359  dd1nitions of, 354 355  Dither tuning, of magnetron, 200  Dolph-Chcbyshev array, 257  Dome antenna, 329-330  D,oppler filter bank, MTD.
127  Doppler frequency shift, 68-69, 79-80  in FM-CW radar, 83  Doppler measurement accuracy.
407-408  Doppler navigation, 92-95  Doppler-tolerant waveform, 427  Doppler tracking, 182  Double-curvature reflector, 259  Double delay line canceler, 109  Double-null diffcn..:ncc pattern, l 75  Double-threshold detector, 388  DPCA, 143-144  Dual-mode ferrite phase shifter, 295-296  Ducting, 450-456  Duplcxers, 359 366  am.I diode burnout, 350  Duty cycle, 52  Dynamic programming, 332  Dynamic range, 352  and low-noise receivers, 352  Eagle scanner, 298  ECCM, 542, 547-553  Effective aperture, antena, 226-227  Effective bandwidth, 404-4-05  Effective earth's radius, 449  Effective noise temperature, 345  Efficiency:  aperture, 228-232  Efficiency:  klystron.
204  tube, 191  Electromechanical phase shifters, 297-298  Electron-bombarded semiconductor (EBS)  device, 217 21 R  Electron gun, 201  Electronic counter-countermeasures, 542,  547 553  Elevated ducts, 453  Endfire array, 279  Engine modulations.
435  Envelope detector.
2:\.
382-385  Environrncnlal noise.
461 46.'i  Equipment instabilities.
in MTI.
UO 131  Frrors:  in at ray antennas.
318 322  in rcnector antennas.
262--264  Fvaporation duct.
453 455  b,poncntial prohabilily density function, 23  Externally coherent MTI.
138  False alarm.
17  False alarm number.
30  False alarm probability, 24  False alarm time.
24-26, 32  Far field.
antenna.
229  Faraday rotator.
296  Fast Fourier Transform.
123  and multiple beams.
317  f!D ratio, antenna.
239  Feeds:  array antenna.
306-310  paraboloid.
236  Fences, radar.
175.
497 -498  Ferrimagnetic phase shifters, 291-297  Ferrite limiter.
264  Ferrite pl1'lse shiftas.
291-297  Ferroelectric phase shifter.
297  Field-intensity pattern.
229  Filter bank:  CW radar.
76-77  digital, for MTI.
121-125  Fixed error.
FM-CW altimeter.
86-87  Flicker noise, 74, 347-348  Fluid-cooled helix TWT.
207  Flux drive ferrite phase shifter.
295  FM-CW radar.
82-92  FM pulse compresiion.
422-427  Foam shell radome, 267  Focused SAR.
519  Forward scatter.
557  Fox phase shifter.
296-297  Fraunhofer region, antenna, 229 Frequency agility:  ECCM, 548  for glint reduction, 170-172  and sea echo, 485  Frequency diversity, 548 INDEX 575  Frequency measurement accuracy, 407-408  Frequency modulated CW radar, 81-92  Frequency-scan arrays, 298-305  Frequency-scan radar.
and pulse compression,  433  Fresnel region, antenna, 229  Fresnel zone plate, 523, 527  Gain.
antenna, 224-226  Gaseous discharge phase shifter, 297  Gaussian probability density function, 22  Geodesic dome, 265  Glint.
168-172  Grating lobes, 281, 283, 300, 332  Grazing angle, 473  Grid-controlled tubes, 213  Ground-wave 0TH radar, 536  Half-wave wall radome, 267  Hard-tube modulator, 215-216  Height finder radar, 541-546  Helical scan, 177, 545  Hemispherical coverage arrays, 328-329  HF 0TH radar, 529-536  High-range-resolution monopulse, 181-182,  High-range-resolution radar, 434-435  Hologram, 523-526  Home on jam, 549  Huggins phase shifter, 303-305  Hybrid-coupled phase shifter, 289  IAGC, 488  Ice:  on antennas, 240  on radomes, 269  sea, 481-482  Ice spheres, scattering from, 502  Ideal observer, 380  IF cancellation, MTI, 126  Image frequency, of mixer, 347  Image-recovery mixer, 349  Improvement factor, MTI:  antenna scanning, 134-136  antenna sidelobes, 145  clutter nuctuations, 131-134  defined, 111, 129  equipment instability, 130-131  limiting, 136-138  quantization, 120  576 INDEX  Incidence angle, 473  Index of refraction, for air, 448  Insects, 510  Integration improvement factor, 30-31  for Swerling models, 49  Integration loss, 30-33  Integration, of radar pulses, 29-33  Integrators, 388-392  Interclutter visibility, 130, 494-495  Interferometer:  in height finding, 545  radar, 165  Intermediate-frequency receiver, CW radar, 74  Interrupted CW (ICW), 147  Inverse probability receiver, 377-379  Inverse SAR, 528-529  Inverse scattering, 437-438  Inverted coaxial magnetron, 195  Ion oscillations, 74  Ionosphere, 530  IREPS, 456  Isolation, in CW radar, 71-73  in FM-CW radar, 88-91  Kalman filter, 185  Kalmus clutter filter, 497  Keep-alive, in TR tube, 362-363  Klystron amplifier, 200-205  Knife-edge ambiguity diagram, 418-419  Lambert surface, 497  Land clutter, 489-498  at millimeter wavelengths, 563  Laser radar, 564-566  Latching ferrite phase shifters, 293-294  Lens antennas, 248-254  Lens array, 308-309  letter-band nomenclature, 8  Likelihood-ratio receiver, 377, 379  Limited-scan arrays, 334  Limiting, in MTI, 136-138  Limiting loss, 59  Lin-log receiver, 507  Linear array, 279  Linear beam tubes, 200-208  Linear FM pulse compression, 422-427  Linear recursive sequences, 429  Line-of-sight stabilization, 270  Line-type modulator, 214-215  Loaded-line phase shifter, 289  Lobe recognition, in height finding, 546  Lobe switching, 153  Lobing, due to multipath, 442-447 Log-FTC, 506-507  and sea clutter, 486-488  Log-,log.receiver, 486-488  Log normal probability density function, 51  and sea clutter, 479  Logarithmic detector, 384  LORO, 159  Loss, integration, 30-33  Losses, system, 56-61  Low-angle tracking, 172-176  Low-noise front ends, 351-353  Low-sidelobe antenna, 227-228, 333, 549  Luneburg lens, 252-253  m-out-of-ri detector, 388-390, 486  Magnetron, 192-200  Man, radar cross section of, 44  Matched filter, 5, 16, 369-375  in FM-CW radar, 91-92  Maximal length sequences, 429  Maximum unambiguous range, 2-3  Measurement accuracy, 400-411  Median detector, 486  Metal-plate Jens, 250-252  Metal space-frame radome, 266  Metallic radomes, 268  METRRA, 437 )  Microwave radiation hazards, 465-466  Microwave refractometer, 455  Mie region, 34  Millimeter wave radar, 560-564  Minimum detectable signal, 16-18  Mirror-scan antenna, 242-244  Mixer-matrix feed, 305, 308  Mixers, 347-351  Modulating anode, 201, 203  Modulators, 214-216  Module, solid-state, 217-218  Monopulse radar, 160-167, 182-183  in height finding, 543  and high-range-resolution, 181 182, 435  Monostatic radar, 553  MOPA (master-oscillator power amplifier), 106  MOSAR, 315  Motor drives, for antennas, 273  Moving Target Detector, 127-129  Moving target indication (see MTI}  Moving-window detector, 184, 388-390  MTD, 127-129  MTI radar, 101-148  acoustic delay line, 126  AID converter, 120  adaptive, 142  M.T.1.:  adaptive array, 145  cancellation ratio, 130  canonical comb filter, 112  charge transfer device.
126  clutter attenuation.
111, 130  clutter fluctuations.
131 134  clutter-lock.
142  clutter map, 127  coherent reference.
385 386  coho, 105.
14 l  delay-line canceler, 104-114  digital processing, 1 J 9--125  doppler filter bank.
127  double delay-line canceler, 109  DPCA.
143-144  externally coherent, 138  filter bank.
121-125, 127  IF cancellation, 126  improvement factor:  antenna scanning.
134-136  antenna sidelobes, 145  clutter fluctuations.
l 31 134  definition.
11 L 129  equipment instabilities, 130 131  limiting.
136-138  quantization, 120  interclutter visibility, 130, 494-495  limiting in, 136-138  Moving Target Detector, 127-129  multiple prf's, 114-117  noncoherent, 138-139  nonrecursive filter, 110  phase detector, 105  quadrature channel, 119  quantization, 120  recursive filter, 113  reference gain, 111  second-time-around echoes, 117  staggered prf, l l 4-117  stalo, 105  storage tube, 126  suhdutter visibility, 129 130  TACCAR, 142  three-pulse canceler, 109--110  transient response, t 13 114  transversal filter, 110-114  two-frequency, 147 148  visibility factor, 130  Mubis antenna, 316  Multifunction array, 323  Multifunction radar, 337  Multimode feeds, in monopulse, 164  Mullipactor duplexer, 365 Multipath:  and antenna lobing.
442-447  in tracking radar.
172 INDEX 577  Multiple beams, in arrays, 310-318  Multiple-frequency CW radar, 95-98  Multiple prf, in MTI.
114-117  Mutual coupling, 306  n-bar scan, 178  Near field, antenna, 228  Neyman-Pearson observer, 376  Nodding-beam height finder, 541-542  Nodding scan, 178  Noise:  in angle tracking, 167-170  atmospheric, 461-463  environmental, 461-465  in range tracking, 177  Noise bandwidth, 18  Noise factor, 344  Noise figure, 344-347, 350-351  Noise jamming, 548-551  Noise temperature, 345-346  Noise-temperature ratio, 347  Nomenclature, letter band, 8  Noncoherent AMTJ, 147  Noncoherent integration, 29-32  Noncoherent MTI, 138-139  Nonlinear-contact scattering effects, 437  Nonlinear FM pulse compression, 431  Nonmatched filter, 374-375  Nonparametric detector, 393  Nonrecursive filter, 110  Nonwhite noise matched filter, 375  0-type tube, 200  Off-axis tracking, 174  Offset feed, 239  Oil slicks, 482  On-axis tracking, 180-181  Operator loss, 60-61  Operator, radar, 386--387  Optical processing, 523-526  Optimum detector law, 382-384  Organ-pipe scanner, 247-248  Over-the-horizon (0TH) radar, 529-536  Overall noise figure, 345  Palmer scan, 177  Parabolic cylinder, 235-236  Parabolic reflector antennas, 235-243  Parabolic torus, 236, 246--247  Paraboloid, 235  Parallel-fed array, 283, 285  578 INDEX  Parallel-plate feed, 309  Parametric amplifier, 351  Passive TR-limiter, 363, 364  Pattern synthesis, 254-258  Penetration color tube, 357  Performance chart, magnetron, 195-197  Performance figure, radar, 63  Permanent magnet focusing, 202  Phase-coded pulse compression, 428-431  Phase-comparison monopulse, 165-167  Phase detector, in MTI, 105  Phase-frequency array, 303, 334  Phase-in-space 30 radar, 543  Phase-phase array, 335  Phase-sensitive detector, 156, 160  Phase shifter quantization, 321-322  Phase shifters, 286-298  Phased array antennas, 278-337  Phasers, 287  Pi mode, magnetron, 193  PIN diode, 290  Pincushion radar, 316  Pipology, 387  Plumbing loss, 57-58  Polarization:  antenna, 227  circular, 504-506  for target classification, 436  Polarization agility, and glint reduction, 172  Polarization-twist Cassegrain, 242-243  Polyphase codes, 432  Postamplification beam forming, 310-311  Postdetection integration, 29-32  Power gain, antenna, 225-226  Protector TR, 364  Power programming, in 30 radar, 302  PPI, 6, 355  Precipitation:  attenuation by, 503  scattering from, 498-503  Predetection integration, 29  Prelook receiver, 548  Probability density function, 20-23  Probability distribution function, 23, 26  Probability of detection, 27-29  cumulative, 64  for Swerling models, 48  Probability of false alarm, 24  Propagation of radar waves, 62, 441-461  Propeller modulation, 76  Proximity (VT) fuze, 71  Pseudorandom code, 429  Pulling figure, magnetron, 199  Pulse chasing, in bistatic radar, 559 Pulse compression, 420 434  and frequency scan, 303  Pulse compression ratio, 422  Pulse doppler radar, 139-140  Pulse-forming network (PFN1 214  Pulse repetition frequency, 2  staggered, 114-117  Pulser, 214  Pushing figure, magnetron, I 96  Quadrature channel, in MTI, 119  Quadrature component, in monopulse, 176  Quantization:  in MTI, 120 .
J  in phase shifters, 321-322  Quantization error, FM-CW altimeter, 87  Quantization lobes, 321-322  and triangular spacings, 334  Rabbit-ear oscillations:  in CFA, 211  in TWT, 207, 208  RAOAM, 437  Radar applications, 12-13  Radar block diagram, 5-7  Radar cross section, 33-46  aircraft, 39-44  bird, 509  bistatic, 557-559  cone-sphere, 35  definition, 4, 33  example values, 44  fluctuation models, 46-52  insect, 510  man, 44  reduction of, 553  .rod, 34-35  ships, 142-143  sphere, 34  and target classification, 435  Radar definition, 1-2  Radar frequencies, 7-8  Radar equation, 17-65  bistatic, 556-557  derivation of, 3-4  laser, 565-566  0TH, 530-531, 535  SAR, 521-522  surface clutter, 471-474  surveillance, 64  for weather radar, 499-500  Radar history, 8-12  Radar operator, 386-387  Radial velocity direction, in CW radar, 78-79  Radiation hazards, 465-466  Radiation intensity, 224  Radiation pattern:  antenna, 224, 228-235  array, 280-282  Radomes, 264-270  Rain:  and radomes, 269-270  scattering from, 500-502  at millimeter waves, 564  Random errors:  in array antennas, 318-322  in reflector antennas, 262-264  Range accuracy, 401-407  Range ambiguities, 53-54  Range-gate stealer, 551  Range-gated doppler filters, 117-119  Range measurement, in CW radar, 95-98  Range resolution.
and automatic detection, 186  Range tracking, 176-177  Raster scan, 178  Rayleigh probability density function, 22-23, 47  and sea echo, 478  Rayleigh region, 33-34  Rayleigh scattering, 499  Rear-port display, 358-359  Receiver noise, 18-19  Receiver protector, 362-363  Receivers, 343-353  Recirculating-delay-line integrator, 390-392  Recursive filter, 113  Reference gain, MTI, 111  Reflectarray, 309  Reflection coefficient, or sea, 445  Reflective-array compressor, 425  Refraction, 447-450, 455-456  Refractivit;': 448  Refractometer, 455  Reggia-Spencer phase shifter, 291-293  Repeater jamming, 551-552  Resolution, of SAR, 518-519  Resonance region, in scattering, 34  Resonant-charging, modulator, 215  Resonant frequency, of tracking antennas, 179  RF keying.
of Cf A, 211  Rice probability density function, 26, 50  Rieke diagram, magnetron, 195-198  Ring-bar TWT, 206  Ring echoes, 512  Ring-loop TWT, 207  Ring tuner, magnetron, 200  Rising-sun magnetron, 193, 194  Rod, radar cross section of, 34-35 Roll stabilization, 271  Rotodome, 268  Sample and hold, 156  SAR, 517-529  SAW delay lines, 424-426  SCAMP, 163  Scan with compensation, 164  Scan converter, 358 INDEX 579  Scanning-feed reflector antennas, 244-248  Schottky-barrier diodes, 347  Schwartz inequality, 372  Sea clutter, 474-489  HF radar, 533-S35  at millimeter waves, 563-564  Sea state, 475  Second-time-around echo, 3  in MTI, 117  Self-screening range, 550  Semiactive homing, 80  Sensitivity time control (see STC)  Sequential detection, 381-382  in array radar, 324  Sequential lobing, 153-154  Sequential observer, 380-382  Series-fed array, 285  Servo noise, 170  Servo system, 178-179  Shadow grid, 203  Ships, radar cross section of, 42-45  Short pulse, applications of, 421  Sideband superheterodyne receiver, 84-85  Sidelobe canceler, 333, 549  Sidelobes, antenna, 227-228  Sidelobes, FM pulse compression, 426-427  Sidelooking radar, 517  Sigma zero, 471  Signal management, in array radar, 324  Signal-to-noise ratio:  for detection, 28, 48  .
for Swerling models, 47-49  Simultaneous lobing, J(j()  Sinusoidal modulation, in FM radar, 88-91  Smith chart, 196  Snake feed, 301  Snow, scattering from, 502  Snow-covered terrain, 490-491  Solar noise, 463  Sole, CF A, 209  Solid-state limiters, 363-364  Solid-state transmitters, 216-220  Space feeds, 308-309  Space-frame radome, 265-266  SPASUR, 80  580 INDEX  Speckle, in SAR, 528  Speed gate, 81  Sphere, radar cross section of, 33-34  Spherical reflectors, 245-246  Spike leakage, and diode burnout, 350  Spikes, and sea clutter, 477  Spin-tuned magnetron, 199  Spiral scan, 178  Split range gate, 176-177  Spotlight mode, SAR, 527  Spread spectrum, 434  Squint angle, 155, 158-159  Squint mode, SAR, 527  Stabilization of antennas, 270-273  Stacked-beam 30 radar, 543-544  Staggered prf, in MTI, 114-117  Stalo, 105  Standard deviation, 21  Standard temperature, 19  STC:  in ARSR-3, 540  and duplexer, 366  and logarithmic receiver, 507  and sea clutter, 488  and shaped beams, 261  Storage tube, 357-358  MTI, 126  Straddling loss, 61  Straps, magnetron, 193  Stretch pulse compression, 432  Structure constant, 511  Subarrays, 309-310  Subclutter visibility, 129-130  Submillimeter wavelengths, 564  Surface acoustic wave delay lines, 424-426  Surface duct, 451, 453-455  Surface, for reflector antennas, 239-240  Surveillance radar range equation, 64  Swerling cross section models, 46-49  Switched-line phase shifter, 288  Synthesis of antenna patterns, 254-2S8  Synthetic aperture radar, 517-529  Synthetic video displays, 359  System losses, 56-61  System noise figure, 346  System noise temperature, 345, 463-465  Systematic errors:  antenna, 262  tracking, 180  TACCAR, 142  Tapped-delay-line integrator, 390  Target classification, 434-438  Taylor aperture illumination, 257-258 Tellurometer, 97  Thermal noise, 18  Thin,wall radome, 267  Thinned arrays, 309, 319, 331-332  Three-axis mount, 271  30 radar, 301, 541, 544  Three-pulse canceler, 109-110  Threshold detection, 16-17, 27  Thumbtack ambiguity diagram, 418-419  Time-difference height finding, 546-547  Time-frequency coded waveform, 431  Tolerances, in lenses, 253-254  Torque fins, antenna, 269  TR tube, 361-362 )  Track initiation and maintenance, 325-326  Track-while-scan radar, 152-153, 183  sector scanning, 248  Tracking, automatic, 153, 183-186, 392  Tracking illuminator, CW, 73, 81  Tracking radar, 152-186  angular accuracy, 167-172  conical scan, 155-159, 182-183  conopulse, 164  glint, 168-172  Jobe switching, 153  low-angle, 172-176  monopulse, 160-167, 181-183, 435  off-axis tracking, 174  on-axis tracking, 180-181  scan with compensation, 164  sequential lobing, 153-154  simultaneous lobing, 160  ' Tracking with surveillance radar, 183-186  Transient response, in MTI, 113-114  Transistors:  low noise, 351, 352  power, 217  Transmitter noise, 73-74  Transmitter power, 52-53  Transmitters, 190-220  Amplitron, 209  crossed-field amplifiers, 208-213  grid-controlled tubes, 213  klystron, 200-205  magnetron, 192-200  modulators, 214-216  solid-state, 216-220  traveling-wave tube, 206-208  Twystron, 208  Transreftector, 242  Transversal filter, 110-114  Traveling-wave tube phase shifter, 297  Traveling-wave tubes, 206-208  Triangular element spacing, 333-334  True-hearing display, 271  True time delays, in arrays, 288  Tuning:  klystron, 203  magnetron, 199 ·· 200  Twin-slab toroidal phase shifter, 294  Twist reOector.
242 243  Two-frequency CW, 95 97  Two-frequency MTI, 147 148  Twystron, 208  Type 11 servo system.
178, 186  Uncertainty relation.
408-409  lJ nequally spaced arrays.
331 -332  Unfocused SAR, 518-519  I fniform prohahility density function, 21-22  l I nigrid.
2tU  V-bcam radar.
542  Varactor diode, 291  Variance.
21  Vdocity modulation.
200 201  Visihility factor.
for clutter, 130 INDEX 581  VSWR, and isolation in CW radar, 72  Wave-interference radar, 554  Weather clutter, 498-507  Weather effects, on radomes, 269-270  Weather fix, 507  Weibull probability density function:  land clutter, 496  sea clutter, 480  Weighting, for time sidelobes, 426  Weinstock cross section models, 50  Whitening filter, 375  Wing-beat frequency, bird, 509  Within-pulse scanning, 314-316  by frequency scanning, 302-303  in 3D radar, 545  Wrap-up factor, 299  X-ray hazard, 466  Z, radar reflectivity factor, 500-501  Zero-crossings detector, 384-385  Zoning of lenses, 249, 251  