Radar Basics  
  WHAT IS RADAR?  ................................ ................................ ........  3 
RADAR APPLICATIONS  ................................ ................................  3 
FREQUENCY BANDS  ................................ ................................ .... 3 
CONTINUOUS WAVE AND PULSED RADAR  ................................ .. 4 
PULSED RADAR  ................................ ................................ ...........  4 
PULSE POWER  ................................ ................................ ................  4 
RADAR EQUATION  ................................ ................................ ...........  5 
PULSE WIDTH ................................ ................................ ................  5 
PULSE MODULATION  ................................ ................................ .......  6 
Linear FM Chirps  ................................ ................................ ... 6 
Phase Modulation  ................................ ................................ .. 6 
Frequency Hopping  ................................ ................................  6 
Digital Modulation  ................................ ................................ . 6 
PULSE COMPRESSION  ................................ ................................ .......  6 
LIFECYCLE OF RADAR M EASUREMENT TASKS  ..............................  7 
CHALLENGES OF RADAR DESIGN & VERIFICATION  ...............................  7 
CHALLENGES OF PRODUCTION TESTING ................................ .............  7 
SIGNAL MONITORING  ................................ ................................ ..... 8 
BASIC RF PULSED RADAR SIGNALS  ................................ .....................  8 
TRANSMITTER TESTS................................ ................................ .......  9 
RECEIVER TESTS ................................ ................................ .............  9 
  www.tektronix.com/radar  3   
Figure 1: A Weather Radar D isplay  
What is Radar ? 
Radar (RAdio Detection And Ranging) is actually a fairly 
simple  process  of bouncing radio waves off object s and 
looking at the reflections to determining presence, size, 
distance, position and speed.  
Typically, radars illuminate their targets with an RF pulse and 
then listen for the return echo. Since the RF pulse propagates 
at the speed of light, the time it  takes the echo to return is 
proportional to the distance from the target. This, of course, 
applies to a primary -radar, one that relies on reflected energy 
bouncing back off the target. Secondary -radars , that re -
transmit the signal back from a transponder , have additional 
delays.  
Transmitted  RF signals are “boun ced” off a target  and a 
receiver measures the  characteristics  of the echo . Most often , 
low duty cycle pulses  are used.  
As the  technology has evolved , the basic concept of radar has 
not changed. At th e same time , the accuracy, resolution and 
number of radar applications has increased dramatically  over 
time. 
Radar Applications  
Radar technology is used heavily in military applications. 
Ground -based radar is used for long -range threat -detection 
and air tr affic co ntrol. Ship -based radar provide  surface -to-
surface and surface -to-air observation. Airborne radar is 
utilized for threat detection, surveillance, mapping, and 
altitude determination. Finally, missile radars are used for 
tracking and guidance.  
There  are many commercial aviation  applications of radar 
such as air traffic control ( ATC) long range surveillance , 
terminal air traffic  monitoring, s urface movement  tracking, and 
weather surveillance . Additionally, short -range radar is 
increasingly being used in automotive applications for collision 
avoidance, driver assistance, and autonomous driving. 
Specialized radars can also be used to provide imaging 
through fog, through walls, and even underground.  Modern radar s produce  complicated pulses that can presen t 
significant measurement challenges. Improvements to range, 
resolution , and immunity to interference have motivated 
numerous coding schemes, frequency and  phase modulated 
pulses , frequency chirped pulses , and narrow pulses with high 
overall  bandwidth.  
Frequency Bands  
Radar f requency bands are classified  into letter designations 
defined by the IEEE  (see Table 1). The most commonly used 
bands used today for radar are the L -band through the KU -
band or 1 – 18 GHz. Short -range a utomoti ve radar systems 
use the very high W -band frequencies in the 75+ GHz range . 
 
Table 1 Common Radar Frequency Bands  
Band  Use Range  
HF Long -range , over the horizon 
(OTH)  3-30 MHz 
VHF Long -range, over the horizon 
(OTH)  30-300 MHz 
UHF Long -range, over the horizon 
(OTH)  300 MHz-3 
GHz 
L Long range Air Traffic Control 
(ATC), surveillance  1-2 GHz  
S Medium Range, Airport 
Surveillance Radar (ASR),  
long range weather, marine radar  2-4 GHz  
C Weather, snow/ice mapping, 
precipitation detecti on 4-8 GHz  
X Missile guidance, marine radar, 
weather, ground surveillance, 
short -range airport tracking radar  8-12 GHz  
Ku High-resolution radar, satellite 
transponders  12-18 GHz  
K Cloud detection, police radar  18-27 GHz  
Ka Short range, airport surveill ance, 
red-light traffic camera trigger  27-40 GHz  
V Very short range, space 
applications  40-75 GHz  
W Automotive/vehicle 
parking/warning radar systems, 
imaging  75-110GHz  
 4  www.tektronix.com/radar   Continuous Wave and Pulsed 
Radar  
Radar  systems can use continuous wave  (CW) signals  or, 
more commonly,  low duty -cycle pulsed signals.  CW radar  
applications can be simple unmodulated Doppler speed 
sensing systems such as those used by police and sports 
related radar s, or may employ modulation in order to sense 
range as well as speed.  Modu lated CW applications have 
many specialized and military applications  such as maritime / 
naval applications, missile homing, and radar altimeters . The 
detection range of CW radar  systems is relatively short, due to 
the constraint s of continuous RF power . There is no minimum 
range, however,  which makes CW radar particularly useful for 
close -in applications.  
Pulsed Radar  
The r adar measurements discussed in this document  are all 
pulse measurements. Although there are several continuous 
transmission types of ra dar, primarily Doppler, the great 
majority of radars are pulsed.  There are two general 
categories of pulsed radar, Moving Target Indicator (MTI) and 
Pulsed Doppler. MTI radar is a long -range, low pulse 
repetition frequency ( PRF) radar used to d etect and tr ack 
small (~2m2) moving targets at long distances ( up to ~30km) 
by eliminating ground clutter (aka  chaff) . MTI is useful when 
velocity is not a big concern (i.e.  “just tell me if something is 
moving” ). Pulsed Doppler radar, in contrast, utilizes a h igh 
PRF to avoid “blind speeds”  and has a s horter “unambiguous” 
range (~15km), high resolution, and provides detailed velocity 
data. It is used for a irborne missile approach tracking , air 
traffic c ontrol, and medical applications ( e.g. blood flow  
monitoring ). 
The RF pulse characteristics reveal  a great deal about a 
radar's capability. Electronic Warfare (EW) and ELectronic 
lNTelligence (ELINT) experts specialize in the study of these 
pulsed signals. Pulse characteristics provide valuable 
information a bout the type  of radar producing a signal and 
what its source might be - sailboat, battleship, passenger 
plane, bomber, missile, etc.  
 
Figure 2. Common Pulse Characteristics  
Pulsed radar t ypically utilizes very low duty cycle RF pulses ( < 
10%) . The r ange and resolution is determined b y the pulse 
repetition frequency ( PRF), pulse width  (PW) , and transmit 
power . A wide PW generally provide s better  range, but poor 
resolution . Conversely, a  narrow PW supports less  range, but better resolution . This  relationship constitutes one of the 
fundamental trade -offs in radar engineering. Pulse 
compression with a modulated carrier is often  used to 
enhance resolution while maintaining a narrow PW allowing 
for higher power  and longer  range . 
The Pulse Repetition Interval (PRI) is the time the pulse cycle 
takes before repeating. It is equal to the reciprocal of the PRF 
or Pulse Repetition Rate (PRR), the number of transmitted 
pulses per second. PRI is important because it determines  the 
maximum unambiguous range or  distance of the radar. In fact, 
pulse-off time may actually be a better indication of the radar 
system's maximum design range.  
Traditional  radar systems employ a Transmit/Receive (T/R) 
switch to allow the transmitter and receiver to share a single 
antenn a. The transmitter and receiver take turns using the 
antenna. The transmitter sends out pulses and during the off -
time, the receiver listens for the return echo. The pulse -off 
time is the period the receiver can listen for the reflected echo. 
The longer th e off-time, the further away the target can be 
without the return delay putting the received pulse after the 
next transmitted pulse. This would incorrectly make the target 
appear to be reflected from a nearby object. To avoid this 
ambiguity, most radars si mply use a pulse -off time that is long 
enough to make echo returns from very distant objects so 
weak in power , they are unlikely to be erroneously detected in 
the subsequent pulse's off -time.  
Figure 3 illustrates the need for puls e compression to obtain 
good range and resolution. Wider PWs  have higher average 
power , which increases range  capability . However, wide PWs  
may cause  echoes from closely spaced targets to overlap or 
run together in the receiver , appearing as a single targe t. 
Modulated pulse s mitigate these issues , providing higher 
power and finer resolution to se parate closely spaced targets.  
 
Figure 3. Pulse Width versus Resolution  
Pulse Power  
Another consideration for the maximum range of a radar  is the 
transmitted power. Peak power is a measure of the maximum 
instantaneous power level in the pulse. Power droop , pulse 
top amplitude , and overshoot are also of interest. ELINT 
experts sometimes scrutinize these characteristics, as they 
provide additi onal information about a radar's characteristics . 
 www.tektronix.com/radar  5  Pulse top amplitude (Power) and Pulse Width (PW) are 
important for calculating the total energy in a given pulse 
(Power x Time). Knowing the duty cycle and the power of a 
given pulse, the average RF power t ransmitted can be 
calculated (Pulse Power x Duty Cycle).  
Radar Equation  
The Radar Equation , as it is commonly known, defines many 
of the engineering trade -offs encountered  by radar designers.  
 
Equation 1. Radar Range Equation  
The radar equation relates the expected receive  power (P r) to 
the transmitted pulse p ower (P t); based on transmit antenna 
gain (G t), area of the receive antenna (A r), target cross section 
(aka reflectivity) σ, range from the transmitter antenna to the 
target (R t), and range of the target to the receive antenna (Rr). 
Unlike many communications systems, radar systems suffer 
from very large signal path losses. The round -trip distance is 
twice that of a typical c ommunications link  and there are  
losses associated with the radar cross -section and reflectivity 
of target s. As can be observed from the Radar Equation, t he 
range term is raised to the fourth power in the denominator, 
underscoring the tremendous signal pow er losses radar 
signal s experience . There are also several forms of the radar 
equation that take into account differing applications and 
antenna configurations.  
Using the radar equation, the received signal level can be 
calculated to determine if sufficien t power exists to detect a 
reflected  radar pulse. Combining multiple pulses to 
accumulate greater signal p ower and average out the noise i s 
also helpful for increasing the detection range.  
Pulse Width  
Pulse width is an important property of radar signal s. The 
wider a pulse, the greater the energy contained in the pulse 
for a given amplitude. The greater the transmitted pulse 
power, the greater the reception range capability of the radar.  
Greater pulse width also increases the average transmitted 
power. This  makes the radar transmitter work harder. The 
difference in decibels (dB) between the pulse power and 
average power level is easily calculated using ten times the 
log of the pulse width divided by the pulse repetition interval.  
Range is therefore limited b y the pulse characteristics and 
propagation losses. The PRI and duty cycle set the maximum 
allowed time for a return echo, while the power or energy 
transmitted must overcome the background noise to be 
detected by  the receiver.  
Pulse width also affects a radar’s minimum resolution. Echoes 
from long pulses can overlap in time, making it impossible to 
determine the nature of the target or targets. A long pulse 
return may be caused by a single large target, possibly an airliner, or multiple smaller targets clo sely spaced, possibly a 
tight formation of fighter aircraft. Without sufficient resolution, 
it is impossible to determine the number of objects that 
actually make up the echo return. Narrow pulse width s 
mitigate the  overlapping of echoes and improve resolu tion at 
the expense of transmit power.  
Pulse width thus affects t wo very important radar  system 
capabilities - resolution and detection range.  These two 
qualities are traded off against  each other.  Wider pulses 
equate to longer -range radars  with less  resol ution, whereas 
narrow  pulses equate to  finer resolution but shorter range.  
Narrow pulses also  require greater bandwidth to correctly 
transmit  and receive. This makes the pulse's spectral nature 
also of interest,  which must be considered in the overall 
system design  (see Figure 4). 
 
Figure 4. Pulse Time vs  Frequency Characteristics  
 6  www.tektronix.com/radar   Pulse Modulation  
While unmodulated  pulsed  radar are relatively simple to 
implement, they have drawbacks . As described  previous ly, 
unmodulated  pulses have relatively poor range  resolution . To 
make the most efficient use of transmit power and optimize 
range resolution, most radars modulate pulses using a variety 
of techniques  (see Figure 5).
 
Figure 5. Common Pulse Modulations – constant CW (top), 
Linear FM (middle), Phase -Shift Keying (bottom)  
Linear FM Chirps  
The simplest  pulse modulation scheme is the  linear FM (LFM) 
chirp. It is also the most common types of pulse compression  
and is in wide use. Sweeping the carrier frequency throughout 
a pulse results in  every part of a pulse being  distinct  and 
discernable . This enables pulse compression techniques to be 
utilized  in the receiver , which is a very powerful radar 
technique for impr oving range resolution and making more 
efficient use of transmit power.  
Phase Modulation  
Phase modulation can also be used to differentiate segments 
of a pulse in a similar  fashion as frequency hopping. Pulse 
phase modulation is often implemented as a vers ion of Binary 
Phase -Shift Keying (BPSK). There are specific phase codin g 
schemes, such as Barker Codes to  ensure orthogonality of the 
coding while providing excellent range resolution.  
Frequency Hopping  
Another modulation technique utilizes  several frequen cy hops 
within a pulse. If each frequency has a corresponding filter 
with the appropriate delay in the receiver, then all segments 
can be compressed together in the receiver. If the frequency 
hopping sequence remains the same for all pulses, then the 
recei ver compression can  even be implemented with a simple 
Surface Acoustic Wave  (SAW ) filter.  One common form of 
frequency hopped coding is known as Costas C oding. This is 
a coding that intentionally reduces the side -lobes in the 
periodic auto -correlation f unction and has advantageous performance in the presence of Doppler  effects . Additionally, 
the variable frequency pattern used by  hopping pulses 
reduce s susceptanc e to spoofing and jamming . This also 
reduce s interference between transmitters in close proximit y. 
Digital Modulation  
With the advancements of software defined radio and digital 
signal processing applied to radar, mo re complex pulse 
modulations are now used. For example, more effective anti -
spoofing can be accomplished using M -ary PSK or QAM 
modulati ons. These modulations produce pulses that 
resemble noise as opposed to coherent frequencies , which 
makes them harder to detect . Other informati on can be 
encoded into the se more complex digital modulations  as well . 
Pulse Compression  
Basic  pulsed  radar  using time-of-flight  to measure  target  range  
has limitations. For a given pulse width, the range resolution is 
limited to the distance over which the pulse travels during the 
time of its duration. When multiple targets are at nearly equal 
distance from the radar, the return from the farthest target will 
overlap the return from the first target. In this situation, the two 
targets can no longer be  resolved  from each  other  with just  
simple  pulses.  
Using a short pulse width is one way to improve distance 
resolution . However,  shorter  pulses  contain  proportionately  less 
energy, preventing reception at greater range due to 
propagation  losses. Increasing  the transmit  power is  impractical  
in many cases, such as for aircraft radar  due to power  constraints.  
The answer to t hese challenges is the use of pulse 
compression. If a pulse can be effectively compressed in time, 
then the returns will no longer overlap. Pulse compression 
allows low amplitude returns to be “pulled” out of the noise 
floor. It  is achieved by modulating t he pulse in the transmitter 
so different  parts of the pulse become more discernable . The 
actual time compression is accomplished by the radar 
receiver.  
 
Figure 6. A matched filter in the receiver compresses the 
signal in time  
The most common pulse compression technique linear 
frequency modulation, or LFM pulses.  A LFM pulse is one 
where the pulse begins at one carrier frequency, then ramps 
linearly, up or down  to an end frequency .  LFM pulses are 
often called “chirps” or chirped p ulses.  Compression is 
achieved in the receiver by passing the s ignal through a 
matched filter (see Figure 6). This filter is designed to have a 
delay characteristic matched to the LFM frequency range, and 
 www.tektronix.com/radar  7  delay s portions of the modulated signal proportional to the 
carrier frequency. For example, the filter may delay the 
starting frequency of the LFM more than the ending frequency 
of the LFM, causing the leading edge of the pulse to be 
delayed more tha n the trailing edge .  When the  pulse passes 
through a receiver signal processor, the chirp will transform 
from a frequency chirp pulse to a narrow pulse containing all 
the frequencies overlapped. The width of the resulting pulse is 
dependent on the frequency resolution of the receiver 
processor. Bear in mind, there will be additional time -smearing 
and ringing due to non -linearity in the transmitted pulse.  
When a pulse entering the receiver is a target return, there will 
likely be multiple close reflections due to the different surfaces 
of the target. If the compression signal processor has 
sufficient resolution, it can separate each of these reflections 
into discrete narrow pulse s. 
 
Figure 7. Barker c oded binary phase shift keying  (BPSK)  
Another common pulse com pression technique employs 
binary phase shift keying, or BPSK modulation, using a Barker 
coded sequence  (see Figure 7).  Barker codes are unique 
binary patterns that auto correlate against themselves at only 
one point  in time.  Barker Codes can vary in length from 2 - 13 
bits, providing a corresponding compression ratio  of 2 - 13. 
The compression is achieved in the receiver by sensing the 
auto-correlation of the Barker sequence within the detected 
pulse.  
 
Figure 8. Barker coded spectrum showing side -lobe 
suppression  Lifecycle of Radar 
Measurement Tasks  
The measurements needed for radar will vary depending on 
the job to be done and the type or radar to be characterized. 
From radar system design and component  selection to the 
surveillance of deployed radars, accurate and fast 
measurements are required with reproducible results.  
Challenges of Radar Design & 
Verification  
When performing  radar design verification, there is a need  to 
assure the transmitted signal is correct , the receiver responds 
to and detects the  correct signals, and that there are no 
spurious  signals emitted from the transmitter.  Unexpected 
outputs can range from unintended signals related to the 
desired pulse (such as harmonics, sub -harmonics, image 
mixing products, etc.), as well as spurious outputs unrelated to 
the desired pulse, such as radiation of internal local 
oscillators, coupling from digital clocks, spurious oscillations 
within RF circuitry, pulse errors, and so forth  
In the modern wor ld of "software defined" radar, modulated 
pulses, chirps, and other waveforms are usually  not generated  
with traditional analog circuitry, but with  Digital Signal 
Processors  (DSP) and Direct Digital Synthesis (DDS) 
techniques . These digital techniques  gene rate complicated 
signals directly at intermediate frequencies ( IF) or RF 
frequencies. The signals  only become analog when the 
synthesized digital data is passed  through a digital -to-analog 
(D/A) converter.  
Within the DSP, subtle software code and numeric  errors such 
as poorly chosen  filter constants, numeric rounding, or 
overflow errors  can create very short -duration artifacts  that 
may bear little or no relation to the desired output.  A single 
DSP error  can create momentarily incorrect RF output  (i.e. a 
glitch). This can play havoc when filtered, amplified, and 
transmitted.  
Spurious emissions can also interfere with other  RF services 
in the deployment area and often  provide a distinctive 
signature if they are specific to a particular transmitter  design.  
Wide band radars can also “bleed” into surrounding spectrum 
causing unintended interference well outside the assigned 
spectrum.  
Challenges of Production Testing  
Production testing involves  verification that each 
manufactured product  meets its specifications. Test tasks 
include tu ning and calibrating assemblies, along with the 
compensation and calibration  of analog modules, linearizers, 
and amplifier components. Results must be accura te and 
repeatable to assure  the final product will function as 
intended. As comp onent and subsystem vendors make 
changes  to their processes, continued verification of 
 8  www.tektronix.com/radar   performance is required without varying the tests throughout 
the product lifecycle . 
Automated testing reduces the chance for operator error , 
which is a drawback of manua l test processes and manually 
operated test equipment. With automation, r eproducibility of 
test results can be maintained regardless of production 
personnel changes  and training requirements can  be 
significantly reduced.  
Signal Monitoring  
Signal monitoring  is a different challenge. For Signal 
Monitoring, t here is less need to verify a specification, but 
more to identify si gnals that may be present in the surrounding 
area or show t hemselves only very rarely. These types of 
interfering signals  can jam or redu ce the effectiveness of a 
radar. When searching for p ulsed or interfering signals, an RF 
analyzer must not “blink” when the signal appears. 
Discovering, triggering, and capturing infrequent signals or 
transient characteristics of signals are required befor e 
analysis can be performed.  
Interference may be manifested not only as an infrequent 
problem, but may be an issue of multiple signals contending 
for the same spectrum , either intentionally or unintentionally. 
Discovering such overlapping signals can be ve ry difficult 
using traditional test equipment. 
 
Figure 9. Oscilloscope trace of an RF pulse train  
Basic RF Pulsed Radar Signals  
A simple pulse can be a single frequency that is turned on for 
a short time and then off again. The s ignal travels from the 
transmit antenna, reflects off of a target and returns to the 
radar. The time it takes for the pulse to return represents the 
range, or distance to the target.  
An oscilloscope can show the time domain voltage waveform 
of the transmit ted pulse. This includes all individual cycles of 
the RF pulse as in  Figure 9. 
A RF detector can be used to create a trace of the envelope of 
the pulse, instead of the individual cycles. This makes 
triggering much easier. A Vector  Signal Analyzer (VSA), or a 
spectrum analyzer in zero -span, can display amplitude v ersus 
time. Th is is the equivalent of using a  RF detector. The lower 
trace in Figure 10 is a spectrum analyzer detected envelope  of 
a single RF pu lse seen in the voltage waveform of  Figure 9. 
A spectrum analyzer can also show the frequency spectrum of 
the pulse. The sin(x) / x (pronounced "sine x over x ") classic 
pulse spectrum plot is seen in the upper trace. A VSA can use  
a Fast Fourier Transform (FFT), or other Discrete -Time 
Frequency Transformation  (DTFT) , to make such a spectrum 
plot of a single pulse. A swept spectrum analyzer must either 
be in a "maximum trace hold" mode, or it must sweep slowly 
enough that at least o ne pulse appears at each position 
across the screen to provide a comp lete spectrum view. 
Without additional frequency processing software, the 
oscilloscope provides only the voltage waveform.  
 www.tektronix.com/radar  9   
Figure 10. RF pulse spectrum (top) an d pulse trace (bottom)  
Transmitter Tests  
Modern radars often generate pulses at an Intermediate 
Frequency (IF) where the processing is easier and then 
convert the IF  frequency to the final CW frequency before 
amplifying it to the necessary high power. When  testing an up -
converter from the IF system, or testing the power amplifier, a 
radar pulse generator is needed in addition to  the pulse 
analyzer.  
There are several solutions available for generating radar 
pulses. Arbitrary Function Generators  (AFGs) , Arbit rary 
Waveform Generators  (AWGs) , and software to create the 
necessary pulses can generate baseband, IF, RF, or 
microwave signals usin g direct synthesis up to 10 GHz and 
higher . Test waveforms can be imported into  the generators, 
synthesized, and  replayed. Signal generation is often required 
in the selection and verification of analog transmitter 
components to test the margin of design and manufacturing 
processes.  
Receiver Tests  
Testing  the receiver  portion  of a radar  system , when  the 
companion transmitter  is not yet available , requires  pulse  
generation  equipment.  However,  verification of receiver 
performance under varying signal conditions  may not be 
possible  using  the companion  transmitter. This requires a 
generator with the capability to add impairments an d 
distortions to generated pulses. Common  impairments  are in-
channel  and out-of-channel  signals and  noise  to test 
desensitization  or blocking. This will verify the limits of receiver 
functionality. A generator of waveforms with arbitrary variation  
of any part of a digitally  created  waveform  fills this need.  
 
 10  www.tektronix.com/radar  
 Contact Information:  
ASEAN / Australia (65) 6356 3900  
Austria  00800  2255 4835  
Balkans, Israel, South Africa and other ISE Countries +41 52 675 3777  
Belgium  00800  2255 4835  
Brazil +55 (11) 3759  76 27 
Canada 1 800 833  9200  
Central East Europe / Baltics +41 52 675  3777  
Central Europe / Greece +41 52 675 3777  
Denmark +45 80 88  1401  
Finland +41 52 675  3777  
France  00800  2255 4835  
Germany  00800  2255 4835  
Hong Kong 400 820 5835  
India 000 800 650  1 835 
Italy  00800  2255 4835  
Japan 81 (3) 6714  3010  
Luxembourg  +41  52  675 3777  
Mexico, Central/South America and Caribbean 52 (55) 56 04 50 90  
Middle East, Asia, and North Africa +41 52 675 3777  
The  Netherlands  00800  2255 4835  
Norway  800 16098  
Peopl e’s Republic of China 400 820 5835  
Poland +41 52 675  3777  
Portugal  80  08 12370  
Republic of Korea 001 800 8255 2835  
Russia / CIS +7 (495) 6647564  
South Africa +41 52 675 3777  
Spain  00800  2255 4835  
Sweden  00800  2255 4835  
Switzerland  00800  2255 4835  
Taiwan 886 (2) 2656 6688  
United Kingdom / Ireland 00800 2255  4835  
USA 1 800 833  9200  
Rev. 01/16  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
WWW.TEK.COM  
 
For Further Information  
Tektronix  maintains  a comprehensive,  constantly  expanding  collection  of application  notes,  technical  briefs  and other  resources  to help engineers  working  on the cutting  edge  of technology. 
Please  visit www.tek.com  
Copyright © 201 7, Tektronix. All rights reserved. Tektronix products are cov ered by U.S. and foreign patents, issued and pending. Information in this publication supersedes that in all 
previously  published  material.  Specification  and price  change  privileges  reserved.  TEKTRONIX  and TEK are registered  trademarks  of Tektronix,  Inc. All other  trade  names  referenced  are 
the service  marks,  trademarks  or registered  trademarks  of their respective  companies.   