 INTRODUCTION TO  RADAR SYSTEMS  Second Edition  Merrill I.
Skolnik  McGRAW-HILL BOOK COMPANY  Auckland Bogotii Guatemala Hamburg Lisbon  London Madrid Mexico New Delhi Panama Paris  San Juan S5o Paulo Singapore Sydney Tokyo  INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS SecondEdition MerrillI.Skolnik McGRAW-HILL BOOKCOMPANY Auckland Bogota Guatemala Hamburg Lisbon London Madrid Mexico NewDelhiPanama Paris SanJuanSaoPauloSingapore Sydney Tokyo INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  International Edition 1981  Exclusive rights by McGraw-Hill Book Co.-- Singapore for  manufacture and export.
This book cannot be re-exported  from the country to which it is consigned by McGraw-Hill.
 Copyright @ 1980,1962 by McGraw-Hill, Inc.
 All rights reserved.
Except as permitted under the United States Copyright  Act of 1976, no part of this publication may be reproduced or distributed in  any form or by any means, or stored in a data base or retrieval system,  without the prior written permission of the publisher.
 This book was set in Times Roman.
 The editor was Frank J.
Cerra.
 The production supervisor was Gayle Angelson.
 Library of Congress Cataloging in Pubilcation Data  Skolnik, Merrill Ivan, date  Introduction to radar systems.
 Includes bibliographical references and index.
 1.
Radar.
I.
Title.
11.
Series.
 TK6575S477 1980 621.3848 79-15354  ISBN 0-07-057909-1  When ordering this title use ISBN 0-07-066572- 9  Printed in Singapore  INTRODUCTION TORADARSYSTEMS International Edition1981 Exclusive rightsbyMcGraw-Hili BookCo.--Singapore for manufacture andexport.Thisbookcannotbere-exported fromthecountlYtowhichitisconsigned byMcGraw-Hill.
Copyright©1980,1962byMcGraw-Hill, Inc.
Allrightsreserved.
Exceptaspermitted undertheUnitedStatesCopyright Actof1976,nopartofthispublication maybereproduced ordistributed in anyformorbyanymeans,orstoredinadatabaseorretrievalsystem, withoutthepriorwrittenpermission ofthepublisher.
I 2 34 5 6 7 89 2 0 BJE9 8 76 54 ThisbookwassetinTimesRoman.
TheeditorwasFrankJ.Cerra.
Theproduction supervisor wasGayleAngelson.
LibraryofCongress Cataloging InPublication Data Skolnik,MerrillIvan,date Introduction toradarsystems.
Includesbibliographical references andindex.
1.Radar.I.Title.II.Series.
TK6575.s477 1980621.3848 79-15354 ISBN0-07-057909-1 Whenordering thistitleuseISBN 0-07-066572~ 9 PrintedinSingapore CONTENTS  Preface  1 The Nature of Radar  1.1 lntroductiorl  1.2 *l'lle Sirnple Fortn of the Kadar Equatiorl  1.3 Radar Hlock Diagram and Operation  1.4 Radar Frequencies  1.5 Radar Dcvcloprnent Prior to World War I1  1.6 Applications of Kadar  References  The Radar Equation  Prediction of Range Performance  Mirlimurn Detectable Signal  Receiver Noise  Probability-density Functions  Signal-to-noise Ratio  Integration of Radar Pulses  Radar Cross Sectiorl of Targets  Cross-section Fluctuations  Transmitter Power  Pulse Repetition Frequency and Range Ambiguities  Antenna ~aramete'rs  System Losses  Propagation Effects  Other Consideratiorls  Refererlces  3 CW and Frequency-Modulated Radar  2.1 Tile Iloppler Effect  3.2 CW Radar  3.3 Frequency-modulated CW Radar  CONTENTS Preface IX 1TheNatureofRadar 1 1.1Introduction 1 1.2TheSimpleFormoftheRadarEquation 3 1.3RadarBlockDiagram andOperation 5 1.4RadarFrequencies 7 1.5RadarDevelopment PriortoWorldWarII 8 1.6Applications ofRadar 12 References 14 2TheRadarEquation 15 2.1Prediction ofRangePerformance 15 2.2Minimum Detectable Signal 16 2.3Receiver Noise 18 2.4Probability-density Functions 20 2.5Signal-to-noise Ratio 23 2.6Integration ofRadarPulses 29 2.7RadarCrossSectionofTargets 33 2.8Cross-section Fluctuations 46 2.9Transmitter Power 52 2.10PulseRepetition Frequency andRangeAmbiguities 53 2.11Antenna Parameters 54 2.12System Losses 56 2.1JPropagation Effects 62 2.14OtherConsiderations 62 References 65 3CWandFrequency-Modulated Radar 68 3.tTheDoppler ElTect 68 3.2CWRadar 70 3.3Frequency-modulated CWRadar 81 Airl>or-ne Doppler Navigation  M ultiple-Frequency CW Radar  References  MTI and Pulse Doppler Radar  Introd~iction  Delay-Line Cancelers  Multiple, or Staggered, Pulse Repetition Freqiirncics  Range-Gated Doppler Filters  Digital Signal Processing  Other MTI Delay Lines  Example of an MTI Radar Processor  Limitations to MTI Performance  Noncoherent MTI  Pulse Doppler Radar  MTI from a Moving Platform  Other Types of MTI  References  Tracking Radar  Tracking with Radar  Sequential Lobing  Conical Scan  Monopulse Tracking Radar  Target-Reflection Characteristics and Angular Accuracy  Tracking in Range  Acquisition  Other Topics  Comparison of Trackers  Tracking with Surveillance Radar  References  Radar Transmitters  Introduction  The Magnetron Oscillator  Klystron Amplifier  Traveling-Wave-Tube Amplifier  Hybrid Linear-Beam Amplifier  Crossed-Field Amplifiers  Grid-Con trolled Tubes  Modulators  Solid-State Transnlitters  References  Radar Antennas  Antenna Parameters  Antenna Radiation Pattern and Aperture Distribution  Parabolic-Reflector Antennas  Scanning-Feed Reflector Antennas  Lens Antennas  \'JCONTENTS 3.4Airhorne Doppler Navigation l)~ 3.5Multiple-Frequency CWRadar LJS Rekrences l)K 4MTIandPulseDoppler Radar 10l 4.1Introduction 10/ 4.2Delay-Line Cancelers 106 4.3Multiple, orStaggered, PulseRepetition Frequencies I14 4.4Range-Gated Doppler Filters 117 4.5DigitalSignalProcessing I19 4.6OtherMTIDelayLines 126 4.7Example ofan MTI RadarProcessor 127 4.HLimitations toMTIPerformance 12L) 4.9Noncoherent MTI DH 4.10PulseDoppler Radar DtJ 4.11MTIfromaMoving Platform 140 4.12OtherTypesofMTI 147 References 14~ 5Tracking Radar 152 5.1Tracking withRadar 152 5.2Sequential Lobing 15.\ 5.3ConicalScan 155 5.4Monopulse Tracking Radar 160 5.5Target-Reflection Characteristics andAngular Accuracy 167 5.6Tracking inRange 176 5.7Acquisition 177 5.ROtherTopics In 5.9Comparison ofTrackers IX:2 5.10Tracking withSurveillance Radar 1~3 References IX6 6RadarTransmitters 190 6.1Introduction 190 6.2TheMagnetron Oscillator 192 6.3Klystron Amplifier 20() 6.4Traveling- Wave-TubeAmplifier 206 6.5HybridLinear-Beam Amplifier lOX 6.6Crossed-Field Amplifiers 20X 6.7Grid-Controlled Tubes 2\.1 (d~Modulators 2/·) 6.9Solid-Slale Transmitters 2III References no 7RadarAntennas 223 7.1Antenna Parameters 221 7.2Antenna Radiation PatternandAperture Distribution 22~ 7.3Parabolic-Reflector Antennas 235 7.4Scanning-Feed Reflector Antennas 244 7.5LensAntennas 24~ CONTENTS vii  7.6 Pattern Sy~~rlicsis  7.7 Cosecarit-Squared Arttenna Pattern  7.8 i:fTccl of Errors on Radiatiot~ Patterns  7.9 Kadomcs  7.10 Stabili7ation of Antcnnas  f~cfcrcrlccs  8 l'lle Electrot~ically Steered Phased  Array At I Radar  I rrl r otlr~ctior~  1t:tsic ('or~ccl>ts  I'I~~~SC.
sl1irlct.s  I,'requc~~cy-Scar1 Arritys  Array Illcnierits  l'cccls for Arrays  Sil~lultarlcous Multil>lc 13ea1lis from Array Ariterllias  Random Errors in Arrays  Computer Control of Phased-Array Radar  Otlicr Array Topics  Applications of the Array in Radar  Advantages arid Limitations  Kcfcrcl~ccs  Receivers, Displays, and Duplexers  The Radar Receiver  Noise Figure  Mixers  Low-Noise Front-Erids  [)is plays  1)uplexers and Receiver Protectors  References  Detectiotl of Radar Signals in Noise  Introductiot~  Matched-Filter Receiver  Correlation Detectiori  Detection Criteria  Detector Cliaracteristics  Performance of the Radar Operator  Automatic Detection  Constant-False-Alarm-Rate (CFAR) Receiver  References  1 1 Extractio~~ of Information and Waveform  Design  11.1 Introduction  11.2 Information Available from a Radar  1 1.3 Theoretical Accuracy of Radar Measurements  1 1.4 Ambiguity Diagram  7.6Pattern Synthesis 7.7Cosecant-Squared Antenna Pattern 7.RFlTectofFrrorsonRadiation Pa\lerns 7.9Radollles 7.10Stabilization ofAntennas References 8TheElectronicaJJy Steered Phased ArrayAntenna inRadar H.I 11111odudion H.2Basicl'onccpts lUPhaseShifters XAhequellcy-Scan Arrays X.5ArrayElemcnts X.6FeedsforAnays X.7Simultaneous Multiple BeamsfromArrayAntennas X.XRandom ErrorsinArrays 8.9Computer Control ofPhased-Array Radar 1\.10OtherArrayTopics 8.11Applications oftheArrayinRadar ~.12Advantages andLimitations Refercnces 9Receivers, Displays, andDuplexers 9.1TheRadarReceiver 9.2NoiseFigure 9.3Mixers 9.4Low-NoiseFront-Ends· 9.5Displays 9.6Duplexers andReceiver Protectors References 10Detection orRadarSignalsInNoise 10.1Introduction 10.2Matched-Filter Receiver 10.3Correlation Detection 10.4Detection Criteria 10.5Detector Characteristics 10.6Performance oftheRadarOperator 10.7Automatic Detection 10.8Constant-False-Alarm-Rate (CFAR) Receiver References 11Extraction ofInformation andWaveform Design 11.1Introduction 11.2Information Available fromaRadar 11.3Theoretical Accuracy ofRadarMeasurements 11.4Ambiguity DiagramCONTENTS vii 254 258 262 264 270 273 278 278279 286 298 305 306 310 318 322 328 334 335 337 343 343 344 347 351 353 359 366 369 369 369 375 376 382 386 388 392 395 399 399 399 400 411 viii CONTENTS  1 1.5 Pulse Compression  11.6 Classification of Targets with Radar  References  Propagation of Radar Waves  Introduction  Propagation over a Plane Earth  The Round Earth  Refraction  Anomalous Propagation  Diffraction  Attenuation by Atmospheric Gases  Environmental Noise  Microwave-Radiation Hazards  References  Radar Clutter  Introduction to Radar Clutter  Surface-Clutter Radar Equations  Sea Clutter  Detection of Targets in Sea Clutter  Land Clutter  Detection of Targets in Land Clutter  Effects of Weather on Radar  Detection of Targets in Precipitation  Angel Echoes  References  Other Radar Topics  Synthetic Aperture Radar  HF Over-the-Horizon Radar  Air-Surveillance Radar  Height-Finder and 3D Radars  Electronic Counter-Countermeasures  Bistatic Radar  Millimeter Waves and Beyond  References  Index  viiiCONTENTS 11.5PulseCompression 420 11.6Classification ofTargets withRadar 434 References 438 12Propagation ofRadarWaves 441 12.1Introduction 441 \2.2Propagation overaPlaneEarth 442 12.3TheRoundEarth 446 12.4Refraction 447 12.5Anomalous Propagation 450 12.6Diffraction 456 12.7Attenuation byAtmospheric Gases 459 12.8Environmental Noise 461 12.9Microwave-Radiation Hazards 465 References 466 13RadarClutter 470 13.1Introduction toRadarClutter 470 13.2Surface-,Clutter RadarEquations 471 13.3SeaClutter 474 13.4Detection ofTargetsinSeaClutter 482 13.5LandClutter 489 13.6Detection ofTargets inLandClutter 497 13.7EffectsofWeather onRadar 498 13.8Detection ofTargetsinPrecipitation 504 13.9AngelEchoes 508 References, 512 14OtherRadarTopics 517 14.1Synthetic Aperture Radar 517 14.2HFOver-the-Horizon Radar 529 14.3Air-Surveillance Radar 536 14.4Height-Finder and3DRadars 541 14.5Electronic Counter-Countermeasures 547 14.6BistaticRadar 553 14.7Millimeter WavesandBeyond 560 References 566 Index 571 PREFACE  Although tlie fundamentals of radar have changed little since the publication of the first  edition, there has been continual development of new radar capabilities and continual im-  provements to the technology and practice of radar.
This growth has necessitated extensive  revisions arid tlie introduction of topics not found in the original.
 One of the major changes is in the treatment of MTI (moving target indication) radar  (Chap.
4).
Most of the basic MTI concepts Gat have been added were known at the time of tlie  first edition, but they had not appeared in the open literature nor were they widely used i11  practice.
Inclusion in the first edition would have'been largely academic since the analog  delay-line technology available at that time did not make it practical to build the sophisticated  signal processors that were theoretically possible.
However, subsequent advances in digital  technology, originally developed for applications other than radar, have allowed the practical  implementation of the multiple delay-line cancelers and multiple pulse-repetition-frequency  MTI radars indicated by the basic MTI theory.
 Automatic detection and tracking, or ADT (Secs.
5.10 and 10.7).
is another important  evelopment whose basic theory was known for some time, but whose practical realization  ad to await advances in digital technology.
The principle of ADT was demonstrated in the  early 1950s.
using vacuum-tube technology, as part .of the United States Air Force's SAGE  air-defense system developed by MIT Lincoln Laboratory.
In this form ADT was physically  large, expensive, and difficult to maintain.
The commercial availability in the late 1960s of the  solid-slate minicomputer, however, permitted ADT to be relatively inexpensive, reliable, and  of sniall size so that it can be used with almost any surveillance radar that requires it.
 Anotl\cr radar area that has seen much development is that of the electronically steered  ptiased-array antenna.
In tlie first edition, the radar antenna was the subject of a single  cliaptcr.
I11 tliis edition, one chapter covers the conventional radar antenna (Chap.
7) and a  separate chapter covers the phased-array antenna (Chap.
8).
Devoting a single chapter to the  array antenria is inore a reflection of interest rather than recognition of extensive application.
 The chapter o~i radar clutter (Ctiap.
13) has been reorganized to include methods for the  detection of targets in the presence of clutter.
Generally, the design techniques necessary for  ttie detection of targets in a clutter, background are considerably different from.those necessary  for detection in a noise background.
Other subjects that are new or which have seen significant  cliaiiges in the current edition include low-angle tracking, " on-axis" tracking, solid-state RF  ources, the mirror-scan antet~na, antenna stabilization, computer control of phased arrays,  olid-state duplexers, CFAR, pulse compression, target classification, synthetic-aperture radar,  ver-the-horizon radar, air-surveillance radar, height-finder and 3D radar, and ECCM.
The  bistatic radar and millimeter-wave radar are also included even though their applications have  PREFACE Although thefundamentals ofradarhavechanged littlesincethepublication ofthefirst edition.
therehasbeencontinual development ofnewradarcapabilities andcontinual im­ provements tothetechnology andpracticeofradar.Thisgrowthhasnecessitated extensive revisions andtheintroduction oftopicsnotfoundintheoriginal.
Oneofthemajorchanges isinthetreatment ofMTI(moving targetindication) radar (Chap.4).MostofthebasicMTIconcepts thathavebeenaddedwereknownatthetimeofthe firstedition, butlheyhadnotappeared intheopenliterature norweretheywidelyusedin practice.
Inclusion inthefirsteditionwouldhave'been largelyacademic sincetheanalog delay-line technology available atthattimedidnotmakeitpractical tobuildthesophisticated signalprocessors thatweretheoretically possible.
However, subsequent advances indigital lechnology, originally developed forapplications otherthanradar,haveallowedthepractical implementation ofthemultiple delay-line cancelers andmultiple pulse-repetition-frequency MTIradarsindicated bythebasicMTItheory.
Automatic detection andtracking, orADT(Sees.5)0and10.7),isanother important development whosebasictheorywasknownforsometime,butwhosepractical realization iladtoawaitadvances indigitaltechnology.
Theprinciple ofADTwasdemonstrated inthe early1950s,usingvacuum-tube technology, aspart'oftheUnitedStatesAirForce'sSAGE air-defense systemdeveloped byMITLincoln Laporatory.
InthisformADTwasphysically large,expensive, anddifficult tomaintain.
Thecommercial availability inthelate1960softhe solid-slate minicomputer, however, permitted ADTtoberelatively inexpensive, reliable, and ofsmallsizesothatitcanbeusedwithalmostanysurveillance radarthatrequires it.
Another radarareathathasseenmuchdevelopment isthatoftheelectronically steered phased-array antenna.
Inthefirstedition, theradarantenna wasthesubjectofasingle chapter.
Inthisedition,onechaptercoverstheconventional radarantenna (Chap.7)anda separate chaptercoversthephased-array antenna (Chap.8).Devoting asinglechaptertothe arrayantenna ismorearellection ofinterestratherthanrecognition ofextensive application.
Thechapteronradarclutter(Chap.13)hasbeenreorganized toincludemethods forthe detection oftargetsinthepresence ofclutter.Generally, thedesigntechniques necessary for thedetection oftargetsinaclutter'background areconsiderably different from'those necessary fordetection inanoisebackground.
Othersubjects thatareneworwhichhaveseensignificant changes inthecurrenteditionincludelow-angle tracking, "on-axis" tracking, solid-state RF sources, themirror-scan antenna, antenna stabilization, computer controlofphasedarrays, )Olid-state duplexers, CFAR,pulsecompression, targetclassification, synthetic-aperture radar, over-the-horizon radar,air-surveillance radar,height-finder and3Dradar,andECCM.The bistaticradarandmillimeter-wave radararealsoincluded eventhoughtheirapplications have X PREFACE  been limited.
Omitted from this second edition is the chapter on Radar Astronomy since  interest in this sub.ject has dccrcascti with tltc i~vi~ilithility of space prolws tlliil cilll explore ttlc  planets at close range.
The basic material of the first edition that covers the radar equation,  the detection of signals in noise, the extraction of information, and the propagation of radar  waves has not changed significantly.
The reader, ttowcvcl., wilt find only a fcw pagcs of  the original edition that have not been modified in some manner.
 One of the features of the first edition which Ilas hcen contintled is the inclt~sion of  extensive references at the end of each chapter.
These are provided to acknowlcdgc the sources  of material used in the preparation of the book, as well as to permit the interested reader to  learn more about some particular subject.
Some references that appeared in the first edition  have been omitted since they have been replaced by more current references or appear in  publications that are increasingly difficult to find.
The references included in the first edition  represented a large fraction of those available at the time.
It woilld have been difficult to add to  them extensively or to include many additional topics.
This is not so with the second edition.
 The current literature is quite large; and, because of the limitations of.space, only a milch  smaller proportion of what is available could be cited.
 In addition to changes in radar technology, there have been changes also in style and  nomenclature.
For example, db has been changed to dB, and Mc is replaced by Mi i~.
Also, t he  letter-band nomenclature widely employed by the radar engineer for designating the common  radar frequency bands (such as L, S, and X) has been officially adopted as a standard by the  IEEE.
 The material in this book has been used as the basis for a graduate course in radar taught  by the author at the Johns Hopkins .University Evening College and, before that, at several  other institutions.
This course is different from those usually found in most graduate electrical  engineering programs.
Typical EE courses cover topics related to circuits, components, de-  vices, and techniques that might make up an electrical or electronic system; but seldom is the  student exposed to the system itself.
It is the system application (whether radar, communica-  tions, navigation, control, information processing, or energy) that is the raison d'itre for the  electrical engineer.
The course on which this book is based is a proven method for introducing  the student to the subject of electronic systems.
It integrates and applies the basic concepts  found in the student's other courses and permits the inclusion of material important to  the practice of electrical engineering not usually found in the traditional curriculum.
 Instructors of engineering courses like to use texts that contain a variety of problems that  can be assigned to students.
Problems are not included in this book.
Althoirgh the author  assigns problems when using this book as a text, they are not considered a major learning  technique.
Instead, the comprehensive term paper, usually involving a radar design problem or  a study in depth of some particular radar technology, has been found to be a better means for  having the student reinforce what is covered in class and in the text.
Even more important, it  allows the student to research the literature and to be a bit more creative than is possible by  simply solving standard problems.
 A book of this type which covers a wide variety of topics cannot be written in isolation.
It  would not have been possible,without'the many contributions on radar that have appeared in  the open literature and which have been used here as the basic source -material.
A large  measure of gratitude must be expressed to those radar engineers who have taken the time anci  energy to ensure that the results :of their work were made available by publication ill  recognized journals.
I.
 On a more personal note, neither edition of this book could have been written without the  complete support and patience of my wife Judith and my entire family who allowed me tllc  time necessary to undertake this work.
 Merrill 1.
Skolrlik  xPREFACE beenlimited.
Omitted fromthissecondedition isthechapter onRadarAstronomy since interestinthissubjecthasdecreased withtheavailability ofspaceprobesthatcallexplorethe planetsatcloserange.Thebasicmaterial ofthefirsteditionthatcoverstheradarequation, thedetection ofsignalsinnoise,theextraction ofinformation, andthepropagation ofradar waveshasnotchanged significantly.
Thereader,however, willfindonlyafewpagesof theoriginal editionthathavenotbeenmodified insomemanner.
Oneofthefeatures ofthefirsteditionwhichhasbeencontinued istheinclusion of extensive references attheendofeachchapter.
Theseareprovided toacknowledge thesources ofmaterial usedinthepreparation ofthebook,aswellastopermittheinterested readerto learnmoreaboutsomeparticular subject.Somereferences thatappeared inthefirstedition havebeenomitted sincetheyhavebeenreplaced bymorecurrent references orappearin publications thatareincreasingly difficult tofind.Thereferences included inthefirstedition represented alargefractionofthoseavailable atthetime.Itwouldhavebeendifficulttoaddto themextensively ortoincludemanyadditional topics.Thisisnotsowiththesecondedition.
Thecurrentliterature isquitelarge;and,becauseofthelimitations ofspace,onlyamuch smallerproportion ofwhatisavailable couldbecited.
Inaddition tochanges inradartechnology, therchavebeenchanges alsoinstyleand nomenclature.
Forexample, dbhasbeenchanged todB,andMcisreplaced byMIlL.AIso,the letter-band nomenclature widelyemployed bytheradarengineer fordesignating thecommon radarfrequency bands(suchasL,S,andX)hasbeenofficially adopted asastandard bythe IEEE.
Thematerial inthisbookhasbeenusedasthebasisforagraduate courseinradartaught bytheauthorattheJohnsHopkins 'University Evening College and,beforethat,atseveral otherinstitutions.
Thiscourseisdifferent fromthoseusuallyfoundinmostgraduate electrical engineering programs.
Typical EEcourses covertopicsrelatedtocircuits, components, de­ vices,andtechniques thatmightmakeupanelectrical orelectronic system;butseldomisthe studentexposed tothesystemitself.Itisthesystemapplication (whether radar,communica­ tions,navigation, control, information processing, orenergy)thatistheraisond'ctreforthe electrical engineer.
Thecourseonwhichthisbookisbasedisaprovenmethodforintroducing thestudent tothesubjectofelectronic systems.Itintegrates andappliesthebasicconcepts foundinthestudent's othercourses andpermits theinclusion ofmaterial important to thepractice ofelectrical engineering notusuallyfoundinthetraditional curriculum.
Instructors ofengineering coursesliketousetextsth3;tcontainavarietyofproblems that canbeassigned tostudents.
Problems arenotincluded inthisbook.Although theauthor assignsproblems whenusingthisbookasatext,theyarenotconsidered amajorlearning technique.
Instead,thecomprehensive termpaper,usuallyinvolving aradardesignproblem or astudyindepthofsomeparticular radartechnology, hasbeenfoundtobeabcttermeansfor havingthestudentreinforce whatiscovered inclassandinthetext.Evenmoreimportant, it allowsthestudenttoresearch theliterature andtobeabitmorecreative thanispossible by simplysolvingstandard problems.
Abookofthistypewhichcoversawidevarietyoftopicscannotbewritteninisolation.
It wouldnothavebeenpossiblewithoutthe manycontributions onradarthathaveappeared in theopenliterature andwhichhavebeenusedhereasthebasicsource·material.
Alarge measure ofgratitude mustbeexpressed tothoseradarengineers whohavetakenthetimeand energytoensurethattheresults,oftheirworkweremadeavailable bypuhlication in recognized journals.
'.
Onamorepersonal note,neithereditionofthisbookcouldhavebeenwrittenwithout th~ complete support andpatience ofmywifeJudithandmyentirefamilywhoallowed methe timenecessary toundertake thiswork.
MerrillI.Skolnik CHAPTER  ONE  THE NATURE RADAR  1.1 INTRODUCTION  Radar is an electromagnetic system for the detection and location of objects.
It operates by  transmitting a particular type of waveform, a pulse-modulated sine wave for example, and  detects the nature of the echo signal.
Radar is used to extend the capability of one's senses for  observing the environment, especially the sense of vision.
The value of radar lies not in being a  si~hstitute for the eye, but in doing what the eye cannot do-Radar cannot resolve detail as well  the eye, nor is it capable of recognizing the "color" of objects to the degree of sophistication  which the eye is capable.
However, radar can be designed to see through those conditions  irnpervioris to normal human vision, such as darkness, haze, fog, rain, and snow.
In addition,  radar has the advantage of being able to measure the distance or range to the object.
This is  probably its most important attribute.
 An elementary form of radar consists of a transmitting antenna emitting electromagnetic  radiation generated by an oscilIator of some sort, a receiving antenna, and an energy-detecting  device.
or receiver.
A portion of the transmitted signal is intercepted by a reflecting object  (target) and is reradiated in all directions.
1.t is the energy reradiated in the back direction that  is of prime interest to the radar.
The receiving antenna collects the returned energy and  delivers it to a receiver, where it is processed to detect the presence of the target and to extract  its location and relative velocity.
The distance to the target is determined by measuring the  time taken for the radar signal to travel to the target and back.
The direction, or angular  position, of the target may be determined from the direction of arrival of the reflected wave-  front.
The usual method of measuring the direction of arrival is with narrow antenna beams.
If  relative motion exists between target and radar, the shift in the carrier frequency of the  reflected wave (doppler effect) is a measure of the target's relative (radial) velocity and may be  used to distinguish moving targets from stationary objects.
In radars which continuously track  the movement of a target, a continuous indication of the rate of change of target position is  also available.
 1  CHAPTER ONE THENATURE OFRADAR 1.1INTRODUCTION Radarisanelectromagnetic systemforthedetection andlocation ofobjects.Itoperates by transmitting aparticular typeofwaveform, apulse-modulated sinewaveforexample, and detectsthenatureoftheechosignal.Radarisusedtoextendthecapability ofone'ssensesfor observing theenvironment, especially thesenseofvision.Thevalueofradarliesnotinbeinga substitute fortheeye,butindoingwhattheeyecannotdo...Radarcannotresolvedetailaswell astheeye,norisitcapableofrecognizing the"color"ofobjectstothedegreeofsophistication ofwhichtheeyeiscapable.
However, radarcanbedesigned toseethrough thoseconditions impervious tonormalhumanvision,suchasdarkness, haze,fog,rairi,andsnow.Inaddition, radarhastheadvantage ofbeingabletomeasure thedistance orrangetotheobject.Thisis probably itsmostimportant attribute.
Anelementary formofradarconsistsofatransmitting antenna emitting electromagnetic radiation generated byanoscillator ofsomesort,areceiving antenna, ~ndanenergy-detecting device,orreceiver.
Aportionofthetransmitted signalisintercepted byareRecting object (target)andisreradiated inalldirections.
I.tistheenergyreradiated inthebackdirection that isofprimeinterest totheradar.Thereceiving antenna collects thereturned energyand delivers ittoareceiver, whereitisprocessed todetectthepresence ofthetargetandtoextract itslocation andrelativevelocity.
Thedistance tothetargetisdetermined bymeasuring the timetakenfortheradarsignaltotraveltothetargetandback.Thedirection, orangular position, ofthetargetmaybedetermined fromthedirection ofarrivalofthereflected wave­ front.Theusualmethodofmeasuring thedirection ofarrivaliswithnarrowantenna beams.If relative motion existsbetween targetandradar,theshiftinthecarrierfrequency ofthe reflected wave(doppler elTect)isameasure ofthetarget'srelative(radial)velocityandmaybe usedtodistinguish movingtargetsfromstationary objects.Inradarswhichcontinuously track themovement ofatarget,acontinuous indication oftherateofchangeoftargetposition is alsoavailable. 2 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  The name radar reflects the emphasis placed by the early experimenters on a device to  detect the presence of a target and measure its range.
Radar is a contraction of the words radio  detection and ranging.
It was first developed as a detection device to warn of the approach of  hostile aircraft and for directing antiaircraft weapons.
Although a well-designed modern radar  can usually extract more information from the target signal than merely range, the measure-  ment of range is still one of radar's most important functions.
There seem to be no other  competitive techniques which can measure range as well or as rapidly as can a radar.
 The most common radar waveform is a train of narrow, rectangular-shape pulses modu-  lating a sinewave carrier.
The distance, or range, to the target is determined by measuring the  time TR taken by the pulse to travel to the target and return.
Since electromagnetic energy  propagates at the speed of light c = 3 x 10' m/s, the range R is  The factor 2 appears in the denominator because of the two-way propagation of radar.
With  the range in kilometers or nautical miles, and TR in microseconds, Eq.
(1.1) becomes  Each microsecond of round-trip travel time corresponds to a distance of 0.081 nautical mile,  0.093 statute mile, 150 meters, 164 yards, or 492.
feet.
 Once the transmitted pulse is emitted by the radar, a sufficient length of time must elapse  to allow any echo signals to return and be detected before the next pulse may be transmitted.
 Therefore the rate at which the pulses may be transmitted is determined by the longest range at  which targets are expected.
If the pulse repetition frequency is too high, echo signals from some  targets might arrive after the transmission of the next pulse, and ambiguities in measuring  I I .
.
.
 Pulse repetition' frequency, Hz  Figure 1.1 Plot of maximum unambiguous range as a function of the pulse repetition frequency.
 (1.1)2INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS Thenameradarreflectstheemphasis placedbytheearlyexperimenters onadeviceto detectthepresence ofatargetandmeasure itsrange.Radarisacontraction ofthewordsradio detection andranging.Itwasfirstdeveloped asadetection devicetowarnoftheapproach of hostileaircraftandfordirecting antiaircraft weapons.
Although awell-designed modernradar canusuallyextractmoreinformation fromthetargetsignalthanmerelyrange, the measure­ mentofrangeisstilloneofradar'smostimportant functions.
Thereseemtobenoother competitive techniques whichcanmeasure rangeaswellorasrapidlyascanaradar.
Themostcommon radarwaveform isatrainofnarrow, rectangular-shape pulsesmodu­ latingasinewave carrier.Thedistance, orrange,tothetargetisdetermined bymeasuring the timeTRtakenbythepulsetotraveltothetargetandreturn.Sinceelectromagnetic energy propagates atthespeedoflighte=3 x108mis,therangeRis R=eTR 2 Thefactor2appears inthedenominator becauseofthetwo-way propagation ofradar.With therangeinkilometers ornautical miles,andTRinmicroseconds, Eq.(1.1)becomes' or Eachmicrosecond ofround-trip traveltimecorresponds toadistance of0.081nautical mile, 0.093statutemile,150meters,164yards,or492·feet.
Oncethetransmitted pulseisemittedbytheradar,asufficient lengthoftimemustelapse toallowanyechosignalstoreturnandbedetected beforethenextpulsemaybetransmitted.
Therefore therateatwhichthepulsesmaybetransmitted isdetermined bythelongestrangeat whichtargetsareexpected.Ifthepulserepetition frequency istoohigh,echosignalsfromsome targetsmightarriveafterthetransmission ofthenextpulse,andambiguities inmeasuring ! III ~ E 0u1,000:;: ::l 0c: .u 0>c: 0<- III ::l 0 ::l 0>100'.0 E 0c: :J 10L-_l...-..I..-I-1...J....1-U-L_-.J..---L--1-....L....L..l...L.J'-'--_...1.--4-~ ...................
10 100 1,000 Pulserepetition' frequency, Hz Figure1.1Plotofmaximum unambiguous rangeasafunction ofthepulserepetition frequency. THE NATURE OF RADAR 3  range might result.
Echoes that arrive after the transmission of the next pulse are called  secorrd-tinte-arotrrtd (or multiple-time-around) echoes.
Such an echo would appear to be at a  much shorter range than the actual and could be misleading if it were not known to be a  second-time-around echo.
The range beyond which targets appear as second-time-around  echoes is called the rna.uintttrn trr~arnhigtrous rattge and is  where./, = pulse repetition frequency, in Hz.
A plot of the maximum unambiguous range as a  function of pulse repetition frequency is shown in Fig.
1.1.
 Although the typical radar transmits a simple pulse-modulated waveform, there are a  number of other suitable modulations that might be used.
The pulse carrier might be  frequency- or phase-modulated to permit the echo signals to be compressed in time after  reception.
This achieves the benefits of high range-resolution without the need to resort to a  .
short pulse.
The technique of using a long, modulated pulse to obtain the resolution of a short  pulse, but with the energy of a long pulse, is known as pulse compression.
Continuous  waveforms (CW) also can be used by taking advantage of the doppler frequency shift to  separate the received echo from the transmitted signal and the echoes from stationary clutter.
 Unmodulated CW waveforms do not measure range, but a range measurement can be made  by applying either frequency- or phase-modulation.
 1.2 THE SIMPLE FORM OF THE RADAR EQUATION  The radar equation relates the range of a radar to the characteristics of the transmitter,  receiver, antenna, target, and environment.
It is useful not just as a means for determining the  maximum distance from the radar to the target, but it can serve both as a tool for under-  standing radar operation and as a basis for radar design.
In this section, the simple form of  the radar equation is derived.
 If the power of the radar transmitter is denoted by P,, and if an isotropic antenna  is used (one which radiates uniformly in all directions), the power density (watts per unit area)  at a distance R from the radar is equal to the transmitter power divided by the surface area  4nR2 of an imaginary sphere of rapius R, or  pt Power density from isotropic antenna = - 4nR2  Radars employ directive antennas to channel, or direct, the radiated power Pt into some  particular direction.
The gain G of an antenna is a measure of the increased power radiated in  the direction of the target as compared with the power that would have been radiated from an  isotropic antenna.
It may be defined as the ratio of the maximum radiation intensity from the  subject antenna to the radiation intensity from a lossless, isotropic antenna with the same  power input.
(The radiation intensity is the power radiated per unit solid angle in a given  direction.) The power density at the target from an antenna with a transmitting gain G is  Pt G Power density from directive antenna = - 4nR2  The target intercepts a portion of the incident power and reradiates it in vqrious directions.
 THENATURE OFRADAR3 rangemightresult.Echoesthatarriveafterthetransmission ofthenextpulsearecalled second-time-arOlmd (ormultiple-time-around) echoes.Suchanechowouldappeartobeata muchshorterrangethantheactualandcouldbemisleading ifitwerenotknowntobea second-time-around echo.Therangebeyondwhichtargetsappearassecond-time-around echoesiscalledthemaximum unambiguous rangeandis c Runamb=2fp (1.2) wherefp=pulserepetition frequency, inHz.Aplotofthemaximum unambiguous rangeasa function ofpulserepetition frequency isshowninFig.1.1.
Although thetypicalradartransmits asimplepulse-modulated waveform, therearea number ofothersuitable modulations thatmightbeused.Thepulsecarriermightbe frequency- orphase-modulated topermittheechosignalstobecompressed intimeafter reception.
Thisachieves thebenefitsofhighrange-resolution withouttheneedtoresorttoa shortpulse.Thetechnique ofusingalong,modulated pulsetoobtaintheresolution ofashort pulse,butwiththeenergyofalongpulse,isknownaspulsecompression.
Continuous waveforms (CW)alsocanbeusedbytakingadvantage ofthedoppler frequency shiftto separate thereceived echofromthetransmitted signalandtheechoesfromstationary clutter.
Unmodulated CWwaveforms donotmeasure range,butarangemeasurement canbemade byapplying eitherfrequency- orphase-modulation.
1.2THESIMPLE FORMOFTHERADAR EQUATION Theradarequation relatestherangeofaradartothecharacteristics ofthetransmitter, receiver.
antenna, target,andenvironment.
Itisusefulnotjustasameansfordetermining the maximum distance fromtheradartothetarget,butitcanservebothasatoolforunder­ standing radaroperation andasabasisforradardesign.Inthissection,thesimpleformof theradarequation isderived.
Ifthepoweroftheradartransmitter isdenoted byP"andifanisotropic antenna isused(onewhichradiates uniformly inalldirections), thepowerdensity(wattsperunitarea) atadistance Rfromtheradarisequaltothetransmitter powerdividedbythesurfacearea 4n:R2ofanimaginary sphereofradiusR,or I Powerdensityfromisotropic antenna=4P,2n:R(1.3) Radarsemploydirective antennas tochannel, ordirect,theradiated powerP,intosome particular direction.
ThegainGofanantenna isameasure oftheincreased powerradiated in thedirection ofthetargetascompared withthepowerthatwouldhavebeenradiated froman isotropic antenna.Itmaybedefinedastheratioofthemaximum radiation intensity fromthe subjectantenna totheradiation intensity fromalossless,isotropic antenna withthesame powerinput.(Theradiation intensity isthepowerradiated perunitsolidangleinagiven direction.) Thepowerdensityatthetargetfromanantenna withatransmitting gainGis Powerdensityfromdirective antenna=:::~2 (1.4) Thetargetintercepts aportionoftheincident powerandreradiates itinv~riousdirections. 4 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  The measure of the amount of incident power intercepted by the target and reradiated back in  the direction of the radar is denoted as the radar cross section a, and is defined by the relation  P,G a Power density of echo signal at radar = ---- - 4nR2 4nR2  The radar cross section a has units of area.
It is a characteristic of the particular target and is a  measure of its size as seen by the radar.
The radar antenna captures a portion of the echo  power.
If the effective area of the receiving antenna is denoted A., the power P, received by the  radar is  The maximum radar range Rmax is the distance beyond which the target cannot be detected.
It  occurs when the received echo signal power P, just equals the minimum detectable signal S,,, .
 Therefore 1  This is the fundamental form of the radar equation.
Note that the important antenna par-  ameters are the transmitting gain and the receiving effective area.
 Antenna theory gives the relationship between the transmitting gain and the receiving  effective area of an antenna as  Since radars generally use the same antenna for both transmission and reception, Eq.
(1.8) can  be substituted into Eq.
(1.7), first for A, then for G, to give two other forms of the radar  equation  These three forms (Eqs.
1.7, 1.9, and 1.10) illustrate the need to be careful in the inter-  pretation of the radar equation.
For example, from Eq.
(1.9) it might be thought that the range  of a radar varies as All2, but Eq.
(1.10) indicates a 1-'12 relationship, and Eq.
(1.7) shows the  range to be independent of 1.
The correct relationship depends on whether it is assumed the  gain is constant or the effective area is constant with wavelength.
Furthermore, the introduc-  tion of other constraints, such as the requirement to scan a specified volume in a given time,  can yield a different wavelength dependence.
 These simplified versions of the radar equation do not adequately describe the perfor-  mance of practical radar.
Many important factors that affect range are not explicitly included.
 In practice, the observed maximum radar ranges are usually much smaller than what would be  predicted by the above equations, sometimes by as much as a factor of two.
There are many  reasons for the failure of the simple radar equation to correlate with actual performance, as  discussed in Chap.
2.
_ , 9, 11 ' .
 4INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS Themeasure oftheamountofincident powerintercepted bythetargetandreradiated backin thedirection oftheradarisdenoted astheradarcrosssection (J,andisdefinedbytherelation Powerdensityofechosignalatradar=P,G2~4rrR4n:R(1.5) Theradarcrosssection (Jhasunitsofarea.Itisacharacteristic oftheparticular targetandisa measure ofitssizeasseenbytheradar.Theradarantenna captures aportionoftheecho power.Iftheeffective areaofthereceiving antenna isdenoted A",thepowerP,received bythe radaris (1.6) Themaximum radarrangeRmaxisthedistance beyondwhichthetargetcannotbedetected.It occurswhenthereceived echosignalpowerP,justequalstheminimum detectable signalSmin' Therefore [PGA(J]1/4 Rmax=(4~)2S:in(1.7) Thisisthefundamental formoftheradarequation.
Notethattheimportant antenna par~ ametersarethetransmitting gainandthereceiving effective area.
Antenna theorygivestherelationship between thetransmitting gainandthereceiving effective areaofanantenna as (1.8) Sinceradarsgenerally usethesameantennaforbothtransmission andreception, Eq.(1.8)can besubstituted intoEq.(1.7),'firstforAethenforG,togivetwootherformsoftheradar equation Rmax=[PIG:A2 (Jr/4 (1.9)(4n:)Smin Rmax=[P,A;O']1/4(1.10) 4rrA.2Smln Thesethreeforms(Eqs.·1.7, 1.9,and1.10)illustrate theneedtobecarefulintheinter­ pretation oftheradarequation.
Forexample, fromEq.(1.9)itmightbethoughtthattherange ofaradarvariesasA.1/2,butEq.(1.10)indicates aA.-1/2relationship, andEq.(1.7)showsthe rangetobeindependent ofA..Thecorrectrelationship depends onwhether itisassumed the gainisconstant ortheeffective areaisconstant withwavelength.
Furthermore, theintroduc~ tionofotherconstraints, suchastherequirement toscanaspecified volumeinagiventime, canyieldadifferent wavelength dependence.
Thesesimplified versions ofthe.radarequation donotadequately describe theperfor­ manceofpractical radar.Manyimportant factorsthataffectrangearenotexplicitly included.
Inpractice, theobserved maximum radarrangesareusuallymuchsmallerthanwhatwouldbe predicted bytheaboveequations, sometimes byasmuchasafactoroftwo.Therearemany reasonsforthe'failureofthesimpleradarequation tocorrelate withactualperformance, as discussed inChap.2..
.......·. THE NATURE OF RADAR 5  1.3 RADAR BLOCK DIAGRAM AND OPERATION  Ttle operation of a typical pulse radar may be described with the aid of the block diagram  shown in Fig.
1.2.
Tlle transtnitter may be an oscillator, such as a magnetron, that is " pulsed"  (turned on and on) by the rnodulator to generate a repetitive train of pulses.
The magnetron  has prohnhly been the most widely used of the various microwave generators for radar.
A  typicrtl radar for tile dctcction of aircraft at ranges of 100 or 200 nmi might employ a peak  power of the order of a megawatt, an average power of several kilowatts, a pulse width of  several microseconds, and a pulse repetition frequency of several hundred pulses per second.
 The waveform generated by the transmitter travels via a transmission line to the antenna,  where it is radiated into space.
A single antenna is generally used for both transmitting and  receiving.
The receiver must be protected from damage caused by the high power of the  transmitter.
This is the function of the duplexer.
The duplexer also serves to channel the  returned echo signals to the receiver and not to the transmitter.
The duplexer might consist of  two gas-discharge devices, one known as a TR (transmit-receive) and the other an ATR  (anti-transmit-receive).
The TR protects the receiver during transmission and the ATR directs  the echo signal to the receiver during reception.
Solid-state ferrite circulators and receiver  protectors with gas-plasma TR devices and/or diode limiters are also employed as duplexers.
 The receiver is usually of the superheterodyne type.
The first stage might be a low-noise  RF amplifier, such as a parametric amplifier or a low-noise transistor.
However, it is not  always desirable to employ a low-noise first stage in radar.
The receiver input can simply be  the mixer stage, especially in military radars that must operate in a noisy environment.
 Although a receiver with a low-noise front-end will be more sensitive, the mixer input can  have greater dynamic range, less susceptibility to overload, and less vulnerability to electronic  interference.
 The mixer and local oscillator (LO) convert the RF signal to an intermediate frequency  (IF).
A " typical" IF amplifier for an air-surveillance radar might have a center frequency of 30  or 60 MHz and a bandwidth of the order of one megahertz.
The IF amplifier should be  designed as a n~atclted filter; i.e., its frequency-response function H(f) should maximize the  peak-sigtial-to-mean-noise-power ratio at the output.
This occurs when the magnitude of the  frequency-response function 1 H(f)( is equal to the magnitude of the echo signal spectrum  I S(.f') 1, and the phase spectrum of the matched filter is the negative of the phase spectrum of  the echo signal (Sec.
10.2).
In a radar whose signal waveform approximates a rectangular  pulse, the conventional IF filter bandpass characteristic approximates a matched filter when  the product of the IF bandwidth B and the pulse width r is of the order of unity, that is, Bt - 1.
 After maximizing the signal-to-noise ratio in the IF amplifier, the pulse modulation is  extracted by the second detector acd amplified by the video amplifier to a level where it can be  Tronsrnitler Pulse  modulalor  4  Low - noise  R F Mixer  amplifier I ..
 Figure 1.2 Block diagram of a pulse radar.
 THENATURE OFRADARS 1.3RADAR BLOCK DIAGRAM ANDOPERATION Theoperation ofatypicalpulseradarmaybedescribed withtheaidoftheblockdiagram showninFig.1.2.Thetransmitter maybeanoscillator.
suchasamagnetron.
thatis"pulsed" (turnedonandoff)bythemodulator togenerate arepetitive trainofpulses.Themagnetron hasprohahly heenthemostwidelyusedofthevariousmicrowave generators forradar.A typicalradarforthedetection ofaircraftatrangesof100or200nmimightemployapeak poweroftheorderofamegawatt.
anaverage powerofseveralkilowatts, apulsewidthof severalmicroseconds.
andapulserepetition frequency ofseveralhundred pulsespersecond.
Thewaveform generated bythetransmitter travelsviaatransmission linetotheantenna.
whereitisradiated intospace.Asingleantenna isgenerally usedforbothtransmitting and receiving.
Thereceiver mustbepro~ected fromdamage causedbythehighpowerofthe transmitter.
Thisisthefunction oftheduplexer.
Theduplexer alsoservestochannel the returned echosignalstothereceiverandnottothetransmitter.
Theduplexer mightconsistof twogas-discharge devices.
oneknownasaTR(transmit-receive) andtheotheranATR (anti-transmit-receive).
TheTRprotects thereceiverduringtransmission andtheATRdirects theechosignaltothereceiver duringreception.
Solid-state ferritecirculators andreceiver protectors withgas-plasma TRdevicesand/ordiodelimitersarealsoemployed asduplexers.
Thereceiver isusuallyofthesuperheterodyne type.Thefirststagemightbealow-noise RFamplifier.
suchasaparametric amplifier oralow-noise transistor.
However.
itisnot alwaysdesirable toemployalow-noise firststageinradar.Thereceiverinputcansimplybe themixerstage.especially inmilitary radarsthatmustoperate inanoisyenvironment.
Although areceiver withalow-noise front-end willbemoresensitive, themixerinputcan havegreaterdynamic range.lesssusceptibility tooverload, andlessvulnerability toelectronic interference.
Themixerandlocaloscillator (LO)converttheRFsignaltoanintermediate frequency (IF)./\"typical" IFamplifier foranair-surveillance radarmighthaveacenterfrequency of30 or60MHzandabandwidth oftheorderofonemegahertz.
TheIFamplifier shouldbe designed asamatc/tedfilter;i.e.,itsfrequency-response functionH(f)shouldmaximize the peak-signal-to-mean-noise-power ratioattheoutput.Thisoccurswhenthemagnitude ofthe frequency-response function [H(f)Iisequaltothemagnitude oftheechosignalspectrum IS(f)I.andthephasespectrum ofthematched filteristhenegative ofthephasespectrum of theechosignal(Sec.10.2).Inaradarwhosesignalwaveform approximates arectangular pulse.theconventional IFfilterbandpass characteristic approximates amatched filterwhen theproductoftheIFbandwidth Bandthepulsewidthtisoftheorderofunity,thatis,Bt~1.
Aftermaximizing thesignal-to-noise ratiointheIFamplifier, thepulsemodulation is extracted bytheseconddetector andamplified bythevideoamplifier toalevelwhereitcanbe Dupleller Antenna Low-noise RF amplifierIFamplifier (matched filter) Figure1.2Blockdiagram ofapulseradar. Figure 1.3 (a) PPI presentation displaying range vs.
angle (intensity modulation); (h) A-scope presenta-  tion displaying amplitude vs.
range (deflection modulation).
 \ "4  properly displayed, usually on a cathode-ray tube (CRT).
Timing signals are also supplied to  the indicator to provide the range zero.
Angle information is obtained from the pointing  direction of the antenna.
The most common form of cathode-ray tube display is the plan  position indicator, or PPI (Fig.
1.3a), which maps in polar coordinates the location of the  target in azimuth and range.
This is an intensity-modulated display in which the amplitude of  the receiver output modulates the electron-beam intensity (z axis) as the electron beam is made  to sweep outward from the center of the tube.
The beam rotates in angle in response to the  antenna position.
A B-scope display is similar to the PPI except that it utilizes rectangular,  rather than polar, coordinates to display range vs.
angle.
Both the B-scope and the PPI, being  intensity modulated, have limited dynamic range.
Another form of display is the A-scope,  shown in Fig.
1.3b, which plots target .amplitude (y axis) vs.
range (x axis), for some fixed  direction.
This is a deflection-modulated display.
It is more suited for tracking-radar applica-  tion than for surveillance radar.
 The block diagram of Fig.
1.2 is a simplified version that omits many details.
It does not  include several devices often found in radar, such as means for automatically compensating the  receiver for changes in frequency (AFC) or gain (AGC), receiver circuits for reducing interfer-  ence from other radars and from unwanted signals, rotary joints in the transmission lines to  allow movement of the antenna, circuitry for discriminating between moving targets and  unwanted stationary objects (MTI), and pulse compression for achieving the resolution benefits  of a short pulse but with the energy of a 'long pulse.
If the radar is used for tracking, some  means are necessary for sensing the angular location of a moving target and allowing the  antenna automatically to lock-on and to track the target.
Monitoring devices are usually  included to ensure that the transmitter is delivering the proper shape pulse at the proper  power level and that the receiver sensitivity has not degraded.
Provisions may also be in-  corporated in the radar for locating equipment failures so that faulty circuits can be easily  found and replaced.
 Instead of displaying the " raw-video" output of a surveillance radar directly on the CRT,  it might first be processed by an'autornaticdetection and tracking (ADT) device that quantizes  the radar coverage into range-azimuth resolution cells, adds (or integrates) all the echo pulses  received within each cell, establishes a threshold (on the basis of these integrated pulses) that  permits only the strong outputs due to target echoes to pass while rejecting noise, establishes  and maintains the tracks (trajectories) of each target, and displays the processed information  6INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS , -~ (a) (b) Figure1.3(a)PPIpresentation displaying rangevs.angle(intensity modulation); (0)A-scop~ pr~senta­ tiondisplaying amplitude vs.range(deflection modulation).
properly displayed, usuallyonacathode-ray tube(CRT).Timingsignalsarealsosupplied to theindicator toprovidetherangezero.Angleinformation isobtained fromthepointing direction oftheantenna.
Themostcommon formofcathode-ray tubedisplayistheplan position indicator, orPPI(Fig.1.3a),whichmapsinpolarcoordinates thelocation ofthe targetinazimuthandrange.Thisisanintensity-modulated displayinwhichtheamplitude of thereceiveroutputmodulates theelectron-beam intensity (zaxis)astheelectronbeamismade tosweepoutward fromthecenterofthetube.Thebeamrotatesinangleinresponse tothe antenna position.AB-scopedisplayissimilartothePPIexceptthatitutilizesrectangular, ratherthanpolar,coordinates todisplayrangevs.angle.BoththeB-scopeandthePPI,being intensity modulated, havelimiteddynamic range.Another formofdisplayistheA-scope, showninFig.1.3b,whichplotstargetamplitude (yaxis)vs.range(xaxis),forsomefixed direction.
Thisisadeftectiort':inodulated display.Itismoresuitedfortracking-radar applica­ tionthanforsurveillance radar.
Theblockdiagram ofFig.1.2isasimplified versionthatomitsmanydetails.Itdoesnot includeseveraldevicesoftenfoundinradar,suchasmeansforautomatically compensating the receiverforchangesinfrequency (AFC)orgain(AGe),receivercircuitsforreducing interfer­ encefromotherradarsandfromunwanted signals,rotaryjointsinthetransmission linesto allowmovement oftheantenna, circuitry fordiscriminating between movingtargetsand unwanted stationary objects(MTnandpulsecompression forachieving theresolution benefits ofashortpulsebutwiththeenergyofalongpulse.Iftheradarisusedfortracking, some meansarenecessary forsensingtheangularlocation ofamovingtargetandallowing the antenna automatically tolock-onandtotrackthetarget.Monitoring devicesareusually included toensurethatthetransmitter isdelivering thepropershapepulseattheproper powerlevelandthatthereceiversensitivity hasnotdegraded.
Provisions mayalsobein­ corporated intheradarforlocatingequipment failuressothatfaultycircuitscanbeeasily foundandreplaced.
Insteadofdisplaying the"raw·video" outputofasurveillance radardirectlyontheCRT, itmightfirstbeprocessed byanautomatic 'detection andtracking (ADT)devicethatquantizes theradarcoverage intorange-azimuth resolution cells,adds(orintegrates) alltheechopulses received withineachcell,establishes athreshold (onthebasisoftheseintegrated pulses)that permitsonlythestrongoutputsduetotargetechoestopasswhilerejecting noise,establishes andmaintains thetracks(trajectories) ofeachtarget,anddisplays theprocessed information THE NATURE OF RADAR 7  to the operator.
These operations of an ADT are usually implemented with digital computer  techriology.
 A common form of radar antenna is a reflector with a parabolic shape, fed (illuminated)  from a point source at its focus.
The parabolic reflector focuses the energy into a narrow beam,  just as does a searchlight or an automobile headlamp.
The beam may be scanned in space by  mechanical pointing of the antenna.
Phased-array antennas have also been used for radar.
In a  pllascd array, tllc bcam is scanned by electronically varying the phase of the currents across  the aperture.
 1.4 RADAR FREQUENCIES  Conventional radars generally have been operated at frequencies extending from about  220 MHz to 35 GHz, a spread of more than seven octaves.
These are not necessarily the limits,  .
, since radars can be, and have been, operated at frequencies outside either end of this range.
 Skywave HF over-the-horizon (OTH) radar might be at frequencies as low as 4 or 5 MHz, and  groundwave HF radars as low as 2 MHz.
At the other end of the spectrum, millimeter radars  have operated at 94 GHz.
Laser radars operate at even higher frequencies.
 The place of radar frequencies in the electromagnetic spectrum is shown in Fig.
1.4.
Some  of the nomenclature employed to designate the various frequency regions is also shown.
 Early in the development of radar, a letter code such as S, X, L, etc., was employed to  desigr~ate radar frequency bands.
Although its original purpose was to guard military secrecy,  the designations were maintained, probably out of habit as well as the need for some conven-  ient short nomenclature.
This usage has continued and is now an accepted practice of radar  engineers.
Table 1.1 lists the radar-frequency letter-band nomenclature adopted by the  IEEE.' These are related to the specific bands assigned by the International Telecommunica-  tions Union for radar.
For example, although the nominal frequency range for L band is 1000  to 2000 MHz, an L-band radar is thought of as being confined within the region from 1215 to  1400 MHz since that is the extent of the assigned band.
Letter-band nomenclature is not a  Wovelenath  30 Hz 300Hz 3kHz 30kHz 300kHz 3MHz 30MHz 300MHz 3GHz 30GHz 300GHz 3,000 GHr  Frequency 10 km lkm 100 m 10m I m lOcm tcm 1 mm O.lnm  Figure 1.4 Radar frequencies and the electromagnetic spectrum.
UHF---c+SHF-+k  Super  high  frequency  Centimetric  woves I  -VLF  Very low  frequency  I  Myriometric  woves -+HF-t-VHF-+  High  frequency  Decometric  waves  4 EHF --+  Extremely  hrgh  frequency  Millimetric  waves --LF-+-MF  Low  frequency  Kilometric  woves  1 I I I Bond 7 Very high  frequency  Metric  woves Decimilli-  metric woves Medium  frequency  Hectometric  woves  Video frequencies Ultrohigh  frequency  Decimetric  wovcs  Bond 4  Audio frequencies c Bond 8 I Bond 9 Bond 10 Bond l l  mdg frw Bond 12  Submillimeler Bond 5  I  For  i nfmm Bond 6  t------* I OTH  rodor I  Letter designotions L S C X Ku Ka  * I  Microwove region I  THENATURE OFRADAR7 totheoperator.
Theseoperations ofanADTareusuallyimplemented withdigitalcomputer technology.
Acommon formofradarantenna isareflector withaparabolic shape,fed(illuminated) fromapointsourceatitsfocus.Theparabolic reflector focusestheenergyintoanarrowbeam, justasdoesasearchlight oranautomobile headlamp.
Thebeammaybescanned inspaceby mechanical pointing oftheantenna.
Phased-array antennas havealsobeenusedforradar.Ina phasedarray.thebeamisscanned byelectronically varyingthephaseofthecurrents across theaperture.
1.4RADAR FREQUENCIES Conventional radarsgenerally havebeenoperated atfrequencies extending fromabout 220MHzto35GHz,aspreadofmorethansevenoctaves.Thesearenotnecessarily the limits, sinceradarscanbe,andhavebeen,operated atfrequencies outsideeitherendofthisrange.
Skywave HFover-the-horizon (OTH)radarmightbeatfrequencies aslowas4or5MHz,and groundwave HFradarsaslowas2MHz.Attheotherendofthespectrum, millimeter radars haveoperated at94GHz.Laserradarsoperateatevenhigherfrequencies.
Theplaceofradarfrequencies intheelectromagnetic spectrum isshowninFig.1.4.Some ofthenomenclature employed todesignate thevariousfrequency regionsisalsoshown.
Earlyinthedevelopment ofradar,alettercodesuchasS,X,L,etc.,wasemployed to designate radarfrequency bands.Although itsoriginalpurpose wastoguardmilitarysecrecy, thedesignations weremaintained, probably outofhabitaswellastheneedforsomeconven­ ientshortnomenclature.
Thisusagehascontinued andisnowanaccepted practice ofradar engineers.
Table1.1liststheradar-frequency letter-band nomenclature adopted bythe IEEE.15Thesearerelatedtothespecificbandsassigned bytheInternational Telecommunica­ tionsUnionforradar.Forexample, although thenominal frequency rangeforLbandis1000 to2000MHz,anL-bandradaristhoughtofasbeingconfined withintheregionfrom1215to 1400MHzsincethatistheextentoftheassigned band.Letter-band nomenclature isnota fOkm IkmWavelength 100m 10m 1m !Oem 1cm lmm OIMm r red---I LF--------+---MF--HF- -VHF- fo-UHF-I-SHF- .....EHF- --VlF Verylow Low Medium High VeryhighUltrohigh Super Extremely frequency frequency frequency frequency frequency frequency high hiqh Ifrequency frequency Myriometric Kilometric Hecrometric Decometric Metric Decimetric Centimetric Millimetric Decimilli- woves woves woves woves woves woves woves woves metricwoves Bond4Bond5Bond6Bond7Bond8Bond9Bond10BondIIBond12 ::i~~~OiA !~e9~~ry~i~s~Submillimeler Fo ~roodcost OTHI JIinfra>------l••bond rodorI Letterdesignotions LSCXKuKa.
Audiofrequencies II ..
•,Microwave rtQion Videofrequencies•II I I I I -- 30Hz300Hz 3kHz 30kHz 300kHz 3MHz 30MHz 300MHz3GHz Frequency30GHz 300GHz 3,000GHz Figure1.4Radarfrequencies andtheelectromagnetic spectrum. 8 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  Table 1.1 Standard radar-frequency letter-band nomenclature  Specific radiolocatio~l  Band Nominal (radar) bands based on  designation frequency range ITU assignments for region 2  HF  VHF  UHF  K  K,  rnrn 138-144 MHz  2 16-225  420-450 MHz  890-942  1215-1400 MHz  2300-2500 MHz  2 700-3 700  5250-5925 MHz  8500- 10,680 MHz  13.4-14.0 GHz  15.7- 17.7  24.05-24.25 GHz  33.4-36.0 GHz  substitute for the actual numerical frequency limits of radars.
The specific numerical frequency  limits should be used whenever appropriate, but the letter designations of Table 1.1 may be  used whenever a short notation is desired.
 1.5 RADAR DEVELOPMENT PRIOR TO WORLD WAR I1  Although the development of radar as a full-fledged technology did not occur until World War  11, the basic principle of radar detection is almost as old as the subject of electromagnetism  itself.
Heinrich Hertz, in 1886, experimentally tested the theories of Maxwell and demonstrated  the similarity between radio and light waves.
Hertz showed that radio waves could be reflected L  ,I  by metallic and dielectric bodies.
It is interesting to note that although Hertz's experiments  were performed with relatively short wavelength radiation (66 cm), later work in radio engin-  eering was almost entirely at longer wavelengths.
The shorter wavelengths were not actively  used to any great extent until the late thirties.
 In 1903 a German engineer by the name of Hiilsmeyer experimented with the detection of  radio waves reflected from ships.
He obtained a patent in 1904 in several countries for an  obstacle detector and ship navigational de~ice.~ His methods were demonstrated before the  German Navy, but generated little interest.
The state of technology at that time was not  sufficiently adequate to obtain ranges of more than about a mile, and his detection technique  was dismissed on the grounds that it was little better than a visual observer.
 Marconi recognized the potentialities of short waves for radio detection and strongly  urged their use in 1922 for this application.
In a speech delivered before the Institute of Radio  Engineers, he said:'  As was first shown by Hertz, electric waves can be completely reflected by conducting bodies.
In  some of 'my tests I have noticed the effects of reflection and detection of these waves by metallic  objects miles away.
 It !eems to me that it should be possible to design apparatus by means of which a ship could  8INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS Table1.1Standard radar-frequency letter-band nomenclature Specificradiolocation Band Nominal (radar)bandsbasedon designation frequency range ITUassignments forregion2 HF 3-30MHz VHF 30-300MHz 138-144MHz 216-225 UHF 300-1000 MHz 420-450MHz 890-942 L 1000-2000 MHz 1215-1400 MHz S 2000-4000 MHz 2300-2500 MHz 2700-3700 C 4000-8000 MHz 5250-5925 MHz X 8000-12,000 MHz 8500-10,680 MHz Ku 12.0-18GHz 13.4-14.0 GHz 15.7-17.7 K 18-27GHz 24.05-24.25 GHz.._,;, Kg 27-40GHz 33.4-36.0 GHz mm 40-300GHz substitute fortheactualnumerical frequency limitsofradars.Thespecificnumerical frequency limitsshouldbeusedwhenever appropriate, buttheletterdesignations ofTable1.1maybe usedwhenever ashortnotation isdesired.
1.5RADAR DEVELOPMENT PRIORTOWORLD WARII Although thedevelopment ofradarasafull-fledged technology didnotoccuruntilWorldWar II,thebasicprinciple ofradardetection isalmostasoldasthesubjectofelectromagnetism itself.Heinrich Hertz,in1886,experimentally testedthetheoriesofMaxwell anddemonstrated thesimilarity between radioandlightwaves.Hertzshowedthatradiowavescouldbereflected bymetallic anddielectric bodies.Itisinteresting tonotethatalthough Hertz'sexperiments wereperformed withrelatively shortwavelength radiation (66cm),laterworkinradioengin­ eeringwasalmostentirelyatlongerwavelengths.
Theshorterwavelengths werenotactively usedtoanygreatextentuntilthelatethirties.
In1903aGerman engineer bythenameofHiilsmeyer experimented withthedetection of radiowavesreflected fromships.Heobtained apatentin1904inseveralcountries foran obstacle detector andshipnavigational device.2Hismethods weredemonstrated beforethe German Navy,butgenerated littleinterest.
Thestateoftechnology atthattimewasnot sufficiently adequate toobtainrangesofmorethanaboutamile,andhisdetection technique wasdismissed onthegrounds thatitwaslittlebetterthanavisualobserver.
Marconi recognized thepotentialities ofshortwavesforradiodetection andstrongly urgedtheirusein1922forthisapplication.
Inaspeechdelivered beforetheInstitute ofRadio Engineers, hesaid:3 AswasfirstshownbyHertz,electricwavescanbecompletely reflected byconducting bodies.In someofinytestsJhavenoticedtheeffectsofreflection anddetection ofthesewavesbymetallic objectsmilesaway.
It~eemstomethatitshouldbepossibletodesignapparatus bymeansofwhichashipcould THE NATURE OF RADAR 9  radiate or project a divergent beam of these rays in any desired direction, which rays, if coming  across a metallic object, such as another steamer or ship, would be reflected back to a receiver screened  from the local transmitter on the sending ship, and thereby, immediately reveal the presence and  bearing of the other ship in fog or thick weather.
 Although Marconi predicted and successfully demonstrated radio communication be-  tween continents, he was apparently not successful in gaining support for some of his other  ideas involving very short waves.
One was the radar detection mentioned above; the other was  the suggestion that very short waves are capable of propagation well beyond the optical line of  sight-a phenometlon now know11 as tropospheric scatter.
He also suggested that radio waves  be used for the transfer of power from one point to the other without the use of wire or other  trat~smissiot~ lit~cs.
 In the aututnrl of 1922 A.
ti.
I'aylor arid L.
C.
Young of tile Naval Research Laboratory  detected a wooden ship using a CW wave-interference radar with separated receiver and  transmitter.
The wavelerlgth was 5 m.
A proposal was submitted for further work but was not  accepted.
 The first application of the pulse technique to the measurement of distance was in the  basic scientific investigation by Breit and Tuve in 1925 for measuring the height of the  i~nosphere.~.'~ However, more than a decade was to elapse before the detection of aircraft by  pulse radar was demonstrated.
 The first experimental radar systems operated with CW and depended for detection upon  the interference produced between the direct signal received from the transmitter and the  doppler-frequency-shifted signal reflected by a moving target.
This effect is the same as the  rhythmic flickering, or flutter, observed in an ordinary television receiver, especially on weak  stations, when an aircraft passes overhead.
This type of radar originally was called CW  wqaoe-irtfer-erence radar.
Today, such a radar is called a bistatic C W radar.
The first experimen-  tal detections of aircraft used this radar principle rather than a monostatic (single-site) pulse  radar because CW equipment was readily available.
Successful pulse radar had to await the  development of suitable components, especially high-peak-power tubes, and a better under-  standing of pulse receivers.
 The first detection of aircraft using the wave-interference effect was made in June, 1930, by  L.
A.
tlyland of the Naval Research Laboratory.' It was made accidentally while he was  working with a direction-finding apparatus located in an aircraft on the ground.
The transmit-  ter at a frequency of 33 MHz was located 2 miles away, and the beam crossed an air lane from  a nearby airfield.
When aircraft passed through the beam, Hyland noted an increase in the  received signal.
This stimulated a more deliberate investigation by the NRL personnel, but the  work continued at a slow pace, lacking official encouragement and funds from the govern-  nrent.
although it was fully supported by the NRL administration.
By 1932 the equipment was  demonstrated to detect aircraft at distances as great as 50 miles from the transmitter.
The NRL  work on aircraft detection with CW wave interference was kept classified until 1933, when  several Bell Telephone Laboratories engineers reported the detection of aircraft during the  course of other experiments.' The NRL work was disclosed in a patent filed and granted to  Taylor, Young, and Hyland6 on a "System for Detecting Objects by Radio." The type of radar  described in this patent was a CW wave-interference radar.
Early in 1934, a 60-MHz CW  wave-interference radar was demonstrated by NRL.
 The early CW wave-interference radars were useful only for detecting the preserrce of the  target.
The problem of extracting target-position information from such radars was a difficult  one and could not be readily solved with the techniques existing at that time.
A proposal was  made by NRL in 1933 to errlploy a chain of transmitting and receiving stations along a line to  be guarded.
for the purpose of obtaining some knowledge of distance and velocity.
This was  THENATURE OFRADAR9 radiateorprojectadivergent beamoftheseraysinanydesireddirection, whichrays,ifcoming acrossametallic object,suchasanothersteamerorship,wouldbereflected backtoareceiverscreened fromthelocaltransmitter onthesending ship,andthereby, immediately revealthepresence and bearingoftheothershipinfogorthickweather.
Although Marconi predicted andsuccessfully demonstrated radiocommunication be­ tweencontinents, hewasapparently notsuccessful ingainingsupport forsomeofhisother ideasinvolving veryshortwaves.Onewastheradardetection mentioned above;theotherwas thesuggestion thatveryshortwavesarecapableofpropagation wellbeyondtheopticallineof sight-a phenomenon nowknownastropospheric scatter.Healsosuggested thatradiowaves beusedforthetransferofpowerfromonepointtotheotherwithouttheuseofwireorother transmission lines.
Intheautumn of1922A.H.TaylorandL.C.YoungoftheNavalResearch Laboratory detected awooden shipusingaCWwave-interference radarwithseparated receiver and transmitter.
Thewavelength was5m.Aproposal wassubmitted forfurtherworkbutwasnot accepted.
Thefirstapplication ofthepulsetechnique tothemeasurement ofdistance wasinthe basicscientific investigation byBreitandTuvein1925formeasuring theheightofthe ionosphere.4.16However, morethanadecadewastoelapsebeforethedetection ofaircraftby pulseradarwasdemonstrated.
Thefirstexperimental radarsystemsoperated withCWanddepended fordetection upon theinterference produced between thedirectsignalreceived fromthetransmitter andthe doppler-frequency-shifted signalreflected byamovingtarget.Thiseffectisthesameasthe rhythmic flickering, orflutter,observed inanordinary television receiver, especially onweak stations, whenanaircraft passesoverhead.
Thistypeofradaroriginally wascalledCW wal}e-inte~rere'lce radar.Today,sucharadariscalledabistaticCWradar.Thefirstexperimen­ taldetections ofaircraftusedthisradarprinciple ratherthanamonostatic (single-site) pulse radarbecauseCWequipment wasreadilyavailable.
Successful pulseradarhadtoawaitthe development ofsuitable components, especially high-peak-power tubes,andabetterunder­ standing ofpulsereceivers.
Thefirstdetection ofaircraftusingthewave-interference effectwasmadeinJune,1930,by L.1\..HylandoftheNavalResearch Laboratory.l Itwasmadeaccidentally whilehewas working withadirection-finding apparatus locatedinanaircraftontheground.Thetransmit­ teratafrequency of33MHzwaslocated2milesaway,andthebeamcrossedanairlanefrom anearbyairfield.Whenaircraftpassedthrough thebeam,Hylandnotedanincrease inthe received signal.Thisstimulated amoredeliberate investigation bytheNRLpersonnel, butthe workcontinued ataslowpace,lackingofficialencouragement andfundsfromthegovern­ ment.although itwasfullysupported bytheNRLadministration.
By1932theequipment was demonstrated todetectaircraftatdistances asgreatas50milesfromthetransmitter.
TheNRL workonaircraftdetection withCWwaveinterference waskeptclassified until1933,when severalBellTelephone Laboratories engineers reported thedetection ofaircraftduringthe courseofotherexperiments.5TheNRLworkwasdisclosed inapatentfiledandgrantedto Taylor,Young,andHyland6ona"SystemforDetecting ObjectsbyRadio."Thetypeofradar described inthispatentwasaCWwave-interference radar.Earlyin1934,a6O-MHz CW wave-interference radarwasdemonstrated byNRL.
TheearlyCWwave-interference radarswereusefulonlyfordetecting thepresence ofthe target.Theproblem ofextracting target-position information fromsuchradarswasadifficult oneandcouldnotbereadilysolvedwiththetechniques existingatthattime.Aproposal was madebyNRLin1933toemployachainoftransmitting andreceiving stationsalongalineto beguarded.
forthepurpose ofobtaining someknowledge ofdistance andvelocity.
Thiswas 10 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  never carried out, however.
The limited ability of CW wave-interference radar to be anything  more than a trip wire undoubtedly tempered what little official enthusiasm existed for radar.
 It was recognized that the limitations to obtaining adequate position information coiild  be overcome with pulse transmission.
Strange as it may now seem, in the early days pulse  radar encountered much skepticism.
Nevertheless, an effort was started at NRL in the spring  of 1934 to develop a pulse radar.
The work received low priority and was carried out prin-  cipally by R.
M.
Page, but he was not allowed to devote his full time to the effort.
 The first attempt with pulse radar at NRL was at a frequency of60 MHz.
According to  Guerlac,' the first tests of the 60-MHz pulse radar were carried out in late December, 1934,  and early January, 1935.
These tests were "hopelessly unsuccessful and a grievous disappoint-  ment." No pulse echoes were observed on the cathode-ray tube.
The chief reason for this  failure was attributed to the receiver's being designed for CW communications rather than for  pulse reception.
The shortcomings were corrected, and the first radar echoes obtained at  NRL using pulses occurred on April 28, 1936, with a radar operating at a frequency of  28.3 MHz and a pulse width of 5 ,US.
The range was only 24 miles.
By early June the range was  25 miles.
 It was realized by the NRL experimenters that higher radar frequencies were desired,  especially for shipboard application, where large antennas could not be tolerated.
However,  the necessary components did not exist.
The success of the experiments at 28 MHz encouraged  the NRL experimenters to develop a 200-MHz equipment.
The first echoes at 200 MHz were  received July 22, 1936, less than three months after the start of the project.
This radar was also  the first to employ a duplexing system with a common antenna for both transmitting and  receiving.
The range was only 10 to 12 miles.
In the spring of 1937 it was installed and tested on  the destroyer Leary.
The range of the 200-MHz radar was limited by the transmitter.
The  development of higher-powered tubes by the Eitel-McCullough Corporation allowed an  improved design of the 200-MHz radar known as XAF.
This occurred in January, 1938.
 Although the power delivered to the antenna was only 6 kW, a range of 50 miles-the limit of  the sweep-was obtained by February.
The XAF was tested aboard the battleship New York,  in maneuvers held during January and February of 1939, and met with considerable success.
 Ranges of 20 to 24 kiloyards were obtained on battleships and cruisers.
By October, 1939,  orders were placed for a manufactured version called the CXAM.
Nineteen of these radars  were installed on major ships of the fleet by 1941.
 The United States Army Signal Corps also maintained an interest in radar during the  early 1930s.' The beginning of serious Signal Corps work in pulse radar apparently resulted  from a visit to NRL in January, 1936.
By December of that year the Army tested its first pulse  radar, obtaining a range of 7 miles.
The first operational radar used for antiaircraft fire control  was the SCR-268, available in 1938,' The SCR-268 was used in conjunction with searchlights  for radar fire control.
This was necessary because of its poor angular accuracy.
However, its  range accuracy was superior to that obtained with optical methods.
The SCR-268 remained  the standard fire-control equipment until January, 1944, when it was replaced by the SCR-584  microwave radar.
The SCR-584 could control an antiaircraft battery without the necessity for  searchlights or optical angle tracking,  In 1939 the Army developed the SCR-270, a long-range radar for early warning.
The attack  on Pearl Harbor in December, 1941, was detected by an SCR-270, one of six in Hawaii at the  time.' (There were also 16 SCR-268s assigned to units in Honolulu.) But unfortunately, the  true significance of the blips on the scope was not realized until after the bombs had fallen.
A  modified SCR-270 was also the first radar to detect echoes\ from the moon in 1946.
 The early developments of pulse radar were primarily concerned with military applica-  tions.
Although it was not recognized as being a radar at the time, the frequency-modulated  toINTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS nevercarriedout,however.
ThelimitedabilityofCWwave-interference radartobeanything morethanatripwireundoubtedly tempered whatlittleofficialenthusiasm existedforradar.
Itwasrecognized thatthelimitations toobtaining adequate position information could beovercome withpulsetransmission: Strangeasitmaynowseem,intheearlydayspulse radarencountered muchskepticism.
Nevertheless, aneffortwasstartedatNRLinthespring of1934todevelopapulseradar.Theworkreceived lowpriorityandwascarriedoutprin­ cipallybyR.M.Page,buthewasnotallowedtodevotehisfulltimetotheeffort.
ThefirstattemptwithpulseradaratNRLwasatafrequency of60MHz.According to Guerlac,t thefirsttestsofthe6O-MHz pulseradarwerecarriedoutinlateDecember, 1934, andearlyJanuary, 1935.Thesetestswere"hopelessly unsuccessful andagrievous disappoint­ ment."Nopulseechoeswereobserved onthecathode-ray tube.Thechiefreasonforthis failurewasattributed tothereceiver's beingdesigned forCWcommunications ratherthanfor pulsereception.
Theshortcomings werecorrected, andthefirstradarechoesobtained at NRLusingpulsesoccurred onApril28,1936,witharadaroperating atafrequency of 28.3MHzandapulsewidthof5IlS.Therangewasonly2!miles.ByearlyJunetherangewas 25miles.
ItwasrealizedbytheNRLexperimenters thathigherradarfrequencies weredesired, especially forshipboard application, wherelargeantennas couldnotbetolerated.
However, thenecessary components didnotexist.Thesuccessoftheexperiments at28MHzencouraged theNRLexperimenters todevelopa200-MHz equipment.
Thefirstechoesat200MHzwere received July22,1936,lessthanthreemonthsafter thestartoftheproject.Thisradarwasalso thefirsttoemployaduplexing systemwithacommon antenna forbothtransmitting and receiving.
Therangewasonly10to12miles.Inthespringof1937itwasinstalled andtestedon thedestroyer Leary.Therangeofthe200-MHz radarwaslimitedbythetransmitter.
The development ofhigher-powered tubesbytheEitel-McCullough Corporation allowed an improved designofthe200-MHz radarknownasXAF.Thisoccurred inJanuary, 1938.
Although thepowerdelivered totheantenna wasonly6kW,arangeof50miles-the limitof thesweep-was obtained byFebruary.
TheXAFwastestedaboardthebattleship NewYork, inmaneuvers heldduringJanuaryandFebruary of1939,andmetwithconsiderable success.
Rangesof20to24kiloyards wereobtained onbattleships andcruisers.
ByOctober, 1939, orderswereplacedforamanufactured versioncalledtheCXAM.
Nineteen oftheseradars wereinstalled onmajorshipsofthefleetby1941.
TheUnitedStatesArmySignalCorpsalsomaintained aninterestinradarduringthe early1930s.7Thebeginning ofseriousSignalCorpsworkinpulseradarapparently resulted fromavisittoNRLinJanuary, 1936.ByDecember ofthatyeartheArmytesteditsfirstpulse radar,obtaining arangeof7miles.Thefirstoperational radarusedforantiaircraft firecontrol wastheSCR-268, available in1938!8TheSCR-268 wasusedinconjunction withsearchlights forradarfirecontrol.Thiswasnecessary becauseofitspoorangularaccuracy.
However, its rangeaccuracy wassuperior tothatobtained withopticalmethods.
TheSCR-268 remained thestandard fire-control equipment untilJanuary, 1944,whenitwasreplaced bytheSCR-584 microwave radar.TheSCR-584 couldcontrolanantiaircraft batterywithoutthenecessity for searchlights oropticalangletracking..
.
(n1939theArmydeveloped theSCR-270, along-range radarforearlywarning.
Theattack onPearlHarborinDecember, 1941,wasdetected byanSCR-270, oneofsixinHawaiiatthe time.!(Therewerealso16SCR-268s assigned tounitsinHonolulu.) Butunfortunately, the truesignificance oftheblipsonthescopewasnotrealizeduntilafterthebombshadfallen.A modified SCR-270 wasalsothefirstradartodetectechoes!fromthemoonin1946.
Theearlydevelopments ofpulseradarwereprimarily concerned withmilitaryapplica­ tions.Although itwasnotrecognized asbeingaradaratthetime,thefrequency-modulated THE NATURE OF RADAR 11  aircraft radio altimeter was probably tlie first commercial application of tlie radar principie.
 The first equipments were operated in aircraft as early as 1936 and utilized the same principle  of operation as the FM-CW radar described in Sec.
3.3.
In the case of the radio altimeter, the  target is tlie ground.
 111 13rit.aiti [lie development of radar began later than it1 the United States.'-'' But  because they felt the nearness of war more acutely and were in a more vulnerable position with  respect to air attack, the British expended a large amount of effort on radar development.
By  the time the United States entered tlie war, the British were well experienced in the military  applications of radar.
British interest in radar began in early 1935, when Sir Robert Watson-  Watt was asked about the possibility of producing a death ray using radio waves.
Watson-  Watt concluded that this type of death ray required fantastically large amounts of power and  could be regarded as not being practical at that time.
Instead, he recotnmended that it would  be more promising to investigate means for radio detection as opposed to radio destruction.
 (The only available means for locating aircraft prior to World War IE were sound locators  whose maximum detection range under favorable conditions was about 20 miles.) Watson-  Watt was allowed to explore the possibilities of radio detection, and in February, 1935, he  issued two memoranda outlining the conditions necessary for an effective radar system.
In that  same month the detection of an aircraft was carried out, using 6-MHz communication equip-  ment, by observing tlie beats between the echo signal and the directly received signal (wave  interference).
The technique was similar to the first United States radar-detection experiments.
 The transmitter and receiver were separated by about 5.5 miles.
When the aircraft receded  froin the receiver, it was possible to detect the beats to about an 8-mile range.
 By June, 1935, the British had demonstrated the pulse technique to measure range of an  aircraft target.
This was almost a year sooner than the successful NRL experiments with pulse  radar.
By September, ranges greater than 40 miles were obtained on bomber aircraft.
The  frequency was 12 MHz.
Also, in that month, the first radar measurement of the height of  aircraft above ground was made by measuring the elevation angle of arrival of the reflected  signal.
In March, 1936, the range of detection had increased to 90 miles and the frequency was  raised to 25 MHz.
 A series of CH (Chain Homej radar stations at a frequency of 25 MHz were successfully  demonstrated in April, 1937.
Most of the stations were operating by September, 1938, and  plotted the track of the aircraft which flew Neville Chamberlain, the British Prime Minister at  that time, to Munich to confer with Hitler and Mussolini.
In the same month, the CH radar  stations began 24-hour duty, which continued until the end of the war.
 The British realized quite early that ground-based search radars such as CH were not  sufficiently accurate to guide fighter aircraft to a complete interception at night or in bad  weather.
Consequently, they developed, by 1939, an aircraft-interception radar (AI), mounted  on an aircraft, for the detection and interception of hostile aircraft.
The A1 radar operated at a  frequency of 200 MHz.
During the development of the A1 radar it was noted that radar could  be used for the detection of ships from the air and also that the character of echoes from the  ground was dependent on the nature of the terrain.
The former phenomenon was quickly  exploited for the detection and location of surface ships and submarines.
The latter effect was  not exploited initially, but was later used for airborne mapping radars.
 Until the middle of 1940 tlie development of radar in Britain and the United States was  carried out independently of one another.
In September of that year a British technical mission  visited the United States to exchange information concerning the radar developments in the  two countries.
The British realized the advantages to be gained from the better angular  resolution possible at the microwave frequencies, especially for airborne and naval applica-  tions.
They suggested that the United States undertake the development of a microwave A1  THENATURE OFRADAR11 aircraftradioaltimeter wasprobably thefirstcommercial application oftheradarprinciple.
Thefirstequipments wereoperated inaircraftasearlyas1936andutilizedthesameprinciple ofoperation astheFM-CW radardescribed inSec.3.3.Inthecaseoftheradioaltimeter, the targetistheground.
.InBrit.ainthedevelopment ofradarbeganlaterthanintheUnitedStates.S-11But becausetheyfeltthenearness ofwarmoreacutelyandwereinamorevulnerable position with respecttoairattack,theBritishexpended alargeamountofeffortonradardevelopment.
By thetimetheUnitedStatesenteredthewar,theBritishwerewellexperienced inthemilitary applications ofradar.Britishinterestinradarbeganinearly1935,whenSirRobertWatson­ Wattwasaskedaboutthepossibility ofproducing adeathrayusingradiowaves.Watson­ Wattconcluded thatthistypeofdeathrayrequired fantastically largeamounts ofpowerand couldheregarded asnotbeingpractical atthattime.Instead,herecommended thatitwould bemorepromising toinvestigate meansforradiodetection asopposed toradiodestruction.
(Theonlyavailable meansforlocating aircraftpriortoWorldWarnweresoundlocators whosemaximum detection rangeunderfavorable conditions wasabout20miles.)Watson­ Wattwasallowed toexplorethepossibilities ofradiodetection, andinFebruary, 1935,he issuedtwomemoranda outlining theconditions necessary foraneffectiveradarsystem.Inthat samemonththedetection ofanaircraftwascarriedout,using6-MHzcommunication equip­ ment,byobserving thebeatsbetween theechosignalandthedirectlyreceived signal(wave interference).
Thetechnique wassimilartothefirstUnitedStatesradar-detection experiments.
Thetransmitter andreceiver wereseparated byabout5.5miles.Whentheaircraftreceded fromthereceiver, itwaspossible todetectthebeatstoaboutan8-milerange.
ByJune,1935,theBritishhaddemonstrated thepulsetechnique tomeasure rangeofan aircraft target.
Thiswasalmostayearsoonerthanthesuccessful NRLexperiments withpulse radar.BySeptember, rangesgreaterthan40mileswereobtained onbomberaircraft.
The frequency was12MHz.Also,inthatmonth,thefirstradarmeasurement oftheheightof aircraftabovegroundwasmadebymeasuring theelevation angleofarrivalofthereflected signal.InMarch,1936,therangeofdetection hadincreased to90milesandthefrequency was raisedto25MHz.
AseriesofCH(ChainHome)radarstationsatafrequency of25MHzweresuccessfully demonstrated inApril,1937.Mostofthestations wereoperating bySeptember, 1938,and ,JplottedthetrackoftheaircraftwhichflewNevilleChamberlain, theBritishPrimeMinister at thattime,toMunichtoconferwithHitlerandMussolini.
Inthesamemonth,theCHradar stations began24-hour duty,whichcontinued untiltheendofthewar.
TheBritishrealized quiteearlythatground-based searchradarssuchasCHwerenot sufficiently accurate toguidefighteraircrafttoacomplete interception atnightorinbad weather.
Consequently, theydeveloped, by1939,anaircraft-interception radar(AI),mounted onanaircraft,forthedetection andinterception ofhostileaircraft.TheAIradaroperated ata frequency of200MHz.Duringthedevelopment oftheAIradaritwasnotedthatradarcould beusedforthedetection ofshipsfromtheairandalsothatthecharacter ofechoesfromthe groundwasdependent onthenatureoftheterrain.Theformerphenomenon wasquickly exploited forthedetection andlocation ofsurfaceshipsandsubmarines.
Thelattereffectwas notexploited initially, butwaslaterusedforairborne mapping radars.
Unlilthemiddleof1940thedevelopment ofradarinBritainandtheUnitedStateswas carriedoutindependently ofoneanother.
InSeptember ofthatyearaBritishtechnical mission visitedtheUnitedStatestoexchange information concerning theradardevelopments inthe twocountries.
TheBritishrealized theadvantages tobegainedfromthebetterangular resolution possible atthemicrowave frequencies, especially forairborne andnavalapplica­ tions.Theysuggested thattheUnitedStatesundertake thedevelopment ofamicrowave AI 12 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  radar and a microwave antiaircraft fire-control radar.
The British technical mission  demonstrated the cavity-magnetron power tube developed by Randell and Boot and furnished  design information so that it could be duplicated by United States manufacturers.
The Randell  and Boot magnetron operated at a wavelength of 10 cm and produced a power output of  about 1 kW, an improvement by a factor of 100 over anything previously achieved at cen-  timeter wavelengths.
The development of the magnetron was one of tile most important  contributions to the realization of microwave radar.
 The success of microwave radar was by no means certain at the end of 1940.
Therefore the  United States Service Laboratories chose to concentrate on the development of radars at the  lower frequencies, primarily the very high frequency (VHF) band, where techniques and  components were more readily available.
The exploration of the microwave region for radar  application became the responsibility of the Radiation Laboratory, organized in November,  1940, under the administration of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
 In addition to the developments carried out in the United States and Great Britain, radar  was developed essentially independently in Germany, France, Russia, Italy, and Japan during  the middle and late thirties.12 The extent of these developments and their subsequent military  deployment varied, however.
All of these countries carried out experiments with CW wave  interference, and even though the French and the Japanese deployed such radars opera-  tionally, they proved of limited value.
Each country eventually progressed to pulse radar  operation and the advantages pertaining thereto.
Although the advantages of the higher  frequencies were well recognized, except for the United States and Great Britain none of the  others deployed radar at frequencies higher than about 600 MHz during the war.
 The Germans deployed several different types of radars during World War 11.
Ground-  based radars were avgilable for air search and height finding so as to perform ground control  of intercept (GCI).
Coastal, shipboard, and airborne radar were also employed successfully in  significant numbers.
An excellent description of the electronic battle in World War I1 between  the Germans and the Allies, with many lessons to offer, is the book " It~strtlrnertts of Dcrrkt~ess"  by Price.I3  The French efforts in radar, although they got an early start, were not as energetically  supported as in Britain or the United States, and were severely disrupted by the German  occupation in 1940.12 The development of radar in Italy also started early, but was slow.
There  were only relatively few Italian-produced radars operationally deployed by the time they left  the war in September, 1943.
The work in Japan was also slow but received impetus from  disclosures by their German allies in 1940 and from the capture of United States pulse radars  in the Philippines early in 1942.
The development of radar in the Soviet Union was quite  similar to the experience elsewhere.
By the summer of 1941 they had deployed operationally a  number of 80-MHz air-search radars for the defense' of Moscow against the German  invasion.14 Their indigenous efforts were interrupted by the course of the war.
 Thus, radar developed independently and simultaneously in several countries just prior to  World War 11.
It is not possible to single out any one individual as the inventor; there were  many fathers of radar.
This was brought about not only by the spread of radio technology to  many countries, but by the maturing of the airplane during this same time and the common  recognition of its military threat and the need to defend against it.
 .'  1.6 APPLICATIONS OF RADAR  Radar has been employed on'the ground, in the air, on the sea, and in space.
Ground-based  radar has been applied chiefly to'the detection, location, and tracking of aircraft or space  targets.
Shipboard radar is used as a navigation aid and safety device to locate buoys, shore  12INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS radarandamicrowave antiaircraft fire-control radar.TheBritishtechnical miSSIon demonstrated thecavity-magnetron powertubedeveloped byRandellandBootandfurnished designinformation sothatitcouldbeduplicated byUnitedStatesmanufacturers.
TheRandell andBootmagnetron operated atawavelength of10cmandproduced apoweroutputof about1kW,animprovement byafactorof100overanything previously achieved atcen­ timeter·wavelengths.
Thedevelopment ofthemagnetron wasoneofthemostimportant contributions totherealization ofmicrowave radar.
Thesuccessofmicrowave radarwasbynomeanscertainattheendof1940.Therefore the UnitedStatesServiceLaboratories chosetoconcentrate onthedevelopment ofradarsatthe lowerfrequencies, primarily theveryhighfrequency (VHF)band,wheretechniques and components weremorereadilyavailable.
Theexploration ofthemicrowave regionforradar application becametheresponsibility oftheRadiation Laboratory, organized inNovember, 1940,undertheadministration oftheMassachusetts Institute ofTechnology.
Inaddition tothedevelopments carriedoutintheUnitedStatesandGreatBritain,radar wasdeveloped essentially independently inGermany, France,Russia,Italy,andJapanduring themiddleandlatethirties.12Theextentofthesedevelopments andtheirsubsequent military deployment varied,however.
Allofthesecountries carriedoutexperiments withCWwave interference, andeventhoughtheFrenchandtheJapanese deployed suchradarsopera­ tionally, theyprovedoflimitedvalue.Eachcountry eventually progressed topulseradar operation andtheadvantages pertaining thereto.
Although theadvantages ofthehigher frequencies werewellrecognized, exceptfortheUnitedStatesandGreatBritainnoneofthe othersdeployed radaratfrequencies higherthanabout600MHzduringthewar.
TheGermans deployed severaldifferent typesofradarsduringWorldWarII.Ground­ basedradarswereavt,lilable forairsearchandheightfindingsoastoperform groundcontrol ofintercept (GCI).Coastal, shipboard, andairborne radarwerealsoemployed successfully in significant numbers.
Anexcellent description oftheelectronic battleinWorldWar11between theGermans andtheAllies,withmanylessonstooffer,isthebook"Instrllmetlts ojDarkness" byPrice.13 TheFrencheffortsinradar,although theygotanearlystart,werenotasenergetically supported asinBritainortheUnitedStates,andwereseverely disrupted bytheGerman occupation in1940.12Thedevelopment ofradarinItalyalsostartedearly,butwasslow.There wereonlyrelatively fewItalian-produced radarsoperationally deployed bythetimetheyleft thewarinSeptember, 1943.TheworkinJapanwasalsoslowbutreceived impetus from disclosures bytheirGerman alliesin1940andfromthecaptureofUnitedStatespulseradars inthePhilippines earlyin1942.Thedevelopment ofradarintheSovietUnionwasquite similartotheexperience elsewhere: Bythesummerof1941theyhaddeployed operationally a number of80-MHz air-search radarsforthedefense'ofMoscow againsttheGerman invasion.14Theirindigenous effortswereinterrupted bythecourseofthewar.
Thus,radardeveloped independently andsimultaneously inseveralcountries justpriorto WorldWarII.Itisnotpossible'to singleoutanyoneindividual astheinventor; therewere manyfathersofradar.Thiswasbroughtaboutnotonlybythespreadofradiotechnology to many coun~ries, butbythematuring oftheairplane duringthissametimeandthecommon recognition ofitsmilitarythreatandtheneedtodefendagainstit.
:;, 1.6APPLICATIONS OFRADAR Radarhasbeenemployed on·theground,intheair,onthesea,andinspace.Ground-hased radarhasbeenappliedchieflyto'thedetection, location, andtracking ofaircraftorspace targets.Shipboard radaris'used a~a'navigation aidandsafet~devicetolocatebuoys,shore lines, and other ships.
as well as for observing aircraft.
Airborne radar may be used to detect  other aircraft, ships, or land vehicles, or it may be used for mapping of land, storm avoidance,  terrain avoidance, and navigation.
In space, radar has assisted in the guidance of spacecraft  and for the remote sensing of the land and sea.
 The major user of radar, and contributor of the cost of almost all of its development, has  been the military: although there have been increasingly important civil applications, chiefly  for niaririe and air tiavigation.
The niajor areas of radar application, in no particular order of  irnpo~ ta~icc, are Ijriefly described below.
 Air.
Trclffic Corrtrol (A TC).
Radars are employed throughout the world for the purpose of  safely coritrollit~g air traffic en route and in tlic vicinity of airports.
Aircraft and ground  vcllicular traffic st large airports are monitored by tliearis of high-resolution radar.
Radar  has been used with GCA (ground-control approach) systems to guide aircraft to a safe  landing in bad weather.
In addition, the microwave landing system and the widely used  ATC radar-beacon system are based in large part on radar technology.
 Aircv-aft Nac~iqatiotl.
The weather-avoidance radar used on aircraft to outline regions of preci-  pitation to the pilot is a classical form of radar.
Radar is also used for terrain avoidance  and terrain following.
Although they may not always be thought of as radars, the radio  altimeter (either FM/CW or pulse) and the doppler navigator are also radars.
Sometimes  ground-mapping radars of moderately high resolution are used for aircraft navigation  purposes.
 Ship Safety.
Radar is used for enhancing the safety of ship travel by warning of potential  collision with other ships, and for detecting navigation buoys, especially in poor visibility.
 I11 terms of numbers, this is one of the larger applications of radar, but in terms of physical  size and cost it is one of the smallest.
It has also proven to be one of the most reliable  radar systems.
Automatic detection and tracking equipments (also called plot extractors)  are commercially available for use with such radars for the purpose of collision avoi-  dance.
Shore-based radar of moderately high resolution is also used for the surveillance of  liarbors as an aid to navigation.
 Space..
Space vehicles have used radar for rendezvous and docking, and for landing on the  moon.
Some of the largest ground-based radars are for the detection and tracking of  satellites.
Satcllitc-borne radars have also been used for remote sensing as meritioried  below.
 Rer~rote Setrsirrg.
A11 radars are remote sensors; however, as this term is used it implies the  sensing of geophysical objects, or the "environment." For some time, radar has been used  as a remote sensor of the weather.
It was also used in the past to probe the moon and the  planets (radar astronomy).
The ionospheric sounder, an important adjunct for HF (short  wave) communications, is a radar.
Remote sensing with radar is also concerned with  Earth resources, which includes the measurement and mapping of sea conditions, water  resources, ice cover, agriculture, forestry conditions, geological formations, and environ-  niental pollution.
The platforms for such radars include satellites as well as aircraft.
 La~v Erfircentenr.
In addition to the wide use of radar to measure the speed of automobile  traffic by highway police, radar has also been employed as a means for the detection of  intruders.
 Alilitnrv.
Many of the civilian applications of radar are also employed by the military.
The  traditional role of radar for military application has been for surveillance, navigation, and  for the control and guidance of weapons.
It represents, by far, the largest use of radar.
 THENATURE OFRADAR13 lines.andotherships,aswellasforobserving aircraft.
Airborne radarmaybeusedtodetect otheraircraft, ships,orlandvehicles, oritmaybeusedformapping ofland,stormavoidance, terrainavoidance, andnavigation.
In space,radarhasassisted intheguidance ofspacecraft andfortheremotesensingofthelandandsea.
Themajoruserofradar,andcontributor ofthecostofalmostallofitsdevelopment, has beenthemilitary: although therehavebeenincreasingly important civilapplications, chieny formarineandairnavigation.
Themajorareasofradarapplication, innoparticular orderof importance.
archrieflydescribed below.
AirTrafficCOlltrol (ATC).Radarsareemployed throughout theworldforthepurpose of safelycontrolling airtrafficenrouteandinthevicinityofairports.
Aircraftandground vehicular trafficatlargeairports arcmonitored bymeansofhigh-resolution radar.Radar hasbeenusedwithGCA(ground-control approach) systems toguideaircrafttoasafe landinginbadweather.
Inaddition, themicrowave landingsystemandthewidelyused ATCradar-beacon systemarebasedinlargepartonradartechnology.
Aircr~fiNavigatioll.
Theweather-avoidance radarusedonaircrafttooutlineregionsofpreci­ pitation tothepilotisaclassical formofradar.Radarisalsousedforterrainavoidance andterrainfollowing.
Although theymaynotalwaysbethoughtofasradars,theradio altimeter (eitherFMjCW orpulse)andthedoppler navigator arealsoradars.Sometimes ground-mapping radarsofmoderately highresolution areusedforaircraftnavigation purposes.
S},i"Safety.Radarisusedforenhancing thesafetyofshiptravelbywarning ofpotential collision withotherships,andfordetecting navigation buoys,especially inpoorvisibility.
Intermsofnumbers, thisisoneofthelargerapplications ofradar,butintermsofphysical sizeandcostitisoneofthesmallest.
Ithasalsoproventobeoneofthemostreliable radarsystems.
Automatic detection andtracking equipments (alsocalledplotextractors) arecommercially available forusewithsuchradarsforthepurpose ofcollision avoi­ dance.Shore-based radarofmoderately highresolution isalsousedforthesurveillance of harbors asanaidtonavigation.
Space.Spacevehicles haveusedradarforrendezvous anddocking, andforlandingonthe moon.Someofthelargestground-based radarsareforthedetection andtracking of satellites.
Satellite-borne radarshavealsobeenusedforremotesensingasmentioned below.
RemoteSellsillg.
Allradarsareremotesensors; however, asthistermisuseditimpliesthe sensingofgeophysical objects,orthe"environment." Forsometime,radarhasbeenused asaremotesensoroftheweather.
Itwasalsousedinthepasttoprobethemoonandthe planets(radarastronomy).
Theionospheric sounder, animportant adjunctforHF(short wave)communications, isaradar.Remote sensing withradarisalsoconcerned with Earthresources, whichincludes themeasurement andmapping ofseaconditions, water resources, icecover,agriculture, forestryconditions, geological formations, andenviron­ mentalpollution.
Theplatforms forsuchradarsincludesatelJites asweBasaircraft.
LawEnforcement.
Inaddition tothewideuseofradartomeasure thespeedofautomobile trafficbyhighway police,radarhasalsobeenemployed asameansforthedetection of intruders.
Military.
Manyofthecivilianapplications ofradararealsoemployed bythemilitary.
The traditional roleofradarformilitaryapplication hasbeenforsurveillance, navigation, and forthecontrolandguidance ofweapons.
Itrepresents, byfar,thelargestuseofradar. 14 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  REFERENCES  1.
Guerlac, H.
E.: "OSRD Long History," vol.
V, Division 14, "Radar," available from Office of  Technical Services, U.S.
Department of Commerce.
 2.
British Patent 13,170, issued to Christian Hiilsmeyer, Sept.
22, 1904, entitled " Hertzian-wave Project-  ing and Receiving Apparatus Adapted to Indicate or Give Warning of the Presence of a Metallic  Body, Such as a Ship or a Train, in the Line of Projection of Such Waves."  3.
Marconi, S.
G.: Radio Telegraphy, Proc.
IRE, vol.
10, no.
4, p.
237, 1922.
 4.
Breit, G., and M.
A.
Tuve: A Test of the Existence of the Conducting Layer, Phys Rev., vol.
28,  pp.
554-575, September, 1926.
 5.
Englund, C.
R., A.
B.
Crawford, and W.
W.
Mumford: Some results of a Study of Ultra-short-wave  Transmission Phenomena, Proc.
IRE, vol.
21, pp.
475-492, March, 1933.
 6.
CIS.
Patent 1,981,884, "System for Detecting Objects by Radio," issued to A.
H.
Taylor, L.
C.
Young,  and L.
A.
Hyland, Nov.
27, 1934.
 7.
Vieweger, A.
L.: Radar in the Signal Corps, IRE Trans., vol.
MIL-4, pp.
555-561, October, 1960.
 8.
Origins of Radar: Background to the Awards of the Royal Commission, Wireless World, vol.
58,  pp.
95-99, March, 1952.
 9.
Wilkins, A.
F.: The Story of Radar, Research (London), vol.
6, pp.
434-440, November, 1953.
 10.
Rowe, A.
P.: "One Story of Radar," Cambridge University Press, New York, 1948.
A very readable .i  description of the history of radar development at TRE (Telecommunications Research Establish-  ment, England) and how TRE went about its business from 1935 to the end of World War 11.
 11.
Watson-Watt, Sir Robert: "Three Steps to Victory," Odhams Press, Ltd., London, 1957; "The Pulse of  Radar," The Dial Press, Inc., New York, 1959.
 12.
Susskind, C.: "The Birth of the Golden Cockerel: The Development of Radar," in preparation  13.
Price, A.: "Instruments of Darkness," Macdonald and Janes, London, 1977.
 14.
Lobanov, M.
M.: "Iz Proshlovo Radiolokatzii" (Out of the Past of Radar), Military Publisher of the  Ministry of Defense, USSR, Moscow, 1969.
 15.
IEEE Standard Letter Designations for Radar-Frequency Bands, IEEE Std 521-1976, Nov.
30, 1976.
 16.
Villard, 0.
G., Jr.: The Ionospheric Sounder and Its Place in the History of Radio Science, Radio  Science, vol.
11, pp.
847-860, November, 1976.
 14INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS REFERENCES 1.Guerlac, H.E.:"OSRD LongHistory," vol.V,Division 14,"Radar," available fromOfficeof Technical Services, U.S.Department ofCommerce.
2.BritishPatent13,170,issuedtoChristian Hiilsmeyer, Sept.22,1904,entitled" Hertzian-wave Project­ ingandReceiving Apparatus Adapted toIndicate orGiveWarning ofthePresence ofaMetallic Body,SuchasaShiporaTrain,intheLineofProjection ofSuchWaves." 3.Marconi, S.G.:RadioTelegraphy, Proc.IRE,vol.10,no.4,p.237,1922.
4.Breit,G.,andM.A.Tuve:ATestoftheExistence oftheConducting Layer,Phys.Rev.,vol.28, pp.554-575, September, 1926.
5.Englund, C.R.,A.B.Crawford, andW.W.Mumford: SomeresultsofaStudyofUltra-short-wave Transmission Phenomena, Proc.IRE,vol.21,pp.475-492, March,1933.
6.U.S.Patent1,981,884, "System forDetecting ObjectsbyRadio,"issuedtoA.H.Taylor,L.C.Young, andL.A.Hyland,Nov.27,1934.
7.Vieweger, A.L.:RadarintheSignalCorps,IRETrans.,vol.MIL-4,pp.555-561, October, 1960.
8.OriginsofRadar:Background totheAwardsoftheRoyalCommission, Wireless World,vol.58, pp.95-99,March,1952.
9.Wilkins, A.F.:TheStoryofRadar,Research (London), vol.6,pp.434-440, November, 1953.
10.Rowe,A.P.:"OneStoryofRadar,"Cambridge University Press,NewYork,1948.Averyreadable description ofthehistoryofradardevelopment atTRE(Telecommunications Research Establish­ ment,England) andhowTREwentaboutitsbusiness from1935totheendofWorldWarII.
11.Watson-Watt, SirRobert:"ThreeStepstoVictory," Odhams Press,Ltd.,London, 1957;"ThePulseof Radar,"TheDialPress,Inc.,NewYork,1959.
12.Susskind,c.:"TheBirthoftheGoldenCockerel: TheDevelopment ofRadar,"inpreparation.
13.Price,A.:"Instruments ofDarkness," Macdonald andJanes,London, 1977.
14.Lobanov, M.M.:"IzProshlovo Radiolokatzii" (OutofthePastofRadar),Military Publisher ofthe Ministry ofDefense, USSR,Moscow, 1969.
15.IEEEStandard LetterDesignations forRadar-Frequency Bands,IEEEStd521-1976, Nov.30,1976.
16.Villard,O.G.,k:TheIonospheric Sounder andItsPlaceintheHistoryofRadioScience, Radio Science,vol.11,pp.847-860, November, 1976. TWO  THE RADAR EQUATION  2.1 PREDICTION OF RANGE PERFORMANCE  The simple form of the radar equation derived in Sec.
1.2 expressed the maximum radar range  R,,, in terms of radar and target parameters:  where P, = transmitted power, watts  G = antenna gain  A, = antenna emective aperture, m2  a = radar cross section, m2  Smin = minimum detectable signal, watts  All the parameters are to some extent under the control of the radar designer, except for the  target cross section a.
The radar equation states that if long ranges are desired, the transmitted  power must be large, the radiated energy must be concentrated into a narrow beam (high  transmitting antenna gain), the received echo energy must be collected with a large antenna  aperture (also synonymous with high gain), and the receiver must be sensitive to weak signals.
 In practice, however, the simple radar equation does not predict the range performance of  actual radar equipments to a satisfactory degree of accuracy.
The predicted values of radar  range are usually optimistic.
In some cases the actual range might be only half that predicted.'  Part of this discrepancy is due to the failure of Eq.
(2.1) to explicitly include the various losses  that can occur throughout the system or the loss in performance usually experienced when  electronic equipment is operated in the field rather than under laboratory-type conditions.
 4nother important factor that must be considered in the radai equation is the statistical or  unpredictable nature of several of the parameters.
The minimum detectable signal S,,, and the  target cross section cr are both statistical in nature and must be expressed in statistical terms.
 (2.1)CHAPTER TWO THERADAR EQUATION 2.1PREDICTION OFRANGE PERFORMANCE i Thesimpleformoftheradarequation derivedinSec.1.2expressed themaximum radarrange Rmu.intermsofradarandtargetparameters: Rmu.=[r'~2Ae(J] 1/4 41tSmln wherePt=transmitted power,watts G=antenna gain Ar=antennaeffective aperture, m2 (J=radarcrosssection,m2 Smln=minimum detectable signal,watts Alltheparameters aretosomeextentunderthecontroloftheradardesigner, exceptforthe targetcrosssection(J.Theradarequation statesthatiflongrangesaredesired,thetransmitted powermustbelarge,theradiated energymustbeconcentrated intoanarrowbeam(high transmitting antenna gain),thereceived echoenergymustbecollected withalargeantenna aperture (alsosynonymous withhighgain),andthereceivermustbesensitive toweaksignals.
Inpractice, however, thesimpleradarequation doesnotpredicttherangeperformance of actualradarequipments toasatisfactory degreeofaccuracy.
Thepredicted valuesofradar rangeareusuallyoptimistic.
Insomecasestheactualrangemightbeonlyhalfthatpredicted.1 Partofthisdiscrepancy isduetothefailureofEq.(2.1)toexplicitly includethevariouslosses thatcanoccurthroughout thesystemorthelossinperformance usuallyexperienced when electronic equipment isoperated inthefieldratherthanunderlaboratory-type conditions.
&.nother important factorthatmustbeconsidered intheradatequation isthestatistical or unpredictable natureofseveraloftheparameters.
Theminimum detectable signal Smlnandthe ~argetcrosssection(Jarebothstatistical innatureandmustbeexpressed instatistical terms. 16 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  Other statistical factors which do not appear explicitly in Eq.
(2.1) but which have an effect on  the radar performance are the meteorological conditions along the propagation path and thc  performance of the radar operator, if one is employed.
The statistical nature of these several  parameters does not allow the maximum radar range to be described by a single number.
Its  specification must include a statement of the probability that the radar will detect a certain  type of target at a particular range.
 In this chapter, the simple radar equation will be extended to include most of the impor-  tant factors that influence radar range performance.
If all those factors affecting radar range  were known, it.
would be possible, in principle, to make an accuratc prediction of radar  perforpance.
But, as is true for most endeavors, the quality of the prediction is a function of  the amount of effort employed in determining the quantitative effects of the various pa-  rameters.
Unfortunately, the effort required to specify completely the effects of all radar pa-  rameters to the degree of accuracy required for range prediction is usually not economically  justified.
A compromise is always necessary between what one would like to have and what  one can actually get with reasonable effort.
This will be better appreciated as we proceed  through the chapter and note the various factors that must be taken into account.
J  A complete and detailed discussion of all those factors that influence the prediction of  radar range is beyond the scope of a single chapter.
For this reason many subjects will appear  to be treated only lightly.
This is deliberate and is necessitated by brevity.
More detailed  information will be found in some of the subsequent chapters or in the references listed at the  end of the chapter.
 '.
6  The ability of a radar receiver to detect a weak echo signal is limited by the noise energy that  occupies the same portion of the frequency spectrum as does'the signal energy.
The weakest  signal the receiver can detect is called the minimum detectable signal.
The specification of the  minimum detectable signal is sometimes difficult because of its statistical nature and because  the criterion for deciding whether a target is present or not may not be too well defined.
 Detection is based on establishing a threshold level at the output of the receiver.
If the  receiver output exceeds the threshold, a signal is assumed to be present.
This is called threshold  detection.
Consider the output of a typical radar receiver as a function of time (Fig.
2.1).
This  might represent one sweep of the video output displayed on an A-scope.
The envelope has a  fluctuating appearance caused by the random nature of noise.
If a large signal is present such  as at A in Fig.
2.1, it is greater than the surrounding noise peaks and can be recognized on the  basis of its amplitude.
Thus, if the threshold level were set sufficiently high, the envelope would  not generally exceed.
the threshold if noise alone were present, but would exceed it if a strong  signal were present.
If the signal were small, however, it would be more difficult to recognize its  presence.
The threshold level mustbe low if weak signals are to be detected, but it cannot be so  low that noise peaks cross the threshold and give a false indication of the presence of targets.
 The voltage envelope :of.
Fig.
2.1 , is assumed to be from a matched-filter receiver  (Sec.
10.2).
A matched filter is one designed to maximize the output peak signal to average  noise (power) ratio.
It has a frequency-response function which is proportional to the complex  conjugate of the signa1,spectrum.
(This is not the same as the concept of" impedance match "  of circuit theory.) The ideal matched-filterreceiver cannot always be exactly realized in prac-  tice, but it is possible to approach.it with practical receiver circuits.
A matched filter for a radar  transmitting a rectangular-shaped .pulse is usually characterized by a bandwidth B approxi-  mately the reciprocal of the pulse width 7, or Br = 1.
The output of a matched-filter receiver is  16INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS Otherstatistical factorswhichdonotappearexplicitly inEq.(2.1)butwhichhaveaneffecton theradarperformance arethemeteorological conditions alongthepropagation pathandthe performance oftheradaroperator, ifoneisemployed.
Thestatistical natureoftheseseveral parameters doesnotallowthemaximum radarrangetobedescribed byasinglenumber.
Its specification mustincludeastatement oftheprobability thattheradarwilldetectacertain typeoftargetataparticular range.
Inthischapter, thesimpleradarequation willbeextended toincludemostoftheimpor­ tantfactorsthatinfluence radarrangeperformance.
Ifallthosefactorsaffecting radarrange wereknown, it.wouldbepossible, inprinciple, tomakeanaccurate prediction ofradar perfoqnance.
But,asistrueformostendeavors, thequalityoftheprediction isafunction of theamount ofeffortemployed indetermining thequantitative effectsofthevariouspa­ rameters.
Unfortunately, theeffortrequired tospecifycompletely theeffectsofallradarpa­ rameters tothedegreeofaccuracy required forrangeprediction isusuallynoteconomically justified.
Acompromise isalwaysnecessary between whatonewouldliketohaveandwhat onecanactually getwithreasonable effort.Thiswillbebetterappreciated asweproceed through thechapterandnotethevariousfactorsthatmustbetakenintoaccount.
Acomplete anddetailed discussion ofallthosefactorsthatinfluence theprediction of radarrangeisbeyondthescopeofasinglechapter.Forthisreasonmanysubjectswillappear tobetreatedonlylightly.Thisisdeliberate andisnecessitated bybrevity.Moredetailed information willbefoundinsomeofthesubsequent chapters orinthereferences listedatthe endofthechapter.
2.2MINIMUM DETECTABLE SIGNAL Theabilityofaradarreceivertodetectaweakechosignalislimitedbythenoiseenergythat occupies thesameportionofthefrequency spectrum asdoes'thesignalenergy.Theweakest signalthereceivercandetectiscalled.theminimum detectable signal.Thespecification ofthe minimum detectable signalissometimes difficultbecauseofitsstatistical natureandbecause thecriterion fordeciding whether atargetispresentornotmaynotbetoowelldefined.
Detection isbasedonestablishing athreshold levelattheoutputofthereceiver.Ifthe receiveroutputexceedsthethreshold, asignalisassumed tobepresent.Thisiscalledthreshold detection.
Consider theoutputofatypicalradarreceiverasafunction oftime(Fig.2.1).This mightrepresent onesweepofthevideooutputdisplayed onanA-scope.
Theenvelope hasa fluctuating appearance causedbytherandomnatureofnoise.Ifalargesignalispresentsuch asatAinFig.2.1,itisgreaterthanthesurrounding noisepeaksandcanberecognized onthe basisofitsamplitude.
Thus,ifthethreshold levelweresetsufficiently high,theenvelope would notgenerally exceed.thethreshold ifnoisealonewerepresent,butwouldexceeditifastrong signalwerepresent.Uthe signalweresmall,however, itwouldbemoredifficulttorecognize its presence.
Thethreshold levelmust.belowifweaksignalsaretobedetected, butitcannotbeso lowthatnoisepeakscrossthethreshold andgiveafalseindication ofthepresence oftargets.
Thevoltage envelope lof·Fig.2.1.isassumed tobefromamatched-filter receiver (Sec.10.2).Amatched filterisonedesigned tomaximize theoutputpeaksignaltoaverage noise(power)ratio.Ithasafrequency-response function whichisproportional tothecomplex conjugate ofthesignalspectrum.
(Thi.sisnotthesameastheconceptof"impedance match" ofcircuittheory.)Theidealmatched-filter· receivercannotalwaysbeexactlyrealizedinprac­ tice,butitispossibletoapproach itwithpractical receivercircuits.Amatched filterforaradar transmitting arectangular-shaped .pulseisusuallycharacterized byabandwidth Bapproxi­ matelythereciprocal ofthepulsewidthf,orBr;:::1.Theoutputofamatched-filter receiver is Threshold level , A  Time -  Figure 2.1 Typical envelope of tile radar receiver output as a function of time.
A, and B, and C represent  signal plus noise.
,4 arid B would be valid detections, but C is a missed detection.
 the cross correlation between the received waveform and a replica of the transmitted  waveform.
Hence it does not preserve the shape of the input waveform.
(There is no reason to  wish to preserve the shape of the received waveform so long as the output signal-to-noise ratio  is maximized.)  Let us return to tlie receiver output as represented in Fig.
2.1.
A threshold level is estab-  lished, as shown by the dashed line.
A target is said to be detected if the envelope crosses tlie  thresliold.
if the sigrial is large such as at A, it is not difficult to decide that a target is present.
 I3ut consider tlie two signals at B and C, representing target echoes of equal atnplitudc.
'I'lic  noise voltage accompanying the signal at B is large enough so that the combination of signal  plus noise exceeds the tlireshold.
At C the noise is not as large and the resultant signal plus  rioise does not cross the tlireshold.
Thus the presence of noise will sometimes enhance'  the detection of weak signals but it may also cause the loss of a signal which would otherwise  be detected.
 Weak signals such as C would riot be lost if the threshold level were lower.
But too low a  tlireshold increases the likelihood that noise alone will rise above the threshold and be taken  for a real signal.
Such an occurrence is called afalse alarm.
Therefore, if the threshold is set too  low, false target indications are obtained, but if it is set too high, targets might be missed.
The  selection of the proper threshold level is a compromise that depends upon how important it is  if a mistake is made either by (1) failing to recognize a signal that is present (probability of z  miss) or by (2) falsely indicating the presence of a signal when none exists (probability of a false  alarm).
 When the target-decision process is made by an operator viewing a cathode-ray-tube  display, it would seem that the criterion used by the operator for detection ought to be  arialogous to the setting of a threshold, either consciously or subconsciously.
The chief differ-  ence between tlie electronic and the operator thresholds is that the former may be determined  with some logic and can be expected to remain constant with time, while the latter's threshold  might be difficult to predict and may not remain fixed.
The individual's performance as part of  the radar detection process depends upon the state of the operator's fatigue and motivation, as  well as training.
 The capability of the human operator as part of the radar detection process can be  determined only by experiment.
Needless to say, in experiments of this nature there are likely  to be wide variations between different experimenters.
Therefore, for the purposes of the  preserit discussion, the operator will be considered the same as an electronic threshold detec-  tor, an assumption that is generally valid for an alert, trained operator.
 The signal-to.noise ratio necessary to provide adequate detection is one of the important  THERADAR EQUATION 17 _Thresho~ve~ Rmsvalue ofnoise Q) 0'o-o> Time-- Fi~un'2.1Typical envelope ortheradarreceiveroutputasarunction ortime.
A,andB,andCrepresent signalplusnoise.AandBwouldbevaliddetections, butCisamisseddetection.
thecrosscorrelation between thereceived waveform andareplicaofthetransmitted waveform.
Henceitdoesnotpreserve theshapeoftheinputwaveform.
(Thereisnoreasonto wishtopreserve theshapeofthereceived waveform solongastheoutputsignal-to-noise ratio ismaximized.) LetliSreturntothereceiveroutputasrepresented inFig.2.1.Athreshold levelisestab­ lished.asshownbythedashedline.Atargetissaidtobedetected iftheenvelope crossesthe threshold.
IfthesignalislargesuchasatA,itisnotdifficult todecidethatatargetispresent.
Butconsider thetwosignalsatBandC,representing targetechoesofequalamplitude.
The noisevoltageaccompanying thesignalatBislargeenoughsothatthecombination ofsignal pIllsnoiseexceeds thethreshold.
AtCthenoiseisnotaslargeandtheresultant signalplus noisedoesnotcrossthethreshold.
Thusthepresence ofnoisewillsometimes enhance' thedetection ofweaksignalsbutitmayalsocausethelossofasignalwhichwouldotherwise bedetected.
WeaksignalssuchasCwouldnotbelostifthethreshold levelwerelower.ButtooIowa threshold increases thelikelihood thatnoisealonewillriseabovethethreshold andbetaken forarealsignal.Suchanoccurrence iscalledafalsealarm.Therefore, ifthethreshold issettoo low.falsetargetindications areobtained, butifitissettoohigh,targetsmightbemissed.The selection oftheproperthreshold levelisacompromise thatdepends uponhowimportant itis ifamistake ismadeeitherby(1)failingtorecognize asignalthatispresent(probability ofa miss)orby(2)falselyindicating thepresence ofasignalwhennoneexists(probability ofafalse alarm).
Whenthetarget-decision process ismadebyanoperator viewing acathode-ray-tube display, itwouldseemthatthecriterion usedbytheoperator fordetection oughttobe analogous tothesettingofathreshold, eitherconsciously orsubconsciously.
Thechiefdiffer­ encebetween theelectronic andtheoperator thresholds isthattheformermaybedetermined withsomelogicandcanbeexpected toremainconstant withtime,whilethelatter'sthreshold mightbedifficult topredictandmaynotremainfixed.Theindividual's performance aspartof theradardetection processdepends uponthestateoftheoperator's fatigueandmotivation, as wellastraining, Thecapability ofthehumanoperator aspartoftheradardetection process canbe determined onlybyexperiment.
Needless tosay,inexperiments ofthisnaturetherearelikely tobewidevariations between different experimenters.
Therefore, forthepurposes ofthe presentdiscussion, theoperator willbeconsidered thesameasanelectronic threshold detec­ tor,anassumption thatisgenerally validforanalert,trainedoperator.
Thesignal-to ,noiserationecessary toprovideadequate detection isoneoftheimportant parameters that must be determined in order to comptite the minimum detectable signal.
 Although the detection decision is usually based on measurements at the video otrtput, it is  easier to consider maximizing the signal-to-noise ratio at the output of the IF amplifier rather  than in the video.
The receiver may be considered linear irp to the output of the IF.
It is shown  by Van Vieck and Middleton3 that maximizing the signal-to-noise ratio at the output of the IF  is equivalent to maximizing the video output.
The advantage of considering the signal-to-noise  ratio at the IF is that the assumption of linearity may be made.
It is also assumed that the IF  filter characteristic approximates the matched filter, so that the oirtput signal-to-noise ratio is  maximized.
 2.3 RECEIVER NOISE  Since noise is the chief factor limiting receiver sensitivity, it is necessary to obtain some means  of describing it quantitatively.
Noise is unwanted electromagnetic energy which interferes with  the ability of the receiver to detect the wanted signal.
It may originate within the receiver itself,  or it may enter via the receiving antenna along with the desired signal.
If the radar were to  operate in a perfectly noise-free environment so that no external sources of noise accompanied  the desired signal, and if the receiver itself were so perfect that it did not generate any excess  noise, there would still exist an unavoidable component of noise generated by the thermal  motion of the conduction'electrons in the ohmic portions of the receiver input stages.
This is  called thermal noise, or Johnson noise, and is directly proportional to the temperature of the  ohmic portions of the circuit and the receiver band~idth.~' The available thermal-noise power  generated by a receiver' of bandwidth B, (in hertz) at a temperature T (degrees Kelvin) is  equal to  Available thermal-noise power = kTB, (2.2)  where k = Boltzmann's constant = 1.38 x J/deg.
If the temperatiire T is taken to be  290 K, which corresponds approximately to room temperature (62"F), the factor kT is  4 x lo-" W/Hz of bandwidth.
If the receiver circuitry were at some other temperature, ttie  thermal-noise power would be correspondingly different.
 A receiver with a reactance input such as a parametric amplifier need not have any ::!  significant ohmic loss.
The limitation in this case is the thermal noise seen by the antennii and  the ohmic losses in the transmission line.
 For radar receivers of the superheterodyne type (the type of receiver used for most radar  applications), the receiver bandwidth is approximately that of the intermediate-freqire~lcy  stages.
It should be cautioned that the bandwidth B, of Eq.
(2.2) is not the 3-dB, or half-power,  bandwidth commonly employed by electronic engineers.
It is an integrated bandwidth and is  given by  where H( f) = frequency-response characteristic of IF amplifier (filter) and fo = frequency of  maximum response (usually occurs at midband).
 When H( f) is normalized .
to unity at midband (maximum-response frequency),  H( fo) = 1.
The bandwidth Bn is called the noise bandwidth and is the bandwidth of an equiva-  lent rectangular filter whose noise-power output is the same as the filter with characteristic  18INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS parameters thatmustbedetermined inordertocompute theminimum detectable signal, Although thedetection decision isusuallybasedonmeasurements atthevideooutput,itis easiertoconsider maximizing thesignal-to-noise ratioattheoutputoftheIFamplifier rather thaninthevideo.Thereceivermaybeconsidered linearuptotheoutputoftheIF.Itisshown byVanVleckandMiddleton3thatmaximizing thesignal-to-noise ratioattheoutputoftheIF isequivalent tomaximizing thevideooutput.Theadvantage ofconsidering thesignal-to-noise ratioattheIFisthattheassumption oflinearity maybemade.Itisalsoassumed thattheIF filtercharacteristic approximates thematched filter,sothattheoutputsignal-to-noise ratiois maximized.
2.3RECEIVER NOISE Sincenoiseisthechieffactorlimitingreceiversensitivity, itisnecessary toobtainsomemeans ofdescribing itquantitatively.
Noiseisunwanted electromagnetic energywhichinterferes with theabilityofthereceivertodetectthewantedsignal.Itmayoriginate withinthereceiveritself, oritmayenterviathereceiving antenna alongwiththedesiredsignal.Iftheradarwereto operateinaperfectly noise-free environment sothatnoexternal sourcesofnoiseaccompanied thedesiredsignal,andifthereceiveritselfweresoperfectthatitdidnotgenerate anyexcess noise,therewouldstillexistanunavoidable component ofnoisegenerated bythethermal motionoftheconduction' electrons intheohmicportions ofthereceiverinputstages.Thisis calledthermalnoise,orJohnson noise,andisdirectlyproportional tothetemperature ofthe ohmicportions ofthecircuitandthereceiverbandwidth.60Theavailable thermal-noise power generated byareceiver' ofbandwidth BII(inhertz)atatemperature T(degrees Kelvin) is equalto Available thermal-noise power=kTBII (2.2) wherek=Boltzmann's constant=1.38x10-23Jjdeg.Ifthetemperature Tistakentobl: 290K,whichcorresponds approximately toroomtemperature (62°F),thefactorkTis 4 x10-21WjHzofbandwidth.
Ifthereceivercircuitry wereatsomeothertemperature, thl: thermal-noise powerwouldbecorrespondingly different.
Areceiver withareactance inputsuchasaparametric amplifier neednothaveany significant ohmicloss.Thelimitation inthiscaseisthethermalnoiseseenbytheantennii and theohmiclossesinthetransmission line.
Forradarreceivers ofthesuperheterodyne type(thetypeofreceiverusedformostradar applications), thereceiver bandwidth isapproximately thatoftheintermediate-frequency stages.Itshouldbecautioned thatthebandwidth BIIofEq.(2.2)isnotthe3-dB,orhalf-power.
bandwidth commonly employed byelectronic engineers.
Itisanintegrated bandwidth andis givenby ('IH(f) 12df BII= .-allH(fo) 12(2.3) whereH(f)=frequency-response characteristic ofIFamplifier (filter)andfo=frequency of maximum response (usually occursatmidband).
WhenH(f)isnormalized' tounityatmidband (maximum-response frequency).
H(fo)=1.Thebandwidth BIIiscalled,the noisebandwidth andisthebandwidth ofanequiva­ lentrectangular filterwhose noise~poweroutput isthesameasthefilterwithcharacteristic THE RADAR EQUATION 19  I!(/ ) '1 lic 3-ti13 I~i~r~tlwitltli is tlcfirictl as tlic scparntioti it1 licrtz betwceri tlie poitits oti tlic  frequericy-resi~otisc cliaractcristic wliere the response is reduced to 0.707 (3 dB) fro111 its r~iaxi-  nlilm valric.
Tllc 3-dl3 t~i~ndwicith is widely i~sed, since it is easy to measure.
The meastire~nent  of rioisc t)aridwicftli.
I~owcvcr, irivolves a coriiplete knowledge of tlie resporrse cliaractet.istic  N(/ ).
Tlie rreqiicncy-response cliaracteristics of many practical radar receivers are such that  tlic 3-dl3 i~rici tlic tioisc I~nt~tlwidtlis tlo riot differ appreciably.
Tlierefore tlie 3-dl3 I~itnciwidtli  rnay be used in niatiy cases as an approximation to the rioise bandwidth.'  The noise power in practical receivers is often greater than can be accounted for by  thertnal noise alone.
The additional noise cotnpotlents are due to mechanisms other than the  tlierrnal agitation of tlie conduction electrons.
For purposes of the present discussion,  tiowever, the exact origin of tlie extra noise components is not important except to know that  it exists.
No matter whether the noise is generated by a thermal mechanism or by some other  mechanism.
tile total tloise at tlie output of the receiver may be considered to be equal to the  thermal-noise power obtained from an " ideal " receiver multiplied by a factor called the iroise  fig~rre.
The noise figure Fn of a receiver is defined by the equation  i  N I: = ---- "-..
- tloise out of practical receiver -  " kTo BnG, noise out of ideal receiver at std temp To (2.40)  where No = rioise output from receiver, and G, = available gain.
The standard temperature To  is taken to be 290 K, according to the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers  definition.
'Tlie noise No is measured over the linear portion of the receiver input-output  characteristic, usually at the output of tlie IF amplifier before the nonlinear second detector.
 'The receiver bandwidth Bn is that of tlie IF aniplifier in most receivers.
The available gain G, is  tlie ratio of the signal out So to the signal in Si, and kTo Bn is the input noise Ni in an ideal  receiver.
Equation (2.40) may be rewritten as  The noise figure may be interpreted, therefore, as a measure of the degradation of signal-to-  noise-ratio as the signal passes through the receiver.
 j Rearranging Eq.
(2.417).
the input signal may be expressed as  If the minimum detectable signal S,,, is that value of SI corresponding to the minimum ratio of  output (IF) signal-to-noise ratio (So/No~in necessary for detection, then  Substituting Eq.
(2.6) into Eq.
(2.1) results in the following form of the radar equation:  Before continuing the discussion of the factors involved in the radar equation, it is  necessary to digress and review briefly some topics in probability theory in order to describe  the signal-to-noise ratio in statistical terms.
 THERADAR EQUATION 19 11(1),TheJ-t1Bhandwidth isdefinedastheseparation inhertzhetween thepointsonthe frequency-response characteristic whcrcthcresponsc isreduced to0.707(3dB)fromitsmaxi­ mUIllvaluc.Thc3-dBhandwidth iswidelylIscd.sinceitiseasytomeasure.
Themeasurement ofnoisebandwidth.
however.
involves acomplctcknowlcdge oftherespollse charactcristic /-1(/).Thefrequcncy-responsc characteristics ofmanypractical radarreceivers aresuchthat thc3-dBandthenoisehandwidths do1I0tdifferappreciahly.
Therefore the3-dBbandwidth maybeusedinmanycasesasanapproximation tothenoisebandwidth.2 Thenoisepowerinpractical receivers isoftengreaterthancanbeaccounted forby thermal noisealone.Theadditional noisecomponents areduetomechanisms otherthanthe thermal agitation oftheconduction electrons.
For'purposes ofthepresent discussion.
however, theexactoriginoftheextranoisecomponents isnotimportant excepttoknowthat itexists.Nomatterwhether thenoiseisgenerated byathermal mechanism orbysomeother mechanism.
thetotalnoiseattheoutputofthereceiver maybeconsidered tobeequaltothe thermal-noise powerobtained froman"ideal"receiver multiplied byafactorcalledthe"oise figure.ThenoisefigureFnofareceiver isdefinedbytheequation r=~!'-__ =noiseoutofpractical receiver nkToBnG onoiseoutofidealreceiveratstdtempTo(2.4a) whereNo=noiseoutputfromreceiver, andGo=available gain.Thestandard temperature To istakentobe290K.according totheInstitute ofElectrical andElectronics Engineers definition.
The1I0iseNoismcasured overthelinearportion ofthereceiver input-output characteristic.
usuallyattheoutputoftheIFamplifier beforethenonlinear seconddetector.
Thereceiver bandwidth BnisthatoftheIFamplifier inmostreceivers.
Theavailable gainGois theratioofthesignaloutSotothesignalinSj,andkToBnistheinputnoiseNjinanideal receiver.
Equation (2.4a)mayberewritten as (2.4b) Thenoisefiguremaybeinterpreted, therefore, asameasure ofthedegradation ofsignal-to­ noise-ratio asthesignalpassesthrough thereceiver.
Rearranging Eq.(2.4").theinputsignalmaybeexpressed as (2.5) Iftheminimum detectable signal SmlnisthatvalueofSIcorresponding totheminimum ratioof output(IF)signal-to-noise ratio(So/No~lnnecessary fordetection.
then (2.6) Substituting Eq.(2.6)intoEq.(2.t)resultsinthefollowing formoftheradarequation: (2.7) Beforecontinuing thediscussion ofthefactorsinvolved intheradarequation.
itis necessary todigressandreviewbrieflysometopicsinprobability theoryinordertodescribe thesignal-to-noise ratioinstatistical terms. 20 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  2.4 PROBABILITY-DENSITY FUNCTIONS  The basic concepts of probability theory needed in solving noise problems may be found in  any of several In this section we shall briefly review probability and the  probability-density function and cite some examples.
 Noise is a random phenomenon.
Predictions concerning the average performance of  random phenomena are possible by observing and classifying occurrences, but one cannot  predict exactly what will occur for any particular event.
Phenomena of a random nature can be  described with the aid of probability theory.
 Probability is a measure of the likelihood of occurrence of an event.
The scale of probabil-  ity ranges from 0 to 1.t An event which is certain is assigned the probability 1.
An impossible  event is assigned the probability 0.
The intermediate probabilities are assigned so that the  more likely an event, the greater is its probability.
 One of the more useful concepts of probability theory needed to analyze the detection of  signals in noise is the probability-density function.
Consider the variable x as representing a  typical measured value of a random process such as a noise voltage or current.
Imagine each x  to define a point on a straight line corresponding to the distance from a fixed reference point.
 The distance of x from the reference point might represent the value of the noise current or the  noise voltage.
Divide the line into small equal segments of length Ax and count the number of  times that x falls in each interval.
The probability-density function p(x) is then defined as  (number of values in range AX at x)/Ax p(x) = lim (2.8)  AX-o total number of values = N  N-rm  The probability that a particular measured value lies within the infinitesimal width ds  centered at x is simply p(x) dx.
The probability that the value of x lies within the finite rangz  from xl to x2 is found by integrating p(x) over the range of interest, or  X2  Piobability (x, < x < x2) = 1 p(x) dx  XI  By definition, the probability-density function is positive.
Since every measurement must yield  some value, the integral of the probability density over all values of x must be equal to unity; .j that is,  The average value of a variable function, +(x), that is described by the probability-density  function, p(x), is  This follows from the definition of an average value and the probability-density function.
The  mean, or average, value of x is  t Probabilities are sometimes expressed in percent (0 to 100) rather than 0 to 1.
 (2.9)20INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS 2.4PROBABILITY-DENSITY FUNCTIONS Thebasicconcepts ofprobability theoryneededinsolvingnoiseproblems maybefoundin anyofseveralreferences.4-8 Inthissection weshallbrieflyreviewprobability andthe probability-density function andcitesomeexamples.
Noiseisarandom phenomenon.
Predictions concerning theaverage performance of random phenomena arepossible byobserving andclassifying occurrences, butonecannot predictexactlywhatwilloccurforanyparticular event.Phenomena ofarandomnaturecanbe described withtheaidofprobability theory.
Probability isameasure ofthelikelihood ofoccurrence ofanevent.Thescaleofprobabil­ ityrangesfrom0tol.tAneventwhichiscertainisassigned theprobability 1.Animpossible eventisassigned theprobability O.Theintermediate probabilities areassigned sothatthe morelikelyanevent,thegreaterisitsprobability.
Oneofthemoreusefulconcepts ofprobability theoryneededtoanalyzethedetection of signalsinnoiseistheprobability-density function.
Consider thevariablexasrepresenting a typicalmeasured valueofarandom processsuchasanoisevoltageorcurrent.
Imagine eachx todefineapointonastraight linecorresponding tothedistance fromafixedreference point.
Thedistance ofxfromthereference pointmightrepresent thevalueofthenoisecurrentorthe noisevoltage.
Dividethelineintosmallequalsegments oflength ~xandcountthenumberof timesthatxfallsineachinterval.
Theprobability-density functionp(x)isthendefinedas ()1.(number ofvaluesinrange ~xatx)1~xpx=1m (2.8) &X-'O totalnumber ofvalues=NN-.oo Theprobability thataparticular measured valuelieswithintheinfinitesimal widthdx centered atxissimplyp(x)dx.Theprobability thatthevalueofxlieswithinthefiniterange fromx1toX2isfoundbyintegrating p(x)overtherangeofinterest, or Probability (Xl<X<X2)=f2p(x)dx XI Bydefinition, theprobability-density function ispositive.
Sinceeverymeasurement mustyield somevalue,theintegraloftheprobability densityoverallvaluesofxmustbeequaltounity; thatis, fOOp(x)dx=1 -00(2.10) Theaverage valueofavariable function, q,(x),thatisdescribed bytheprobability-density function,p(x),is (q,(x).v=fooq,(x)p(x) dx -00(2.1l) Thisfollowsfromthedefinition ofanaveragevalueandtheprobability-density function.
The mean,oraverage, valueofxis (x).v=ml=f00xp(x)dx -00 tProbabilities aresometimes expressed inpercent(0to1(0)ratherthan0to1.(2.12) and tlie mean square value is THE RADAR EQUATION 21  'Tlie quantities in, and l,lz are sometimes called the first and second moments of the random  variable .u.
If .u represents an electric voltage or current, inl is the d-c component.
It is the value  read by a direct-curretlt voltmeter or ammeter.
The mean square value (nt,) of the current  wl~eri rrlllltiplied by tile resistaricet gives the mean power.
The mean square value of voltage  times tlie conductance is also the mean power.
The variarlce is defined as  The variance is tile meall square deviation of x about its mean and is sometimes called the  secorld ceiltral rnonrcllt.
If the random variable is a noise current, the product of the variance  '/a and resistance gives the mean power of the a-c component.
The square root of the variance o is  called the stclrldard deviatioit and is the root-mean-square (rms) value of the a-c component.
 We shall consider four examples of probability-density functions: the uniform, gaussian,  Rayleigh, and exponential.
The uniform probability-density (Fig.
2.2~) is defined as  Ik fora<x<a+b  /I(.Y) =  \O for .w < a and x > a + b  t 111 ~ioise theory it is customary to take the resistance as 1 ohm or the conductance as 1 mho.
 Figure 2.2 Examples of probability-density functions.
(a) Unlform; (6) Gaussian; (c) Rayleigh (voltage);  (d) Rayleigtl (power) or exponential.
 THERADAR EQUATION 21 andthemeansquarevalueis (x2)av=1112=r'XJX2p(X)dx •-co(2.13) Thequantities 111Iand1112aresometimes calledthefirstandsecondmoments oftherandom variable x.Ifxrepresents anelectricvoltageorcurrent, 1111isthed-ccomponent.
Itisthevalue readhyadirect-current voltmeter orammeter.
Themeansquarevalue(m2)ofthecurrent whenmultiplied bytheresistancet givesthemeanpower.Themeansquarevalueofvoltage timestheconductance isalsothemeanpower.Thevariance isdefined as Il2=(12=«(x-/IId2)"=f(x-11Id21'(x)c1x=1112-11Ii=(x2).v-(x);v(2.14) -co Thevariance isthemeansquaredeviation ofxaboutitsmeanandissometimes calledthe secOIldcentralmoment.Iftherandom variable isanoisecurrent, theproductofthevariance andresistance givesthemeanpowerofthea-ccomponent.
Thesquarerootofthevariance (Jis calledthestandard deviation andistheroot-mean-square (rms)valueofthea-ccomponent.
Weshallconsider fourexamples ofprobability-density functions: theuniform, gaussian, Rayleigh.
andexponential.
Theuniform probability-density (Fig.2.2£1)isdefined as I'(x)=l~forQ<X<Q+b forx<Qandx>Q+b tinnoisetheoryitiscustomary totaketheresistance as1ohmortheconductance as1mho.
aa (a) (cIx xa (d)x w f<iRure2.2Examples ofprobability-density functions.
(0)Umform; (b)Gaussian; (c)Rayleigh (voltage); (d)Rayleigh (power)orexponential. 22 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  where k is a constant.
A rectangular, or uniform, distribution describes the phase of a random  sine wave relative to a particular origin of time; that is, the phase of the sine wave may be  found, with equal probability, anywhere from 0 to 2n, with k = 1121s.
It also applies to the  distribution of the round-off (quantizing) error in numerical computations and in analog-to-  digital converters.
 The constant k may be found by applying Eq.
(2.10); that is,  The average value of x is  This result could have been determined by inspection.
The second-moment, or mean square,  value is  and the variance is  a = standard deviation = b  rJj  The gaussian, or normal, probability density (Fig.
2.2b) is one of the most important in  noise theory, since many sources of noise, such as thermal noise or shot noise, may be  represented by gaussian statistics.
Also, a gaussian representation is often more convenient to  manipulate mathematically.
The gaussian density function has a bell-shaped appearance and  is defined by  where exp [ ] is the exponential function, and the parameters have been adjusted to satisfy the  normalizing condition of Eq.
(2.10).
It can be shown that  *-m -02  The probability density of the sum of a large number of independently distributed quanti-  ties approaches the gaussian probability-density function no matter what the individual dis-  tributions may be, provided that the contribution of any one quantity is not comparable with  the resultant of all others.
This is the central limit theorem.
Another property of the gaussian  distribution is that no matter how large a value x we may choose, there is always some finite  probability of finding a greater value.
If the noise at the input of the threshold detector were  truly gaussian, then no matter how high the threshold were set, there would always be a chance  that it would be exceeded by noise and appear as a false alarm.
However, the probability  diminishes rapidly with increasing x, and for all practical purposes the probability of obtaining  an exceedingly high value of x ,is negligibly small.
 The Rayleigh probabi~itydensit~ function is also of special interest to the radar systems  22INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS 1k=­borwherekisaconstant.
Arectangular, oruniform, distribution describes thephaseofarandom sinewaverelativetoaparticular originoftime;thatis,thephaseofthesinewavemaybe found,withequalprobability, anywhere from0to2n,withk=If2n.Italsoappliestothe distribution oftheround-ofT (quantizing) errorinnumerical computations andinanalog-to­ digitalconverters.
Theconstantkmaybefoundbyapplying Eq.(2.10);thatis, 00 a+bfp(x)dx=fkdx=1 -00 IJ Theaveragevalueofxis lJ+b1 b mt=f-xdx=a+- IJb 2 Thisresultcouldhavebeendetermined byinspection.
Thesecond-moment, ormeansquare, valueis andthevariance is (1=standard deviation =~ 2'1'3 Thegaussian, ornormal,probability density(Fig.2.2b)isoneofthemostimportant in noisetheory,sincemanysourcesofnoise,suchasthermal noiseorshotnoise,maybe represented bygaussian statistics.
Also,agaussian representation isoftenmoreconvenient to manipulate mathematically.
thegaussian densityfunction hasabell-shaped appearance and isdefinedby 1-(x-xo)2p(x)=J 2exp 22 (2.15)2n(1 (1 whereexp[ ]istheexponential function, andtheparameters havebeenadjusted tosatisfythe normalizing condition ofEq.(2.10).Itcanbeshownthat .00 mt=Ixp(x)dx=Xo •-00m2=rlX)x2p(x)dx=x5+(1: •-IX) Theprobability densityofthesumofalargenumberofindependently distributed quanti­ tiesapproaches thegaussian probability-density function nomatterwhattheindividual dis­ tributions maybe,provided thatthecontribution ofanyonequantity isnotcomparable with theresultant ofallothers.Thisisthe(entrallimit theorem.
Another property ofthegaussian distribution isthatnomatterhowlargeavaluexwemaychoose,thereisalwayssomefinite probability offindingagreatervalue.Ifthenoiseattheinputofthethreshold detector were trulygaussian, thennomatterhowhighthethreshold wereset,therewouldalwaysbeachance thatitwouldbeexceeded bynoiseandappearasafalsealarm.However, theprobability diminishes rapidlywithincreasing x,andforallpractical purposes theprobability ofobtaining anexceedingly highvalueofX,isnegligibly small.
TheRayleigh probability-density function isaisoofspecialinteresttotheradarsystems erigirice~ 11 tlescr il~cs tl~c eriveloi~c of (lie ~ioisc outlxrt fro111 ii rlar r.owbatld filtcr (sucli as tile IF  filter iri a sr~pcrheterotlyne receiver).
tile cross-section fluctuatioris of certain types of conlplex  radar targets.
arid rnariy kinds of clutter arid weather echoes.
The Rayleigh density function is  Tliis is plottetf iri Fig.
2.2~.
Tlie parameter .u might represent a voltage, and (.u2),, the mean, or  average, valirc of tlic voltage squar-ed.
If .uZ is replaced by w, wlierc kc represents power instead  of voltage (assuming the resistance is I ohm), Eq.
(2.17) becomes  1 P(w) = exp ( - ,v 2 o  "'0  where H., is tlie average power.
This is tlie exponential probability-density function, but it is  sornetiriie5 called the Rayleigh-power probability-density function.
It is plotted in Fig.
2.2d.
 , ?'lie starid:trd dcviatiori of the Kayleigli density of Eq.
(2.17) is equal to J(4/n) - 1 times tlie  mean valuc, arid for tile cxponeritial density of Eq.
(2.18) tlie standard deviation is equal to wo.
 'l'licrc ate otlicr pr ot~ability-density functions of interest in radar, such as the Rice, log norrnal,  arid tlie chi square.
I'liese will be introduced as needed.
 Ariotlicr rriathcrnatical description of statistical phenomena is the probability distrihrrtiot~  Jirr~c.tir,r~ f'(u), dclined as tile probability tliat tile value x is less than some specified value  111 sorrie cases, tlie distribution function may be easier to obtain from an experimental set of  data tlian the derisity function.
Tlie density function may be found from the distribution  futiction by dilferen tiatiori.
 2.5 SIGNAL-TO-NOISE RATIO  : In this section tile results of statistical noise theory will be applied to obtain the signal-to-noise  ratio at the output of the IF amplifier necessary to achieve a specified probability of detection  without exceeding a specified probability of false alarm.
The output signal-to-noise ratio thus  obtained rnay be substituted into Eq.
(2.6) to find the minimum detectable signal, which, in  turn.
is used in the radar equation, as in Eq.
(2.7).
 Corisider an IF amplifier with bandwidth BIF followed by a second detector and a video  arnplificr witli baridwidth B,.
(Fig.
2.3).
Tlie second detector and video amplifier are assumed  to form an envelope detector, that is, one which rejects the carrier frequency but passes the  niodulation envelope.
To extract the modulation envelope, the video bandwidth must be wide  enough to pass the low-frequency components generated by the second detector, but not so wide  as to pass the high-frequency components at or near the intermediate frequency.
The video  bandwidth B,, must be greater than BIF/2 in order to pass all the video modulation.
Most radar  receivers used in conjunction with an operator viewing a CRT display meet this condition and  Second  detector - V~deo  amplifier  (Bv) .
:  Figure 2.3 Envelope detector.
 TilERADAR EQUATION 23 cnginccr, Itdcscrihes thccnvclopc ofthcnoiscoutputfromanarrowoandfilter (suchasJheIF filterinasuperheterodyne receiver).
thecross-section l1uctuations ofcertaintypesofcomplex radartargets.andmanykindsofclutterandweather echoes.TheRayleigh densityfunction is (2.17) x~O 2x (X2 )I'(X)=2exp-i<x).v <x>av ThisisplottedinFig.2.2c.Theparameter xmightrepresent avoltage, and<x2>."themean,or average.
valueofthevoltagesquared.Ifx2isreplaced oyw,wherewrepresents powerinstead ofvoltage(assuming theresistance is1ohm),Eq.(2.17)becomes 1(w) p(w)=----exp----- Wo WoW;:o::O (2.18) where \\'0istheaverage power.Thisistheexponential probability-density function, butitis sometimes calledtheRayleigh-power probability-density function.ItisplottedinFig.2.2d.
Thestandard deviation oftheRayleigh densityofEq.(2.17)isequaltoJ(4/n)-1timesthe meanvalue.andfortheexponential densityofEq.(2.18)thestandard deviation isequaltowo.
Thereareotherprobaoility-density functions ofinterestinradar,suchastheRice,lognormal, andthechisquare.Thesewilloeintroduced asneeded.
Another mathematical description ofstatistical phenomena istheprobability distrinlttioll timetioll l'(x).definedastheprobability thatthevaluexislessthansomespecified value .x P(x)=Ip(x)dx -00ord p(x)=dxP(x) (2.19) Insomecases,thedistribution function maybeeasiertoobtainfromanexperimental setof datathanthedensityfunction.
Thedensity functi<?n maybefoundfromthedistribution function bydifferentiation.
2.5SIGNAL-TO-NOISE RATIO Inthissectiontheresultsofstatistical noisetheorywillbeappliedtoobtainthesignal-to-noise ratioattheoutputoftheIFamplifier necessary toachieveaspecified probability ofdetection without exceeding aspecified probability offalsealarm.Theoutputsignal-to-noise ratiothus ootained maybesubstituted intoEq.(2.6)tofindtheminimum detectable signal,which,in turn.isusedintheradarequation, asinEq.(2.7).
Consider anIFamplifier withbandwidth BtFfollowed byaseconddetector andavideo amplifier withbandwidth 8,.(Fig.2.3).Theseconddetector andvideoamplifier areassumed toformanenvelope detector, thatis,onewhichrejectsthecarrierIrequency butpassesthe modulation envelope.
Toextractthemodulation envelope, thevideobandwidth mustbewide enoughtopassthelow-frequency components generated bytheseconddetector, butnotsowide astopassthehigh-frequency components atorneartheintermediate frequency.
Thevideo bandwidth Bt•mustbegreaterthanB1F/2inordertopassallthevideomodulation.
Mostradar receivers usedinconjunction withanoperator viewingaCRTdisplaymeetthiscondition and IFSecondVideo ~amplifier1-- r-----amplifier (BIt)detector(Bv)Figure2.3Envelope detector. 24 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  may be considered envelope detectors.
Either a square-law or a linear detector may be  assumed since the effect on the detection probability by assuming one instead of the other is  iisually small.
 The noise entering the IF filter (the terms filter and amplifier are used interchangeably) is  assumed to be gaussian, with probability-density function given by  where p(v) do is the probability of finding the noise voltage v between the values of 11 and  v + dl,, $o is the variance, or mean-square value of the noise voltage, and the mean value of 11 is  taken to be zero.
If gaussian noise were passed through a narrowband IF filter-one whose  bandwidth is small compared with the midfrequency-the probability density of the envelope  of the noise voltage output is shown by Riceg to be  where R is the amplitude of the envelope of the filter output.
Equation (2.21) is a form of the  Rayleigh probability-density function.
 The probability that the envelope of the noise voltage will lie between the values of V, and  V2 is  v2 R Probability (V, < R < V2) = - exp (- 5) dR  v, +o 2+0  The probability that the noise voltage envelope will exceed the voltage threshold V,- is  "R Probability (VT < R < m) = [ - exp (- c) dR  v7.
$0 2$ 0  = exp (- 2) = P,,  Whenever the voltage envelope exceeds the threshold, a target detection is considered to have -?  occurred, by definition.
Since the probability of a false alarm is the probability that noise will  cross the threshold, Eq.
(2.24) gives the probability of a false alarm, denoted PI,.
 The average time interval between crossings of the threshold by noise alone is defined as  the filse-alarm time 3, ,  IN Ta = lim --  N-+W N k=~  where & is the time between crossings of the threshold VT by the noise envelope, when the  slope of the crossing is positive.
The false-alarm probability may also be defined as the ratio of  the duration of time the envelope is actually above the threshold to the total time it coirld have  been above the threshold, or  N -  24INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS maybeconsidered envelope detectors.
Eitherasquare-law oralineardetector maybe assumed sincetheeffectonthedetection probability byassuming oneinsteadoftheotheris usuallysmall.
Thenoiseentering theIFfilter(thetermsfilterandamplifier areusedinterchangeably) is assumed tobegaussian, withprobability-density function givenby 1 -v2 p(v)=Jexp2.1,2rrt/Jo 'PO(2.20) wherep(v)dvistheprobability offindingthenoisevoltagevbetween thevaluesofI'and v+dv,t/Joisthevariance, ormean-square valueofthenoisevoltage,andthemeanvalueofI'is takentobezero.Ifgaussian noisewerepassedthrough anarrowband IFfilter-one whose bandwidth issmallcompared withthemidfrequency-the probability densityoftheenvelope ofthenoisevoltageoutputisshownbyRice9tobe R(R2 ) p(R)=-exp-- t/Jo 2t/Jo(2.21) whereRistheamplitude oftheenvelope ofthefilteroutput.Equation (2.21)isaformofthe Rayleigh probability-density function.
Theprobability thattheenvelope ofthenoisevoltagewillliebetween thevaluesofVIand V2is Theprobability thatthenoisevoltageenvelope willexceedthevoltagethreshold Vris <XlR(R2 )Probability (VT<R<(0)=JTexp-2.1,dR Vr'PO 'Po (V})=exp-2ljJo=Pfa(2.22) (2.13) (2.24) Whenever thevoltageenvelope exceedsthethreshold, atargetdetection isconsidered tohave occurred, bydefinition.
Sincetheprobability ofafalsealarmistheprobability thatnoisewill crossthethreshold, Eq.(2.24)givestheprobability ofafalsealarm,denoted Pfa.
Theaveragetimeinterval between crossings ofthethreshold bynoisealoneisdefinedas thefalse-alarm timeTra, .
I N 7fa=lIm-N°L1k N-+<Xl k='l where1kisthetimebetween crossings ofthethreshold VTbythenoiseenvelope, whenthe slopeofthecrossing ispositive.
Thefalse-alarm probability mayalsobedefinedastheratioof theduration oftimetheenvelope isactually abovethethreshold tothetotaltimeitcOllldhave beenabovethethreshold, or (2.25) Time -  Figure 2.4 Envelope of receiver output illustrating false alarms due to noise.
 where t, and & are defined in Fig.
2.4.
The average duration of a noise pulse is approximately  the reciprocal of the bandwidth B, which in the case of the envelope detector is BIF.
Equating  Eqs.
(2.24) and (2.25) we get  1 v", 3, = - exp - BIF 21//0  A plot of Eq.
(2.26) is shown in Fig.
2.5, with V;/2t,bo as the abscissa.
If, for example, the  bandwidth of the IF amplifier were 1 MHz and the average false-alarm time that could be  tolerated were 15 nlin, the probability of a fdse alarm is 1.1 1 x lo-'.
From Eq.
(2.24) the  threshold voltage necessary to achieve this false-alarm time is 6.45 times the rms value of the  noise voltage.
 The false-alarm probabilities of practical radars are quite small.
The reason for this is that  the false-alarm probability is the probability that a noise pulse will cross the threshold during  an interval of time approximately equal to the reciprocal of the bandwidth.
For a 1-MHz  bandwidth, there are of the order of 106 noise pulses per second.
Hence the false-alarm  probability of any one pulse must be small ( < if false-alarm times greater than 1 s are to  be obtained.
 The specification of a tolerable false-alarm time usually follows from the requirements  desired by the customer and depends on the nature of the radar application.
The exponential  relationship between the false-alarm time Tfa and the threshold level VT results in the false-  alarm time being sensitive to variations or instabilities in the threshold level.
For example, if'  the batidwidtll were 1 MHz, a value of 10 log (V$/2t,bo) = 12.95 dB results in an average  false-alarm time of 6 min, while a value of 14.72 dB results in a false-alarm time of 10,000 h.
 Thus a change in the threshold of only 1.77 dB changes the false-alarm time by five orders of  magnitude.
Such is the nature of gaussian noise.
In practice, therefore, the threshold level  would probably be adjusted slightly above that computed by Eq.
(2.26), so that instabilities  which lower the threshold slightly will not cause a flood of false alarms.
 If the receiver were turned off (gated) for a fraction of time (as in a tracking radar with a  servo-controlled range gate or a radar which turns off the receiver during the time of transmis-  sion), the false-alarm probability will be increased by the fraction of time the receiver is not  operative assuming that the average false-alarm time remains the same.
However, this is  usually not important since small changes in the probability of false alarm result in even  smaller changes in the threshold level because of the exponential relationship of Eq.
(2.26).
 Thus far, a receiver with only a noise input has been discussed.
Next, consider a sine-wave  signal of amplitude A to be present along with noise at the input to the IF filter.
The frequency  ThresholdOJ0' E o;- ~v, '6 c b'l'ci1 OJ ' no "iii>c toJTHERADAR EQUATION 25 TIr--------+ +----7k+I-------+,'!-- tk+21I Time--+- (2.26)Figure2.4Envelope ofreceiveroutputillustrating falsealarmsduetonoise.
wheretkand7karedefinedinFig.2.4.Theaverageduration ofanoisepulseisapproximately thereciprocal ofthebandwidth B,whichinthecaseoftheenvelope detector isBIF.Equating Eqs.(2.24)and(2.25),weget 1V} 1[3=B 1Fexp2t/to AplotofEq.(2.26)isshowninFig.2.5,withV}/2t/toastheabscissa.
If,forexample, the bandwidth oftheIFamplifier wereIMHzandtheaverage false-alarm timethatcouldbe tolerated were15min,theprobability ofafalsealarmis1.11x10-9•FromEq.(2.24)the threshold voltagenecessary toachievethisfalse-alarm timeis6.45timesthermsvalueofthe noisevoltage.
Thefalse-alarm probabilities ofpractical radarsarequitesmall.Thereasonforthisisthat thefalse-alarm probability istheprobability thatanoisepulsewillcrossthethreshold during anintervaloftimeapproximately equaltothereciprocal ofthebandwidth.
ForaI-MHz bandwidth, thereareoftheorderoflQ6noisepulsespersecond.
Hencethefalse-alarm probability ofanyone pulsemustbesmall(<10-6)iffalse-alarm timesgreaterthan1 sareto beobtained.
Thespecification ofatolerable false-alarm timeusuallyfollowsfromtherequirements desiredbythecustomer anddepends onthenatureoftheradarapplication.
Theexponential relationship between thefalse-alarm time1[3andthethreshold levelVTresultsinthefalse­ alarmtimebeingsensitive tovariations orinstabilities inthethreshold level.Forexample, if' thebandwidth wereIMHz,avalueof10log(V}/2t/to) =12.95dBresultsinanaverage false-alarm timeof6min,whileavalueof14.72dBresultsinafalse-alarm timeof10,000h.
Thusachangeinthethreshold ofonly1.77dBchanges thefalse-alarm timebyfiveordersof magnitude.
Suchisthenatureofgaussian noise.Inpractice, therefore, thethreshold level wouldprobably beadjusted slightlyabovethatcomputed byEq.(2.26),sothatinstabilities whichlowerthethreshold slightlywillnotcauseafloodoffalsealarms.
Iftherecelver wereturnedoff(gated)forafractionoftime(asinatracking radarwitha servo-controlled rangegateoraradarwhichturnsotTthereceiverduringthetimeoftransmis­ sion),thefalse-alarm probability willbeincreased bythefractionoftimethereceiver isnot operative assuming thattheaverage false-alarm timeremains thesame.However, thisis usuallynotimportant sincesmallchanges intheprobability offalsealarmresultineven smallerchanges inthethreshold levelbecauseoftheexponential relationship ofEq.(2.26).
Thusfar,areceiverwithonlyanoiseinputhasbeendiscussed.
Next,consider asinc:-wave signalofamplitude AtobepresentalongwithnoiseattheinputtotheIFfilter.Thefrequency 26 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  1 yeor  6 months  30 doys  2 weeks  l week  15 rnin  Figure 2.5 Average time between false alarms as a function of the threshold level I/, and thc receiver  bandwidth 8; (I/, is the mean square noise voltage.
 3  of the signal is the same as the IF midband frequencyhF.
The outpul or the envelope detector  has a probability-density function given by9  where lo(Z) is the modified Bessei function of zero order and argument Z.
For Z large, an  asymptotic expansion for io(Z) is  When the signal is absent, A = 0 and Eq.
(2.27) reduces to Eq.
(2.21), the probability-density  function for noise alone.
Equation (2.27) is sometimes called the Rice probability-density  function.
 The probability that the ;ignal will be detected (which is the probability ofdetenio,,) is the  same as the probability that the envelope R will exceed the predetermined threshold VT.
The  26INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS ,yeor 15min-.6months 15 9 10.t112 13 14 Threshold-to-noise ratioV,Y2iJ.to, dB0.1'--__ L.-L__ L-L.__<--_-L-J_...L---I_...L-----' __ ----' 8',000 30days .J::.2weeks- h.~ VI -1week E100L-a 0 3doys <I.> VI2days0....
<:: a.>1day a.> ~.-a.>.012ha.>10E.+= a.> 0- 0L- a.> :> <l 1h Figure2.5Average timebetween falsealarmsasafunction ofthethreshold levelV,andthereceiver bandwidth B;"'0isthemeansquarenoisevoltage.
ofthesignalisthesameastheIFmidband frequencyJ.F'Theoutputof[heenvelope detec~or hasaprobability-density function givenby9 (2.27) R(R2+A2)(RA) pAR)="'0exp-2"'010"'0 where10(Z)isthemodified Besselfunction ofzeroorderandargument Z.ForZlarge,an asymptotic expansion for10(Z)is 10(Z)~-&(1+_1+...)v2nZ 8Z Whenthesignalisabsent,A=0andEq.(2.27)reducestoEq.(2.21),theprobability-density function fornoisealone.Equation (2.27)issometimes calledtheRiceprobability-density function.
Theprobability thatthesignalwillbedetected (whichistheprobability ofdetection) isthe sameastheprobability thattheenvelope Rwillexceedthepredetermined threshold VT•The probability' of detection f', is therefore  This cannot he evaluated by sirnple nleans, and numerical techniques or a series approxima-  tion must be used.
A series approximation valid when RA/$o % 1, A 9 I R - A 1, and terms in  A- and beyond can be neglected is9  VT - A 1 + (VT - A)2/$o  X [I- 4~-- + - - ...
 8A 2/rC/0  where tlie error fu~lction is defined as  erf Z = -  A graphic illustratior~ of the process of threshold detection is shown in Fig.
2.6.
The  probability density for noise alone [Eq.
(2.21)] is plotted along with that for signal and noise  [Eq.
(2.27)J with /I/(/:!* = 3.
A tl~resl~old voltage VT/$;12 = 2.5 is shown.
The crosshatched  area to the right of I~,/$:'~ under the curve for signal-plus-noise represents the probability of  detection.
while the double-crosshatched area under the curve for noise alone represents the  probability of a false alarm.
If v~/$;'~ is increased to reduce the probability of a false alarm,  the probability of detection will be reduced also.
 Equation (2.29) may be used to plot a family of curves relating the probability of detection  to the threshold voltage and to the amplitude of tlie sine-wave signal.
Although the receiver  designer prefers to operate with voltages, it is more convenient for the radar system engineer to  ernploy power relationships.
Equation (2.29) may be converted to power by replacing the  signal - to -rrns-noise-voltage ratio with the following:  .I signal amplitude fi(rms signal voltage) .-.- - - - = (2 signal power) 'I2 = (:) - '12  d,:,I2 - rrns noise voltage rms noise voltage noise power  We shall also replace If;/2rC/, by In (l/P,,) [from Eq.
(2.24)).
Using the above relationships,  the probability of detection is plotted in Fig.
2.7 as a function of the signal-to-noise ratio with  the probability of a false alarm as a parameter.
 Figure 2.6 Probability-density function for noise alone  arid for signal-plus-noise, illustrating the process of  tl~resl~old detection.
 (2.28)THERADAR EQUATION 27 probability' ofdetection I'distherefore Pd=.(~{ls{R}dR=(~~~exp( -R2 2:oA2 )10(~:)dR Thiscannotheevaluated bysimplemeans,andnumerical techniques oraseriesapproxima­ tionmustbeuscd.1\sericsapproximation validwhenRANo ~1,A~IR -AI,andtermsin A-3andbeyondcanbeneglected is9 I( VI--A)I'd=I-err,..
2 'vi2t/t() (2.29) wheretheerrorfunction isdcfincd as 2r7.erfZ=-7:e-u2du V1t·o 1\graphic illustration oftheprocessofthreshold detection isshowninFig.2.6.The prohahility dcnsityfornoisealone[Eq.(2.21)]isplottedalongwiththatforsignalandnoise [Eq.(2.27)]withANb!2=3.Athreshold voltageVTNlP =2.5isshown.Thecrosshatched areatotherightofVTNlPunderthecurveforsignal-plus-noise represents theprobability of detection.
whilethedouhle-crosshatched areaunderthecurvefornoisealonerepresents the prohability ofafalsealarm.IfVTNbl2isincreased toreducetheprobability ofafalsealarm, theprobability ofdetection willbereduced also.
Equation (2.29)maybeusedtoplotafamilyofcurvesrelating theprobability ofdetection tothethreshold voltageandtotheamplitude ofthesine-wave signal.Although thereceiver designer preferstooperate withvoltages, itismoreconvenient fortheradarsystemengineer to employ powerrelationships.
Equation (2.29)maybeconverted topowerbyreplacing the signalto·rms-noise-voltage ratiowiththefollowing: _.~__=~!~n~_l_~~plitude =J2(rms signalvoltage) =(2signalpower) 112=(25)112 t/tl/2rmsnoisevoltagc rmsnoisevoltage noisepower N WeshallalsoreplaceVi-/2t/Jo byIn(l/Pra)[fromEg.(2.24)].Usingtheaboverelationships, thcprobability ofdetection isplottedinFig.2.7asafunction ofthesignal-to-noise ratiowith theprobability ofafalsealarmasaparameter.
Noise%ne06 0.4 :::.0.3 ~ 0.2 0.1 0.......,""-'-_....L......u<.JOO!""'-"'-~CA..L.e.-L----L_o Figure2.6Probability-density function fornoisealone andforsignal-plus-noise.
illustrating theprocess of thrc!\hold detection. 28 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  4 6 8 " 10 12 14 16 18 20  (S/N ), , signal-to-noise ratio, dB  Figure 2.7 Probability of detection for a sine wave in noise as a function of the signal-to-noise (power)  ratio and the probability of false alarm.
.I  Both the false-alarm time and the detection probability are specified by the system require-  ments.
The radar designer computes the probability of the false alarm and from Fig.
2.7  determines the signal-to-noise ratio.
This is the signal-to-noise ratio that is used in tht: eqlta-  tion for minimum detectable signal [Eq.
(2.6)].
The signal-to-noise ratios of Fig.
2.7 apply to a  single radar pulse.
For example, suppose that the desired false-alarm time was 15 min and tllc  IF bandwidth was 1 MHz.
This gives a false-alarm probability of 1.1 1 x lo-'.
Figure 2.7  indicates that a signal-to-noise ratio of 13.1 dB is required to yield a 0.50 probability of  detection, 14.7 dB for 0.90, and 16.5 dB for 0.999.
 There are several interesting facts illustrated by Fig.
2.7.
At first glance, it might seem that  the signal-to-noise ratio required for detection is higher than that dictated by intuition, even  for a probability of detection of 0.50.
One might be inclined to say that so long as the signal is  greater than noise, detection should be accomplished.
Such reasoning may not be correct when  the false-alarm probability is properly taken into account.
Another interesting effect to be  noted from Fig.
2.7 is that a change of only 3.4 dB can mean the difference between reliable  detection (0.999) and marginal detection (0.50).
(When the target cross section fluctuates, the  28INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS ,.",.
..n1Dr-CI)2~ I I I I I I I IQQQQQQQQ 0.9999 0.20.t0.80 20 18 8 10 12 14 16 (SIN),,signal-to-noise ratio,dB6/ I IIIIrl///IIIIII'IIII'1 /II///1///Il / I/III1//11 II1// //'III / I ////1'// I~/I,'III!VI ////II//~II//~Villi /II///If/// /1/I~IIIIfll //IIIIIIIVI //I I/IIIII // IIIIJ/ /II 10-3IIIIIvi//jY/,//~!j/ Probability of 10-41O-~, 1 i\ falsealarm -I10-610iIO-S 'O-10;1~0~-112../' I0.10 0.05 40.995 0.99 0.98 0.60 0.50 0.40 0.300.9995 0.999 0.998 g0.95 +­u W+- ~0.90 :0o.g0.70 L-a......o Figure2.7Probability ofdetection forasinewaveinnoiseasafunction ofthesignal-to-noise (power) ratioandtheprobability offalsealarm.
Boththefalse-alarm timeandthedetection probability arespecified bythesystemrequire­ ments.Theradardesigner computes theprobability ofthefalsealarmandfromFig.2.7 determines thesignal-to-noise ratio.Thisisthesignal-to-noise ratiothatisusedintheequa­ tionforminimum detectable signal[Eq.(2.6)].Thesignal-to-noise ratiosofFig.2.7applytoa singleradarpulse.Forexample, supposethatthedesiredfalse-alarm timewas15minandtht: IFbandwidth was1MHz.Thisgivesafalse-alarm probability of1.11x10-9.Figure2.7 indicates thatasignal-to-noise ratioof13.1dBisrequired toyielda0.50probability of detection, 14.7dBfor0.90,and16.5dBfor0.999.
Thereareseveralinteresting factsillustrated byFig.2.7.Atfirstglance,itmightseemthat thesignal-to-noise ratiorequired fordetection ishigherthanthatdictatedbyintuition, even foraprobability ofdetection of0.50.Onemightbeinclinedtosaythatsolongasthesignalis greaterthannoise,detection shouldbeaccomplished.
Suchreasoning maynotbecorrectwhen thefalse-alarm probability isproperly takenintoaccount.
Another interesting effecttobe notedfromFig.2.7isthatachangeofonly3.4dBcanmeanthedifference betweenreliable detection (0.999)andmarginal detection (0.50).(Whenthetargetcrosssectionfluctuates, the change iri signal-to-rioise ratio is much greater than this for a given change in detection  probability, as discussed in Sec.
2.8.) Also, the signal-to-noise ratio required for detection is  not a serisitive functioti of the false-alarm time.
For example, a radar with a 1 -MHz bandwidth  requires a signal-to-rioise ratio of 14.7 dl3 for a 0.90 probability of detection and a 15-min  false-alarni irne.
1 f r lie false-alarnl (irrle were increased from 15 rnin to 24 h, the signal-to-noise  ratio would he iricreascd to 15.4 dI3.
If the false-alarm tinie were as high as 1 year, the required  sigllal-to-rioisc ratio wot~ld Ijc 16.2 dl3.
 2.6 INTEGRA'TION OF RADAR PULSES  'I'lic r cli~tiorisliil~ t)ctwcct~ tlic siglial-to-lioisc iatio, tlic probability ofdctcctioti, aucl tltc 11l.oI1-  ability of false alarrn as giver1 in Fig.
2.7 applies for a single pulse only.
However, many pulses  ;it c 11sl1;11ly IC'IIII IIC'CI 11 0111 ;~riy 1x11 tic~lli~r tar gct oti each radar scari and can be used to iri~prove  dctcctloti I lie rir~rril~cr of ~~r~lscs~r~, rcturlicd from a point target as the radar antellria scaris  tIiro\~gIi rt~ 1~~;111iwidtl1- IF 1  - -7 -.
-  'Is- @ 69-b (2.30)  wlierc On = antenna bearnwidtli, deg  1, = pulse repetiliori frequency, Hz  0, = antenna scanning rate, deg/s  (I),,, = antenna scan rate, rpm  Typical parameters for a ground-based search radar might be pulse repetition frequency  300 Hz, 1.5" beamwidth, and antenna scan rate 5 rpm (30'1s).
These parameters result in  15 liits from a point target on each scan.
The process of summing all the radar echo pulses for  the purpose of improving detection is called integration.
Ma~y techniques might be employed  for accornplisliing integration, as discussed in Secs.
10.7.
All practical integration techniques  ernploy some sort of storage device.
Perhaps the most common radar integration method is  tlic catliode-ray-tube display combined wit11 the integrating properties of the eye and brain of  tlic radar operator.
The discussion in this section is concerned primarily with integration  pcrformcd by electronic devices in which detection is made automatically on the basis of a  thrcslioid crossing.
 Integration may be accomplished in the radar receiver either before the second detector  (in tlic IF) or aftcr tile secorid detector (in the video).
A definite distinction must be made  bctween tlicse two cases.
Integration before the detector is called pedetection, or coherent,  integration, while integration after the detector is called postdetection, or noncoherenr, integra-  tion.
Predetection integration requires that the phase of the echo signal be preserved if full  benefit is to be obtained from the summing process.
On the other hand, phase information is  destroyed by the second detector; hence postdetection integration is not concerned with  preserving RF phase.
For this convenience, postdetection integration is not as efficient as  predetection integration.
 If PJ pulses, all of the same signal-to-noise ratio, were integrated by an ideal predetection  integrator, the resultant, or integrated, signal-to-noise (power) ratio would be exactly n times  that of a single pulse.
If the same 11 pulses were integrated by an ideal postdetection device, the  resultant signal-to-noise ratio would be less than n times that of a single pulse.
This loss in  integration efficiency is caused by the nonlinear action of the second detector, which converts  some of the signal energy to noise energy in the rectification process.
 (2.30)THERADAR EQUATION 29 change insignal-to-noise ratioismuchgreaterthanthisforagivenchangeindetection probahility, asdiscusscd inSec.2.8.)/\lso,thesignal-to-noise ratiorequired fordetection is notasensitive function ofthefalse-alarm time.Forexample, aradarwithaI-MHzbandwidth requires asignal-to-noise ratioof14.7dBfora0.90probability ofdetection andaIS-min false-alarm limc.IfIhcfalsc-alarm limewereincreased fromISminto24h,thesignal-to-noise ratiowouldheincreascd to15.4dB.Ifthefalse-alarm timewereashighasIyear,therequired signal-tn-lloise ratiowouldhe16.2dB.
2.6INTEGRATION OFRADAR PULSES Therclatiollship hetwecn thesiglwl-to-IJOisc ratio,theprobability ofdetection, andtheproh­ abilitynffalsealarmasgivclIinFig.2.7appliesforasinglepulscQnly.
However, manypulses arcusuallyrctlllllcd fromanyparticular targetolleachradarscanandcanhcusedtoimprove detection.
ThelIumber ofpulsesilln)returned fromapointtarge.tastheradarantcnna scans through itsbeamwidtlL is(/' L.-.:'t,,;'".-_..~.
C;',-\",''\;...
,«!Bf[p 0Bfp liB=.r!J=6~;3 ~~ whereOn=anlenna beamwidth, deg .f~=pulserepetition frequency, Hz {}J=antenna scanning rate,degjs (I),"=antenna scanrate,rpm Typical parameters foraground-based searchradarmightbepulserepetition frequency 300Hz,1.5°beamwidth, andantenna scanrate5rpm(300/s).Theseparameters resultin IShitsfromapointtargetoneac;hscan.Theprocessofsumming alltheradarechopulsesfor thepurpose ofimproving detection iscalledintegration.
MaRytechniques mightbeemployed foraccomplishing integration, asdiscussed inSees.to.7.Allpractical integration techniques employ somesortofstoragedevice.Perhaps themostcommon radarintegration method is thecathode-ray-tube displaycombined withtheintegrating properties oftheeyeandbrainof theradaroperator.
Thediscussion inthissectionisconcerned primarily withintegration performed byelectronic devicesinwhichdetection ismadeautomatically onthebasisof3 threshold crossing.
Integration maybeaccomplished intheradarreceiver eitherbeforetheseconddetector (intheIF)oraftcrtheseconddetector (inthevideo).Adefinite distinction mustbemade hetween thesetwocases.Integration beforethedetector iscalledpredetection, orcoherent, integration, whileintegration afterthedetector iscalledpostdetection, ornoncoherent, integra­ tion.Predetection integration requires thatthephaseoftheechosignalbepreserved iffull benefitistobeobtained fromthesumming process.Ontheotherhand,phaseinformation is destroyed bytheseconddetector; hencepostdetection integration isnotconcerned with preserving RFphase.Forthisconvenience, postdetection integration isnotasefficient as predetection integration.
If11pulses,allofthesamesignal-to-noise ratio,wereintegrated byanidealpredetection integrator, theresultant, orintegrated, signal-to-noise (power) ratiowouldbeexactlyntimes thatofasinglepulse.Ifthesame 11pulseswereintegrated byanidealpostdetection device,the resultant signal-to-noise ratiowouldbelessthanntimesthatofasinglepulse.Thislossin integration efficiency iscausedbythenonlinear actionoftheseconddetector, whichconverts someofthesignalenergytonoiseenergyintherectification process. 30 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  The comparison of predetection and postdetection integration may be briefly sumrnari~cd  by stating that although postdetection integration is not as efficient as predetection integr-a-  tion, it is easier to implement in most applications.
Postdetection integration is therefore  preferred, even though the integrated signal-to-noise ratio may not be as great.
As mentioned  in Sec.
10.6, an alert, trained operator viewing a properly designed cathode-ray tube display 1s  a close approximation to the theoretical postdetection integrator.
 The efficiency of postdetection integration relative to ideal predetection integration has  been computed by Marcum" when all pulses are of equal amplitude.
Tl~e integration  efficiency may be defined as follows:  where 11 = number of pulses integrated  (SIN), = value of signal-to-noise ratio of a single pulse required to produce given probability  of detection (for n = 1)  (SIN), = value of signal-to-noise ratio per pulse required to produce same probability of  detection when n pulses are integrated  The improvement in the signal-to-noise ratio when n pulses are integrated postdetection is  nE,(n) and is the integration-improvement factor.
It may also be thought of as the effective  number of pulses integrated by the postdetection integrator.
The improvement with ideal  predetection integration would be equal to n.
Examples of the postdetection integration- .
 improvement factor Ii(n) = nEi(n) are shown in Fig.
2.8a.
These curves were derived from data  given by Marcum.
The integration loss is shown in Fig.
2.8b, where integration loss in decibels  is defined as Li(n) = 10 log [l/Ei(n)].
The integration-improvement factor (or the integration  loss) is not a sensitive function of either the probability of detection or the probability of false  alarm.
 The parameter n, for the curves of Fig.
2.8 is thefcllse-alarm n~tnihrr, as introduced by  Marcum.1° It is equal to thereciprocal of the false-alarm probability P,, defined previously by  Eqs.
(2.24) and (2.25).
Some authors, like Marcum, prefer to use the false-alarm number  instead of the false-alarm probability.
On the average, there will be one false ciecision o11t of 11,  possible decisions within the false-alarni time &, .
Thus the average number of possible dcci-  sions between false alarms is defined to be n,.
If r is the pulse width, Tp the pulse repetition  period, and fp = l/Tp is the pulse repetition frequency, then the number of decisions n, in time  &, is equal to the number of range intervals per pulse period q = Tp/r = l/f,r times the  number of pulse periods per secondf,, times the false-alarm time 7',-, .
Thcrcfore, the numbcr of  possible decisions is n, = &, fpq = &,IT.
Since r - 1/B, where B is the bandwidth, tilt.
falsc-  alarm number is n, = Fa B = l/Pr,.
 Note that P,, = I/&, B is the probability of false alarm assuming that independent deci-  sions as to the presence or absence of a target are made B times a second.
As the radar scans by  a target it receives n pulses.
If these n pulses are integrated before a target decision is made.
 then there are B/n possible decisions per second.
The false-alarm probability is thus ti times as  great.
This does not mean that there will be more false alarms, since it is the rate of detection-  decisions that is reduced rather than the average time between alarms.
This is another reason  the average false-alarm time &, is a more significant parameter than the false-alarm probabi-  lity.
In this text, Pfa will be taken as the reciprocal of F, B = n,, unless stated otherwise.
Somc  authors" prefer to define a false-alarm number nj that takes account the number of pulses  integrated, such that nj = nf/n.
Therefore, caution should be exercised when using different  authors' computations for the signal-to-noise ratio as a function of probability of detection  30INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS Thecomparison ofpredetection andpostdetection integration maybebrknysummarized bystatingthatalthough postdetection integration isnotasefficient aspredctection integra­ tion,itiseasiertoimplement inmostapplications.
Postdetection integration istherefore preferred, eventhoughtheintegrated signal-to-noise ratiomaynotbeasgreat.Asmentioned inSec.10.6,analert,trainedoperator viewingaproperly designed cathode-ray tubedisplayis acloseapproximation tothetheoretical postdetection integrator.
Theefficiency ofpostdetection integration relativetoidealpredetection integration has beencomputed byMarcum'owhenallpulsesareofequalamplitude.
Theintegration efficiency maybedefinedasfollows; (2.31) where 11=numberofpulsesintegrated (51N),=valueofsignal-to-noise ratioofasinglepulserequired toproduce givenprobability ofdetection (forn=1) (SIN)n=valueofsignal-to-noise ratioperpulserequired toproduce sameprobability of detection whennpulsesareintegrated Theimprovement inthesignal-to-noise ratiowhen 11pulsesareintegrated postdetection is n£/(n)andistheintegration-improvement factor.Itmayalsobethought ofastheeffective number ofpulsesintegrated bythepostdetection integrator.
Theimprovement withideal predetection integration wouldbeequalton.Examples ofthepostdetection integration­ improvement factor/;(n)=n£;(n)areshowninFig.2.8a.Thesecurveswerederivedfromdata givenbyMarcum.
Theintegration lossisshowninFig.2.8b,whereintegration lossindecibels isdefinedasL;(n)=10log[1/£;(n)].
Theintegration-improvement factor(ortheintegration loss)isnotasensitive function ofeithertheprobability ofdetection ortheprobability offalse alarm.
Theparameter nfforthecurvesofFig.2.8isthefalse-alarm ll/lmoa, asintroduced by Marcum.tOItisequaltotheredprocal ofthefalse-alarm probability Pradefinedpreviously by Eqs.(2.24)and(2.25).Someauthors, likeMarcum, prefertousethefalse-alarm number insteadofthefalse-alarm probability.
Ontheaverage, therewillheonefalsedecision 0111ofIII possible decisions withinthefalse-alanri timeTea.Thustheaveragenumber ofpossible deci­ sionsbetween falsealarmsisdefinedtobenf'Ifristhepulsewidth,Tpthepulserepetition period,andfp=IITpisthepulserepetition frequency, thenthenumberofdecisions Ilfintime 1(aisequaltothenumber ofrangeintervals perpulseperiod,., =Tp/r=l/fprtimesthe numberofpulseperiodspersecondfp, timesthefalse-alarm timeTra.Therefore, thenumberof possible decisions is1If=1(afptl=1(a/r.Sincer:::::liB,whereBisthebandwidth, thefalse­ alarmnumber is11f=1(aB=11Pra.
NotethatPCa=1/4aBistheprobability offalsealarmassuming thatindependent deci­ sionsastothepresence orabsenceofatargetaremadeBtimesasecond.Astheradarscansby atargetitreceives 11pulses.Ifthese 11pulsesareintegrated beforeatargetdecision ismade.
thenthereareBinpo.ssible decisions persecond.Thefalse-alarm probability isthus11timesas great.Thisdoesnotmeanthattherewillbemorefalsealarms,sinceitistherateofdetection­ decisions thatisreducedratherthantheaveragetimebetween alarms.Thisisanother reason theaverage false-alarm time1(aisamoresignificant parameter thanthefalse-alarm probabi­ lity.Inthistext,Prawillbetakenasthereciprocal of1(aB=IIf'unlessstatedotherwise.
Som~ authors 11prefertodefineafalse-al~rm numbernlthattakesaccount thenumberofpulses integrated, suchthatnj-=11fIn.Therefore, cautionshouldbeexercised whenusingdifTerent authors' computations forthesignal-to-noise ratioasafunction ofprobability ofdetection 1 10 100 1,000 10,000  n = number of pulses  (b)  Figure 2.8 ((1) inttpration-itnprovcrnent factor.
square law detector, P, = probability of detection,  )if = IiT,:, B = false alarm number.
T,, = average time between false alarms, B = bandwidth; (b) integra-  tion loss as a functior~ of !I.
the number of pulses integrated, P,, and n,.
(After ~arcum,'~ courtesy IRE  Trc~rrs.)  1,000r---------_ t--- 100 ----------I-I- 10 100 1,000 n,number ofpulsesintegrated (postdetection) (a)10,000 10,000 1,000 lOa n=numberofpulses (bl_______ ~_ Pel=050 Pel=090 ~=0.99 102f---- a_-_-'---'-----l.
18---~--- ---------- 6f--------+-----------t-;>"'7"7"':~VL_---___+_------_l 41---------f-----,;~~.c:n~'f---------+_------____j12~------- ---------------------t----- .
'"'"a ca +-­o L0' Q) +-­cen10----------+---- ------+-----------t-r7''----75,<--y<'7''-------j -0 Fi~ureVI(ellIntegration-improvement factor,squarelawdetector, Pd=probability ofdetection.
IIf=1/1;.B=falsealarmnumber, 1;-.=averagetimebetweenfalsealarms,B=bandwidth; (b)integra­ tionlossasafunction ofII,thenumberofpulsesintegrated, Pd'andIIf.(AfterMarcum,lo courtesyIRE TrailS.) 32 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  and probability of false alarm, or false-alarm number, since tilere is no stantfat-ci~~atiotl ol'  definitions.
They all can give the correct values for use in the radar eqilation provided ~lic  asstlmptions used by each author are understood.
 The original false-alarm time of Marcum'' is different from that used in this text.
He  defined it as the time in which the probability is 112 that a false alarm will not occur.
A  comparison of the two definitions is given by Hollis.12 Marcum's definition of false-alarnl time  is seldom used, although his definition of false-alarm number is often found.
 The solid straight line plotted in Fig.
2.8~ represents a perfect predetection integrator  with E,(n) = 1.
It is hardly ever achieved in practice.
When only a few pillscs are integrated  postdetection (large signal-to-noise ratio per pulse), Fig.
2.8a shows that the integration-  improvement factor is not much different from a perfect predetection integrator.
When a large  number of pulses are integrated (small signal-to-noise ratio per pulse), the difference between  postdetection and predetection integration is more pronounced.
 The dashed straight line applies to an integration-improvement factor proportional to  nli2.
As discussed in Sec.
10.6, data obtained during World War II seemed to indicate that this  described the performance of an operator viewing a cathode-ray tube display.
More recent  experiments, however, show that the operator-integration performance when v~ewillg a  properly designed PPI or B-scope display is better represented by the theoretical postdetec-  tion integrator as given by Fig.
2.8, rather than by the nilZ law.
 The radar equation with n pulses integrated can be written  where the parameters are the same as that of Eq.
(2.7) except that (SIN), is the signal-to-noise  ratio of one of the n equal pulses that are integrated to produce the required probability of  detection for a specified probability of false alarm.'To use this form of the radar equation it is  necessary to have a set of curves like those of Fig.
2.7 for each vaiue of 11.
Such curves are  available," but are not necessary since only Figs.
2.7 and 2.8 are needed.
Substituting  Eq.
(2.31) into (2.32) gives  The value of (SIN): is found from Fig.
2.7 as before, and nEi(n) is found from Fig.
2.Htr.
 The post-detection integration loss described by Fig.
2.8 assumes a perfect integraior.
 Many practical integrators, however, have a "loss of memory" with time.
That is, the ampli-  tude of a signal stored in such an integrator decays, so that the stored pulses are not sirrnnlctf  with equal weight as assumed above.
Practical analog integrators such as the recirctrlati~ig  delay line (also called a feedback integrator), the low-pass filter, and the electronic storage  tube apply what is equivalent to an exponential weighting to the integrated piilses; that is, if ,I  pulses are integrated, the voltage out of the integrator is  V= 1 6 exp [-(i- l)y]  1=1  where V; is the voltage amplitude of the ith pulse and exp (- y) is the attenuation per pulse.
In  a recirculating delay-line integrator, e-Y is the attenuation around the loop.
In an RC  low-pass filter y = Tp/RC, where Tp is the pulse repetition period and RC is the filter time  constant.
 In order to find the signal-topnoise ratio for a given probability of detection and probabi-  lity of false alarm, an analysis similar to that used to obtain Figs.
2.7 and 2.8 should he  (2.32) (2.33)32INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS andprobability offalsealarm,orfalse-alarm number, sincethereisnostandardiLation of definitions.
Theyallcangivethecorrectvaluesforuseintheradarequation provided the assumptions usedbyeachauthorareunderstood.
Theoriginal false-alarm timeofMarcum lOisdifferent fromthatusedinthistext.He defineditasthetimeinwhichtheprobability is1/2thatafalsealarmwillnotoccur.A comparison ofthetwodefinitions isgivenbyHollis.12Marcum's definition offalse-alarm time isseldomused,although hisdefinition offalse-alarm number isoftenfound.
Thesolidstraight lineplottedinFig.2.8arepresents aperfectpredetection integrator with£;(n)=1.Itishardlyeverachieved inpractice.
Whenonlyafewpulsesareintegrated postdetection (largesignal-to-noise ratioperpulse),Fig.2.8ashowsthattheintegration­ improvement factorisnotmuchditTerent fromaperfectpredetection integrator.
Whenalarge numberofpulsesareintegrated (smallsignal-to-noise ratioperpulse),thedifference between postdetection andpredetection integration ismorepronounced.
Thedashedstraight lineappliestoanintegration-improvement factorproportional to nl/2.Asdiscussed inSec.10.6,dataobtained duringWorldWarIIseemedtoindicatethatthis described theperformance ofanoperator viewingacathode-ray tubedisplay.
Morerecent experiments, however, showthattheoperator-integration performance whenviewing a properly designed PPJorB-scope displayisbetterrepresented bythetheoretical postdetec­ tionintegrator asgivenbyFig.2.8,ratherthanbythen1/2law.
Theradarequation withnpulsesintegrated canbewritten 4 P,GAeO" Rmax=(4n)2kToBnFn(S/N)n wheretheparameters arethesameasthatofEq.(2.7)exceptthat(S/N)nisthesignal-to-noise ratioofoneofthenequalpulsesthatareintegrated toproduce therequired probability of detection foraspecified probability offalsealarm:Tousethisformoftheradarequation itis necessary tohaveasetofcurveslikethoseofFig.2.7foreachvaiueof11.Suchcurvesare available,l1 butarenotnecessary sinceonlyFigs.2.7and2.8areneeded.
Substituting Eq.(2.31)into(2.32)gives 4 P,GAeO"nE;(n) Rmax={4n)2kToBnFn{S/Nh Thevalueof(S/N)lisfoundfromFig.2.7asbefore,andnE;(lI)isfoundfromFig.2.Xa.
Thepost-detection integration lossdescribed byFig.2.8assumes aperfectintegraior.
Manypractical integrators, however, havea"lossofmemory" withtime.Thatis,theampli­ tudeofasignalstoredinsuchanintegrator decays,sothatthestoredpulsesarenotsummed withequalweightasassumed above.Practical analogintegrators suchastherecirculating delayline(alsocalledafeedback integrator), thelow-pass filter,andtheelectronic storage tubeapplywhatisequivalent toanexponential weighting totheintegrated pulses;thatis,if11 pulsesareintegrated, thevoltageoutoftheintegrator is Nv=LViexp[-(i-l)y] 1=1(2.34) whereViisthevoltageamplitude oftheithpulseandexp(-y)istheattenuation perpulse.In arecirculating delay-line integrator, e-Yistheattenuation around theloop.InanRC low-pass filtery=Tp/RC,whereTpisthepulserepetition periodandRCisthefiltertime constant.
Inordertofindthesignal-to ..noiseratioforagivenprobability ofdetection andprobabi­ lityorfalsealarm,ananalysis similartothatusedtoobtainFigs.2.7and2.8shouldhe TtfE RADAR EQUATION 33  repeated for each value of .)I and n.13 This is not done here.
Instead, for simplicity, an efficiency  will be defined which is the ratio of tile average signal-to-noise ratio for the exponential  integrator to the average signal-to-noise ratio for the uniform integrator.
For a dumped  integrator, one which erases the contents of the integrator after rr pulses and starts over, the  efficiencv isI4  /> = tanh (11~12)  11 tanh (712)  An exarnple of an integrator that dumps is an electrostatic storage tube that is erased whenever  it is read.
The efficiency of an integrator that operates continuously without dumping is  Tlie rnaxin~irnl efficiency of a dumped integrator occurs for = 0, but for a continuous integra-  tor tl~c niaxitnunl cflicicticy occurs for II~ = 1.257.
 2.7 RADAR CROSS SECTION OF TARGETS  The radar cross section of a target is the (fictional) area intercepting that amount of power  which.
when scattered equally in all directions, produces an echo at the radar equal to that  from the target; or in other terms,  power reflected toward source/unit solid angle  6= Er - = lim 47rn2 f.
1 incident power density/4~ (2.36)  R-+m  where R = distance between radar and target  E, = reflected field strength at radar  Ei = strength of incident field at target  This equation is equivalent to the radar range equationbf Sec.
1.2.
For most common types of  radar targets such as aircraft, ships, and terrain, the radar cross section does not necessarily  bear a simple relationship to the physical area, except that the larger the target size, the larger  the cross section is likely to be.
 Scattering and diflractiorr are variations of the same physical process.15 When an object  scatters an electromagnetic wave, the scattered field is defined as the difference between the  total field in the presence of the object and the field that would exist if the object were absent  (but with the sources unchanged).
On the other hand, the diffracted field is the total field in the  presence of the object.
With radar backscatter, the two fields are the same, and one may talk  about scattering and diffraction interchangeably.
 In theory, the scattered field, and hence the radar cross section, can be determined by  solving Maxwell's equations with the proper boundary conditions applied.16 Unfortunately,  the determination of the radar cross section with Maxwell's equations can be accomplished  only for the most simple of shapes, and solutions valid over a large range of frequencies are not  easy to obtain.
The radar cross section of a simple sphere is shown in Fig.
2.9 as a function of  its circumference measured in wavelengths (2na/A, where a is the radius of the sphere and 1 is  the ~avelength).'~-'~.~~ The region where the size of the sphere is small compared with the  wavelength (2na/A 4 1) is called the Rayleigh region, after Lord Rayleigh who, in the early  1870~~ first studied scattering by small particles.
Lord Rayleigh was interested in the scattering  of light by microscopic particles, rather than in radar.
His work preceded the orginal electro-  magnetic echo experiments of Hertz by about fifteen years.
The Rayleigh scattering region is of  THERADAR EQUATION 33 repeated foreachvalueof)'and11.13Thisisnotdonehere.Instead,forsimplicity, anefficiency willbedefined whichistheratiooftheaverage signal-to-noise ratiofortheexponential integrator totheaverage signal-to-noise ratiofortheuniform integrator.
Foradumped integrator.
onewhicherasesthecontents oftheintegrator after Ilpulsesandstartsover,the efficiency isI 4 tanh(1l1'/2) f1=--,,--'----,~-'-:- Iltanhb'/2)(2.35a) (2.35b) (2.36)Anexample ofanintegrator thatdumpsisanelectrostatic storagetubethatiserasedwhenever itisread.Theefficiency ofanintegrator thatoperates continuously withoutdumping is [I-exp(-'11')]2P=---.--.--------- 11tanh(r/2) Themaximum efficiency ofadumped integrator occursforI'=0,butforacontinuous integra­ torlhemaximum efficiency occursforIl}'=1.257.
2.7RADAR CROSS SECTION OFTARGETS Theradarcrosssectionofatargetisthe(fictional) areaintercepting thatamountofpower which.whenscattered equallyinalldirections, produces anechoattheradarequaltothat fromthetarget;orinotherterms, powerreflected towardsource/unit solidangle 1E12 (J= incident powerdensity/4n =!~4nR2 E: whereR=distance between radarandtarget Er=reflected fieldstrength atradar Ej=strength ofincident fieldattarget Thisequation isequivalent totheradarrangeequation"'ofSec.
1.2.Formostcommon typesof radartargetssuchasaircraft, ships,andterrain,theradarcrosssectiondoesnotnecessarily bearasimplerelationship tothephysical area,exceptthatthelargerthetargetsize,thelarger thecrosssectionislikelytobe.
Scattering anddiffraction arevariations ofthesamephysical process.1SWhenanobject scatters anelectromagnetic wave,thescattered fieldisdefinedasthedilTerence between the totalfieldinthepresence oftheobjectandthefieldthatwouldexistiftheobjectwereabsent (butwiththesourcesunchanged).
Ontheotherhand,thediffracted fieldisthetotalfieldinthe presence oftheobject.Withradarbackscatter, thetwofieldsarethesame,andonemaytalk aboutscattering anddiffraction interchangeably.
Intheory,thescattered field,andhencetheradarcrosssection,canbedetermined by solvingMaxwell's equations withtheproperboundary conditions applied.16Unfortunately, thedetermination oftheradarcrosssectionwithMaxwell's equations canbeaccomplished onlyforthemostsimpleofshapes,andsolutions validoveralargerangeoffrequencies arenot easytoobtain.TheradarcrosssectionofasimplesphereisshowninFig.2.9asafunction of itscircumference measured inwavelengths (2na/A.,whereaistheradiusofthesphereandA.is thewavelength).17-19.34 Theregionwherethesizeofthesphereissmallcompared withthe wavelength (2nalA.
~I)iscalledtheRayleigh region,afterLordRayJeigh who,intheearly 18705,firststudiedscattering bysmallparticles.
LordRayleigh wasinterested inthescattering oflightbymicroscopic particles, ratherthaninradar.Hisworkpreceded theorginalelectro­ magnetic echoexperiments ofHertzbyaboutfifteenyears.TheRayleigh scattering regionisof 34 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  Circumference /wovelength = 2 ~ra/ A  Figure 2.9 Radar cross section of the sphere.
a = radius; 1 = wavelength.
 interest to the radar engineer because the cross sections of raindrops and other meteorological  particles fall within this region at the usual radar frequencies.
Since the cross section of objects  within the Rayleigh region varies as A-4, rain and clouds are essentially invisible to radars  which operate at relatively long wavelengths (low frequencies).
The usual radar targets are  much larger than raindrops or cloud particles, and lowering the radar frequency to the point  where rain or cloud echoes are negligibly small will not seriously reduce the cross sectior~ of  the larger desired targets.
On the other hand, if it were desired to actually observe, rather than  eliminate, raindrop echoes, as in a meteorological or weather-observing radar, the higher  radar frequencies would be preferred.
 At the other extreme from the Rayleigh region is the optical region, where the dimensiol~s  of the sphere are large compared with the wavelength (2nalA % 1).
For large 2na/l, the radar  cross section approaches the optical cross section na2.
In between the optical and the Rayleigh  region is the Mie, or resonance, region.
The cross section is oscillatory with frequency within  this region.
The maximum value is 5.6 dB greater than the optical value, while the value of the  first null is 5.5 dB below the optical value.
(The theoretical values of the maxima and minima  may vary according to the method of calculation employed.) The behavior of the radar cross  sections of other simple reflecting objects as a function of frequency is similar to that of the  sphere.' 5-25  Since the sphere is a sphere no matter from what aspect it is viewed, its cross section will  not be aspect-sensitive.
The cross section of other objects, however, will depend upon the  direction as viewed by the radar.
 Figure 2.10 is a plot of the backscatter cross section of a long thin rod as a function of  aspect.26 The rod is 391 long and 1/4 in diameter, and is made of silver.
If the rod were of steel  instead of silver, the first maximum would be about 5 dB below that shown.
The radar cross  section of the thin rod (and similar, objects) is small when viewed end-on (8 = 0") since the  physical area is small.
However, at near end-on, waves couple onto the scatterer which travel  34INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS Optical regionMieorresonance region1.0 0.01N t:l \::: "- ~0.1 cu.c '"b'" 0.001 lL..-__ ....l-_.l----l.---l.--L.-l...-L....!-L __--l._--L_L-L-J--L-L..L-L- __ ---.J 0.1 0.20.30.40.50.81.0 2 3 4 5 6 8 10 20 Circumference /wavelength =21Ta/A Figure2.9Radarcrosssectionofthesphere.a=radius;l=wavelength.
interesttotheradarengineer becausethecrosssectionsofraindrops andothermeteorological particles fallwithinthisregionattheusualradarfrequencies.
Sincethecrosssectionofobjects withintheRayleigh regionvariesasA.-4,rainandcloudsareessentially invisible toradars whichoperateatrelatively longwavelengths (lowfrequencies).
Theusualradartargetsare muchlargerthanraindrops orcloudparticles, andlowering theradarfrequency tothepoint whererainorcloudechoesarenegligibly smallwillnotseriously reducethecrosssectionof thelargerdesiredtargets.Ontheotherhand,ifitweredesiredtoactuallyobserve, ratherthan eliminate, raindrop echoes,asinameteorological orweather-observing radar,thehigher radarfrequencies wouldbepreferred.
Attheotherextreme fromtheRayleigh regionistheopticalregion,wherethedimensions ofthespherearelargecompared withthewavelength (2na/A.
~1).Forlarge2na/A.,themdar crosssectionapproaches theopticalcrosssectionna2•Inbetween theopticalandtheRayleigh regionistheMie,orresonance, region.Thecrosssectionisoscillatory withfrequency within thisregion.Themaximum valueis5.6dBgreaterthantheopticalvalue,whilethevalueofthe firstnullis5.5dBbelowtheopticalvalue.(Thetheoretical valuesofthemaximaandminima mayvaryaccording tothemethodofcalculation employed.) Thebehavior oftheradarcross sectionsofothersimplereflecting objectsasafunctionoffrequency issimilartothatofthe sphere.
15-25 Sincethesphereisaspherenomatterfromwhataspectitisviewed,itscrosssectionwill notbeaspect-sensitive.
Thecrosssectionofotherobjects,however, willdependuponthe direction asviewedbytheradar.
Figure2.10isaplotofthebackscatter crosssectionofalongthinrodasafunction of aspect.
26Therodis39A.longandA./4indiameter, ~ndismadeofsilver.Iftherodwereofsteel insteadofsilver,thefirstmaximum wouldbeabout5dBbelowthatshown.Theradarcross sectionofthethinrod(andsimilar:objects)issmallwhenviewedend-on(0=0°)sincethe physicalareaissmall.However, atnearend-on,wavescoupleontothescatterer whichtravel Measured ---- Colculoted  F-igure 2.10 Backscatter cross section of a lotig thin rod.
(From peters,16 IRE I'rans.)  down the length of the object and reflect from the discontinuity at the far end.
This gives rise to  a traveling wave component that is not predicted by physical optics the~ry.*~,~'  An interesting radar scattering object is the cone-sphere, a cone whose base is capped with  a sphere such that the first derivatives of the cone and sphere contours are equal at the join  between the two.
Figure 2.1 1 is a plot of the nose-on radar cross section.
Figure 2.12 is a plot as  a function of aspect.
The cross section of the cone-sphere from the vicinity of the nose-on  direction is quite low.
Scattering from any object occurs fro& discontinuities.
Thediscontinui-  ties.
and hence the backscattering, of the cone-sphere are from the tip and from the join  between the cone and the sphere.
There is also a backscattering contribution f~om a "creeping  Figure 2.11 Radar cross section of a cone sphere with 15" half angle as a function of the diameter in  wavelengths.
(Afier BIore," IEEE Trans.) '  TilERADAR EQUATION 35 OJu 908070--- Measured - ---Calculated 30405060 Angular orientation 820\•I I I!., I / I / I I I /..,,/ 7-II I, 2-I I I-.r;c;, ~16­ Qj >o ~ ~11.5-o ::J 0" '"o l1J>o.0o o l1J Lo o.cu W Figure2.10Backscatter crosssectionofalongthinrod.(From!;eters,26 IRETrails.) downthelengthoftheobjectandreflectfromthediscontinuity atthefarend.Thisgivesriseto atraveling wavecomponent thatisnotpredicted byphysical opticstheory.26.3s ;\ninteresting radarscattering objectisthecone-sphere, aconewhosebaseiscappedwith aspheresuchthatthefirstderivatives oftheconeandspherecontours areequalatthejoin betweenthetwo.Figure2.11isaplotofthenose-onradarcrosssection.Figure2.12isaplotas afunction ofaspect.Thecrosssectionofthecone-sphere fromthevicinityofthenose-on direction isquitelow.Scattering fromanyobjectoccursfromdiscontinuities.
Thediscontinui­ ties.andhencethebackscattering, ofthecone-sphere arefromthetipandfromthejoin hetween theconeandthesphere.Thereisalsoabackscattering contribution fcoma"creeping o br;!<-10·­ ~ 0­o o ~rv co-20f--f---------t------------::-­ (J=0.01>,,2 III '"1 ~-.30~e u (:; Uorr04 08 1.2 Diameter (Wavelengths) Figure2.11Radarcrosssectionofaconespherewith15°halfangleasafunction ofthediameter in wavelengths.
(AfterBlore.27IEEETrailS.) (, 9'1~ Id 11dUUfld IUO~~)  .uo!lez!~elod (la(1e~od) (eqJaA (q) 'uo!lez!~alod (~eln~puad~ad) leiuoz!~oq (0) '~~'01 = asaq jo sn!peJ puo  alaue jleq o~'z I 111!m a~ayds-auo3 a%el o jo (ap u! ua~!8 ,?ID) uo!i~as sso~:, JepeJ pa~nsna~ ~1-z aln%!~  270" 27001800 //~--~=-~-------._---- /'~ ------------//.~'_/-/ .------------------ ----- -,~ '-,~---~ '-'"" //...------- .-----.
~'--,---"- '~ 1/1//</----<><";: //~----'."'-/1// .~\ ~(J cr',,2...j30dB----------- /' -' 40dB~ /// o.------~ 1600 ==-~ 10dB-- /- " i20dB~/ / / cr:.-././ / ,,2-bodB-- ./'./ i /-- ,40dB--------------- 0"900(al 900(b) Figure2.12Measured radarcrosssection(a/).,2givenindB)ofalarge con~-sph~re with12.5°halfangle andradiusofbase=1O.4J...(a)horizontal (perpendicular) polarization, (b)vertical(parallel) polarization.
(FromPannelletal.61) 36 THE RADAR EQCJATION 37  wave" wliicli travels i~t~t~titl the base of the spliere.
The nose-on radar cross section is small  and dccrcascs as tl~c sqirarc of tlrc wavcle~igtli.
'I'lic cross section is sinall over a relatively lasgc  angular region.
A large specular return is obtained when the cone-sphere is viewed at near  pcrpcridictrlar iricidetlcc to the corle surface, i.e., when 0 = 90 - a, where u = cone half angle.
 From the rear lialf of the cone-sphere, tlie radar cross section is approximately that of the  sphere.
 The nose-on cross section of the cone-sphere varies, but its maximum value is approxi-  rnately 0.4A2 arid its minimum is 0.01A2 for a wide range of half-angles for frequencies above  tlie Kayleigli region.
'l'lie null spacing is also relatively insensitive to the cone half-angle.
If a  "typical" value of cross section is taken as 0.1A2, the cross section at S band (A = 0.1 m) is  10 hi2, and at ,I' band (A = 3 cm), the cross section is approximately mZ.
Thus, in  theory.
the cone-sphere can have very low backscatter energy.
Suppose, for example, that the  projected area of the cone-sphere were 1 m2.
The radar cross section of a sphere, with the same  projected area, at S band is about 30 dB greater.
A corner reflector at S band, also of the same  projected area, has a radar cross section about 60 dB greater than the cone-sphere.
Thus,  objects with the same physical projected area can have considerably different radar cross  sections.
 In order to realize in practice the very low theoretical values of the radar cross section for  a cotie-sptiere, the tip of the cone must be sliarp and not rounded, the surface must be smooth  (roughness small compared to a wavelength), the join between the cone and the sphere must  have a continuous first derivative, and there must be no holes, windows, or protuberances on  the surface.
A coinparison of the nose-on cross section of several cone-shaped objects is given  in Fig.
2.13.
 Shaping of the target, as with the cone-sphere, is a good method for reducing the radar  cross section.
Materials such as carbon-fiber composites, which are sometimes used in aero-  space applications, can further reduce the radar cross section of targets as compared with that  produced by liiglily reflecting metallic materials.62  50 0 04 08 1.2 1.6 2.0 2.4  Diameter in wavelengths Figure 2.13  a set of 40" Radar cross section of  cones, double-backed  1 cones, cone-spheres, double-  rounded cones, and circular ogives  as a function of diameter in wave-  lengths.
(From ~Iore,~' lEEE  Trans.)  THERADAR EQUATION 37 wave"whichtravelsaroundthehaseofthesphere.Thenose-on radarcrosssectionissmall anddecreases astilesquareofthewavelength.
Thecrosssectionissmalloverarelatively large angular region.Alargespecular returnisobtained whenthecone-sphere isviewedatnear perpendicular incidence totheconesurface,i.e.,when(}=90-a,wherea=conehalfangle.
FromtherearhaIrorthecone-sphere, theradarcrosssectionisapproximately thatofthe sphere.
Thenose-on crosssectionofthecone-sphere varies,butitsmaximum valueisapproxi­ mately0.4),2anditsminimum is0.0U.2forawiderangeofhalf-angles forfrequencies above theRayleigh region.TheHullspacing isalsorelatively insensitive totheconehalf-angle.
Ifa "typical" valueofcrosssectionistakenas0.1),2,thecrosssectionatSband(A=0.1m)is 103m2,andatXband(A=3cm),thecrosssectionisapproximately 10-4m2.Thus,in theory.thecone-sphere canhaveverylowbackscatter energy.Suppose, forexample, thatthe projected areaofthecone-sphere were1m2•Theradarcrosssectionofasphere,withthesame projected area,atSbandisabout30dBgreater.Acornerreflector atSband,alsoofthesame projected area,hasaradarcrosssectionabout60dBgreaterthanthecone-sphere.
Thus, objectswiththesamephysical projected areacanhaveconsiderably different radarcross sections.
Inordertorealizeinpractice theverylowtheoretical valuesoftheradarcrosssectionfor acone-sphere.
thetipoftheconemustbesharpandnotrounded, thesurfacemustbesmooth (roughness smallcompared toawavelength), thejoinbetween theconeandthespheremust haveacontinuous firstderivative, andtheremustbenoholes,windows, orprotuberances on thesurface.
/\comparison orthenose-on crosssectionofseveralcone-shaped objectsisgiven inFig.2.13.
.
Shaping orthetarget,aswiththecone-sphere, isagoodmethod forreducing theradar crosssection.
Materials suchascarbon-fiber composites, whicharesometimes usedinaero­ spaceapplications, canfurtherreducetheradarcrosssectionoftargetsascompared withthat produced byhighlyreflecting metallic materials.62 Figure2.13Radarcrosssectionof asetof40°cones,double-backed cones, cone-spheres, double­ rounded cones,andcircularogives asafunction ofdiameter inwave­ lengths.
(FromBlore,27IEEE Trans.)Cone cone ConeSphere 2.01.612 08~--Circularogive,/ \:~ \'.Double-rounded cone 04-50"-----'----'----'----'-----"----'-----'o Diameter inwavelengthso+10.
C 52 ~-20 <II <II <IIo ~u 40-o-30 oo 0:obl~ a 0'o-10 Complex  target^.^'^^^ The radar cross section of complex targets such as ships, aircraft, cities,  and terrain are complicated functions of the viewing aspect and the radar frequency.
Target  cross sections may be computed with the aid of digital compirters, or they rnay be meastrred  experimentally.
The target cross section can be measured with full-scale targets, but it is more  convenient to make cross-section measurements on scale models at the proper scaled  freqi~ency.~~  A complex target may be considered as comprising a large number of independent objects  that scatter energy in all directions.
The energy scattered in the direction of the radar is of  prime interest.
The relative phases and amplitudes of the echo signals from the individtlal  scattering objects as measured at the radar receiver determine the total cross section.
The  phases and amplitudes of the individual signals might add to give a large total cross section, or  the relationships with one another might result in total cancellation.
In general, the behavior is  somewhere between total reinforcement and total cancellation.
If the separation between the  individual scattering objects is large compared with the wavelength-and this is usually true  for most radar applications-the phases of the individual signals at the radar receiver will vary  as the viewing aspect is changed and cause a scintillating echo.
.
I Consider the scattering from a relatively "simple" complex target consisting of two equal,  isotropic objects (such as spheres) separated a distance I (Fig.
2.14).
By isotropic scattering is  meant that the radar cross section of each object is independent of the viewing aspect.
The  separation I is assumed to be less than 1x12, where c is the velocity of propagation and r is the  pulse duration.
With this assumption, both scatterers are illuminated simultaneously by  the pulse packet.
Another restriction placed on 1 is that it be small compared with the distance  R from radar to target.
Furthermore, R, RR, -- R.
The cross sections of the two targets are  assumed equal and are designated go.
The composite cross section a, of the two scatterers is  a, - go = 2 [I + cos (F sin 0) 1  The ratio a,/oo can be anything from a minimum of zero to a maximum of four timcs tllc crohs  section of an individual scatterer.
Polar plots of a,/ao for various values of !/A are sllown In  Fig.
2.15.
Although this is a rather simple example of a "complex" target, it is complicated  enough to indicate the type of behavior to be expected with practical radar targets.
 The radar cross sections of actual targets are far more complicated in structure than the .
i I  simple two-scatterer target.
Practical targets are composed of many individual scatterers, each  with different scattering properties.
Also, interactions may occur between the scatterers whlct~  affect the resultant cross section.
 An example of the cross sect~on as a function of aspect angle for a propeller-driven  Sphere  target  Figure 2.14 Geometry of t he t wo-scatterer complex target.
 38INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS Complex targets.J2.JJTheradarcrosssectionofcomplex targetssuchasships,aircraft,cities, andterrainarecomplicated functions oftheviewing aspectandtheradarfrequency.
Target crosssections maybecomputed withtheaidofdigitalcomputers, ortheymaybemeasured experimentally.
Thetargetcrosssectioncanbemeasured withfull-scale targets,butitismore convenient tomakecross-section measurements onscalemodels attheproperscaled frequency.63 Acomplex targetmaybeconsidered ascomprising alargenumberofindependent objects thatscatterenergyinalldirections.
Theenergyscattered inthedirection oftheradarisof primeinterest.
Therelative phasesandamplitudes oftheechosignalsfromtheindividual scattering objectsasmeasured attheradarreceiver determine thetotalcrosssection.The phasesandamplitudes oftheindividual signalsmightaddtogivealargetotalcrosssection,or therelationships withoneanothermightresultintotalcancellation.
Ingeneral, thebehavior is somewhere b~tween totalreinforcement andtotalcancellation.
Iftheseparation between the individual scattering objectsislargecompared withthewavelength-and thisisusuallytrue formostradarapplications-the phasesoftheindividual signalsattheradarreceiverwillvary astheviewing aspectischanged andcauseascintillating echo.
Consider thescattering fromarelatively" simple" complex targetconsisting oftwoequal.
isotropic objects(suchasspheres) separated adistanceI(Fig.2.14).Byisotropic scattering is meantthattheradarcrosssectionofeachobjectisindependent oftheviewing aspect.The separation Iisassumed tobelessthancr/2,wherecisthevelocity ofpropagation andristhe pulseduration.
Withthisassumption, bothscatterers areilluminated simultaneously by thepulsepacket.Another restriction placedonIisthatitbesmallcompared withthedistance Rfromradartotarget.Furthermore, R1~R2~R.Thecrosssections ofthetwotargetsare assumed equalandaredesignated 0'0.Thecomposite crosssection O'rofthetwoscatterers is O'r [(47[1.l)]0'0=2 1+cos-y'SIn(, (2.37) TheratioO'r/O'Ocanbeanything fromaminimum ofzerotoamaximum offourtimesthecros~ sectionofanindividual scatterer.
PolarplotsofO'rlO'oforvariousvalucsofII)",areshownin Fig.2.15.Although thisisarathersimpleexample ofa..complex" target,itiscomplicated enoughtoindicate thetypeofbehavior tobeexpected withpractical radartargets.
Theradarcrosssections ofactualtargetsare~armorecomplicated instructure thanthe simpletwo-scatterer target.Practical targetsarecomposed ofmanyindividual scallerers.
each withdifferent scattering properties.
Also,interactions mayoccurbetween thescattcrers which affecttheresultant crosssection.
Anexample ofthecrosssectionasafunction ofaspectangleforapropeller-driven Spherer-{------1 Sphere torget torget Rodar Figure2.14Geometry ortheIwo-scallcrcr complextarge!. THE RADAR EQUATION 39  (c)  1  Figure 2.15 Polar plots of a,/a, for the two-scatterer complex target [Eq.
(2.37)].
(a) I = 1; (b) 1 = 21;  (c) 1 = 4A.
 aircraftZ8 is sllown in Fig.
2.16.
The aircraft is the B-26, a World War I1 medium-range  two-engine bomber.
The radar wavelength was 10 cm.
These data were obtained exper-  i~nentally by mounting the aircraft on a turntable in surroundings free from other reflecting  objects and by observing with a nearby radar set.
The propellers were running during the  measurement and produced a modulation of the order of 1 to 2 kHz.
The cross section can  change by as much as 15 dB for a change in aspect of only 3".
The maximum echo signal  occurs in the vicinity of broadside, where the projected area of the aircraft is largest.
 It is not usually convenient to obtain the radar cross section of aircraft by mounting the  full-size aircraft on a rotating table.
Measurements can be obtained with scale models on a  pattern range.19 An example of such model measurements is given by the dashed curves in  Fig.
2.17.
If care is taken in the construction of the model and in the pattern-range  instrumen tat ion, it is possible to achieve reasonably representative measurements.
 The radar cross section of an aircraft can also be obtained by c~mputation.'~ The target is  broken up into a number of simple geometrical shapes, the contribution of each (taking  THERADAR EQUATION 39 r\\\,, \ \.­ \0° I ./0° I ••k4A-,..1 (c)•• ~2Ak (b) Fi2ure2.15Polarplotsof(Jr/(JOforthetwo-scatterer complex target(Eq.(2.37)].(a)I=A.;(b)1=2,1.; (c)1=4)..
aircrafl28 isshowninFig.2.16.Theaircraft istheB-26,a.WorldWarIImedium-range two-engine bomber.
Theradarwavelength was10em.Thesedatawereobtained exper­ imentally bymounting theaircraftonaturntable insurroundings freefromotherreflecting objectsandbyobserving withanearbyradarset.Thepropellers wererunning duringthe measurement andproduced amodulation oftheorderof1to2kHz.Thecrosssectioncan changebyas!Iluchas15dBforachangeinaspectofonly1°.Themaximum echosignal occursinthevicinityofbroadside, wheretheprojected areaoftheaircraftislargest.
Itisnotusuallyconvenient toobtaintheradarcrosssectionofaircraftbymounting the full-sizeaircraftonarotating table.Measurements canbeobtained withscalemodelsona patternrange.29Anexample ofsuchmodelmeasurements isgivenbythedashedcurvesin Fig.2.17.Ifcareistakenintheconstruction ofthemodelandinthepattern-range instrumentation.
itispossible toachievereasonably representative measurements.
Theradarcrosssectionofanaircraftcanalsobeobtained bycomputation.l7Thetargetis brokenupintoanumber ofsimplegeometrical shapes,thecontribution ofeach(taking 40 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  Figure 2.16 Experimental cross section of the B-26 two-engine bomber at IO-cm wavelength as a function  of azimuth angle.
(From Ridenour,'' courtesy McGraw-Hill Book Company, Inc.)  account of aspect changes and shadowing of one component by another) is computed and ttlc  component cross sections are combined to yield the composite value.
The " theoretical " values  of Fig.
2.17 for B-47 were obtained by calculation.
 The most realistic method for obtaining the radar cross section of aircraft is to measure  the actual target in flight.
There is no question about the authenticity of the target being  measured.
An example of such a facility is the dynamic radar cross-section range of the U.S.
 Naval Research Lab~ratory.~' Radars at L, S, C and X bands illuminate the aircraft target in  flight.
The radar track data is used to establish the aspect angle of the target with respect to the  radar.
Pulse-to-pulse radar cross section is available, but for convenience in presenting the  data the values plotted usually are an average of a large number of values taken within a 10 by  10" aspect angle interval.
Examples of such data are given in Figs.
2.18 to 2.20.
The radar cross  section of the T-38 aircraft at head-on incidence is shown in Table 2.1.
This data was also  obtained from an aircraft in flight.
(The T-38 is a twin-jet trainer with a 7.7 m wing span and a  14 m length.)  40INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS 35dB Figure2.16Experimental crosssectionofthe8-26two-engine bomberatto-emwavelength asafunction ofazimuth angle.(FromRidenour,28 courtesyMcGraw-Hill BookCompany, Inc.) accountofaspectchangesandshadowing ofonecomponent byanother) iscomputed andthe component crosssectionsarecombined toyieldthecomposite value.The"theoretical" values ofFig.2.17forB-47wereobtained bycalculation.
Themostrealisticmethodforobtaining theradarcrosssectionofaircraftistomeasure theactualtargetinflight.Thereisnoquestion abouttheauthenticity ofthetargetheing measured.
Anexample ofsuchafacilityisthedynamic radarcross-section rangeoftheU.S.
NavalResearch Laboratory.3o RadarsatL,S,CandXbandsilluminate theaircrafttargetin flight.Theradartrackdataisusedtoestablish theaspectangleofthetargetwithrespecttothe radar.Pulse-to-pulse radarcrosssectionisavailable, butforconvenience inpresenting the datathevaluesplottedusuallyareanaverageofalargenumberofvaluestakenwithina10by 10°aspectangleinterval.
Examples ofsuchdataaregiveninFigs.2.18to2.20.Theradarcross sectionoftheT-38aircraftathead-on incidence isshowninTable2.1.Thisdatawasalso obtained fromanaircraftinflight.(TheT-38isatwin-jettrainerwitha7.7mwingspananda 14mlength.) Figure 2.17 Comparison of the theoretical and model-measurement horizontal-polarization radar cross  sections of the B-47 medium bomber jet aircraft with a wing span of 35 m and a length of 33 m.
Solid curve  is the average of the computed cross sections obtained by the University of Michigan Engineering  Rewarch Institute at a frequency of 980 MHz.
Dashed curves are model measurements obtained by the  ,: Ohio State University Antenna Laboratory at a frequency of 600 MHz.
Open circles are the maximum  values averaged over 10" intervals; solid circles are median values.
Radar is assumed to be in the same  plane as the aircraft.64  It can be seen that the radar cross section of an aircraft is difficult to specify concisely.
 Slight changes in viewing aspect or frequency result in large fluctuations in cross section.
 Nevertheless, a single value of cross section is sometimes given for specific aircraft targets for  use in computing the radar equation.
There is no standard, agreed-upon method for specifying  the single-valued cross section of an aircraft.
The average value or the median might be taken.
 Sometimes it is a " minimum" value, perhaps the value exceeded 99 percent of the time or 95  percent of the time.
It might also be the value which when substituted into the radar equation  assures that the computed range agrees with the experimentally measured range.
 Table 2.2 lists "example" values of cross section for various targets at microwave  frequencies.
Note that only a single value is given even though there can be a large variation.
 They should not be used for design purposes when actual data is available for the particular  targets of interest.
 A military propeller aircraft such as the AD-4B has a cross section of about 20 m2 at L  band, but a la) m2 cross section at VHF.
The longer wavelengths at VHF result in greater  THERADAR EQUATION 41 I I I.­ I I ,/ / Trailing edgeof horizontal toil /I T, I I I I--0--0Peakdue10 Iralingedge dwingo2- 24- 24-Peakdue foleading 2 -edged wing" I'"/'"1".
I '....
04....0,/ \ I,I \ I V 10\8\ 6'\\ 4\.­-....-- 10 8 6 41008-,000- •8"10,00j§-,--r---'--r--r ---r--r--j-- f,--l----r-.-r---,-I-~-- 61\ I' 1\ 1 I II Peakduefo /\_~Peakdue gaslank------/- ...', fofuselage 1 I J Ii I 1 I! I, \ I I! II Io I / I I1 I / I I I1 \ I 1 , cfI II," I, , / I 0 I , ' I/\ II(I I', 1 , 6' \ 'J \ \ I,'0, I'\', \'"\",./ \ 0 \'"<lJ (; 5 V"O 1 c: 2 U:x V"O ~ U 2- Azimuth angle-degrees Figure2.17Comparison ofthetheoretical andmodel-measurement horizontal-polarization radarcross sections oftheB-47medium bomberjetaircraftwithawingspanof35mandalengthof33m.Solidcurve istheaverage ofthecomputed crosssections obtained bytheUniversity ofMichigan Engineering Research Institute atafrequency of980MHz.Dashedcurvesaremodelmeasurements obtained bythe OhioStateUniversity Antenna Laboratory atafrequency of600MHz.Opencirclesarethemaximum valucsavcragcd over10°intervals; solidcirclesaremedianvalues.Radarisassumed tobeinthesame planeastheaircrafLf\4 Itcanbeseenthattheradarcrosssectionofanaircraftisdifficulttospecifyconcisely.
Slightchanges inviewing aspectorfrequency resultinlargefluctuations incrosssection.
Nevertheless, asinglevalueofcrosssectionissometimes givenforspecificaircrafttargetsfor useincomputing theradarequation.
Thereisnostandard, agreed-upon methodforspecifying thesingle-valued crosssectionofanaircraft.Theaveragevalueorthemedianmightbetaken.
Sometimes itisa"minimum" value,perhapsthevalueexceeded 99percentofthetimeor95 percentofthetime.Itmightalsobethevaluewhichwhensubstituted intotheradarequation assuresthatthecomputed rangeagreeswiththeexperimentally measured range.
Table2.2lists"example" valuesofcrosssectionforvarious targetsatmicrowave frequencies.
Notethatonlyasinglevalueisgiveneventhoughtherecanbealargevariation.
Theyshouldnotbeusedfordesignpurposes whenactualdataisavailable fortheparticular targetsofinterest.
Amilitary propeller aircraftsuchastheAD-4Bhasacrosssectionofabout20m2atL band,buta100m2crosssectionatVHF.Thelongerwavelengths atVHFresultingreater 42 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  Az~muth aspect angle (degl  (0)  ...
*-.-.-  E 20  m u  b 10  A = 180  '0 -10 -20 -30 -40 -10 -20 -30 -40  (bl Eleval~on aspect angce (degl Ic) Figure 2.18 (a) Azimuth variation of radar  cross section of a C-54 aircraft with constant  elevation angle of - 10".
(The C-54 is the  military version of the four-piston-engined  DC-4 commercial aircraft with a wing span  of 36 m and a length of 29 m.) Each point  represents the average of medians obtained  from samples within a 10 by 10" aspect cell.
 Frequency is 1300 MHz (L band) with linear  polarization.
V V = vertical polar~rat ion,  HH = horizontal polarization.
(b) Eleva- I  tion-variation nose-on (azimuth = 0") (c)  Elevation-variation tail-on (azimuth=  180").
(From Olin and Queen.")  cross section than microwaves because the dimensions of the scattering objects are compar-  able to the wavelength and produce resonance effects.
 An example of the measured radar cross section of a large ship (16,000 tons) is shown in  Fig.
2.21.
The aspect is at grazing incidence.
When averages of the cross section are taken  about the port and starboard bow and quarter aspects of a number of ships (omitting the peak  at broadside), a simple empirical expression is obtained for the median (50th percentile) value  of the cross section:  OA .
20 40 60 80 120 140 160  Az~mulh aspect angle (degl  20  m  b 10 A - IBO* Figure 2.19 Same as Fig.
2.18 except fre-  quency is 9225 MHz (X band).
VH and  0 -lo -20 -30 -40 -10 -20 -30 -40 HV represent cross-polarized components.
 (bl Elevot~m orpect angle[aeg) (CI (From Olin and Q~een.~')  42INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS Figure2.t8(a)Azimuth variation ofradar crosssectionofaC-54aircraftwithconstant elevation angleof-lO°.(TheC-54isthe military versionofthefour-piston-engined DCAcommercial aircraftwithawingspan of36mandalengthof29m.)Eachpoint represents theaverage ofmedians obtained fromsamples withina10by10°aspectcell.
Frequency is1300MHz(Lband)withlinear polarization.
VV=vertical polarization.
HH=horizontal polarization.
(b)Eleva­ tion-variation nose-on (azimuth =0°)(e) Elevation-variation tail-on (azimuth = 180°).(FromOlinandQueen.lO)A;180o--o--o::::=--: 0._______0--0 10203080100120 140 160 180 Az,mu'h aspectangle(deg) (a) 4o,------------,60 (blA~0' 0__ 0__°::::::::_0--0o J::----..1O-----;;2"'0-~3~0~~- 40 °0!c---·-:-;1O~-·-;;-20r;-----,- 3"0:------::-40 Elevatian aspectangle(deg) (e)40 30 N !I200.c 0 CD :2 b10 00 crosssectionthanmicrowaves becausethedimensions ofthescattering objectsarecompar­ abletothewavelength andproduce resonance effects.
Anexample ofth~measured radarcrosssectionofalargeship(16,000tons)isshownin Fig.2.21.Theaspectisatgrazingincidence.
Whenaverages ofthecrosssectionaretaken abouttheportandstarboard bowandquarteraspectsofanumberofships(omitting thepeak atbroadside), asimpleempirical expression isobtained forthemedian(50thpercentile) value ofthecrosssection: (2.38) °0k-----..,2=0-~40=------=60,.-----=8c;;:0--:,=00;,--·1"'2;;-0- ..,4""0-'-..,6=-;;0:--....-;!,80 Az'mulhaspectangle(deg) (a)40,----------, 40,--------:0=----, <£"30 ~o-g20 CD ~30 20~?-----_.
Figure2.19SameasFig.2.18exceptfre­ quency is9225MHz(Xband).VHand HVrepresent cross-polarized components.
(FromOlinandQueen.30)-40A-180' -10--20-3010 Elewahan aSjl8etanglerdcgIreIrTVH ITvv 00--·--=-10=----"2=0--:· 3"'0---:-40 00 lblb10 TfiE RADAR EQUATION 43  Table 2.la Radar cross section (square meters) of the T-3866  Head-on aspect ( f 1.0 degree)  X1.r.
X I,, Svv Lvv  Percentile 20 50 80 20 50 80 20 50 80 20 50 80 1 Figure 2.20 Same as Fig.
2.19.
but for circu-  ,I 1140 I lar polnri~ation.
RR -- right-hand polari7n-  .
- I tion, LL = left-hand polarization; RL arld  .J m v' i ...I w "0,  ',, .
,! In  i  Landing  gear up 0.33 0.83 1.7 0.21 0.53 1.2 1.6 3.1 4.7 1.5 1.8 2.2  i.anding  pearexter~dcd 053 16 3.5 0.24 0.80 2.1 1.1 2.3 4.4 0.99 2.6 4.5 l1 71' 40 ' 70 30 - LR are cross-polarized components.
(Frorrr  11,) I I, ,, I I I (r I Olirr artd Q~reer~.~') 10  Table 2.lb Median cross section (XI.,,) for aspects near nose-on  I  Azimuth angle (degrees)  Flevrttion  angle 0 2 5 7 Azimuth angle (degrees)  Elevation  angle 0 2 5 7  X,, : Transmit left circular polarization, receive left circular (X band).
X,, : Transmit left circular  polarization, receive right circular (X band).
S,,, : Transmit vertical polarization, receive vertical (S band).
 L,.,.
: Same for L band.
 i 'I', .J -I '"I>Ig~'\l '0I 'gI ~,,·1•'~I 'I'("/R Inl I ~-::I)" ! !=.~i~1 ""ff1 ,,,?P 1(\-.
~.
o 0 .~.,::-:::::::-:::"'---- ._---~~~~ ,-------THERADAR EQUATION 43 Figure2.20SameasFig.2.19,butforcircu­ larpolarization.
RR=right-hand polariza­ tion,LL=left-hand polarization; RLand LRarecross-polarized components.
(From OlillalldQlleell.30) Table2.1aRadarcrosssection(squaremeters)oftheT_3866 Head-on aspect(±1.0degree) X,.,.
XI.R Svv Lvv Percentile 205080205080205080205080 Landing gearup 0.330.831.70.210.531.21.63.14.71.51.82.2 Landing gearextended 0.531.63.50.240.802.1I.l2.34.40.992.64.5 Table2.lbMedian crosssection(Xl.lJforaspectsnearnose-on Azimuth angle(degrees) Azimuth angle(degrees) Elevation Elevation angle 0 2 5 7 angle 0 2 5 7 () (Un 16 0.72 0.45 0.90 1.2 6 0.68 0.61 0.99 0.82 18.
0.43 0.44 1.3 0.84 8 1.2 0.94 1.7 2.2 20 0.43 0.52 0.63 0.64 10 1.4 1.6:u 1.4 22 0.45 0.66I.ll.l 12 U.70 1.0 1.6 2.1 24 0.65 14 0.79 0.60 0.63 1.5 Xu.:Transmit leftcircular polarization, receiveleftcircular(Xband).XLR:Transmit leftcircular polarization, receiverightcircular(Xband).Svv:Transmit verticalpolarization, receivevertical(Sband).
Lno:SameforLband. 44 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  Table 2.2 Example radar cross sections at microwave frequencies  Square meters  Conventional, unmanned winged missile  Small, single engine aircraft  Small fighter, or 4-passenger jet  Large fighter  Medium bomber or medium jet airliner  Large bomber or large jet airliner  Jumbo jet  Small open boat  Small pleasure boat  Cabin cruiser  Ship at zero grazing angle  Sliip at higher grazing angles  Pickup truck  Automobile  Bicycle  Man  Bird  Insect 0.02  2  10  See Eq.
(2.38)  Displacement tonnage  expressed in m2  where o = radar cross section in square meters, f = radar frequency in megahertz, and D is the  ship's (full load) displacement in  kiloton^.^' This expression was derived from measurements  made at X, S, and L bands and for naval ships ranging from 2000 to 17,000 tons.
Although it  is probably valid outside this size and frequency range, it does not apply to elevation  angles other than grazing incidence.
At higher elevation angles, as might be viewed from  aircraft, the cross sections of ships might be considerably less than at grazing incidence,  perhaps by an order of magnitude.
When no better information is available, a very rough order  of magnitude estimate of the ship's cross section at other-than-grazing incidence can be had by  taking the ship's displacement in tons to be equal to its cross section in square meters.
The  average cross section of small pleasure boats 20 to 30 ft in length might have a radar cross i  section in the vicinity of a few square meters at X band.68 Boats from 40 to 50 ft in lc~lgrll  might have a cross section of the order of 10 square meters.
 The radar cross section of an automobile at X band is generally greater than that of an  aircraft or a boat.
From the front the cross section might vary from 10 to 200 mZ at A' band,  with 100 mZ being a typical value.65 The cross section increases with increasing frequency (up  to 60 GHz, the range of the measurements).
 The measured radar cross section of a man has been reported3* to be as follows:  Frequency, MHz 0, m2  The spread in cross-section values represents the variation with aspect and polarization.
 44INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS Table2.2Example radarcrosssectionsatmicrowave frequencies Squaremeters Conventional, unmanned wingedmissile Small,singleengineaircraft Smallfighter,or4-passenger jet Largefighter Medium bomber ormedium jetairliner Largebomber orlargejetairliner Jumbojet Smallopenboat Smallpleasure boat Cabincruiser Shipatzerograzing angle Shipathighergrazing angles Pickuptruck Automobile Bicycle Man Bird Insect0.5 1 2 6 20 40 100 0.02 2 10 SeeEq.(2.38) Displacement tonnage expressed inm2 200 100 2 1 0.01 10-5 where (J=radarcrosssectioninsquaremeters,f=radarfrequency inmegahertz, andDisthe ship's(fullload)displacement inkilotons.31Thisexpression wasderivedfrommeasurements madeatX,S,andLbandsandfornavalshipsrangingfrom2000to17,000tons.Although it isprobably validoutside thissizeandfrequency range,itdoesnotapplytoelevation anglesotherthangrazingincidence.
Athigherelevation angles,asmightbeviewedfrom aircraft, thecrosssections ofshipsmightbeconsiderably lessthanatgrazing incidence, perhaps byanorderofmagnitude.
Whennobetterinformation isavailable, averyroughorder ofmagnitude estimate oftheship'scrosssectionatother-than-grazing incidence canbehadby takingtheship'sdisplacement intonstobeequaltoitscrosssectioninsquaremeters.The average crosssectionofsmallpleasure boats20to30ftinlengthmighthavearadarcross sectioninthevicinityofafewsquaremetersatXband.68Boatsfrom40to50ftinlength mighthaveacrosssectionoftheorderof10squaremeters.
Theradarcrosssectionofanautomobile atXbandisgenerally greaterthanthatofan aircraftoraboat.Fromthefrontthecrosssectionmightvaryfrom10to200m2atXband, with100m2beingatypicalvalue.6sThecrosssectionincreases withincreasing frequency (up to60GHz,therangeofthemeasurements).
Themeasured radarcrosssectionofamanhasbeenreported 32tobeasfollows: Frequency, MHz 410 1,120 2,890 4,800 9,3750.033-2.33 0.098-0.997 0.140-1.05 0.368-1.88 0.495-1.22 Thespreadincross-section valuesrepresents thevariation withaspectandpolarization. THE RADAR EQUATION 45  (PORT)  (W  Figure 2.21 Azimuth variation of the radar cross-section of a large Naval Auxiliary Ship at (a) S band  (2800 MH7) and (h) S band (9225 MHz), both with horizontal polarization.
 (PORT!THERADAR EQUATION 45 led (a) (BOW) d lee! (b) Figure2.21Azimuth v<lriation oftheradarcross-section ofalargeNavalAuxiliary Shipat(a)Sband (2800MHz)and(h)Xband(9225MHz).bothwithhorizontal polarization. 46 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  The cross-section data presented in this section lead to tl-tt: concliision that it woiild not be  appropriate simply to select a single value and expect it to have meaning in the compi~tation of  the radar equation without further qualification.
Methods for dealing with the cross sections of  complicated targets are discussed in the next section.
 2.8 CROSS-SECTION FLUCTUATIONS  The discussion of the minimum signal-to-noise ratio in Sec.
2.6 assumed that the echo signal  received from a particular target did not vary with time.
In practice, however, the echo signal  from a target in motion is almost never constant.
Variations in the echo signal may be caused  by meteorological conditions, the lobe structure of the antenna pattern, eqilipmerlt instabili-  ties, or variations in the target cross section.
The cross sections of complex targets (the usual  type of radar target) are quite sensitive to aspe~t.~~,~~ Therefore, as the target aspect changes  relative to the radar, variations in the echo signal will result.
 One method of accounting for a fluctuating cross section in the radar equation is to select  a lower bound, that is, a value of cross section that is exceeded some specified (large) fraction  of time.
The fraction of time that the actual cross section exceeds the selected value would be  close to unity (0.95 or 0.99 being typical).
For all practical purposes the value selected is a  minimum and the target will always present a cross section greater than that selected.
This  procedure results in a conservative prediction of radar range and has the advantage of simpli-  city.
The minimum cross section of typical aircraft or missile targets generally occurs at or near  the head-on aspect.
 However, to properly account for target cross-section fluctuations, the probability-  density function and the correlation properties with time must be known for the partici~lar  target and type of trajectory.
Curves of cross section as a function of aspect and a knowiedgc of  the trajectory with respect to the radar are needed to obtain a true description of the dynami-  cal variations of cross section.
The probability-density function gives the probability of finding  any particular value of target cross section between the values of a and a + (10, while the  autocorrelation function describes the degree of correlation of the cross section with time or  number of pulses.
The spectral density of the cross section (from which the autocorrelation  function can be derived) is also sometimes of importance, especially in tracking radars.
It is  iisually not practical to obtain the experimental data necessary to compute the probabiiity-  density function and the autocorrelation function from which the overall radar performance is  determined.
Most radar situations are of too complex a nature to warrant obtaining complete  data.
A more economical method to assess the effects of a fluctuating cross section is to  postulate a reasonable model for the fluctuations and to analyze it mathematically.
Swerling3'  has calculated the detection proba'bilities for four different fluctuation models of cross section.
 In two of the four cases, it is assumed that the fluctuations are completely correlateci di~ring a  pnrticirlar scan but are completely uncorrelated from scan to scan.
In the othcr ~wo citscs, tl~c  fluctuations are assumed to be more rapid and uncorrelated pulse to pulse.
The four tlucti~a-  tion models are as follows:  Case I.
The echo pulses received from a target on any one scan are of constant amplitude  throughout the entire scan but are independent (uncorrelated) from scan to scan.
This  assumption ignores the effect of the antenna beam shape on the echo amplitude.
An echo  fluctuation of this type will be referred to as scan-to-scan fluctuation.
The probability-  .
' I.
.
 46.NTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS Thecross-section datapresented inthissectionleadtotheconclusion thatitwouldnotbe appropriate simplytoselectasinglevalueandexpectittohavemeaning inthecomputation of theradarequation withoutfurtherqualification.
Methods fordealingwiththecrosssectionsof complicated targetsarediscussed inthenextsection.
2.8CROSS-SECTION FLUCTUATIONS Thediscussion oftheminimum signal~to-noise ratioinSec.2.6assumed thattheechosignal received fromaparticular targetdidnotvarywithtime.Inpractice, however, theechosignal fromatargetinmotionisalmostneverconstant.
Variations intheechosignalmaybecaused bymeteorological conditions, thelobestructure oftheantenna pattern,equipment instabili­ ties,orvariations inthetargetcrosssection.Thecrosssections ofcomplex targets(theusual typeofradartarget)arequitesensitive toaspect.30,36Therefore, asthetargetaspectchanges relativetotheradar,variations intheechosignalwillresult.
Onemethodofaccounting forafluctuating crosssectionintheradarequation istoselect alowerbound,thatis,avalueofcrosssectionthatisexceeded somespecified (large)fraction oftime.Thefractionoftimethattheactualcrosssectionexceedstheselected valuewouldbe closetounity(0.95or0.99beingtypical).
Forallpractical purposes thevalueselected isa minimum andthetargetwillalwayspresentacrosssectiongreaterthanthatselected.
This procedure resultsinaconservative prediction ofradarrangeandhastheadvantage ofsimpli­ city.Theminimum crosssectionoftypicalaircraftormissiletargetsgenerally occursatornear thehead-on aspect.
However, toproperly account fortargetcross-section fluctuations, theprobability­ densityfunction andthecorrelation properties withtimemustbeknownfortheparticular targetandtypeoftrajectory.
Curvesofcrosssectionasafunction ofaspectandaknowkdgl: of thetrajectory withrespecttotheradarareneededtoobtainatruedescription ofthedynami­ calvariations ofcrosssection.Theprobability-density function givestheprobability offinding anyparticular valueoftargetcrosssectionbetween thevaluesof(Jand(J+cia,whilethe autocorrelation function describes thedegreeofcorrelation ofthecrosssectionwith time or number ofpulses.Thespectral densityofthecrosssection(fromwhichtheautocorrdation function canbederived) isalsosometimes ofimportance, especially intracking radars.Itis usuallynotpractical toobtaintheexperimental datanecessary tocompute theprobabiiity­ densityfunction andtheautocorrelation function fromwhichtheoverallradarperformance is determined.
Mostradarsituations areoftoocomplex anaturetowarrantobtaining comrkk data.Amoreeconomical method toassesstheeffectsofafluctuating crosssection isto postulate areasonable modelforthefluctuations andtoanalyzeitmathematically.
Swerling37 hascalculated thedetection probahilities forfourdifferent fluctuation modelsofcrosssection.
Intwoofthefourcases,itisassumed thatthefluctuations arecompletely correlated duringa particular scanbutarecompletely uncorrelated fromscantoscan.IntheolhertwocaSl:S,thl: fluctuations areassumed tobemorerapidanduncorrelated pulsetopulse.Thefourtluctua­ tionmodelsareasfollows: Case1.Theechopulsesreceived fromatargetonanyone scanareofconstant amplitude throughout theentirescanbutareindependent (uncorrelated) fromscantoscan.This assumption ignorestheeffectoftheantenna beamshapeontheechoamplitude.
Anecho fluctuation ofthistypewillbereferredtoasscan-to-scan fluctuation.
Theprobability- • Il.. THE RADAR EQUATION 47  dcrlsity rrrrlctiorl far tllc cross scctioll rr is given by tlle density function  wllere n,, is tlic avcriigc cross section over ail target liuctuations.
 C'asr) 2.
The probnhility-derlsity function for the target cross section is also given by Eq.
(2.39a).
 17111 tllc fltrclrratior1s a1.c r11orc 1.apid tllari in case I and are taken to bc independent from  13r1lsc 10 ptllsc irlsfcact of fro111 scn~ to scan.
 ('(IS(! 3.
111 this C;ISC'.
~lic flr~cttl;~tiv~l is assitrned to be independent from scan to scan as in case  1.
I>(II lllc ~>rol>;~l>ility-dc~tsity f'r~rlctiort is givcn by  1)(4 = 4: ex,, (- on\  C'c~scl 4.
7'llc flilcttlatiori is prrlse to pulse according to Eq.
(2.39b)  The probability-density function assumed in cases 1 and 2 applies to a complex target  consisting of tilariy independent scatterers of approximately equal echoing areas.
Although, in  tlicory, tlic number of independent scatterers must be essentially infinite, in practice the  nunibcr may be as few as four or five.
Tlie probability-density function assumed in cases 3 arid  4 is inore indicative of targets that can be represented as one large reflector together with other  small reflectors.
In all the above cases, the value of cross section to be substituted in the radar  eqiration is tlie average cross scctiori rr,, .
Tlie signal-to-noise ratio needed to achieve a  specified probability of detection witl~out exceeding a specified false-alarm probability can be  calculated for each nlodel of target behavior.
For purposes of comparison, the nonfluctuating  cross scctioti will he called cclsc 5.
 A cornparison of these five models for a false-alarm number = 10' is shown in Fig.
2.22  for 11 = 10 hits integrated.
When the detection probability is large, all four cases in which the  targct cross section is not constant require greater signal-to-noise ratio than the constant cross  section of case 5.
For example, if the desired probability of detection were 0.95, a signal-to-  rloisc ratio of 6.2 dI3/l~ulsc is lieccssary il the target cross section were constant (case 5), b11t if  t he target cross section fluctuated with a Rayleigh distribution and were scan-to-scan uncor-  related (case 1).
tlie signal-to-noise ratio would have to be 16.8 dB/pulse.
This increase in  signal-to-noise corresponds to a reduction in range by a factor of 3.28.
Therefore, if the  cliaracteristics of tlic target cross section are not properly taken into account, the actual  perforrna~ice of tlie radar niight riot measure up to the performance predicted as if the target  cross sectiori were constant.
Figure 2.22 also indicates that for probabilities of detection  greater than about 0.30.
a greater signal-to-noise ratio is required when the fluctuations are  uncorrelated scan to scan (cases 1 and 3) than when tlie fluctuations are uncorrelated pulse to  pulse (cases 2 and 4).
In fact.
the larger tlie number of pulses integrated, the more likely it will  tw for.
the fl irctuatioris to average out, and cases 2 and 4 will approach the nonfluctuatingcase.
 Curves exist".37 for various values of tiits per scan, 11, that give the signal-to-noise ratio  per pulse as a function of P, and rt,.
Tile signal-to-noise ratio per pulse can be used in the form  of tlie radar equation as given by Eq.
(2.32).
It is not necessary, however, to employ such an  clahoratc set of data sirice for most engineering purposes the curves of Figs.
2.23 and 2.24 may  be used as corrections to the probability ofdetection (as found in Fig.
2.7) and as the integration  irni>rovcmcnt factor (Fig.
2.80) for substitution into the radar equation of Eq.
(2.33).
 THERADAR EQUATION 47 (!t:nsityfunction fortheClOSSsection cTisgivenbytiledensityfunction p(cT)=Iexp(_(J) a.v aa>'a20 (2.39a) \vilerecT.,istileaveragecrosssectionoveralltargetlluctuations.
Case2.Theprobability-density function forthetargetcrosssectionisalsogivenbyEq.(2.39£1), hutthefluctuatioJls arcmorcrapidthanincase1andarctakcntobeindependent from pulsetopulseinsteadoffromscantoscan.
ClISt'3.Inthiscase.thefluctuation isassumed tobeindependent fromscantoscanasincase I.huttill'plohahility-dcnsity function isgivcnby (2.39b) ./Cast'4.Thefluctuation ispulsetopulseaccording toEq.(2.39b) Theprobability-density function assumed incases1and2appliestoacomplex target consisting ofmanyindependent scatterers ofapproximately equalechoingareas.Although, in theory,thenumber ofindependent scatterers mustbeessentially infinite, inpractice the numbermaybeasfewasfourorfive.Theprobability-density function assumed incases 3and 4ismoreindicative oftargetsthatcanberepresented asonelargerellector together withother smallrellectors.
Inalltheabovecases,thevalueofcrosssectiontobesubstituted intheradar equation istheaverage crosssection eTav•Thesignal-to-noise rationeededtoachievea specified probability ofdetection withoutexceeding aspecified false-alarm probability canbe calculated foreachmodeloftargetbehavior.
Forpurposes ofcomparison, thenonnuctuating crosssectionwillbccalledcasi.'5.
Acomparison ofthesefivemodelsforafalse-alarm number IIf=108isshowninFig.2.22 for11=10hitsintegrated.
Whenthedetection probability islarge,allfourcasesinwhichthe targetcrosssectionisnotconstant requiregreatersignal-to-noise ratiothantheconstant cross sectionofcase5.Forexample, ifthedesiredprobability ofdetection were0.95,asignal-to­ noiscratioof6.2dB/puIsI..' isnecessary ifthetargetcrosssectionwereconstant (case5),butif thetargetcrosssectionfluctuated withaRayleigh distribution andwerescan-to-scan uncor­ related(caseI),thesignal-to-noise ratiowouldhavetobe16.8dB/pulse.
Thisincrease in signal-to-noise corresponds toareduction inrangebyafactorof3.28.Therefore, ifthe characteristics ofthctargetcrosssectionarenotproperly takenintoaccount, theactual performance oftheradarmightnotmeasure uptotheperformance predicted asifthetarget crosssectionwereconstant.
Figure2.22alsoindicates thatforprobabilities ofdetection greaterthanabout0.30,agrcatersignal-to-noise ratioisrcquired whenthefluctuations are uncorrclated scantoscan(cases 1and3)thanwhenthefluctuations areuncorrelated pulseto pulse(cases2and4).Infact.thclargerthenumberofpulsesintegrated, themorelikelyitwill beforthefluctuations toaverageout.andcases2and4willapproach thenontluctuating case.
CurvesexistIl..nforvariousvaluesofhitsperscan,II,thatgivethesignal-to-noise ratio perpulseasafunction ofPdand11f'Thesignal-to-noise ratioperpulsecanbeusedintheform oftheradarequation asgivenbyEq.(2.32).Itisnotnecessary, however, toemploysuchan elaborate setofdatasinceformostengineering purposes thecurvesofFigs.2.23and2.24may beusedascorrections totheprobability ofdetection (asfoundinFig.2.7)andastheintegration improvcment factor(Fig.2.Ra)forsubstitution intotheradarequation ofEq.(2.33). -10 -5 0 5 10 15 20 25  Signal-to-noise ratio per pulse, dB  -51 1 I I I IIIII I I1 I1  0.01 0.05 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.5 0.7 0.8 0.9 0.95 0.99  Probability of detection Figure 2.22 Con~parison of drtec-  tion probabilities for five different  models of target fluctuation for  11 = 10 pulses integrated and  false-alarm number n, = lo8.
 (Adupfed fro111 Swerliny.-\ ')  Figure 2.23 Additional signal-to-noise  ratio required to achieve a particular  probability of detection, when the  target cross section fluctuates, as com-  pared with a nonfluctuat~ng target;  single hit, n = 1.
(To be used in con-  junction with Fig.
2.7 to find (SIR'),.)  48INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS Figure2.22Comparison oflklec­ tionprobabilities forfivedifferent modelsoftargetfluctuation for II;:::::10pulses integrated and 30false-alarm number IIf=lOll.
(Adapted fromSwerling.
J7)25 o510 15 20 Signal-fo-noise ratioperpulse,dB0.99 0.98 0.95 0.90 c("0.80 c..g0.70 u ~0.60 Q) ~0.50 0 >.0.40:t: :60.30 0 .0e0.20G- 0.10 0.05 0.02 0.01 -10-5 "00"0 <1ro "0-15Q) <J) :Ja Q) co Lo -;;10 "0 L Q) <J) o C I ~ I5 oc crt <J) oco:;: Figure2.23Additional signal-to-noise ratiorequired toachieve aparticular probability ofdetection, whenthe targetcrosssectionfluctuates, ascom- -5L.-...L-_.l----L----'--"'------'---'--L.---'--"'-----"'------L-....l........J paredwithanonftuctuating target; 0.010.050.10.20.30.50.70.8 0.9 0.95 0.99 singlehit,n=1.(Tobeusedincon- Probability ofdetection junction withFig.2.7tofind(S;Nk) TI1E RADAR EQUA.I'ION 49  Number of pulses integrated, n  Figure 2.24 lntegration-improvement factor as a function of the number of pulses integrated for the five  types of target fluctuation considered.
 Tlie procedure for using the radar equation when the target is described by one of the  Swerling models is as folloks:  1.
Find the signal-to-noise ratio from Fig.
2.7 corresponding to the desired value of detection  probability P,, and false-alarm probability PI, .
 2.
From Fig.
2.23 determine the correction factor for either cases 1 and 2 or cases 3 and 4 to be  applied to tile signal-to-noise ratio found fronl step 1 above.
The resultant signal-to-noise  ratio (SIN), is that which would apply if detection were based upon a single pulse.
 3.
If n pulses are integrated, the integration-improvement factor Ii(n) = nEi(,r) is found from  Fig.
2.24.
?'he parameters (SIN), arid nEi(rt) are substituted into tlie radar equation (2.33)  along with o,, .
 The iritegration-improvernent factor in Fig.
2.24 is in some cases greater than ri, or in  other words, the integration efficiency factor Ei(n) > 1.
One is not getting something for  nothing, for in those cases in which the integration-improvement factor is greater than ,I, the  signal-to-noise ratio required for n = 1 is larger than for a nonfluctuating target.
The signal-  to-noise per pulse will always be less than that of an ideal predetection integrator for reasonable  values of P,.
It should also be noted that the data in Figs.
2.23 and 2.24 are essentially  independelit of the false-alarm number, at least over the range of lo6 to 10".
 'I'he two probability-density functions of Eqs.
(2.39a) and (2.39b) that describe tlie  Swerling fluctuation models are special cases of the chi-square distribution of degree 21~1.~' The  probability density function is  THERADAR EQUATION 49 30 tlJ "0 E25u ~ C QJ E20QJ > 0 0- ~ c15g !:0' !!!s "10 ~ ......;-'-,,',""case 4 -50%Pd '-.,",,-Cases1and3-50,90,99%Pd "~Case5 -99%Pd Case5 -50%Pd 10 100 Numberofpulsesintegrated, n1000 Figure2.24Integration-improvement factorasafunction ofthenumber ofpulsesintegrated forthefive typesoftargettluctuation considered.
Theprocedure forusi!1gtheradarequation whenthetargetisdescribed byoneofthe Swerling models isasfollows: t.Findthesignal-to-noise ratiofromFig.2.7corresponding tothedesiredvalueofdetection probability Pdandfalse-alarm probability Pfa• 2.FromFig.2.23determine thecorrection factorforeithercases1and2orcases3and4tobe appliedtothesignal-to-noise ratiofoundfromstep1above.Theresultant signal-to-noise ratio(SIN),isthatwhichwouldapplyifdetection werebaseduponasinglepulse.
3.If/Ipulsesareintegrated, theintegration-improvement factorIj(11)=11£;(11)isfoundfrom Fig.2.24.Theparameters (SIN),and11£;(11)aresubstituted intotheradarequation (2.33) alongwithaav' (2.40) a>OTheintegration-improvement factorinFig.2.24isinsomecasesgreaterthanII,orin otherwords,theintegration efficiency factor£;(11)>1.Oneisnotgettingsomething for nothing, forinthosecasesinwhichtheintegration-improvement factorisgreaterthann,the signal-to-noise ratiorequired forn=1islargerthariforanonfluctuating target.Thesignal­ to-noise perpulsewillalwaysbelessthanthatofanidealpredetection integrator forreasonable valuesofPd'ItshouldalsobenotedthatthedatainFigs.2.23and2.24areessentially independent ofthefalse-alarm number, atleastovertherangeof106to1010.
Thetwoprobability-density functions ofEqs.(2.39a)and(2.39b)thatdescribe the Swerling fluctuation modelsarespecialcasesofthechi-square distribution ofdegree2m.38The probability densityfunction is ( )111(1/Ia)m-1(1/Ia)pa= I - exp-- , (111-1).(Jayaay (Jay It is also called the gamma distribution.
In statistics texts, 2tn is the number of degrees of  freedom, and is an integer.
However, when applied to target cross-sect~on models, 2111 is not  required to be an integer.
Instead, m can be any positive, real number.
When ,ti = 1, the  chi-square distribution of Eq.
(2.40) reduces to the exponential, or Rayleigh-power, distribu-  tion of Eq.
(2.39~) that applies to Swerling cases 1 and 2.
Cases 3 and 4, described by Eq.
(2.39b),  are equivalent to m = 2 in the chi-square distribution.
The ratio of the variance to the average  value of the cross section is equal tom- 'I2 for the chi-square distribution.
The larger the value  of m, the more constrained will be the fluctuations.
The limit of tn equal to infinity corresponds  to the nonfluctuating target.
 The chi-square distribution is a mathematical model used to represent [tie statistics of the  fluctuating radar cross section.
These distributions might not always fit the observed data, btrt  they are fair approximations in many cases and are used nevertheless for convenience.
The  chi-square distribution is described by two parameters: the average cross section a,, and the  number of degrees of freedom 2m.
Analysis3' of measurements on actiial aircraft Hying  straight, level courses shows that the cross-section fluctuations at a particitlar aspect are well  fitted by the chi-square distribution with the parameter m ranging from 0.9 to approximately 2  and with a,, varying approximately 15 dB from minimum to maximum.
The parameters of the  fitted distribution vary with aspect angle, type of aircraft, and frequency.
The value of nl is near  unity for all aspects except at broadside; hence, the distribution is Rayleigh with a varying  average value with the most variation at broadside aspect.
It was also found that the average  value has more effect on the calculation of the probability of detection than the value of tt~  Although the Rayleigh model might provide a good approximation to the radar cross sectiolls  of aircraft in many cases, it is not always applicable.
Exceptions occur at broadside, as  mentioned, and for smaller aircraft.j8 There are also examples where no chi-square distribu-  tion can be made to fit the experimental data.
 The chi-square distribution has been used to approximate the statistics of other-than-  aircraft targets.
Weinst~ck~'*~~ showed that this distribution can describe certain simple  shapes, such as cylinders or cylinders with fins that are characteristic of some satellite objects.
 The parameter m varies between 0.3 and 2, depending on aspect.
These have sometimes been  called Weinstock cases.
 The chi-square distribution with m = 1 (Swerling cases 1 and 2) is the Rayleigh, or  exponential, distribution that results from a large number of independent scatterers, no oric of  which contributes more than a small fraction of the total backscatter energy.
Although ttlc  chi-square distribution with other than m = 1 has been observed empirically to give a reason-  able fit to the radar cross section distribution of many targets, there is no physical scatterirlg  mechanism on which it is based.
It has been said that the chi-square distribution with ~n = 2  (Swerling cases 3 and 4) is indicative of scattering from one large dominant scatterer together  with a collection of small independent scatterers.
However, it is the Rice distribution that  follows from such a The Rice probability density function is  where s is the ratio of the radar cross section of the single dominant scatterer to the total cross  section of the small scatterers, and Io( ) is the modified Bessel function of zero order.'"his is  a more correct description of the single dominant scatterer model than the chi-square with  m = 2.
However it has been shown that the chi-square with m = 2 approximates the Rice when  the dominant-scatterer power is equal to the total cross section of the other, small scatterers,  and so long as the probability of detection is not large.4'  50INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS Itisalsocalledthegammadistribution.
Instatistics texts,2misthenumber ofdegreesof freedom, andisaninteger.However, whenappliedtotargetcross-section models, 2misnot required tobeaninteger.
Instead, mcanbeanypositive, realnumber.
Whenm=I,the chi-square distribution ofEq.(2.40)reducestotheexponential, orRayleigh-power, distribu­ tionofEq.(2.39a)thatappliestoSwerling cases1and2.Cases3and4,described byEq.(2.39b), areequivalent tom=2inthechi-square distribution.
Theratioofthevariance totheaverage valueofthecrosssectionisequaltom-1/2forthechi-square distribution.
Thelargerthevalue ofm,themoreconstrained willbethefluctuations.
Thelimitofmequaltoinfinitycorresponds tothenonftuctuating target.
Thechi-square distribution isamathematical modelusedtorepresent thestatistics ofthe fluctuating radarcrosssection.Thesedistributions mightnotalwaysfittheobserved data,but theyarefairapproximations inmanycasesandareusednevertheless forconvenience.
The chi-square distribution isdescribed bytwoparameters: theaverage cross sectionanandthe number ofdegrees offreedom 2m.Analysis39ofmeasurements onactualaircraft Hying straight, levelcoursesshowsthatthecross-section fluctuations ataparticular aspectarewell fittedbythechi-square distribution withtheparameter mrangingfrom0.9toapproximately 2 andwithaayvaryingapproximately 15dBfromminimum tomaximum.
Theparameters ofthe fitteddistribution varywithaspectangle,typeofaircraft,andfrequency.
Thevalueofmisnear unityforallaspectsexceptatbroadside; hence,thedistribution isRayleigh withavarying average valuewiththemostvariation atbroadside aspect.Itwasalsofoundthattheaverage valuehasmoreeffectonthecalculation oftheprobability ofdetection thanthevalueofm.
Although theRayleigh modelmightprovideagoodapproximation totheradarcrosssections ofaircraft inmanycases,itisnotalwaysapplicable.
Exceptions occuratbroadside, as mentioned, andforsmalleraircraft.38Therearealsoexamples wherenochi-square distribu­ tioncanbemadetofittheexperimental data.
Thechi-square distribution hasbeenusedtoapproximate thestatistics ofotha-than­ aircrafttargets.
Weinstock38•40showed thatthisdistribution candescribe certainsimple shapes,suchascylinders orcylinders withfinsthatarecharacteristic ofsomesatelliteobjects.
Theparameter mvariesbetween 0.3and2,depending onaspect.Thesehavesometimes been calledWeinstock cases.
Thechi-square distribution withm=1(Swerling cases1and2)istheRayleigh, or exponential, distribution thatresultsfromalargenumberofindependent scatterers, nooneof whichcontributes morethanasmallfractionofthetotalbackscatter energy.Although the chi-square distribution withotherthanm=1hasbeenobserved empirically togiveareason­ ablefittotheradarcrosssectiondistribution ofmanytargets,thereisnophysical scallering mechanism onwhichitisbased.Ithasbeensaidthatthechi-square distribution withm=2 (Swerling cases3and4)isindicative ofscattering fromonelargedominant scatterer together withacollection ofsmallindependent scatterers.
However, itistheRicedistribution that followsfromsuchamode1.67TheRiceprobability densityfunction is l+s [a ] ( p(a)=--exp-s--{I+s)102 aay aay..!!-s(1+S)), aaya>O (2.41) wheresistheratiooftheradarcrosssectionofthesingledominant scatterer tothetotalcross sectionofthesmallscatterers, andlo()isthemodified Besselfunction ofzeroorder.
38Thisis amorecorrectdescription ofthesingledominant scatterer modelthanthechi-square with m=2.However ithasbeenshownthatthechi-square withm=2approximates theRicewhen thedominant-scatterer powerisequaltothetotalcrosssectionoftheother,smallscaHerers, andsolongastheprobability ofdetection isnotlarge.4J l'l~e log-norrnal clistrit~r~tic~rl has ;tlso t3ccrl cor~sidercd for represet~tir~g target echo fluctir:t-  tions.
It can be expressed as  wllcre sd = standard deviation of In (a/a,), and a, = median of a.
The ratio of the tneali to tlte  median value of a is exp (si/2).
Tllere is no theoretical model of target scattering that leads to  the log-normal distribution, although it has been suggested that echoes from some satellite  bodies, ships, cylinders.
plates, and arrays can be approximated by a log-normal probability  di~tribution.~~.~"  Figure 2.25 is a comparison of the several distribution models for a false alarm number of  106 when all pulses during a scan are perfectly correlated but with pulses in successive scans  itldependent (scan-to-scar1 fluctuation).
 The fluctuation ~nodels considered in this section assume either complete correlation  between pulses in any particular scan but with scan-to-scan independence (slow fluctuations),  .
-, or else complete independence from pulse to pulse (fast fluctuation).
These represent two  extreme cases.
In some instances, there might be partial correlation of the pulses within a scan  (rnoderate fluctuation).
Sch~artz~~ considered the effect of partial correlation for the case of  two ~l~ilqcs per scar] (11 = 2).
The results for partial correlation fall between the two extremes of  cotlll~lctcly iir~cor related and cor~~plctcly correlated, as nligllt be expected.
Thus to esti~ilatc  I I I I I  -10 -5 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 I-  Signal lo noise roll0 per pulse - dB  Figure 2.25 Comparison of detectiorl probabilities for Rice, log normal, chi-square with m = 2 (Swerling  case 3) and nonfluctuating target models with ,I = 10 hits and false-alarm number n,.= lo6.
Ratio of  dominant-to-backgrour~d equals unity (s = 1) for Rice distribution.
Ratio of mean-to-med~an cross section  for Ing-normal distribution = p  THERADAR EQUATION 51 Thelog-normal distributioll liasalsoheenconsidered forrepresclIlillg targetechonuctua­ tions.Itcanbeexpressed as (2.42) a>O 1'(a)=.~-- exp!--~lI[n(~-)]2fl,.j21!Sda 12sdam whereSd=standard deviation ofIn(a/am)'andam=medianofa.Theratioofthemeantothe medianvalueofaisexp(sJ/2).Thereisnotheoretical modeloftargetscattering thatleadsto thelog-normal distribution, although ithasbeensuggested thatechoesfromsomesatellite bodies,ships,cylinders, plates,andarrayscanbeapproximated byalog-normal probability distribution.42.4.1 Figure2.25isacomparison oftheseveraldistribution modelsforafalsealarmnumber of \{)6whenallpulsesduringascanareperfectly correlated butwithpulsesinsuccessive scans independent (scan-to-scan fluctuation).
Thefluctuation modelsconsidered inthissectionassume eithercomplete correlation between pulsesinanyparticular scanbutwithscan-to-scan independence (slowfluctuations), -.jorelsecomplete independence frompulsetopulse(fastfluctuation).
Theserepresent two extreme cases.1nsomeinstances, theremightbepartialcorrelation ofthepulseswithinascan (moderate fluctuation).
Schwartz44considered theeffectofpartialcorrelation forthecaseof twopulsesperscan(II=2).Theresultsforpartialcorrelation fallbetween thetwoextremes of completely ullcorrelated andcompletely correlated, asmightbeexpectcd.
Thustocstimate i-'-r-- 099 098 095·· 090- r;:a80 ~070 u ~060 LJ_050 o >-040.
~a30o .Deo20 Q.
o10 005 002 001 -\0-5I [ o 510 15 20 Signaltonoiserollaperpulse-dB2530 Figure2.25Comparison ofdetection probabilities forRice,lognormal, chi-square withm=2(Swerling caseJ)andnonfluctuating targetmodelswithfJ=tohitsandfalse-alarm number "1=106•Ratioof dominant-to-background equalsunity(s=I)forRicedistribution.
Ratioofmean-to-median crosssection forfog-normal distribution =p. 52 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  performance for partially correlated pulses, interpolation between the results for the correlated  and uncorrelated conditions can be used as an approximation.
A more general treatment  of partially correlated fluctuations has been given by Swerling." His analysis applies to a large  family of probability-density functions of the signal fluctuations and for very general correla-  tion properties.
Methods for the design of optimal receivers for the detection of moderately  fluctuating signals have been con~idered.~~  It is difficult to be precise about the statistical model to be applied to any particular  target.
Few, if any, real targets fit a mathematical model with any precision and in some cases  it is not possible to approximate actual data with any mathematical model.
Even if the  statistical distribution of a target were known, it might be difficult to relate this to an actual  radar measurement since a target generally travels on some well-defined trajectory rather than  present a statistically independent cross section to the radar.
Thus the various mathematical  models cannot, in general, be expected to yield precise predictions of system performance.
 It has been s~ggested~'.~~ that if only one parameter is to be used to describe a complex  target, it should be the median value of the cross section with Rayleigh statistics (Swerling  cases 1 and 2).
Quite often Swerling case 1 is specified for describing radar performance since it  results in conservative values.
The uncertainty regarding fluctuating target models makes the  use of the constant (nonfluctuating) cross section in the radar equation an attractive alterna-  tive when a priori information about the target is minimal.
 2.9 TRANSMITTER POWER  The power P, in the radar equation (2.1) is called by the radar engineer the peak power.
The  peak pulse power as used in the radar equation is not the instantaneous peak power of a sine  wave.
It is defined as the power averaged over that carrier-frequency cycle which occurs at the  maximum of the pulse of power.
(Peak power is usually equal to one-half the maximum  instantaneous power.) The average radar power Pa, is also of ii~terest in radar and is defined as  the average transmitter power over the pulse-repetition period.
If the transmitted waveform is  a train of rectangular pulses of width z and pulse-repetition period Tp = l[fp, the average  power is related to the peak power by  The ratio P,,/P,, r/TP, or rfi is called the duty cycle of the radar.
A pulse radar for detection of  aircraft might have typically a duty cycle of 0.001, while a CW radar which transmits contin-  ~iously has a duty cycle of unity.
 Writing the radar equation in terms of the average power rather than the peak power, wc  get  P,, GA,anEi(n)  Ria, = (4~)~kTo Fn(Bn .r)(SIN)I .fp  The bandwidth and the pulse width are grouped together since the product of the two is  ~~sually of the order of unity in most pulse-radar applications.
 If the transmitted waveform is not a rectangular pulse, it is sometimes more convenient to  express the radar equation in terms of the energy E, = Pa,/& contained in the transmitted  waveform:  52INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS performance forpartially correlated pulses,interpolation between theresultsforthecorrelated anduncorrelatedconditions canbeusedasanapproximation.
Amoregeneraltreatment ofpartially correlated fluctuations hasbeengivenbySwerling.4sHisanalysis appliestoalarge familyofprobability-density functions ofthesignalfluctuations andforverygeneralcorrela­ tionproperties.
Methods forthedesignofoptimal receivers forthedetection ofmoderately fluctuating signalshavebeenconsidered.46 Itisdifficult tobepreciseaboutthestatistical modeltobeappliedtoanyparticular target.Few,ifany,realtargetsfitamathematical modelwithanyprecision andinsomecases itisnotpossible toapproximate actualdatawithanymathematical model.Evenifthe statistical distribution ofatargetwereknown, itmightbedifficult torelatethistoanactual radarmeasurement sinceatargetgenerally travelsonsomewell-defined trajectory ratherthan presentastatistically independent crosssection.totheradar.Thusthevariousmathematical modelscannot, ingeneral, beexpected toyieldprecisepredictions ofsystemperformance.
Ithasbeensuggested38•39thatifonlyoneparameter istobeusedtodescribe acomplex target,itshouldbethemedian valueofthecrosssectionwithRayleigh statistics (Swerling cases1and2).QuiteoftenSwerling case1isspecified fordescribing radarperformance sinceit resultsinconservative values.Theuncertainty regarding fluctuating targetmodelsmakesthe useoftheconstant (nonfluctuating) crosssectionintheradarequation anattractive alterna­ tivewhenaprioriinformation aboutthetargetisminimal.
2.9TRANSMITIER POWER ThepowerPIintheradarequation (2.1)iscalledbytheradarengineer thepeakpower.The peakpulsepowerasusedintheradarequation isnottheinstantaneous peakpowerofasine wave.Itisdefined'asthepoweraveraged overthatcarrier-frequency cyclewhichoccursatthe maximum ofthepulseofpower.(PeakpoWerisusuallyequaltoone-half themaximum instantaneous power.)TheaverageradarpowerPayisalsoofil1terestinradarandisdefinedas theaveragetransmitter poweroverthepulse-repetition period.Ifthetransmitted waveform is atrainofrectangular pulsesofwidthrandpulse-repetition periodTp=Ilfp,theaverage powerisrelatedtothepeakpowerby (2.43) TheratioPay/PI'r/Tp,orrfpiscalledthedutycycleoftheradar.Apulseradarfordetection of aircraftmighthavetypically adutycycleof0.001,whileaCWradarwhichtransmits contin­ uouslyhasadutycycleofunity.
Writing theradarequation intermsoftheaveragepowerratherthanthepeakpower,we get (2.44L1) Thebandwidth andthepulsewidtharegrouped together sincetheproduct ofthetwois usuallyoftheorderofunityinmostpulse-radar applications.
Ifthetransmitted waveform isnotarectangular pulse,itissometimes moreconvenient to express theradarequation intermsoftheenergyEt=PayUpcontained inthetransmitted waveform: 4 EtGAeO'nEj(n) Rmax=(4n)2kToFr/(B"r)(S/N)1(2.44b) THE RADAR EQUATION 53  In this form, the range does riot depend explicitly on either the wavelength or the pulse  repetitiori frequency.
The irnportarit parariieters affecti~ig range are the total transmitted  energy ~IE,, the transmitting gain ti, tlie erective receiving aperture A,, and the receiver noise  figure F, .
 2.10 I'U I SIC I~l<l'l<'l'l'l'iON 1'RISQUII:NCY AN11 UANCrl: AMBICU ITIES  Tlie pillse repetition frequericy (prf) is determined primarily by tlie maximum range at which  targets arc cxl,ectcd.
If the prf is ~nadc too higli, tlie likeliliood of obtaining target echoes from  tlic WI-orig piilse 11 arisrnissiori is increased.
Eclio sig~ials received after an interval exceeding the  pulse-reyjctition period are called rr~~rltij,le-tin~e-arortnd echoes.
They can result in erroneous or  corlftisillg range r~le:tsi~r-e~nents.
Corisider the three targets labeled A, B, and C in Fig.
2.26~.
 Target .I is located witliin the maximum unambiguous range Runamb [Eq.
(1.2)] of tlie radar,  target B is at a distance greater than Runom,, but less than 2RUnamb, while target C is greater  tliati 2R,,,,,,,, but less than 3RUn,,,,,.
The appearance of the three targets on an A-scope is  sketched in Fig.
2.266.
TIie multiple-time-around echoes on the A-scope cannot be distin-  guislied from proper target echoes actually within the maximum unambiguous range.
Only the  rarige measured for target A is correct; those for B and C are not.
 One method of distingwishing multiple-time-around echoes from unambiguous echoes is  to operate with a varying pulse repetition frequency.
The echo signal from an unambiguous  rarige target will appear at the same place on the A-scope on each sweep no matter whether the  prf is modulated or not.
However, echoes from multiple-time-around targets will be spread  over a finite range as shown in Fig.
2.26~.
The prf may be changed continuously within  prescribed limits, or it may be changed discretely among several predetermined values.
The  number of separate pulse repetition frequencies will depend upon the degree of the multiple-  time targets.
Second-time targets need only two separate repetition frequencies in order to be  resolved.
 Time (or range) +  (a)  nm n  Range -+  (c)  Figure 2.26 Multiple-tirne-around echoes that give rise to ambiguities in range.
(a) Three targets A, B and  C, where A is within R,,,,, , and B and C are multiple-time-around targets; (b) the appearance of the  three targets on the A-scope; (c) appearance of the three targets on the A-scope with a changing prf.
 THERADAR EQUATION 53 Inthisform.therangedoesnotdepend explicitly oneitherthewavelength orthepulse repetition frequency.
Theimportant parameters affecting rangearethetotaltransmitted energyfiE,.thetransmitting gainG.theeffective receiving apertureAnandthereceiver noise figureFn.
2.10PULSE nEPETITION FI~EQLlENCY ANDRANGI£ AMBIGUITIES Thepulserepetition frequency (prr)isdetermined primarily bythemaximum rangeatwhich targetsarcexpected.
Iftheprfismadetoohigh.thelikelihood ofobtaining targetechoesfrom thewrongpulsetransmission isincreased.
Echosignalsreceived afteranintervalexceeding the pulse-repctition pcriodarecalledl/I/11til'le-time-arormd echoes.Theycanresultin erroneous or confusing rangcmcasurcmcnts.
Consider thethreetargetslabeledA.B,andCinFig.2.26a.
TargetAi~locatedwithinthemaximum unambiguous rangeRunamb[Eq.(1.2)]oftheradar, targctBisatadistance greaterthanRunambbutlessthan2Runamb' whiletargetCisgreater than2Runarnh butlessthan3Runamh.
Theappearance ofthethreetargetsonanA-scope is sketched inFig.2.26h.Themultiple-time-around echoesontheA-scope cannotbedistin­ guished frompropertargetechoesactually withinthemaximum unambiguous range.Onlythe rangemeasured fortargetAiscorrect; thoseforBandCarenot.
Onemethodofdisting.uishing multiple-time-around echoesfromunambiguous echoesis tooperate withavarying pulserepetition frequency.
Theechosignalfromanunambiguous rangetargetwillappearatthesameplaceontheA-scopeoneachsweepnomatterwhether the prfismodulated ornot.However, echoesfrommultiple-time-around targetswillbespread overafiniterangeasshowninFig.2.26c.Theprfmaybechanged continuously within prescribed limits.oritmaybechanged discretely amongseveralpredetermined values.The numher ofseparate pulserepetition frequencies willdependuponthedegreeofthemultiple­ timetargets.Second-time targetsneedonlytwoseparate repetition frequencies inordertobe resolved.
t=l/fp Timen.._ ~..Runomb---1 t=0~'n!!'c~"Il L--__ ~'L-JL-:L.fL-;L- I I I I I I t=2/fp t:::3/fp (orrange)-'"' (al 8 C ,4 f\ f\ f\ Range-- (6) Range ---+­ (cI Figure2.26Multiple-time-around echoesthatgiverisetoambiguities inrange.(a)ThreetargetsA,Band C.whereAiswithinRunlmb.andBandCaremultiple-time-around targets;(b)theappearance orthe threetargetsontheA-scope; (c)appearance ofthethreetargetsontheA-scope withachanging prr. 54 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  Instead of modulating the prf, other schemes that might be employed to "mark" s~~cces-  sive PLIIS~S SO as to identify multiple-time-around ecllocs incltrdc clla~igillg tllc pulse al~lpl~tutlc,  pulse width, frequency, phase, or polarization of transmission from pulse to pulse.
Gz~lcrally,  such schemes are not so successful in practice as one would like.
One of the fundamental  limitations is the foldover of nearby targets; that is, nearby strong ground targets (clutter) can  be quite large and can mask weak multiple-time-around targets appearing at the same place  on the display.
Also, more time is required to process the data when resolving ambiguities.
 Ambiguities may theoretically be resolved by observing the variation of the echo signal  with time (range).
This is not always a practical technique, however, since the echo-signal  amplitude can fluctuate strongly for reasons other than a change in range.
Instead, the range  ambiguities in a multiple prf radar can be conveniently decoded and the true range found by  the use of the Chinese remainder theorem4' or other computational algorithms."  2.1 1 ANTENNA PARAMETERS  Almost all radars use directive antennas for transmission and reception.
On transmissiol~, tllc  directive antenna channels the radiated energy into a beam to enhance the energy con-  centrated in the direction of the target.
The antenna gain G is a measure of the power radiated  in a particular direction by a directive antenna to the power which would have been radiatecf  in the same direction by an omnidirectional antenna with 100 percent efficiency.
More  precisely, the power gain of an antenna used for transmission is  power radiated per unit solid angle in azimuth O and elevation 4  G(e, 0) = (2.35) power accepted by antenna from its generatorl4n  Note that the antenna gain is a function of direction.
If it is greater than unity in some  directions, it must be less than unity in other directions.
This follows from the conservation of  energy.
When we speak of antenna gain in relation to the radar equation, we shall usually  mean the maximum gain G, unless otherwise specified.
One of the basic principles of antenna  theory is that of reciprocity, which states that the properties of an antenna are the same no  matter whether it is used for transmission or reception.
 The antenna pattern is a plot of antenna gain as a function of the direction of radiation.
(A  typical antenna pattern plotted as a function of one angular coordinate is shown in Fig.
7.1 .)  Antenna beam shapes most commonly employed in radar are the pencil beam (Fig.
2.2711) and  the fan beam (Fig.
2.27b).
The pencil beam is axially symmetric, or nearly so.
Beamwidths of  typical pencil-beam antennas may be of the order of a few degrees or less.
Pencil heams arc  commonly used where it is necessary to measure continuously the angular position of a target  in both azimuth and elevation, as, for example, the target-tracking radar for the control of  weapons or missile guidance.
The pencil beam may be generated with a metallic rztlzctor  surface shaped in the form of a paraboloid of revolution with the electromagnetic energy kd  fr.oln it point source placed at the focus.
 Although a narrow beam can, if necessary, search a large sector or even a tiemispherr, it is  not always desirable to do so.
Usually, operational requirements place a restriction on the  maximum scan time (time for the beam to return to the same point in spacc) so that the radar  cannot dwell too long at any one radar resolution cell.
This is especially true if there is a large  number of resolution cells to be searched.
The number of resolution cells can be materially  reduced if the narrow angular resolution cell of a pencil-beam radar is replaced by a beam in  which one dimension is broad while the other dimension is narrow, that is, a fan-shaped  pattern.
One method of generating a fan beam is with a parabolic reflector shaped to yield the  54INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS Insteadofmodulating theprf,otherschemes thatmightheemployed to"mark"SUCCl:S­ sivepulsessoastoidentifymultiple-time-around echol:sincludechanginglhl: pulsl:amplitude, pulsewidth,frequency, phase,orpolarization oftransmission frompulsetopulse.Genaally, suchschemes arenotsosuccessful inpractice asonewouldlike.Oneofthefundamental limitations isthefoldover ofnearbytargets;thatis,nearbystronggroundtargets(clutter)can bequitelargeandcanmaskweakmultiple-time-around targetsappearing atthesameplace onthedisplay.
Also,moretimeisrequired toprocessthedatawhenresolving ambiguities.
Ambiguities maytheoretically beresolved byobserving thevariation oftheechosignal withtime(range).
Thisisnotalwaysapractical technique, however, sincetheecho-signal amplitude canfluctuate strongly forreasonsotherthanachangeinrange.Instead, therange ambiguities inamultiple prfradarcanbeconveniently decoded andthetruerangefoundhy theuseoftheChinese remainder theorem41orothercomputational algorithms.~tl 2.11ANTENNA PARAMETERS Almostallradarsusedirective antennas fortransmission andreception.
Ontransmission, the directive antenna channels theradiated energyintoabeamtoenhance theenergycon­ centrated inthedirection ofthetarget.Theantenna gainGisameasure ofthepowerradiatl:d inaparticular direction byadirective antenna tothepowerwhichwouldhaveheenradiatl:d inthesamedirection byanomnidirectional antenna with100percent efficiency.
More precisely, thepowergainofanantenna usedfortransmission is G(l1A.)=pow~rradiated perunitsolidangleinazimuth 0andelevation 4J 0,'I' d bf' (2.45)poweraccepte yantenna romItsgenerator/4n Notethattheantenna gainisafunction ofdirection.Ifitisgreaterthanunityinsome directions, itmustbelessthanunityinotherdirections.
Thisfollowsfromtheconservation of energy.Whenwespeakofantenna gaininrelation totheradarequation, weshallusually meanthemaximum gainG,unlessotherwise specified.
Oneofthebasicprinciples ofantenna theoryisthatofreciprocity, whichstatesthattheproperties ofanantenna arethesameno matterwhether itisusedfortransmission orreception.
Theantenna patternisaplotofantenna gainasafunction ofthedirection ofradiation.
(A typicalantenna patternplottedasafunction ofoneangularcoordinate isshowninFig.7.1.) Antenna beamshapesmostcommonly employed inradararethepencilbeam(Fig.2.27(1)and thefanbeam(Fig.2.27b).Thepencilbeamisaxiallysymmetric, ornearlyso.Beamwidths of typicalpencil-beam antennas maybeoftheorderofafewdegreesorless.Pencilbl:amsare commonly usedwhereitisnecessary tomeasure continuously theangularposition ofatarget inbothazimuth andelevation, as,forexample, thetarget-tracking radarforthecontrolof weapons ormissileguidance.
Thepencilbeammaybegenerated withametallic rdlector surfaceshapedintheformofaparaboloid ofrevolution withtheelectromagnetic energyfed fromapointsourceplacedatthefocus.
Although anarrowbeamcan,ifnecessary, searchalargesectororevenahemisphere, itis notalwaysdesirable todoso.Usually, operational requirements placearestriction onthe maximum scantime(timeforthebeamtoreturntothesamepointinspace-)sothattheradar cannotdwelltoolongatanyoneradarresolution cell.Thisisespecially trueifthereisalarge numberofresolution cellstobesearched.
Thenumberofresolution cellscanbematl:rial.ly reduced ifthenarrowangularresolution cellofapencil-beam radarisreplaced byabeamin whichonedimension isbroadwhiletheotherdimension isnarrow, thatis,afan-shaped pattern.Onemethodofgenerating afanbeamiswithaparabolic reflector shapedtoyieldthe THE RADAR EQUATION 55  Figure 2.27 (a) Pencil-beam antenna pattern; (b)  fan-beam-antenna pattern.
 proper ratio between the azimuth and elevation beamwidths.
Many long-range ground-based  search radars use a fan-beam pattern narrow in azimuth and broad in elevation.
 The rate at which a fan-beam antenna may be scanned is a compromise between the rate  at whicll target-position information is desired (data rate) and the ability to detect weak  targets (probability of detection).
Unfortunately, the two are at cdds with one another.
The  more slowly the radar antenna scans, the more pulses will be available for integration and the  better the detection capability.
On the other hand, a stow scan rate means a longer time  hetwcerl looks at the target.
Scan rates of practical search radars vary from 1 to 60 rpm, 5 or  6 rpm heing typical for the long-range surveillance of aircraft.
 The coverage of a simple fan beam is usually inadequate for targets at high altitudes close  to the radar.
Tltc simple fan-beam antenna radiates very little of its energy in this direction.
 tiowever.
it is possible to modify the antenna pattern to radiate more energy at higher angles.
 One teclitlique for accomplishing this is to employ a fan beam with a shape proportional to the  square of the cosecant of the elevation angle.
In the cosecant-squared antenna (Sec.
7.7)- the  gait1 as a f~~tlction of clevatiorl angle is given by  where G(4) = gain at elevation angle 4, and +o and 4, are the angular limits between which the  beam follows a cscZ shape.
This applies to the airborne search radar observing ground targets  as well as ground-based radars observing aircraft targets.
(In the airborne case, the angle $ is the  depression angle.) Froni (b = 0 to (b = (bO, the antenna pattern is similar to a normal antenna  pattern.
but from (b = 4o to # = +,, the antenna gain varies as csc2 #.
Ideally, the upper limit  4, sllould be 90".
but it is always less than this with a single antenna because of practical  difficulties.
Tlie cosecant-squared antenna may be generated by a distorted section of a parab-  ola or by a true parabola with a properly designed set of multiple feed horns.
The cosecant-  squared pattern may also be generated with an array-type antenna.
 THERADAR EQUATION 55 /0.'-,,/ .,----- (a) (b)Figure2.27(a)Pencil-beam antenna pattern;(b) fan-beam-antenna pattern.
properratiobetween theazimuth andelevation beamwidths.
Manylong-range ground-based searchradarsuseafan-beam patternnarrowinazimuth andbroadinelevation.
Therateatwhichafan-beam antenna maybescanned isacompromise between therate atwhichtarget-position information isdesired(datarate)andtheabilitytodetectweak targets(probability ofdetection).
Unfortunately, thetwoareatcddswithoneanother.
The moreslowlytheradarantenna scans.themorepulseswillbeavailable forintegration andthe betterthedetection capability.
Ontheotherhand,astowscanratemeansalongertime hetween looksatthetarget.Scanratesofpractical searchradarsvaryfrom1to60rpm,5or 6rpmbeingtypicalforthelong-range surveillance ofaircraft.
Thecoverage ofasimplefanbeamisusuallyinadequate fortargetsathighaltitudes close totheradar.Thesimplefan-beam antenna radiates verylittleofitsenergyinthisdirection.
However.
itispossible tomodifytheantenna patterntoradiatemoreenergyathigherangles.
Onetechnique foraccomplishing thisistoemployafanbeamwithashapeproportional tothe squareofthecosecant oftheelevation angle.Inthecosecant-squared antenna (Sec.7.7),the gainasafunction ofelevation angleisgivenby for1>0<1><1>m (2.46) whereG(<p)=gainatelevation angle1>.and1>0and1>maretheangular limitsbetween whichthe beamfollowsacsc2shape.Thisappliestotheairborne searchradarobserving groundtargets aswellasground-based radarsobserving aircrafttargets.(Intheairborne case,theangle1>isthe depression angle.)From1>=0to1>=<Po.theantenna patternissimilartoanormalantenna pattern.
butfrom1>=1>0to1>=1>m,theantenna gainvariesascsc21>.Ideally,theupperlimit 4>mshouldhe90°.butitisalwayslessthanthiswithasingleantenna because ofpractical difficulties.
Thecosecant-squared antenna maybegenerated byadistorted sectionofaparab­ olaorbyatrueparabola withaproperly designed setofmultiple feedhorns.Thecosecant­ squared patternmayalsobegenerated withanarray-type antenna. The cosecant-squared antenna has the important property that the echo power P,  received from a target of constant cross section at constant altitude h is independent of the  target's range R from the radar.
Substituting the gain of the cosecant-squared antenna  [Eq.
(2.46)] into the simple radar equation gives  where KI is a constant.
The height h of the target is assumed constant, and sincc csc 4 = KIh,  the received power becomes  where K2 is a constant.
The echo signal is therefore independent of range for a constant-  altitude target.
 In practice, the power received from an antenna with a cosecant-squared pattern is not  tri~ly independent of range because of the simplifying assi~mptions made.
The cross sectloll cr  varies with the viewing aspect, the earth is not flat, and the radiation pattern of any real  antenna can be made to only approximate the desired cosecant-squared pattern.
The gain of a  typical cosecant-squared antenna used for ground-based search radar might be about 2 dB  less than if a fan beam were generated by the same aperture.
 The maximum gain of an antenna is related to its physical area A (aperture) by  where p = antenna efficiency and A = wavelength of radiated energy.
The antenna efficiency  depends on the aperture illumination and the efficiency of the antenna feed.
The product of p.4  is the effective aperture A,.
A typical reflector antenna with a parabolic shape will produce a  beamwidth approximately equal to  where 1 is the dimension of the antenna in the plane of the angle 0, and A and 1 are mzasurcd Iri  the same units.
The value of the constant, in this case taken to be 65, depends upon the 1  distribution of energy (illumination) across the aperture.
 2.12 SYSTEM LOSSES  At the beginning of this chapter it was mentioned that one of the important factors orn~ttcd  from the simple radar equation was the losses that occur throughout the radar system.
The  losses reduce the signal-to-noise ratio at the receiver output.
They may be of two kinds,  dependingupon whether or not they can be predicted with any degree of precision beforehand.
 The antenna beam-shape loss, collapsing loss, and losses in the microwave plumbing are  examples of losses which can be calculated if the system configuration is known.
These losses  are very real and cannot be ignored in any serious prediction of radar performance.
The loss  due to the integration of many pulses (or integration efficiency) has already been mentioned in  Sec.
2.6 and need not be discussed further.
Losses not readily subject to calculation and which  are less predictable include'those due.to field degradation and to operator fatigue or lack of  operator motivation.
Estimates of the?latter type of loss must be made on the basis of prior  56INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS Thecosecant-squared antenna hastheimportant property thattheechopowerPr received fromatargetofconstant crosssectionatconstant altitude IIisindependent ofthe target's rangeRfromtheradar.Substituting thegainofthecosecant-squared antenna [Eq.(2.46)]intothesimpleradarequation gives P_P,G2(¢0)csc4¢).2(J csc4¢ r -(41t)3csc4¢oR4=K1-"R4 (2.47) whereK1isaconstant.
Theheighthofthetargetisassumed constant, andsincecsc¢=Rill, thereceived powerbecomes (2.4~) (2.49)whereK2isaconstant.
Theechosignalistherefore independent ofrangeforaconstant­ altitude target.
Inpractice, thepowerreceived fromanantenna withacosecant-squared pattern isnot trulyindependent ofrangebecauseofthesimplifying assumptions made.Thecrosssection (1 varieswiththeviewing aspect,theearthisnotflat,andtheradiation patternofanyreal antenna canbemadetoonlyapproxfmate thedesiredcosecant-squared pattern.Thegainofa typicalcosecant-squared antenna usedforground-based searchradarmightbeabout2dB lessthanifafanbeamweregenerated bythesameaperture.
Themaximum gainofanantenna isrelatedtoitsphysical areaA(aperture) by G _41tAp -).2 wherep=antenna efficiency and),=wavelength ofradiated energy.Theantenna efficiency depends ontheaperture illumination andtheefficiency oftheantenna feed.Theproductofp.-l istheeffective aperture Ae.Atypicalreflector antenna withaparabolic shapewillproduce a beamwidth approximately equalto (2.50) whereIisthedimension oftheantenna intheplaneoftheangle0,and),andIaremeasured in thesameunits.Thevalueoftheconstant, inthiscasetakentobe65,depends uponthe distribution ofenergy(illumination) acrosstheaperture.
2.12SYSTEM LOSSES Atthebeginning ofthischapteritwasmentioned thatoneoftheimportant factorsumitted fromthesimpleradarequation wasthelossesthatoccurthroughout theradarsystem.The lossesreducethesignal-to-noise ratioatt.hereceiver output.Theymaybeoftwokinds, depending-upon whetherornottheycanbepredicted withanydegreeofprecision beforehand.
Theantenna beam-shape loss,collapsing loss,andlossesinthemicrowave plumbing are examples oflosseswhichcanbecalculated ifthesystemconfiguration isknown.Theselosses areveryrealandcannotbeignoredinanyseriousprediction ofradarperformance.
Theloss duetotheintegration ofmanypulses(orintegration efficiency) hasalreadybeenmentioned in Sec.2.6andneednotbediscus'sed further.Lossesnotreadilysubjecttocalculation andwhich arelesspredictable include'thosedue·to'fielddegradation andtooperator fatigueorlackof operator motivation.
Estimates ofthe·'latter typeoflossmustbemadeonthebasisofprior TiiE RADAR FQIJATION 57  experierice and experirliental observations.
They tnay be subject to considerable variation and  uncertainty.
Although the loss associated with any one factor may be small, there are many  possible loss mechanisms in a complete radar system, and their sum total can be significant.
 In this section, loss (nurnber greater than unity) and efficiency (number less than unity)  are used interchangeably.
One is simply the reciprocal of the other.
 Plumbing loss.
There is always some finite loss experienced in the transmission lines which  co~~rlect tlle oirtpi~t of tile tratist~litter to the antenna.
The losses in decibels per 100 ft for radar  transmissio~~ lines are sllowri ill Fig.
2.28.
At the lower radar frequencies the transmission line  introduces little loss, utlless its length is exceptionally long.
At the higher radar frequencies,  attenuation may not always be small and may have to be taken into account.
In addition to the  losscs in tlie transrnissiotl line itself, at1 additional loss can occur at each connection or bend in  the line and at the antenna rotary joint if used.
Connector losses are usually small, but if the  connectidn is poorly made, it can contribute significant attenuation.
Since the same transmis-  , sion line is generally used for both receiving and transmission, the loss to be inserted in the  radar equation is twice the one-way loss.
 The signal suffers attenuation as it passes through the duplexer.
Generally, the greater the  isolatio~l required from the duplexer 011 transmission, the larger will be the insertion loss.
By  inscrtio~i loss is rneant tlie loss itltr-oduced when the component.
in this case the duplexer, is  iti~ertcd into tlie tsansrnissiori line.
'Tlic precise value of the i~isertiorl loss depends to a large  exte~it on tile particular design.
For a typical duplexer it might be of the order of 1 dB.
A  o 01 r I I r r 1111 I I I 11 111 I I I 11 111  0.1 1.0 10 100  Frequency, gigacycles  Figure 2.28 Theoretical (one-way) attenuation of RF transmission lines.
Waveguide sizes are inches and  are tlie inside dimensions.
(Data ,from Armed Services Index of R.F.
Transmission Lines and Fittings,  ASESA.
49-28,)  ~1.0 oo ........
OJuTilERADAR EQUATION 57 experience andexperimental observations.
Theymaybesubjecttoconsiderable variation and uncertainty.
Although thelossassociated withanyone factormaybesmall,therearemany possible lossmechanisms inacomplete radarsystem,andtheirsumtotalcanbesignificant.
Inthissection.
loss(number greaterthanunity)andefficiency (number lessthanunity) areusedinterchangeably.
Oneissimplythereciprocal oftheother.
Plumbing loss.Thereisalwayssomefinitelossexperienced inthetransmission lineswhich cOllnect theoutputofthetransmitter totheantenna.
Thelossesindecibels per100ftforradar transmission linesareshowninFig.2.28.Atthelowerradarfrequencies thetransmission line introduces littleloss,unlessitslengthisexceptionally long.Atthehigherradarfrequencies, attenuation maynotalwaysbesmallandmayhavetobetakenintoaccount.
Inaddition tothe losscsinthetransmission lincitself,anadditional losscanoccurateachconnection orbendin thelineandattheantenna rotaryjointifused.Connector lossesareusuallysmall,butifthe connection ispoorlymade,itcancontribute significant attenuation.
Sincethesametransmis­ sionlineisgenerally usedforbothreceiving andtransmission, thelosstobeinserted inthe radarequation istwicetheone-way loss.
Thesignalsuffersattenuation asitpassesthrough theduplexer.
Generally, thegreaterthe isolation required fromtheduplexer ontransmission, thelargerwillbetheinsertion loss.By insertion lossismeantthelossintroduced whenthecomponent, inthiscasetheduplexer, is inserted intothetransmission linc.Theprccisevalueoftheinsertion lossdepcnds toalarge extcntontheparticular design.Foratypicalduplexer itmightbeoftheorderof1dB.A "'""0.90xOAO --......1.122x0.497 ""-1.372 x0.622 ""1.872x0.872 '\.."'"2.84x1.34 ""3.4xU .t>'b 4.3x2.15 ~ ~ rigidcoo~"" .lQ.;· ~ ~6.5x3.25§ ~ coo~\.7.7x3.85 ~t:::: <1 .\0\"" .......:::i0.1-"~\ o~'"9.75x4.875'" -=6'16.id(,0\11.5x5.75 ,'r\~'" <3""15x7.5 "-...18x9 21x10.5 o.a1L-_--I.-----L---...l.---L..LLL.LJ.
__ ..l....-____....--L....l-L....L.l...u...._---..i_...l...-~____I....J...I.....L.J 0.1 1.0 10 100 Frequency.
gigacycles Figure2.28Theoretical (one-way) attenuation orRFtransmission lines.Waveguide sizesareinchesand aretheinsidedimensions.
(Data.fromArmedServices IndexofR.F.Transmission LinesandFittings, ASESA.49-28.) 58 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  gas-tube duplexer also introduces loss when in the fired condition (arc loss); approximately  1 dB is typical.
 In an S-band (3000 MHz) radar, for example, the plumbing losses might be as follows:  100 ft of RG-113/U A1 waveguide transmission line (two-way) 1.0 dB  Loss due to poor connections (estimate) 0.5 dB  Rotary-joint loss 0.4 dB  Duplexer loss 1.5 dB  Total plumbing loss 3.4 dB  Beam-shape loss.
The antenna gain that appears in the radar equation was assumed to be a  constant equal to the maximum value.
But in reality the train of pulses returned from a target  with ascanning radar is modulated in amplitude by the shape of the antenna beam.
To properly  take into account the pulse-train modulation caused by the beam shape, the computations  of the probability of detection (as given in Secs.
2.5.2.6, and 2.8) would have to be performed  assuming a modulated train of pulses rather than constant-amplitude pulses.
Some authors do  indeed take account of the beam shape in this manner when computing the probability of  detection.
Therefore, when using published computations of probability of detection it should ,  be noted whether the effect of the beam shape has been included.
In this text, this approach is  not used.
Instead a beam-shape loss is added to the radar equation to account for the fact that  the maximum gain is employed in the radar equation rather than a gain that changes pulse to  pulse.
This is a simpler, albeit less accurate, method.
It is based on calculating the reduction in  signal power and thus does not depend on the probability of detection.
It applies for detection  probabilities in the vicinity of 0.50, but it is used as an approximation with other values as a  matter of convenience.
 Let the one-way-power antenna pattern be approximated by the gaussian expression  exp (-2.7802/8fi), where 8 is the angle measured from the center of the beam and 0, is the  beamwidth measured between half-power points.
If is the number of pulses received witllirl  the half-power beamwidth Us, and n the total number of pulses integrated (,I does not neces-  sarily equal nB), then the beam-shape loss (number greater than unity) relative to a radar that  integrates all 11 pulses with an antenna gain corresponding to the maximum gain at the beam  center is  I1  Beam-shape loss = -- (, - , ,,, - -.
- - - - - -.
(2 51) 3  1 + 2 exp (- 5.55k2/t1;)  &= 1  For example, if we integrate 11 pulses, all lying uniformly between the 3-dR beamwidth, the  loss is 1.96 dB.
 The beam-shape loss considered above was for, a beam shaped in one plant.
only.
Ii  applies to a fan beam, or to a pencil beam if the target passes through its center.
If the target  passes through any other point of the pencil beam, the maximum signal received will 1101  correspond to the signal from the beam center.
The beam-shape loss is reduced by 111s ratio of  the square of the maximum antenna gain at which the pulses were transmitted divided by the  square of the antenna gain at beam center.
The ratio involves the square because of ttlc  two-way transit.
 When there are a large number of pulses per beamwidth integrated, the scanning loss is  generally taken to be 1.6 dB for a fan beam scanning in one coordinate and 3.2 dR whcn  two-coordinate scanning is ~sed.~'-~'  When the antenna scans rapidly enough that the gain on transmit is nor tile same as tllc  gain on receive, an additional loss has to be computed, called the scatlt~it~g loss.
The technique  58INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS gas-tube duplexer alsointroduces losswheninthefiredcondition (arcloss);approximatcly 1dBistypical.
InanS-band(3000MHz)radar,forexample, theplumbing lossesmightbeasfollows: tOOftofRG-I13/V Alwaveguide transmission line(two-way) Lossduetopoorconnections (estimate) Rotary-joint loss Duplexer loss Totalplumbing loss1.0dB 0.5dB 0.4dB 1.5dB 3.4dB Beam-shape loss.Theantenna gainthatappears intheradarequation wasassumed tobea constant equaltothemaximum value.Butinrealitythetrainofpulsesreturned fromatarget withascanning radarismodulated inamplitude bytheshapeoftheantenna beam.Toproperly takeintoaccount thepulse-train modulation causedbythebeamshape,thecomputations oftheprobability ofdetection (asgiveninSees.2.5,2.6,and2.8)wouldhavetobeperformed assuming amodulated trainofpulsesratherthanconstant-amplitude pulses.Someauthorsdo indeedtakeaccount ofthebeamshapeinthismanner whencomputing theprobability of detection.
Therefore, whenusingpublished computations ofprobability ofdetection itshould benotedwhether theeffectofthebeamshapehasbeenincluded.
Inthistext,thisapproach is notused.Insteadabeam-shape lossisaddedtotheradarequation toaccount forthefactthat themaximum gainisemployed intheradarequation ratherthanagainthatchanges pulseto pulse.Thisisasimpler, albeitlessaccurate, method.Itisbasedoncalculating thereduction in signalpowerandthusdoesnotdependontheprobability ofdetection.
Itappliesfordetection probabilities inthevicinityof0.50,butitisusedasanapproximation withothervaluesasa matterofconvenience.
Lettheone-way-power antenna pattern beapproximated bythegaussian expression exp(-2.78lJ2/(}~), where (}istheanglemeasured fromthecenterofthebeamand08isthe beamwidth measured between half-power points.IfllBisthenumberofpulsesreceived within thehalf-power beamwidth OB,and11thetotalnumberofpulsesintegrated (11doesnotneces­ sarilyequall1B),thenthebeam-shape loss(number greaterthanunity)relativetoaradarthat integrates all11pulseswithanantenna gaincorresponding tothemaximum gainatthcbeam centeris 11Beam-shape loss= (n-l)/2 ..__._.__._- 1+2Lexp(-5.55k2/11~) 1<=1(2.51) Forexample, ifweintegrate 11pulses,alllyinguniformly betwecn the3-dBbeamwidth.
the lossis1.96dB.
Thebeam-shape lossconsidered abovewasfor.abeamshapedinoneplaneonly.It appliestoafanbeam,ortoapencilbeamifthetargetpassesthrough itscenter.Ifthetarget passesthrough anyotherpointofthe.pencilbeam,themaximum signalreceivcd willIlOt correspond tothesignalfromthebeamcenter.Thebeam-shape lossisreduced bytheratioof thesquareofthemaximum antenna gainatwhichthepulsesweretransmitted dividedbythe squareoftheantcnna gainatbeamcenter.Theratioinvolves thesquarebecause ofthc two-way transit.
Whentherearealargenumberofpulsesperbeamwidthintegrated, thescanning lossis generally takentobe1.6dBforafanbeamscanning inonecoordinate and3.2dRwhen two-coordinate scanning isused.49-Sl Whentheantenna scansrapidlyenoughthatthegainontransmit isnotthesameasthe gainonreceive,anadditional losshastobecomputed, calledthescanningloss.Thetechniquc TSIE RADAR EQLJATION 59  for computing scanning loss is similar in principle to that for computing beam-shape loss.
 Scanning loss can be important for rapid-scan antennas or for very long range radars such as  those designed to view extraterrestrial objects.
A similar loss must be taken into account when  covcrilig a sc;ircli voltil~lc with a stcp-scatiriing pcrlcil bcain, as wit11 a pllased array," siiicc riot  all regions of space are illilminated by the same value of antenna gain.
 1,inliting loss.
Lilrlitilig in the radar receiver can lower the probability of detection.
Altllougl~ a  well-tlcsigtlcd and cngirlcered receiver will not limit the received signal under normal circum-  starices.
ir~tensity rrlodulated CR'T displays such as the PPI or the B-scope have limited dyna-  mic range and may limit.
Some receivers, however, might employ limiting for some special  purpose, as for pulse compression processing for example.
 Limiting results in a loss of only a fraction of a decibel for a large number of pulses  iritegrated, provided tllc limiting ratio (ratio of video limit level to rms noise level) is as large as  2 or 3.'' Other analyses of bandpass limiters show that for small signal-to-noise ratio, the  , redtiction in the signal-to-noise ratio of a sine-wave imbedded in narrowband gaussian noise is  n/4 (about 1 dB).53 However, by appropriately shaping the spectrum of the input noise, it has  been suggested54 that the degradation can be made negligibly small.
 Collapsing loss.
If the radar were to integrate additional noise samples along with the wanted  signal-to-noise pulses, the added noise results in a degradation called the collapsing loss.
It can  occur in displays which collapse the range information, such as the C-scope which displays  elevation vs.
azimuth angle.
The echo signal from a particular range interval must compete in a  collapsed-range C-scope display, not only with the noise energy contained within that range  interval, but with the noise energy from all other range intervals at the same elevation arid  azimuth.
In some 3D radars (range, azimuth, and elevation) that display the outputs at all  elevations on a single PPI (range, azimuth) display, the collapsing of the 3D radar information  onto a 2D display results in a loss.
A collapsing loss can occur when the output of a high-  resolution radar is displayed on a device whose resolution is coarser than that inherent in the  radar.
A collapsing loss also results if the outputs of two (or more) radar receivers are  cornbilled and only one contains signal while the other contains noise.
 Tlie mathematical derivation of the collapsing loss, assuming a square-law detector, may  be carried out as suggested by Marcumlo who has shown that the integration of nt noise  pulses.
along wit11 11 signal-plus-noise pulses with signal-to-noise ratio per pulse (SIN), , is  equikalent to the integration of ~n + 11 signal-to-noise pulses each with signal-to-noise ratio  t~(S/N),/(nr + 11).
The collapsing loss in this case is equal to the ratio of the integration loss Li  (Sec.
2.6) for n1 + 11 pulses to the integration loss for n pulses, or  For exaniple, assume that 10 signal-plus-noise pulses are integrated along with 30 noise pulses  arid that Pd = 0.90 and rlf = 10'.
From Fig.
2.8b, Li(40) is 3.5 dB and Li(lO) is 1.7 dB, so that  the collapsing loss is 1.8 dB.
1 t is also possible to account for the collapsing loss by substituting  into the radar equation of Eq.
(2.33) the parameter Ei(m + n) for Ei(n), since Ei(n) = 1/Li(tl).
 -1'lic above applies for a square-law detector.
Trunks5 has shown that the collapsing loss  for a linear detector differs from that of the square-law detector, and it can be much greater.
 .The corliparison between the two is shown in Fig.
2.29 as a function of the collapsing ratio  (111 + 11)irl.
The difference between tile two cases can be large.
As the nurnber of hits ri iricreases,  the difference becomes smaller.
 THERADAR EQUATION 59 forcomputing scanning lossissimilarinprinciple tothatforcomputing beam-shape loss.
Scanning losscanbeimportant forrapid-scan antennas orforverylongrangeradarssuchas thosedesigned toviewextraterrestrial objects.Asimilarlossmustbetakenintoaccount when covcring ascarchvolulllewithastep-scanning pencilbeam,aswithaphasedarray, ~Rsincenot allregionsofspaceareilluminated bythesamevalueofantenna gain.
Limiting loss.Limiting intheradarreceivercanlowertheprobability ofdetection.
Although a wcll-designcd andcngineered receiver willnotlimitthereceived signalundernormalcircum­ stances.
intensity modulated CRTdisplays suchasthePPIortheB-scope havelimiteddyna­ micrangeandmaylimit.Somereceivers, however, mightemploy limiting forsomespecial purpose, asforpulsecompression processing forexample.
Limiting resultsinalossofonlyafraction ofadecibelforalargenumber ofpulses intcgrated.
provided thelimiting ratio(ratioofvideolimitleveltormsnoiselevel)isaslargeas 2or3.10Otheranalyses ofbandpasslimiters showthatforsmallsignal-to-noise ratio,the reductioninthesignal-to-noise ratioofasine-wave imbedded innarrowband gaussian noiseis n/4(aboutIdB).53However, byappropriately shaping thespectrum oftheinputnoise,ithas beensuggested54thatthedegradation canbemadenegligibly small.
Collapsing loss.Iftheradarweretointegrate additional noisesamples alongwiththewanted signal-to-noise pulses,theaddednoiseresultsinadegradation calledthecollapsing loss.Itcan occurindisplays whichcollapse therangeinformation, suchastheC-scope whichdisplays elevation vs.azimuth angle.Theechosignalfromaparticular rangeintervalmustcompete ina collapsed-range C-scope display, notonlywiththenoiseenergycontained withinthatrange interval.
butwiththenoiseenergyfromallotherrangeintervals atthesameelevation and azimuth.
Insome3Dradars(range,azimuth, andelevation) thatdisplaytheoutputsatall elevations onasinglePPI(range,azimuth) display,thecollapsing ofthe3Dradarinformation ontoa2Ddisplay resultsinaloss.Acollapsing losscanoccurwhentheoutputofahigh­ resolution radarisdisplayed onadevicewhoseresolution iscoarserthanthatinherent inthe radar.Acollapsing lossalsoresultsiftheoutputs oftWo(ormore)radarreceivers are combined andonlyonecontains signalwhiletheothercontains noise.
Themathematical derivation ofthecollapsing loss,assuming asquare-law detector.
may hecarriedoutassuggested byMarcum 10whohasshownthattheintegration ofmnoise pUlses.alongwith11signal-plus-noise pulseswithsignal-to-noise ratioperpulse(S/N)n, is equivalent totheintegration ofm+"signal-to-noise pulseseachwithsignal-to-noise ratio ,,(S/N)n/(m+11).Thecollapsing lossinthiscaseisequaltotheratiooftheintegration lossLj (Sec.2.6)form+/1pulsestotheintegration lossfornpulses,or Lj(m+n) Lj(m,11)=L;(lI) (2.52) Forexample.
assumethat10signal-plus-noise pulsesareintegrated alongwith30noisepulses andthatPd=0.90and/If=108.FromFig.2.8b,Lj(40)is3.5dBandL;(lO)is1.7dB,sothat thecollapsing lossis1.8dB.Itisalsopossible toaccount forthecollapsing lossbysubstituting intotheradarequation ofEq.(2.33)theparameter £j(m+11)for£;(n),since£;(n)=1/Li(,,).
Theahoveappliesforasquare-law detector.
Trunk55hasshownthatthecollapsing loss foralineardetector differsfromthatofthesquare-law detector, anditcanbemuchgreater.
Thecomparison hetween thetwoisshowninFig.2.29asafunction ofthecollapsing ratio (111+II)ill.Thedifference betweenthetwocasescanbelarge.Asthenumberofhits"increases, thedifference hecomes smaller. Figure 2.29 Collapsing loss versus collapsing ratio (m + 11)/11, for a false alarm probability of and a  detection probability of 0.5.
(From Trlr~lk," colrrtesy Proc.
IEEE.)  Nonideal equipment.
The transmitter power introduced into the radar equation was assumed  to be the output power (either peak or average).
However, transmitting tubes are not all uniform  in quality, nor should it be expected that any individual tube will remain at the same level of  performance throughout its useful life.
Also the power is usually not uniform over the operat-  ing band of the device.
Thus, for one reason or another, the transmitted power may be other  than the design value.
To allow for this, a loss factor may be introduced.
This factor can vary  with the application, but lacking a better number, a loss of about 2 dB might be used as an  approximation.
 Variations in the receiver noise figure over the operating band also are to be expected.
 Thus, if the best noise figure over the band is used in the radar equation, a loss factor has to be  a%  introduced to account for its poorer value elsewhere within the band.
 If the receiver is not the exact matched filter for the transmitted waveform, a loss in  signal-to-noise ratio will occur.
Examples are given in Table 10.1.
A typical value of loss for a  nonmatched receiver might be about 1 dB.
Because of the exponential relation between the  false-alarm time and the threshold level [Eq.
(2.26)], a slight change in the threshold can cause  a significant change in the false alarm time.
In practice, therefore, it may be necessary to set (tit:  threshold level slightly higher than calculated so as to insure a tolerable false alarm time 111  the event of circuit instabilities.
This increase in the threshold is equivalent to a loss.
 Operator loss.
An alert, motivated, and well-trained operator should perform as well as  described by theory.
However, when distracted, tired, overloaded, or not properly trained,  operator performance will decrease.
There is little guidance available on how to account for  the performance of an operator.
 Based an both empirical and experimental results, one study6' gives the operator-  efficiency factor as  PO = 0.7(Pd)2 (2.53)  60INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS 18 16 14- ~12 ::;10o g'8 iiic-o6-- (5u4-- 2n=1 n=8 Linear detector ~~~~4}----_n=8 Square-low __----~~- detector ,........".....-'- n=l- ~~ Figure2.29Collapsing lossversuscollapsing ratio(m+11)/11,forafalsealarmprohahilily ofJO-banda detection probability of0.5.(FromTnl/lk,ss courtesy Proc.1EEE.) Nonideal equipment.
Thetransmitter powerintroduced intotheradarequation wasassumed tobetheoutputpower(eitherpeakoraverage).
However, transmitting tubesarenotalluniform inquality,norshoulditbeexpected thatanyindividual tubewillremainatthesamelevelof performance throughout itsusefullife.Alsothepowerisusuallynotuniform overtheoperat­ ingbandofthedevice.Thus,foronereasonoranother, thetransmitted powermaybeolher thanthedesignvalue.Toallowforthis,alossfactormaybeintroduced.
Thisfactorcanvary withtheapplication, butlackingabetter number, alossofabout2dBmightbelIsedasan approximation.
Variations inthereceiver noisefigureovertheoperating bandalsoaretobeexpected.
Thus,ifthebestnoisefigureoverthebandisusedintheradarequation, alossfactorhastobe introduced toaccount foritspoorervalueelsewhere withintheband.
Ifthereceiver isnottheexactmatched filterforthetransmitted waveform, alossin signal-to-noise ratiowilloccur.Examples aregiveninTable10.1.Atypicalvalueoflossfora nonmatched receiver mightbeabout1dB.Because oftheexponential relation between the false-alarm timeandthethreshold level[Eq.(2.26)],aslightchangeinthethreshold cancause asignificant changeinthefalsealarmtime.Inpractice, therefore, itmaybenecessary tosetthe threshold levelslightlyhigherthancalculated soastoinsureatolerable falsealarmtimein theeventofcircuitinstabilities.
Thisincrease inthethreshold isequivalent toaloss.
Operator loss.Analert,motivated, andwell-trained operator shouldperform aswellas described bytheory.
However, whendistracted, tired,overloaded, ornotproperly trained, operator performance willdecrease.
Thereislittleguidance available onhowtoaccount for theperformance ofanoperator.
Basedonbothempirical andexperimental results,onestudy69givestheoperator­ efficiency factoras (2.53) where Pd is tlie single-scan probability of detection.
This was said to apply to a good operator  viewing a PPI under good conditions.
Its degree of applicability, however, is not clear.
 It is not iinusual to find no accoutlt of the operator loss being taken in the radar equation.
 This is probably justified when operators are alert, motivated, and well trained.
It is also  justifled when automatic (electronic) detections are made without the aid of an operator.
 When the operator does introduce loss into the system, it is not easy to select a proper value to  account for it.
The better action is to take steps to correct loss in operator performance rather  than tolerate it by including it as a loss factor in the radar equation.
 Field degradation.
When a radar system is operated under laboratory conditions by engineer-  ing personnel and experienced technicians, the inclusion of the above losses into the radar  equation sllould give a realistic description of the performance of the radar under normal  corlditioris (ignoring anomalous propagation effects).
However, when a radar is operated  i111der field cotlditions.
the performance usually deteriorates even more than can be accounted  for.
hy the above losses, especially when the equipment is operated and maintained by inexper-  icilccd or urtillotivatcd ~~crsotirlel.
It may cvctl apply, to some extent, to eqi~iprncrlt operated by  professional engineers under adverse field conditions.
Factors which contribute to field degra-  dation are poor tuiliiig, weak tubes, water in the transmission lines, incorrect mixer-crystal  currelit, deterioration of receiver noise figure, poor TR tube recovery, loose cable connections,  etc.
 To minimize field degradation, radars should be designed with built-in automatic  performance-monitoring equipment.
Careful observation of performance-monitoring instru-  ments and timely preventative maintenance can do much to keep radar performance up to  design level.
Radar cllaracteristics that might be monitored include transmitter power, receiver  noise figure, the spectrum and/or shape of the transmitted pulse, and the decay time of the TR  tube.
 A good estimate of the field degradation is difficult to obtain since it cannot be predicted  and is dependent upon the particular radar design and he conditions under which it is  operating.
A degradation of 3 dB is sometimes assumed when no other information is  available.
 Cllher loss factors.
A radar designed to discriminate between moving targets and stationary  objects (MTI radar) may introduce additional loss over a radar without this facility.
The MTI  discrirniiiatiori technique results in complete loss of sensitivity for certain values of target  velocity relative to the radar.
These are called blind speeds.
The blind-speed problem and the  loss res~~ltirlg tllerefrom are discussed in more detail in Chap.
4,  111 a radar with overlappirig range gates, the gates may be wider than optittlum for  practical reasons.
The additional noise introduced by the nonoptimum gate width will result in  some degradation.
The straddlitig loss accounts for the loss in signal-to-noise ratio for targets  riot at ttie center of the range gate or at the center of the filter in a multiple-filter-bank  processor  Another factor that has a profound effect on the radar range performance is the propaga-  tion medium discussed briefly in the next section and in Chap.
12.
 There are many causes of loss and inefficiency in a radar.
Not all have been included here.
 Although they may each be small, the sum total can result in a significant reduction in radar  performance.
It is importat~t to understand the origins of these losses, not only for better  predictions of radar range, but also for the purpose of keeping them to a minimum by careful  radar design.
 THERADAR EQUATION 61 wherePdisthesingle-scan probability ofdetection.
Thiswassaidtoapplytoagoodoperator viewingaPPIundergoodconditions.
Itsdegreeofapplicability, however, isnotclear.
Itisnotunusualtofindnoaccountoftheoperator lossbeingtakenintheradarequation.
Thisisprobably justified whenoperators arealert,motivated, andwelltrained.Itisalso justified whenautomatic (electronic) detections aremadewithout theaidofanoperator.
Whentheoperator doesintroduce lossintothesystem,itisnoteasytoselectapropervalueto account forit.Thehelleractionistotakestepstocorrectlossinoperator performance rather thantolerate itbyincluding itasalossfactorintheradarequation.
Fielddegradation.
Whenaradarsystemisoperated underlaboratory conditions byengineer­ ingpersonnel andexperienced technicians, theinclusion oftheabovelossesintotheradar equation shouldgivearealistic description oftheperformance oftheradarundernormal conditions (ignoring anomalous propagation effects).
However, whenaradarisoperated underficldconditions.
thcpcrformance usuallydeteriorates evenmorethancanbeaccounted forhytheahovelosses,especially whentheequipment isoperated andmaintained byinexper­ iencedorunmotivated personllcl.
Itmayevcnapply,tosomccxtcnt,toequipmcnt opcratcd hy professional engineers underadversefieldconditions.
Factorswhichcontribute tofielddegra­ dationarcpoortuning.wcaktuhes,waterinthetransmission lines,incorrect mixer-crystal currcnt.dctcrioration ofrcceiver noisefigure,poorTRtuberecovery, loosecableconnections, etc.
Tominimize fielddegradation, radarsshouldbedesigned withbuilt-in automatic performance-monitoring equipment.
Carefulobservation ofperformance-monitoring instru­ mentsandtimelypreventative maintenance candomuchtokeepradarperformance upto designlevel.Radarcharacteristics thatmightbemonitored includetransmitter power,receiver noisefigure,thespectrum and/orshapeofthetransmitted pulse,andthedecaytimeoftheTR tube.
I\.goodestimate ofthefielddegradation isdifficulttoobtainsinceitcannotbepredicted andisdependent upontheparticular radardesignand"theconditions underwhichitis operating.
Adegradation of3dBissometimes assumed whennootherinformation is available.
Other Ios.~factors.
I\.radardesigned todiscriminate between movingtargetsandstationary objects(MTIradar)mayintroduce additional lossoveraradarwithoutthisfacility.TheMTI discrimination technique resultsincomplete lossofsensitivity forcertainvaluesoftarget velocity relativetotheradar.
These arecalledblindspeeds.Theblind-speed problem andthe lossresulting therefrom arediscussed inmoredetailinChap.4.
Inaradarwithoverlapping rangegates,thegatesmayhewiderthanoptimum for practical reasons.
Theadditional noiseintroduced bythenonoptimum gatewidthwillresultin somedegradation.
Thestraddlillg lossaccounts forthelossinsignal-to-noise ratiofortargets notatthecenteroftherangegateoratthecenterofthefilterinamultiple~filter-bank processor.
Another factorthathasaprofound effectontheradarrangeperformance isthepropaga­ tionmedium discussed brieflyinthenextsectionandinChap.12.
Therearemanycausesoflossandinefficiency inaradar.Notallhavebeenincluded here.
Although theymayeachbesmall,thesumtotalcanresultinasignificant reduction inradar performance.
Itisimportant tounderstand theoriginsoftheselosses,notonlyforbetter predictions ofradarrange,butalsoforthepurposeofkeeping themtoaminimum bycarefuJ radardesign. 2.13 PROPAGATION EFFECTS  In analyzing radar performance it is convenient to assume that the radar and target are 110th  located in free space.
However, there are very few radar applications which approximate  free-space conditions.
In most cases of practical interest, the earth's surface and the medium in  which radar waves propagate can have a significant effect on radar performance.
In some  instances the propagation factors might be important enough to overshadow all other factors  that contribute to abnormal radar performance.
The effects of non-free-space propagation on  the radar are of three categories: (1) attenuation of the radar wave as it propagates through the  earth's atmosphere, (2) refraction of the radar wave by the earth's atmosphere, and (3) loht)  structure caused by interference between the direct wave from radar to target and the wave  which arrives at the target via reflection from the ground.
 In general, for most applications of radar at microwave frequencies, the attenuat~on in  propagating through either the normal atmosphere or through precipitation is usually not  sufficient to affect radar performance.
However, the reflection of the radar signal from rain  (clutter) is often a limiting factor in the performance of radar in adverse weather.
 The decreasing density of the atmosphere with increasing altitude results in a bending, or  refraction, of the radar waves in a manner analogous to the bending of light waves by an  optical prism.
This bending usually results in an increase in the radar line of sight.
Normal  atmospheric conditions can be accounted for in a relatively simple manner by considering the  earth to have a larger radius than actual.
A "typical" earth radius for refractive effects IS  four-thirds the actual radius.
At times, atmospheric conditions might cause more than usual  bending of the radar rays, with the result that the radar range will be considerably increased.
 This condition is called superrefraction, or ducting, and is a form of anomalous propagaiion.
 It is not necessarily a desirable conditioh since it cannot be relied upon.
It can degrade the  performance of MTI radar by extending the range at which ground clutter is seen.
'  The presence of the earth's surface not only restricts the line of sight, but it can cause  major modification of the coverage within the line of sight by breaking up the antenna  elevation pattern into many lobes.
Energy propagates directly from the radar to the target, but  there can also be energy that travels to the target via a path that includes a reflection from the  ground.
The direct and ground-reflected waves interfere at the target either destructively or  constructively to produce nulls or reinforcements (lobes).
The lobing that results causes non-  uniform illumination of the coverage, and is an important factor that influences the capabll~ty  of a radar system.
 Most propagation effects that are of importance cannot be easily included into the radar  equation.
They must be properly taken into account, however, since they can have a major  impact on performance.
Further discussion of the effects of propagation on radar is given in  Chap.
12.
 2.14 OTHER CONSIDERATIONS  Prediction of radar range.
In this chapter, some of the more important factors that enter into  the radar equation for the prediction of range were briefly considered.
The radar equation  (2.1), with the modifications indicated in this chapter, becomes  Pa, G Ap, crnEi(n)  Rk,, = (4~)'kTo Fn(Br).fp(SIN), Ls  62INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS 2.13PROPAGATION EFFECTS Inanalyzing radarperformance itisconvenient toassumethattheradarandtargetareboth locatedinfreespace.However, thereareveryfewradarapplications whichapproximate free-space conditions.
Inmostcasesofpractical interest,theearth'ssurfaceandthemedium in whichradarwavespropagate canhaveasignificant effectonradarperformance.
In-some instances thepropagation factorsmightbeimportant enoughtoovershadow allotherfactors thatcontribute toabnormal radarperformance.
Theeffectsofnon-free-space propagation on theradarareofthreecategories: (1)attenuation oftheradarwaveasitpropagates through the earth'satmosphere, (2)refraction oftheradarwavebytheearth'satmosphere, and(3)loht' structure causedbyinterference between thedirectwavefromradartotargetandthewave whicharrivesatthetargetviareflection fromtheground.
Ingeneral, formostapplications ofradaratmicrowave frequencies, theattenuation in propagating through eitherthenormalatmosphere orthrough precipitation isusuallynot sufficient toaffectradarperformance.
However, there.lle~tion oftheradarsignalfromrain (clutter) isoftenalimiting factorinthe"performance ofradarinadverseweather.
Thedecreasing densityoftheatmosphere withincreasing altituderesultsinabending, or refraction, oftheradarwavesinamanner analogous tothebending oflightwavesbyan opticalprism.Thisbending usuallyresultsinanincrease intheradarlineofsight.Normal atmospheric conditions canbeaccounted forinarelatively simplemannerbyconsidering the earthtohavealargerradiusthanactual.A"typical" earthradiusforrefractive effectsis four-thirds theactualradius.Attimes,atmospheric conditions mightcausemorethanusual bendingoftheradarrays,withtheresultthattheradarrangewillbeconsiderably increased.
Thiscondition iscalledsuperre!raetion, ordueting,andisaformofanomalous propagation.
Itisnotnecessarily adesirable conditio'n sinceitcannotbereliedupon.Itcandegrade the performance ofMTIradarbyextending therangeatwhichgroundclutterisseen..
Thepresence oftheearth'ssurfacenotonlyrestricts thelineofsight,butitcancause majormodification ofthecDverage withinthelineofsightbybreaking uptheantenna elevation patternintomanylobes.Energypropagates directlyfromtheradartothetarget,but therecanalsobeenergythattravelstothetargetviaapaththatincludes areflection fromthe ground.Thedirectandground-reflected wavesinterfere atthetargeteitherdestructively or constructively toproduce nullsorreinforcements (lobes).TheJobingthatresultscausesnon­ uniform illumination ofthecoverage, andisanimportant factorthatinfluences thecapability ofaradarsystem.
Mostpropagation effectsthatareofimportance cannotbeeasilyincluded intotheradar equation.
Theymustbeproperly takenintoaccount, however, sincetheycanhaveamajor impactonperformance.
Furtherdiscussion oftheeffectsofpropagation onradarisgivenin Chap.12.
2.14OTHER CONSIDERATIONS Prediction ofradarrange.Inthischapter, someofthemoreimportant factorsthatenterinto theradarequation fortheprediction ofrangewerebrieflyconsidered.
Theradarequation (2.1),withthemodifications indicated inthischapter, becomes .
"R4=PavGAp"anEj(n) mall(4n)2kTofn(Br)fp(S/N)1 Ls(2.54) TtlE RAOAR EQt JATION 63  WIIC'I c R,,,,, = rllaxirn\iiil I i~clar r i~ilge, III  C; = anterlna gain  :I = antenna aperture, 1n2  = antellrla elficiet~cy  rr = ntrmber of hits integrated  E,(rl) = integration efficiency (less than unity)  L, = system losses (greater than unity) not included in other parameters  (T = rictlar cross scction of target, rn2  F', = noise figure  k = Bolt7mann's constant = 1.38 x Jldeg  7, = standard tcrnpcrature = 290 K  B = receiver bandwidth.
Hz  r = pulse widtli.
s  1, = pulse repetition frequency, Hz  (SIN), = signal-to-noise ratio required at receiver output (based on single-hit  detection)  7'tiis equiitiorl car1 also he writtell ill terms of energy rather than power.
Tlie energy in the  Irarlst~iittcd pulse is E, = I],, #il, = P, T and the signal-to-noise power ratio (SIN), can be  replaccd hy the signal-to-noise er~crgy ratio (E/No)l, where E = SIT is tlie energy in the  rcccived signal, and N, = NIB is the noise power per unit bandwidth, or the noise energy.
Also  note that BT - 1, and T,, F, = T, is defined as the system noise temperature.
Then the radar  equation bcco~ncs  4 E, G Ap, anEi(tl) Rmax = ---  (4n)2kT,(E/No)l Ls  Althougli Eq.
(2.55) was derived for a rectangular pulse, it can be applied to other waveforms  as well, provided matched-filter detection is employed.
Most calculations for probability of  detection with signal-to-noise ratio as the parameter apply equally well when the ratio of  signal-energy to noise-power-per-hertz is used instead.
The radar equation developed in this  cliapter for pulse radar can he readily modified to accommodate CW, FM-CW, pulse-doppler,  MTI.
or tracking rada~-.~~.".~'  Radar performance figure.
This is a figure of merit sometimes used to express the relative  pcrforrnancc of radar.
It is defined as the ratio of the pulse power of the radar transmitter to  tlie minimum detectable signal power of the receiver.
It is not often used.
 Blipscan ratio.
This is the same as the single-scan probability of detection.
It predates the  widespread use of the term probability of detection and came about by the manner in which  tile performance of ground-based search-radars was checked.
An aircraft would be flown on a  radial course and on each scan of the antenna it would be recorded whether or not a target blip  had been detected on the radar display.
This was repeated many times until sufficient data was  ohtai~icd to corni,ute, as a futictior) - - ofrange, -- the ratio of the average number ofscans the target  was seen at a particular range (blips) to the total number of times it could have been seen  (scans).
This is the blip-scan ratio and is the probability of detecting a target at a particular  range.
altitude, and aspect.
The head-on and tail-on are the two easiest aspects to provide in  field measurements.
The experimentally found blip-scan ratio curves are subject to many  limitations, but it represents one of the few methods for evaluating the performance of an  actual radar equipment against real targets under somewhat controlled conditions.
 THERADAR EQUATION 63 whereHill"'=maximum radarrange, III (i=antcnna gain .4=antenna aperture, 1112 I'a=antenna efficiency /I=numberofhitsintegrated Ej(/l)=integration efficiency (lessthanunity) LJ=systemlosses(greater thanunity)notincluded inotherparameters fT=radarcrosssectionoftarget,m2 Fn=noisefigure k=Boltzmann's constant =1.38x10-23J/deg 70=standard temperature =290K B=receiver bandwidth, Hz r=pulsewidth.s .If'=pulserepetition frequency, Hz (51N)\=signal-to-noise ratiorequired atreceiveroutput(basedonsingle-hit detection) Thisequation canalsohewrittenintermsofenergyratherthanpower.Theenergyinthe transmitted pulseisEr=Pa\!/~=PIrandthesignal-to-noise powerratio(SIN)Icanbe replaced bythesignal-to-noise energyratio(EIN0)1,whereE=Siristheenergyinthe received signal.andNo=NIBisthenoisepowerperunitbandwidth, orthenoiseenergy.Also notethatBr~1,andToFn=~isdefinedasthesystemnoisetemperature.
Thentheradar equation becomes R4=ErGAPalJ1lEi(l1) max(4rr)2kI;(EIN o)1Ls(2.55) Although Eq.(2.55)wasderived forarectangular pulse,itcanbeappliedtootherwaveforms aswell,provided matched-filter detection isemployed.
Mostcalculations forprobability of detection withsignal-to-noise ratioastheparameter applyequally wellwhentheratioof signal-energy tonoise-power-per-hertz isusedinstead.Theradarequation developed inthis chapter forpulseradarcanbereadilymodified toaccommodate CW,FM-CW, pulse-doppler, MTI.ortracking radar.47.56.57 Radarperformance figure.Thisisafigureofmeritsometimes usedtoexpresstherelative performancc ofradar.Itisdefined asthcratioofthepulsepoweroftheradartransmitter to theminimum detectable signalpowerofthereceiver.Itisnotoftenused.
Blip-scan ratio,Thisisthesamcasthesingle-scan probability ofdetection.
Itpredates the widcspread useofthetermprobability ofdetection andcameaboutbythemanner inwhich theperformance ofground-based search-r.adars waschecked.
Anaircraftwouldbeflownona radialcourseandoneachscanoftheantenna itwouldberecorded whetherornotatargetblip hadbeendetected ontheradardisplay.Thiswasrepeated manytimesuntilsufficient datawas obtained tocomputc.
asafunctigllQ[r1!.llge, theratiooftheaverage num~erofscansthetarget wasseenataparticular range(blips)tothetotalnumber oftimesitcouldhavebeenseen (scans).Thisistheblip-scan ratioandistheprobability ofdetecting atargetataparticuJar range.altitude, andaspect.Thehead-on andtail-onarethetwoeasiestaspectstoprovide in fieldmeasurements.
Theexperimentally foundblip-scan ratiocurvesaresubjecttomany limitations, butitrepresents oneofthefewmethods forevaluating theperformance ofan actualradarequipment againstrealtargetsundersomewhat controlled conditions. 64 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  Cumulative probability of detection.
If the single scan probability of detection for a surveil-  lance radar is P,, the probability of detecting a target at least once during N scans is called the  cumulative probability of detection, and may be written  The variation of P, with range might have to be taken into account when computing PC.
The  variation of range based on the cumulative probability of detection can be as the third power  rather than the more usual fourth power variation based on the single scan probability.59  The cumulative probability has sometimes been proposed as a measure of the detectabi-  lity of a radar rather than the single-scan probability of detection, which is more conservative.
 In practice the use of the cumulative probability is not easy to apply.
Furthermore, radar  operators do not usually use such a criterion for reporting detections.
They seldom report a  detection the first time it is observed, as is implied in the definition of cumulative probability.
 Instead, the criterion for reporting a detection might be a threshold crossing on two successive  scans, or threshold crossings on two out of three scans, three out of five, or so forth.
In  track-while-scan radars the measure of performance might be the probability of initiating a 1  target track rather than a criterion based on detection alone.
 Surveillance-radar range equation.
The form of the radar equation described in this chapter  applies to a radar that dwells on the target for n pulses.
It is sometimes called the searchlight  range equation.
In a search or surveillance radar there is usually an additional constraint  imposed that modifies the range equation significantly.
This constraint is that the radar is  required to search a specified volume of space within a specified time.
Let R denote the angular  region to be searched in the scan time t,.
(For example, 0 might represent a region 360" in  azimuth and 30" in elevation.) The scan time is t, = toR/iZo, where to is the time on target =  n&, and Ro is the solid angular beamwidth which is approximately equal to the product offlle  azimuth beamwidth 8, times the elevation beamwidth 0,.
(This assumes that O, 10, and (IE /O,  are integers, where OA is the total azimuth coverage and oE the total elevation coverage, such  that R 2: OABE.) The antenna gain can be written as G = 4n/Ro.
With the above substitutions  into Eq.
(2.54) the radar equation for a search radar becomes  This indicates that the important parameters in a search radar are the average power and the  antenna effective aperture.
The frequency does not appear explicitly in the search-radar range  equation.
However, the lower frequencies are preferred for a search radar since large power  and large aperture are easier to obtain at the lower frequencies, it is easier to build a good MTI  capability, and there is little effect from adverse weather.
 Different radar range equations can .be derived for different applications, depending on  the particular constraints imposed.
The radar equation will also be considerably different if  clutter echoes or external noise, rather than receiver noise, determine the background with  which the radar signal must compete.
Some of these other forms of the radar equation are  given elsewhere in this text.
 Accuracy of the radar equation.
The predicted value of the range as found from the radar  equation cannot be expected to be checked experimentally with any degree of accuracy.
It is  difficult to determine precisely all the important factors that must be included in the radar  equation and it is difficult to establish a set of controlled, realistic experimental conditions in  which to test the calculations.
Thus it might not be worthwhile to try to obtain too great a  64INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS Cumulative probability ofdetection.
Ifthesinglescanprobability ofdetection forasurveil­ lanceradarisPd,theprobability ofdetecting atargetatleastonceduringNscansiscalledthe cumulative probability ofdetection, andmaybewritten (2.56) (2.57)Thevariation ofPdwithrangemighthavetobetakenintoaccount whencomputing Pc.The variation ofrangebasedonthecumulative probability ofdetection canbeasthethirdpower ratherthanthemoreusualfourthpowervariation basedonthesinglescanprobability.
59 Thecumulative probability hassometimes beenproposed asameasure ofthedetectabi­ lityofaradarratherthanthesingle-scan probability ofdetection, whichismoreconservative.
Inpractice theuseofthecumulative probability isnoteasytoapply.Furthermore, radar operators donotusuallyusesuchacriterion forreporting detections.
Theyseldomreporta detection thefirsttimeitisobserved, asisimpliedinthedefinition ofcumulative probability.
Instead, thecriterion forreporting adetection mightbeathreshold crossing ontwosuccessive scans,orthreshold crossings ontwooutofthreescans,threeoutoffive,orsoforth.In track-while-scan radarsthemeasure ofperformance mightbetheprobability ofinitiating a targettrackratherthanacriterion basedondetection alone.
Surveillance-radar rangeequation.
Theformoftheradarequation described inthischapter appliestoaradarthatdwellsonthetargetfornpulses.Itissometimes calledthesearchlight rangeequation.
Ina'searchorsurveillance radarthereisusuallyanadditional constraint imposed thatmodifies therangeequation significantly.
Thisconstraint isthattheradaris required tosearchaspecified volumeofspacewithinaspecified time.Let0denotetheangular regiontobesearched inthescantimets'(Forexample, 0mightrepresent aregion3600in azimuth and30°inelevation.) Thescantimeists=to0/00,wheretoisthetimeontarget= n/Jp,and00isthesoiidangularbeamwidth whichisapproximatelyequaltotheproductofthe azimuth beamwidth 00timestheelevation beamwidth Oe'(Thisassumes that0.0{fOeandOffOe areintegers, where0Aisthetotalazimuth coverage andOEthetotalelevation coverage, such that0~0Afh.)Theantenna gaincanbewrittenasG=4n/Oo.Withtheabovesubstitutions intoEq.(2.54)theradarequation forasearchradarbecomes R4=PavAeO'Ei(n) ts max4nkToFn(S/Nh Ls0 Thisindicates thattheimportant parameters inasearchradararetheaveragepowerandthe antenna effective aperture.
Thefrequency doesnotappearexplicitly inthesearch-radar range equation.
However, thelowerfrequencies arepreferred forasearchradarsincelargepower andlargeaperture areeasiertoobtainatthelowerfrequencies, itiseasiertobuildagoodMTI capability, andthereislittleeffectfromadverse weather.
Different radarrangeequations can.bederivedfordifferent applications, depending on theparticular constraints imposed.
Theradarequation willalsobeconsiderably different if clutterechoesorexternal noise,ratherthanreceiver noise,determine thebackground with whichtheradarsignalmustcompete.
Someoftheseotherformsoftheradarequation are givenelsewhere inthistext.
Accuracy oftheradarequation.
Thepredicted valueoftherangeasfoundfromtheradar equation cannotbeexpected tobechecked experimentally withanydegreeofaccuracy.
Itis difficult todetermine precisely alltheimportant factorsthatmustbeincluded intheradar equation anditisdifficulttoestablish asetofcontrolled, realistic experimental conditions in whichtotestthecalculations.
Thusitmightnotbeworthwhile totrytoobtaintoogreata precision in the itidividual parameters of the radar equation.
Nevertheless, if a.particular range  is required of a radar, the systems engineer must provide it.
The safest means to achieving a  specified range performance is to design conservatively and add a safety factor.
The inclusion  of a safety factor in design is not always appreciated, especially in competitive procurements,  but it is a standard procedure in nlariy other engineering disciplines.
In the few cases where this  Ilrxirry was permitted, firw radars were obtained since they accomplished what was needed  cvcn rrndcr clcgratlcd corlditio~ls.
 1.
Kitlctio~tr, I,.
N.: " Kndnr Sysrcnl I'ngi~iccrir~g," MIT Radiation Laboratory Series, vol.
1.
p.
592.
 Mctiraw-tjill Book Company, New York.
1947.
 2.
Lawson, J.
L..
arid G.
E.
Uhlenheck (eds.): "Threshold Signals," MIT Radiation Laboratory Series.
 vol.
24, McGraw-Ilill Book Company, New York, 1950, p.
177.
 3.
Vari Vleck.
J.
H..
and D.
Middleton: A Theoretical Comparison of the Visual.
Aural, and Meter  Reception of Pulsed Siprials in tlie Presence of Noise, J.
Appl.
Phys., vol.
17, pp.
940-971, November,  1946.
 4.
Bennett, W.
R.: Methods of Solving Noise Problems, Proc.
IRE, vol.
44, pp.
609-638, May, 1956.
 5.
IJavenport.
W.
R..
and W.
L.
Root: "Introduction to Random Signals and Noise," McGraw-Hill  Book Co..
New York, 1958.
 6.
Bendat.
J.
S.: " Principles and Applications of Random Noise Theory," John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New  j'ork, 1958.
 7.
Helstroni.
C.
W.: "Statistical Theory of Signal Detection," Pergamon Press, New York.
1960.
 8.
Parzcn.
E.: " Modern Probability Theory and Its Applications," John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York,  1960.
 9.
Rice, S.
0.: Mathematical Analysis of Random Noise, Bell Systern Tech.
J., vol.
23, pp.
282-332, 1944,  and vol.
24.
pp.
46 - 156, 1945.
 10.
Marcum, J.
1.: A Statistical Theory of Target Detection by Pulsed Radar, Mathematical Appendix,  IRE Trans., vol.
IT-6, pp.
145-267, April, 1960.
 11.
Meyer, D.
P., and H.
A.
Mayer: " Radar Target Detection," Academic Press, New York, 1973.
 12.
i!ollis, R.: False Alarm Time in Pulse Radar, Proc.
IRE, vol.
42, p.
1189, July, 1954.
 13.
Trunk, G.
V.: Detection Results for Scanning Radars Employing Feedback Integration, IEEE Trans..
 vol.
AES-6, pp.
522-527, July, 1970.
 14.
ilarrington, J.
V., and T.
F.
Rogers: Signal-to-noise Improvement through Integration in a Storage  Tuhe.
Proc.
IRE, vol.
38, pp.
1 197-1203, October, 1950.
 15.
Mentzer, J.
R.: "Scattering and Diffraction of Radio Waves," Pergamon Press, New York.
1955.
 16.
King.
R.
W.
P..
and T.
T.
Wu: "The Scattering and Diffraction of Waves," Harvard University Press.
 Cambridge.
Mass., 1959.
 17.
Crispin, J.
W., Jr., and K.
M.
Siegel: "Methods of Radar Cross-Section Analysis," Academic Press.
 New York, 1968.
 18.
Rowman.
J.
J..
T.
R.
A.
Senior, and P.
L.
E.
Uslengh: " Electromagnetic and Acoustic Scattering by  Sirnple Shapes," North-Holland Publishing Co., Amsterdam, and Johri Wiley & Sons, inc., New York,  1969.
 19.
Ruck, G.
T..
D.
E.
Barrick, W.
D.
Stuart, and C.
K.
Krichbaum: " Radar Cross-Section Handbook," (2  vols.), Plenum Press, New York, 1970.
 20.
Siegel.
K.
M., F.
V.
Schultz, B.
H.
Gere, and F.
B.
Sleator: The Theoretical and Numerical Determina-  tion of the Radar Cross Section of a Prolate Spheroid, IRE Trans., vol.
AP-4, pp.
266-275, July, 1956.
 21.
Mathur.
P; N., and E.
A.
Mueller: Radar Back-scattering Cross Sections for Nonspherical Targets.
 IRE Trarrs., vol.
AP-4, pp.
51-53, January, 1956.
 22.
Scharfman.
H.: Scattering from Dielectric Coated Spheres in the Region of the First Resonance, J.
 Appl.
Phss., vol.
25, pp.
1352.- 1356, November, 1954.
 27.
Andreasen.
M.
(3.: Rack-scattering Cross Section of a Thin, Dielectric, Spherical Shell, IRE Trans.,  vol.
AP-5, pp.
267-270, July, 1957.
 24.
King.
I).
D.: The Measurement and lriterpretation of Antenna Scattering, Proc.
IRE, vol.
37,  pi'.
770-777, July.
1949.
 25.
Siegel, K.
M.: Far Field Scattering from Bodies of Revolution, Appl.
Sci.
Researclt, sec.
B, vol.
7,  pp.
293-328.
1958.
 THERADAR EQUATION 65 precision intheindividual parameters oftheradarequation.
Nevertheless, ira.particular range isrequired ofaradar,thesystems engineer mustprovide it.Thesafestmeanstoachieving a specified rangeperformance istodesignconservatively andaddasafetyfactor.Theinclusion ofasafetyfactorindesignisnotalwaysappreciated, especially incompetitive procurements, butitisastandard procedure inmanyotherengineering disciplines.
Inthefewcaseswherethis luxurywasrcrmitted, fineradarswereobtained sincetheyaccomplished whatwasneeded cvcnunderdcgradlxl conditions.
REFERENCES l.Ridenour, L.N.:"Radar System Engineering," MITRadiation Laboratory Series,vol.I,p.592.
McGraw-Hili BookCompany, NewYork,1947.
2.Lawson.
J.L.andG.E.Uhlenbeck (eds.):"Threshold Signals," MITRadiation Laboratory Series.
vol.24,McGraw-Hili BookCompany, NewYork,1950,p.177.
J.VanVlcek,J.B.,andD.Middleton: ATheoretical Comparison oftheVisual,Aural,andMeter Reception ofPulsedSignalsinthePresence ofNoise,J.Arr/.P1Jys.,vol.17,pp.940-971, November, 1946.
4.Bennett.
W.R.:Methods ofSolving NoiseProblems, Proc.IRE,vol.44,pp.609-638, May.1956.
5.Davenport.
W.B.,andW.L.Root:"Introduction toRandom SignalsandNoise," McGraw-Hili BookCo..NewYork.1958.
6.Bendat.J.S.:"Principles andApplications ofRandom NoiseTheory," JohnWiley&Sons,Inc.,New York,1958.
7.Helstrom, CW.:"Statistical TheoryofSignalDetection," Pergamon Press,NewYork,1960.
8.Parzen,E.:"Modern Probability TheoryandItsApplications," JohnWiley&Sons,Inc.,NewYork, 1960.
9.Ric.;e.S.0.:Mathematical Analysis ofRandom Noise,BellSystemTech.J.,vol.23,pp.282-332,1944, andvol.24.pp.46-156, 1945.
10_Marcum, J.I.:AStatistical TheoryofTargetDetection byPulsedRadar,Mathematical Appendix, IRETrailS.,vol.1T-6,pp.145-267, April,1960.
II.Meyer,D.PooandH.A.Mayer:"Radar TargetDetection," Academic Press,NewYork,1973.
12.Hollis.R.:FalseAlarmTimeinPulseRadar,Proc.IRE,vol.42,p.1189,July,1954.
13.Trunk,G.V.:Detection ResultsforScanning RadarsEmploying Feedback Integration, IEEETrailS..
vol.AES-6,pp.522-527, July,1970.
14.Harrington, J.V.,andT.F.Rogers: Signal-to-noise Improvement through Integration inaStorage Tuhe,Proc.IRE,vol.38,pp.1197-1203, October, 1950.
15.Mentzer, J.R.:"Scattering andDiffraction ofRadioWaves," Pergamon Press,NewYork,1955.
16.King,R.W.P.,andT.T.Wu:"TheScattering andDiffraction ofWaves," Harvard University Press.
Cambridge, Mass.,1959.
17.Crispin, J.WooJr.,andK.M.Siegel:"Methods ofRadarCross-Section Analysis," Academic Press, NewYork,1968.
1R.Bowman, J.J.,T.B.A.Senior,andP.L.E.Uslengh: ..Electromagnetic andAcoustic Scattering by SimpleShapes," North-Holland Publishing Co.,Amsterdam, andJohnWiley&Sons,Inc.,NewYork, 1969.
19.Ruck,G.T..D.E.Barrick, W.D.Stuart,andC.K.Krichbaum:" RadarCross-Section Handbook," (2 vols.),Plenum Press,NewYork,1970.
20.Siegel.K.M.•F.V.Schultz, B.H.Gere,andF.B.Sleator:TheTheoretical andNumerical Determina­ tionoftheRadarCrossSectionofaProlateSpheroid, IRETrans.,vol.AP-4,pp.266-275, July,1956.
21.Mathur, P:N.,andE.A.Mueller: RadarBack-scattering CrossSections forNonspherical Targets, IRETrailS.,vol.AP-4,pp.51-53,January, 1956.
22.Scharfman, H.:Scattering fromDielectric CoatedSpheres intheRegionoftheFirstResonance, J.
I1rr/.Pl,ys.,vol.25,pp.1352--1356.
November, 1954.
n.Andreasen, M.G.:Back-scattering CrossSectionofaThin,Dielectric, Spherical Shell,IRETrans., vol.AP-5,pp.267-270.
July,1957.
24.King,D.D.:TheMeasurement andInterpretation ofAntenna Scattering.
Proc.IRE,vol.37, pp.770-777, July,1949.
25.Siegel.K.M.:FarFieldScaltering fromBodiesofRevolution, Appl.Sci.Research, sec.B,vol.7, pp.293-328, 1958. 66 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  26.
Peters, L., Jr.: End-fire Echo Area of Long, Thin Bodies, IRE Trarrs., vol.
AP-6, pp.
133.- 139, January,  1958.
 27.
Blore, W.
E.: The Radar Cross Section of Ogives, Double-Backed Cones, Double-Koundrd Contj:  and Cone Spheres, IEEE Trans., vol.
AP-12, pp.
582-589, September, 1964.
 28.
Ridenour, L.
N.: '!Radar System Engineering," MIT Radiation Laboratory Series, vol.
1, fig.
3.8,  McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York, 1947.
 29.
Blacksmith, P., Jr., R.
E.
Hiatt, and R.
B.
Mack: Introduction to Radar Cross-Section Measurements,  Proc.
IEEE, vol.
53, pp.
901-920, August, 1965.
 30.
Olin, I.
D., and F.
D.
Queen: Dynamic Measurement of Radar Cross Sections, Proc.
IEEE, vol.
53,  pp.
954-961, August, 1965.
 31.
Skolnik, M.
I.: An Empirical Formula for the Radar Cross Section of Ships at Grazing Incidence,  IEEE Trans., vol.
AES-10, p.
292, March, 1974.
 32.
Schultz, F.
V., R.
C.
Burgener, and S.
King: Measurement of the Radar Cross Section of a Man, Proc.
 IRE, vol.
46, pp.
476-481, February, 1958.
 33.
Kell, R.
E., and R.
A.
Ross: Radar Cross Section of Targets, chap.
27 of the " Radar Handbook," M.
I.
'  Skolnik (ed.), McGraw-Hill Book Co., New York, 1970.
 34.
Rheinstein, J.: Backscatter from Spheres: A Short Pulse View, IEEE Trans., vol.
AP-16, pp.
89-97,  January, 1968.
 35.
Miller, E.
K., G.
J.
Burke, B.
J.
Maxum, G.
M.
Pjerrou, and A.
R.
Neureuther: Radar Cross Section of  a Long Wire, IEEE Trans., vol.
AP-17, pp.
381-384, May, 1969.
 36.
Dunn, J.
H., and D.
D.
Howard: Target Noise, chap.
28 of" Radar Handbook," M.
I.
Skolnik (rd.),  McGraw-Hill Book Co., New York, 1970.
 37.
Swerling, P.: Probability of Detection for Fluctuating Targets, IRE Trans., vol.
IT-6, pp.
269 -308,  April, 1960.
 38.
Nathanson, F.
E.: "Radar Design Principles," McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York, 1969,  chap.
5.
 39.
Wilson, J.
D.: Probability of Detecting Aircraft Targets, IEEE Trans., vol.
AES-8, pp.
757-761,  November, 1972.
 40.
Weinstock, W.: "Target Cross Section Models for Radar Systems Analysis," doctoral dissertation,  University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, 1964.
 41.
Scholefield, P.
H.
R.: Statistical Aspects of Ideal Radar Targets, Proc.
IEEE, vol.
55, pp.
587-589,  April, 1967.
 42.
Pollon, G.
E.: Statistical Parameters for Scattering from Randomly Oriented Arrays, Cylinders, and  Plates, IEEE Trans., vol.
AP-18, pp.
68-75, January, 1970.
 43.
Heidbreder, G.
R., and R.
L.
Mitchell: Detection Probabilities for Log-Normally Distributed Signals,  IEEE Trans., vol.
AES-3, pp.
5-13, January, 1967.
 44.
Schwartz, M.: Effects of Signal Fluctuation on the Detection of Pulse Signals in Noise, IRE Trans.,  vol.
IT-2, pp.
66-71, June, 1956.
, .,  45.
Swerling, P.: Detection of Fluctuating Pulsed Signals in the Presence of Noise, IRE Trans., vol.
IT-3,  pp.
175-178, September, 1957.
 46.
Scholtz, R.
A., J.
J.
Kappl, and N.
E.
Nahi: The Detection of Moderately Fluctuating Rayleigh  Targets, IEEE Trans., vol.
AES-12, pp.
117-125, March, 1976.
 47.
Mooney, D.
H., and W.
A.
Skillman: Pulsedoppler Radar, chap.
19 of "Radar Handbook," M.
I.
 Skolnik (ed.), McGraw-Hill Book Co., New York, 1970.
 48.
Hovanessian, S.
A.: An Algorithm for Calculation of Range in a Multiple PRF Radar, IEEE Tru~ts.,  vol.
AES-12, pp.
287-290, March, 1976.
 49.
Blake, L.
V.: The Effective Number of Pulses Per Beamwidth for a Scanning Radar, Proc.
IRE, vol.
41,  pp.
770-774, June, 1953.
 50.
Hall, W.
M., and D.
K.
Barton: Antenna Pattern Loss Factor for Scanning Radars, Proc.
IEEE,  vol.
53, pp.
1257-1258, September, 1965.
 51.
Hall, W.
M.: Antenna Beam-Shape Factor in Scanning Radars, IEEE Trans., vol.
AES-4, pp.
402-409,  May, 1968.
 52.
Trunk, G.
V.: Detection Results for Scanning Radars Employing Feedback Integration, IEEE Truns.,  vol.
AES-6, pp.
522-527, July, 1970.
 53.
Davenport, W.
B., Jr.: Signal-to-noise Ratios in Band-pass Limiters, J.
Appl.
Phys., vol.
24,  pp.
720-727, June, 1953.
 54.
Manasse, R., R.
Price, and R.
.M.
Lerner: Loss of Signal Detectability in Band-pass Limiters, IRE  Trans., vol.
IT-4, pp.
34-38, March, 1958.
 55.
Trunk, G.
V.: Comparison of thc Collapsing Losses in Linear and Square-law Detectors, Proc.
lEEE,  vol.
60, pp.
743-744, June, 1972.
 66INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS 26.Peters,L.,Jr.:End-fire EchoAreaofLong,ThinBodies,IRETrails.,vol.AP-6,pp.133-139, January, 1958.
27.Blore,W.E.:TheRadarCrossSectionofOgives, DoublecBacked Cones,Doubk-Rounded Cones andConeSpheres, IEEETrans.,vol.AP-12,pp.582-589, September, 1964.
28.Ridenour, L.N.:'~Radar SystemEngineering," MITRadiation Laboratory Series,vol.I,fig.3.8, McGraw-Hill BookCompany, NewYork,1947.
29.Blacksmith, P.,Jr.,R.E.Hiatt,andR.B.Mack:Introduction toRadarCross-Section Measurements, Proc.IEEE,vol.53,pp.901-920, August,1965.
30.Olin,I.D.,andF.D.Queen:Dynamic Measurement ofRadarCrossSections, Proc.IEEE,vol.53, pp.954-961, August, 1965.
31.Skolnik, M.I.:AnEmpirical Formula fortheRadarCrossSectionofShipsatGrazing Incidence, IEEETrans.,vol.AES-lO, p.292,March,1974.
32.Schultz, F.V.,R.C.Burgener, andS.King:Measurement oftheRadarCrossSectionofaMan,Proc.
IRE,vol.46,pp.476-481, February, 1958.
33.Kelt,R.E.,andR.A.Ross:RadarCrossSectionofTargets, chap.27ofthe..RadarHandbook," M.I.
Skolnik (ed.),McGraw-Hili BookCo.,NewYork,1970.
34.Rheinstein, J.:Backscatter fromSpheres: AShortPulseView,IEEETrans.,vol.AP-16,pp.89-97, January, 1968.
35.Miller,E.K.,G.1.Burke,B.J.Maxum.
G.M.Pjerrou, andA.R.Neureuther: RadarCrossSectionof aLongWire,IEEETrans.,vol.AP-17,pp.381-384.
May,1969.
36.Dunn,J.H.,andD.D.Howard: TargetNoise,chap.28of"RadarHandbook," M.I.Skolnik (ed.~ McGraw-Hili BookCo.,NewYork,1970.
37.Swerling, P.:Probability ofDetection forFluctuating Targets,IRETrans.,vol.1T-6,pr.269-30H, April,1960.
38.Nathanson, F.E.:..RadarDesignPrinciples," McGraw-Hili BookCompany, NewYork,1969, chap.5.
39.Wilson, J.D.:Probability ofDetecting Aircraft Targets, IEEETrans.,vol.AES-8,pp.757-761, November, 1972.
40.Weinstock, W.:"Target CrossSectionModelsforRadarSystems Analysis," doctoral dissertation, University ofPennsylvania, Philadelphia, 1964.
41.Scholefield, P.H.R.:Statistical AspectsofIdealRadarTargets, Proc.IEEE,vol.55,pp.587-589, April,1967.
42.Pollon,G.E.:Statistical Parameters forScattering fromRandomly Oriented Arrays,Cylinders, and Plates,IEEETrans.,vol.AP-18,pp.68-75,January, 1970.
43.Heidbreder, G.R.,andR.L.Mitchell: Detection Probabilities forLog-Normally Distributed Signals, IEEETrans.,vol.AES-3,pp.5-13,January, 1967.
44.Schwartz, M.:EffectsofSignalFluctuation ontheDetection ofPulseSignalsinNoise,IRETrans., vol.IT·2,pp.66-71,June,1956.
45.Swerling, P.:Detection ofFluctuating PulsedSignalsinthePresence ofNoise,IRETrans.,vol.IT-3, pp.175-178, September, 1957.
46.Scholtz, R.A.,J.1.Kappl,andN.E.Nahi:TheDetection ofModerately Fluctuating Rayleigh Targets,IEEETrans;,vol.AES-12, pp.117-125, March,1976.
47.Mooney, D.H.,andW.A.Skillman: Pulse-doppler Radar,chap.19of"RadarHandbook," M.I.
Skolnik (ed.).McGraw-Hill BookCo.,NewYork,1970.
48.Hovanessian, S.A.:AnAlgorithm forCalculation ofRangeinaMultiple PRFRadar,IEEETrailS, vol.AES-12, pp.287-290, March,1976.
49.Blake,L.V.:TheEffective Number ofPulsesPerBeamwidth foraScanning Radar,Proc.IRE,vol.41, pp.770-774, June,1953.
50.Hall,W.M.,andD.K.Barton: Antenna PatternLossFactorforScanning Radars, Proc.IEEE, vol.53,pp.1251-1258, September, 1965.
51.Hall,W.M.:Antenna Beam-Shape FactorinScanning Radars,IEEETrans.,vol.AES-4.pp.402-409, May,1968..
52.Trunk,G.V.:Detection ResultsforScanning RadarsEmploying Feedback Integration, IEEETrans., vol.AES-6,pp.522-527, July,1970.
53.Davenport, W.B.,Jr.:Signal-to-noise RatiosinBand-pass Limiters, J.Appl.Phys.,vol.24, pp.720-727, June,1951 54.Manasse, R.,R.Price,andR.M.Lerner:LossofSignalDetectability inBand-pass Limiters, IRE Trans.,vol.1T-4,pp.34-38,March.1958.
55.Trunk,G.V.:Comparison ofthe;Collapsing LossesinLinearandSquare-law Detectors, Proc.IEEE.
vol.60,pp.743-744, June,1972. 56.
Barton, D.
K.: "The Radar Equation," Artech House, Dedham, Mass., 1974.
 57.
Blake, L.
V.: Prediction of Radar Range, chap.
2 of "Radar Handbook," M.
I.
Skolnik (ed.), McGraw-  Hill Book Co., New York, 1970.
 58.
Hahn, P.
M., and S.
D.
Gross: Beam Shape Loss and Surveillance Optimization for Pencil Beam  Arrays, lEEE Trans., vol.
AES-5, pp.
674-675, July, 1969.
 59.
Mallett, J.
D., and L.
E.
Brennan: Cumulative Probability of Detection for Targets Approaching a  Uniformly Scanning Search Radar, Proc.
IEEE, vol.
5 1,596-601, April, 1963, and vol.
52, pp.
708-709,  June, 1964.
 60.
Johnson, J.
B.: Thermal Agitation of Electricity in Conductors, Phys.
Rev., vol.
32, pp.
97-109, 1928.
 61.
Pannell, J.
H., J.
Rheinstein, and A.
F.
Smith: Radar Scattering from a Conducting Cone-Sphere,  All T Lincoln Laboratory Tech.
Rept.
no.
349, Mar.
2, 1964.
(See also Chap.
6 of ref.
19.)  62.
Elphick, B.
L., M.
J.
Chappell, and R.
Batty: The Measured and Calculated RCS ofa Resistive Target  Model, IEE (Londorr) Radar-77, pp.
120-124, Oct.
25-28, 1977.
 63.
Sinclair, G.: Theory of Models of Electromagnetic Systems, Proc.
IRE, vol.
36, pp.
1364-1370,  November, 1948.
 64.
Sche~rstcd, C.
E..
J.
W.
C'rispin.
arld K.
M.
Siegel: Studies in Radar Cross-Sections XV: Radar  Cross-Sections of the B-47 and B-52 Aircraft, Univ.
of Miclrigatr, Radiation Laboratory Report  2260-1-T, August 1954 (tlnclassified), AD 46 741.
 65.
Cf~andler, R.
A,.
and L.
E.
Wood: System Considerations for the Design of Radar Braking Sensors,  IEEE Trans., vol.
VT-26.
pp.
151-160, May, 1977.
 66.
Queen, F.
D.: Radar Cross Sections of the T-38 Aircraft for the Head-On Aspects in L, S, and X  Bands, Naval Research Lahoratory' Report 795 1, Jan.
8, 1976.
 67.
Jao, J.
K., and M.
Elbaum: First-Order Statistics of a Non-Rayleigh Fading Signal and Its Detection,  Proc.
IEEE, vol.
66, pp.
781--789, July, 1978.
 68.
Williams, P.
D.
L..
H.
D.
Cramp, and K.
Curtis: Experimental Study of the Radar Cross-Section of  Maritime Targets, IEE (London) Jottrnal on Electronic Circuits and Systems, vol.
2, no.
4, pp.
121-136,  July.
1978.
 69.
Varela, A.
A.: The Operator Factor Concept, Its History and Present Status, Symposium on Radar  Detection Theory, ONR Symposium Report ACR-10, Mar.
1-2, 1956, DDC No.
117533.
 THERADAR EQUATION 67 56.Barton,D.K.:"TheRadarEquation," ArtechHouse,Dedham, Mass.,1974.
57.Blake,L.V.:Prediction ofRadarRange,chap.2of"RadarHandbook," M.I.Skolnik (ed.),McGraw­ HillBookCo.,NewYork,1970.
58.Hahn,P.M.,andS.D.Gross:BeamShapeLossandSurveillance Optimization forPencilBeam Arrays,IEEETrans.,vol.AES-5,pp.674-675, July,1969.
59.Mallett, J.D.,andL.E.Brennan: Cumulative Probability ofDetection forTargets Approaching a Uniformly Scanning SearchRadar,Proc.IEEE,vol.51,596-601, April,1963,andvol.52,pp.708-709, June,1964.
60.Johnson, J.B.:Thermal Agitation ofElectricity inConductors, Phys.Rev.,vol.32,pp.97-109,1928.
61.Pannell, J.H.,J.Rheinstein, andA.F.Smith:RadarScattering fromaConducting Cone-Sphere, MITLincolnLaboratory Tech.Rept.no.349,Mar.2,1964.
(SeealsoChap.6ofref.19.) 62.Elphick, B.L.,M.J.Chappell, andR.Batty:TheMeasured andCalculated RCSofaResistive Target Model,lEE(Lolldoll) Radar-n, pp.120-124, Oct.25-28,1977.
63.Sinclair, G.:Theory ofModels ofElectromagnetic Systems, Proc.IRE,vol.36,pp.1364-1370, November, 1948.
64.Schcnstcd, C.E.,J.W.Crispin, andK.M.Siegel:Studies inRadarCross-Sections XV:Radar Cross-Sections oftheB-47andB-52Aircraft, Ulliv.ofMichigall, Radiation Laboratory Report 2260-1-T, August1954(unclassified), AD46741.
65.Chandler, R.A.,andL.E.Wood:SystemConsiderations fortheDesignofRadarBraking Sensors, IEEETraIlS.,vol.VT-26,pp.151-160, May,1977.
66.Queen,F.D.:RadarCrossSections oftheT-38Aircraft fortheHead-On Aspects inL,S,andX Bands,Na!'alResearcll Lahoratory'Report 7951,Jan.8,1976.
67.Jao,J.K.,andM.Elbaum: First-Order Statistics ofaNon-Rayleigh FadingSignalandItsDetection, Proc.IEEE,vol.66,pp.781-789, July,1978.
68.Williams, P.D.L.,H.D.Cramp,andK.Curtis:Experimental StudyoftheRadarCross-Section of Maritime Targets,lEE(Lolldon) JournalonElectronic CircuitsandSystems, vol.2,no.4,pp.121-136, July,1978.
69.Varela,A.A.:TheOperator FactorConcept, ItsHistoryandPresent Status,Symposium onRadar Detection Theory,ONRSymposium ReportACR-IO, Mar.1-2,1956,DOCNo.117533. CHAPTER  THREE  AND FREQUENCY-MODULATED RADAR  3.1 THE DOPPLER EFFECT  A radar detects the presence of objects and locates their position in space by transmitting  electromagnetic energy and observing the returned echo.
A pulse radar transmits a relatively  short burst of electromagnetic energy, after which the receiver is turned on to listen for the  echo.
The echo not only indicates that a target is present, but the time that elapses between the  transmission of the pulse and the receipt of the echo is a measure of the distance to the target.
 Separation of the echo signal and the transmitted signal is made on the basis of differences ill  time.
 The radar transmitter may be operated continuously rather than pulsed if the strong  transmitted signal can be separated from the weak echo.
The received-echo-signal power is  cotisicicrahly smaller than the transmitter power; it might be as little as 10- '' tllat of tllc  transmitted power-sometimes even less.
Separate antennas for transmission and reception  help segregate the weak echo from the strong leakage signal, but the isolation is usually not  sufficient.
A feasible technique for separating the received signal from the transmitted signal  when there is relative motion between radar and target is based on recognizing the change in  the echo-signal frequency caused by the doppler effect.
 It is well known in the fields of optics and acoustics that if either the source of oscillation  or the observer of the oscillation is in motion, an apparent shift in frequency will result.
This is  the dopplrr eJfect and is the basis of CW radar.
If R is the distance from the radar to target, tile  total number of wavelengths L contained in the two-way path between the radar and the target  is 2RlA.
The distance R and the wavelength L are assumed to be measured in the same units.
 Since one wavelength corresponds to an angular excursion of 27~ radians, the total angular  excursion # made by the electromagnetic wave during its transit to and from the target is  4rtRlA radians.
If the target is in motion, R and the phase 4 are continually changing.
A change  CHAPTER THREE CWANDFREQUENCY-MODULATED RADAR 3.tTHEDOPPLER EFFECf Aradardetectsthepresence ofobjectsandlocatestheirposition inspacebytransmitting electromagnetic energyandobserving thereturned echo.Apulseradartransmits arelatively shortburstofelectromagnetic energy,afterwhichthereceiver isturnedontolistenforthe echo.Theechonotonlyindicates thatatargetispresent,butthetimethatelapsesbetween the transmission ofthepulseandthereceiptoftheechoisameasure ofthedistance tothetarget.
Separation oftheechosignalandthetransmitted signalismadeonthebasisofdilTerences ill time.
Theradartransmitter maybeoperated continuously ratherthanpulsedifthestrong transmitted signalcanbeseparated fromtheweakecho.Thereceived-echo-signal poweris cOllsiderahly smallerthanthetransmitter power;itmightbeaslittleas10-Itlthatofrhe transmitted power-sometimes evenless.Separate antennas fortransmission andreception helpsegregate theweakechofromthestrongleakagesignal,buttheisolation isusuallynot sufficient.
Afeasibletechnique forseparating thereceived signalfromthetransmitted signal whenthereisrelativemotionbetween radarandtargetisbasedonrecognizing thechangein theecho-signal frequency causedbythedoppler effect.
Itiswellknowninthefieldsofopticsandacoustics thatifeitherthesourceofoscillation ortheobserver oftheoscillation isinmotion,anapparent shiftinfrequency willresult.Thisis thedopplereffectandisthebasisofCWradar.IfRisthedistance fromtheradartotarget,the totalnumberofwavelengths).
contained inthetwo-way pathbetween theradarandthetarget is2RjA..ThedistanceRandthewavelength), areassumed tobemeasured inthesameunits.
Sinceonewavelength corresponds toanangular excursion of2nradians, thetotalangular excursion cPmadebytheelectromagnetic waveduringitstransittoandfromthetargetis 4nRj).radians.
Ifthetargetisinmotion,RandthephasecParecontinually changing.
Achange 68 in 4 with rcspcct to time is equal to a frequency.
This is the doppler angular frequency wd.
 given by  where fd = doppler frequency shift and L).
= relative (or radial) velocity of target with respect  to radar.
The doppler frequency shift is  lerc, = ralslll fr~q~~e~~cy i~id c = velocity of propagatio~l = 3 X 10' [nh 1ffd in  hertz.
r, in knots, and 1 in meters,  1.03~~ (3.2 b)  A plot of this equation is shown in Fig.
3.1.
 1.he relative velocity may be written c, = v cos 0, where v is the target speed and 0 is the  angle ~nade by tllc target trajectory and tile line joining radar and target.
When 0 = " the  doppler frequency is maximum.
The doppler is zero when the trajectory is perpendicular to  the radar line of sight (0 = 90").
 The type of radar which employs a continuous transmission, either modulated or unmod-  ulated.
has had wide application.
Historically, the early radar experimenters worked almost  exclusively wit!, continuous rather than pulsed transmissions (Sec.
1.5).
Two of the more  Figure 3.1 Doppler frequency [Eq.
(32h)) as a function of radar frequency and target telalive velocity.
 CWANDFREQUENCY-MODULATED RADAR69 IIIq,wilhrespccttolilllcisequal10afrequency.
Thisisthedoppler angular frequency UJd.
givenby (3.1) (3.2£1)where f~=doppler frequency shiftandl',=relative(orradial)velocityoftargetwithrespect toradar.Thedoppler frequency shiftis .2v,2v,J~Jd=-r =-c~ where/0=lranslllilleo frequency anu('=velocityofpropagation =3x108m/s.Iffdisin hertz.",inknots.andAinmeters, r._1.OJvr d-A(3.2b) Aplotofthisequation isshowninFig.3.1.
Therelativevelocity maybewrittent',=Vcos(J,wherevisthetargetspeedand()isthe anglemadebythetargettrajectory andthelinejoiningradarandtarget.When()=O.the doppler frequency ismaximum.
Thedoppler iszerowhenthetrajectory isperpendicular to theradarlineofsight(0=90°).
Thetypeofradarwhichemploys acontinuous transmission, eithermodulated orunmod­ ulated.hashadwideapplication.
Historically, theearlyradarexperimenters worked almost exclusively withcontinuous ratherthanpulsedtransmissions (Sec.1.5).Twoofthemore 10,000 1,000 Radarfrequency, MHz1,000--.
L <l.> 0.0.oo Figure3.1Doppler frequency [Eq.(3.2b)Jasafunction ofradarfrequency andtargetrelativevelocity. important early applications of the CW radar principle were the proxim~ty (VT) ftire and the  FM-CW altimeter.
The CW proximity fuze was first employed in artillery projectiles during  World War 11 and greatly enhanced the effectiveness of both field and antlaircraft arttllery  Tile first practical model of the FM-CW altimeter was developed by the Wt'slern Electric  Company in 1938, although the principle of altitude determination using radio-wave  reflections was known ten years earlier, in 1928.'  The CW radar is of interest not only because of its many applications, hut its sttidy also  serves as a means for better understanding the nature and use of the doppler inforrnatlon  contained in the echo signal, whether in a CW or a pulse radar (MTl) application.
In addition  to allowing the received signal to be separated from the transmitted signal, tho CW radar  provides a measurement of relative velocity which may be used to distinguish moving targets  from stationary objects or clutter.
 3.2 CW RADAR  Consider the simple CW radar as illustrated by the block diagram of Fig.
3.2~~.
The transmitter  generates a continuous (unmodulated) oscillation of frequency fo, which is radiated by the  antenna.
A portion of the radiated energy is intercepted by the target and is scattered, some of  it in the direction of the radar, where it is collected by the receiving antenna.
If the target is in  motion with a velocity v, relative to the radar, the received signal will be shifted in frequency  from the transmitted frequency jo by an amount + fd as given by Eq.
(3.2).
The plus sign  associated with the doppler frequency applies if the distance between target and radar is  decreasing (closing target), that is, when the received signal frequency is greater than the  transmitted signal frequency.
The minus sign applies if the distance is increasing (receding  target).
The received echo signal at a frequencyf, 4.fd enters the radar via the antenna and 1s  heterodyned in the detector (mixer) with a portion of the transmitter signal fo to producc a  doppler beat note of frequency fd.
The sign of.& is lost in this process.
 Frequency fo  I\ G  Figure 3.2 (0) Simple CW radar block diagram; (h) response characteristic of bcat-frequency arnpilficr.
*  CW  transmitter (24 k rb  ' Detector  (mixer) 6 = Beat-frequency  amplifier Indicator  70INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS important earlyapplications oftheCWradarprinciple weretheproximity (VT)fULeandthe FM-CW altimeter.
TheCWproximity fuzewasfirstemployed inartilkry projectiles during WorldWarIIandgreatlyenhanced theeffectiveness ofbothfieldandantiaircraft artillery.
Thefirstpractical modeloftheFM-CW altimeter wasdeveloped bytheWeskrn Electric Company in1938,although theprinciple ofaltitude determination usingradio-wave reflections wasknowntenyearsearlier,in1928.1 TheCWradarisofinterestnotonlybecauseofitsmanyapplications.
butitsstudyalso servesasameansforbetterunderstanding thenatureanduseofthedoppler information contained intheechosignal,whether inaCWorapulseradar(MTI)application.
Inaddition toallowing thereceived signaltobeseparated fromthetransmitted signal,theCWradar provides ameasurement ofrelativevelocity whichmaybeusedtodistinguish movingtargds fromstationary objectsorclutter.
3.2CWRADAR Consider thesimpleCWradarasillustrated bytheblockdiagram ofFig.3.2(1.Thetransmitkr generates acontinuous (unmodulated) oscillation offrequency fo,whichisradiated hythe antenna.
Aportionoftheradiated energyisintercepted bythetargetandisscattered, someof itinthedirection oftheradar,whereitiscollected bythereceiving antenna.
Ifthetargetisin motionwithavelocity Vrrelativetotheradar,thereceived signalwillbeshiftedinfrequency fromthetransmitted frequency 10byanamount±!cJasgivenbyEq.(3.2).Theplussign associated withthedoppler frequency appliesifthedistance between targetandradaris decreasing (closing target),thatis,whenthereceived signalfrequency isgreaterthanthe transmitted signalfrequency.
Theminussignappliesifthedistance isincreasing (receding target).Thereceived echosignalatafrequency 10±fdenterstheradarviatheantenna andis heterodyned inthedetector (mixer)withaportionofthetransmitter signal/o toproduce a doppler beatnoteoffrequencyId'ThesignoUdislostinthisprocess.
foE 1'_•f\fVVV\.f\f\."'<=1~.::.:>~ > Beat-frequency amplifier (al (1) <Il Co 0..
<Il (1) 0:: Frequency (b) Figure3.2(a)SimpleCWradarblockdiagram; (b)response charactcristic ofhcat-frcLJlIcm;y amplifier. The purpose of the doppler amplifier is to eliminate echoes from stationary targets and to  an~plify the doppler eclio signal to a level where it can operate an indicating device.
It might  Iiave a frcqi~ency-respouse cliaracteristic sirnilar to that of Fig.
3.2h.
The low-frequency cutoff  must be high enougll to reject tile d-c component caused by stationary targets, but yet it nlitst  be low enougli to pass the smallest doppler frequency expected.
Sometimes both conditions  cantlot he rnct sitni~ltar~cously arid a co~nprornise is necessary.
The upper cutoff frequency is  selected to pass tlic liigliest doppler frequency expected.
 The indicator might be a pair of earphones or a frequency meter.
If exact knowledge of the  doppler frequetlcy is not rlccessary, earplio~ies are especially attractive provided the doppler  frequencies lie within the audio-frequency response of the ear.
Earphones are not only simple  devices.
but the ear acts as a selective bandpass filter with a passband of the order of 50 Hz  centered about tlie signal frequency.2 The narrow-bandpass characteristic of the ear results in  an effective increase in the signal-to-noise ratio of the echo signal.
With subsonic aircraft  targets and transmitter frequencies in the middle range of the microwave frequency region, the  doppler frequencies usually fall within the passband of the ear.
If audio detection were desired  for those combinations of target velocity and transmitter frequency which do not result in  audible doppler frequencies, the doppler signal could be heterodyned to the audible range.
The  doppler frequency can also be detected and measured by conventional frequency meters,  usually one that counts cycles.
An example of the CW radar principle is the radio proximity  (VT) fuze, used with great success during World War I1 for the fuzing of artillery projectiles.
It  may seem strange that the radio proximity fuze should be classified as a radar, but it fulfills the  same basic function of a radar, which is the detection and location of reflecting objects by  " radio " rn~ans.~.~  isolation between transmitter and receiver.
A single antenna serves the purpose of transmission  and reception in the simple CW radar described above.
In principle, a single antenna may be  erliployed since tlie necessary isolation between the transmitted and the received signals is  acliieved via separation in frequency as a result of the doppler effect.
In practice, it is riot  possible to eliminate completely the transmitter leakage.
However, transmitter leakage is not  always undesirable.
A moderate amount of leakage entering the receiver along with the echo  signal supplies the reference necessary for the detection of the doppler frequency shift.
If a  leakage signal of sufficient magnitude were not present, a sample of the transmitted signal  would have to be deliberately introduced into the receiver to provide the necessary reference  freqitency.
 Tliere are two practical effects which limit the amount of transmitter leakage power which  can be tolerated at the receiver.
These are (1) the maximum amount of power the receiver  input circuitry can withstand before it is physically damaged or its sensitivity reduced  (burnout) and (2) the amount of transmitter noise due to hum, microphonics, stray pick-up,  and instability which enters the receiver from the transmitter.
The additional noise introduced  by the transmitter reduces the receiver sensitivity.
Except where the CW radar operates with  relatively low transmitter power and insensitive receivers, additional isolation is usually  required hctwceri tlie transmitter and tlic receiver if tile sensitivity is not to be degraded either  by bur noirt or by excessive noise.
 Tlie amoiliit of isolation required depends on the transmitter power and the accompany-  ing tratisr~iilter rioisc as well as tlie ruggedtless and the sensitivity of the receiver.
For example,  if tllc safe value of power which might be applied to a receiver were 10 mW and if the  trarisnlitter power were 1 kW, the isolation between transmitter and receiver must be at least  50 dB.
 The amount of isolation needed in a long-range CW radar is more often determined by  CWANDFREQUENCY-MODULATED RADAR71 Thepurpose ofthedoppler amplifier istoeliminate echoesfromstationary targetsandto amplify thedoppler echosignaltoalevelwhereitcanoperateanindicating device.Itmight haveafrequency-response characteristic similartothatofFig.3.2b.Thelow-frequency cutoff musthehighenoughtorejectthed-ccomponent causedbystationary targets,butyetitmust helowenough topassthesmallest doppler frequency expected.
Sometimes bothconditions cannot·hemetsimultancously andacompromise isnecessary.
Theuppercutofffrequency is selectcdtopassthchighcstdoppler frequency expected.
Theindicator mightbeapairofearphones orafrequency meter.Ifexactknowledge ofthe doppler frequency isnotneccssary, earphones areespecially attractive provided thedoppler frequencies liewithintheaudio-frequency response oftheear.Earphones arenotonlysimple devices.
buttheearactsasaselective bandpass filterwithapassband oftheorderof50Hz centered aboutthesignalfrequency.2 Thenarrow-bandpass characteristic oftheearresultsin aneffective increase inthesignal-to-noise ratiooftheechosignal.Withsubsonic aircraft targetsandtransmitter frequencies inthemiddlerangeofthemicrowave frequency region,the doppler frequencies usuallyfallwithinthepassband oftheear.Ifaudiodetection weredesired forthosecombinations oftargetvelocity' andtransmitter frequency whichdonotresultin audibledoppler frequencies, thedoppler signalcouldbeheterodyned totheaudiblerange.The doppler frequency canalsobedetected andmeasured byconventional frequency meters, usuallyonethatcountscycles.Anexample oftheCWradarprinciple istheradioproximity (VT)fuze,usedwithgreatsuccessduringWorldWarIIforthefuzingofartillery projectiles.
It mayseemstrangethattheradioproximity fuzeshouldbeclassified asaradar,butitfulfillsthe samebasicfunction ofaradar,whichisthedetection andlocation ofreflecting objectsby "radio" means.J·4 Isolation between transmitter andreceiver.
Asingleantenna servesthepurpose oftransmission andreception inthesimpleCWradardescribed above.Inprinciple, asingleantenna maybe employed sincethenecessary isolation between thetransmitted andthereceived signalsis achieved viaseparation infrequency asaresultofthedoppler effect.Inpractice, itisnot possible toeliminate completely thetransmitter leakage.
However, transmitter leakage isnot alwaysundesirable.
Amoderate amount ofleakageentering thereceiver alongwiththeecho signalsupplies thereference necessary forthedetection ofthedoppler frequency shift.Ifa leakage signalofsufficient magnitude werenotpresent, asampleofthetransmitted signal wouldhavetobedeliberately introduced intothereceiver toprovide thenecessary reference frequency.
Therearetwopractical effectswhichlimittheamountoftransmitter leakagepowerwhich canbetolerated atthereceiver.
Theseare(I)themaximum amount ofpowerthereceiver inputcircuitry canwithstand beforeitisphysically damaged oritssensitivity reduced (burnout) and(2)theamount oftransmitter noiseduetohum,microphonics, straypick-up, andinstability whichentersthereceiver fromthetransmitter.
Theadditional noiseintroduced bythetransmitter reduces thereceiver sensitivity.
ExceptwheretheCWradaroperates with relatively lowtransmitter powerandinsensitive receivers, additional isolation isusually requircd hctwe'en thetransmitter andthereceiver ifthesensitivity isnottobedegraded either byburnout orbyexcessive noise.
Theamount ofisolation required depends onthetransmitter powerandtheaccompany­ ingtransmittcr noiseaswellastheruggedness andthesensitivity ofthereceiver.
Forexample, ifthesafevalueofpowerwhichmightbeapplied toareceiver were10mWandifthe transmitter powerwereIkW,theisolation between transmitter andreceiver mustbeatleast 50dB.
Theamount ofisolation neededinalong-range CWradarismoreoftendetermined by the noise that accompanies the transmitter leakage signal rather than by any damage caused  by high power.5 For example, suppose the isolation between the transmitter and receiver were  si~cli that 10 mW of leakage signal appeared at the receiver.
If the rnini~num detectable signal  were 10-l3 watt (100 dB below 1 mW), the transmitter noise must be at least 110 dR  (preferably 120 or 130 dB) below the transmitted carrier.
 The transmitter noise of concern in doppler radar includes those noise components that  lie within the same frequency range as the doppler frequencies.
The greater the desired radar  range, the more stringent will be the need for reducing the noise modulation accompanying the  transmitter signal.
If complete elimination of the direct leakage signal at the receiver could be  achieved, it might not entirely solve the isolation problem since echoes from nearby fixed  targets (clutter) can also contain the noise components of the transmitted ~ignal.~.~'  It will be recalled (Sec.
1.3) that the receiver of a pulsed radar is isolated and protected  from the damaging effects of the transmitted pulse by the duplexer, which short-circuits the  receiver input during the transmission period.
Turning off the receiver during transmission  with a duplexer is not possible in a CW radar since the transmitter is operated continuously.
 Isolation between transmitter and receiver might be obtained with a single antenna by using a  hybrid junction, circulator, turnstile junction, or with separate polarizations.
Separate  antennas for transmitting and receiving might also be used.
The amount of isolation which can  be readily achieved between the arms of practical hybrid junctions such as the magic-T, rat  race, or short-slot coupler is of the order of 20 to 30 dB.
In some instances, when extreme  precision is exercised, an isolation of perhaps 60 dB or more might be achieved.
One limitation  of the hybrid junction is the 6-dB loss in overall performance which results from the inherent  waste of half the transmitted power and half the received signal power.
Both the loss in  performance and the difficulty in obtaining large isolations have limited the application of the  hybrid junction to short-range radars.
 Ferrite isolation devices such as the circulator do not suffer the 6-dB loss inherent in the  hybrid junction.
Practical devices have isolation of the order of 20 to 50 dB.
Turnstile junc-  tions7 achieve isolations as high as 40 to 60 dB.
 The use of orthogonal polarizations for transmitting and receiving is limited to short-  range radars because of the relatively small amount of isolation that can be obtained.'  An important factor which limits the use of isolation devices with a common antenna is  the reflections produced in the transmission line by the antenna.
The antenna can never be  perfectly matched to free space, and there will always be some transmitted signal reflected back  toward the receiver.
The reflection coefficient from a mismatched antenna with a voltage-  standing-wave ratio o is Jp I = (B - l)/(a + 1).
Therefore, if an isolation of 20 dB is to be  obtained, the VSWR must be less than 1.22.
If 40 dB of isolation is required, the VSWR must  be less than 1.02.
, .
 The largest isolations are obtained with two antennas-one for transmission, the other for  reception-physically separated from.one another.
Isolations of the order of 80 dB or more  are possible with high-gain antennas.
The more directive the antenna beam and the greater the  spacing between antennas, the greater will be the'isolation.
When the antenna designer is  restricted by the nature of the application, large isolations may not be possible.
For example,  typical isolations.between transmitting and receiving antennas on missiles might be about  50 dB at X band, 70 dB at K band and as low as 20 dB at L band.' Metallic baffles, as well as  absorbing material, placed between the antennas can provide additional is~lation.'~  It has been reported1 that the ,isolation .between two X-band horn antennas of 22 dB  gain can be increased from a normal -value of 70 dB to about 120 dB by separating the two  with a smooth surface covered by a sheet of radar-absorbing material and providing screening  ridges at the edges of the horns.
A common:radome enclosing the two antennas should be  avoided since it limits the amount of isolation that can be achieved.
 72INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS thenoisethataccompanies thetransmitter leakagesignalratherthanbyanydamagecaused byhighpower.5Forexample, suppose theisolation between thetransmitter andreceiverwere suchthattomWofleakagesignalappeared atthereceiver.
Iftheminimum detectable signal wereto-13watt(100dBbelow1mW),thetransmitter noisemustbeatleast110dB (preferably 120or130dB)belowthetransmitted carrier.
Thetransmitter noiseofconcern indopplerradarincludes thosenoisecomponents that liewithinthesamefrequency rangeasthedopplerfrequencies.
Thegreaterthedesiredradar range,themorestringent willbetheneedforreducing thenoisemodulation accompanying the transmitter signal.Ifcomplete elimination ofthedirectleakagesignalatthereceivercouldbe achieved, itmightnotentirely solvetheisolation problem sinceechoesfromnearbyfixed targets(clutter) canalsocontainthenoisecomponents ofthetransmitted signal.6.69 Itwillberecalled (Sec.1.3)thatthereceiverofapulsedradarisisolatedandprotected fromthedamaging effectsofthetransmitted pulsebytheduplexer, whichshort-circuits the receiver inputduringthetransmission period.Turning offthereceiverduringtransmission withaduplexer isnotpossible inaCWradarsincethetransmitter isoperated continuously.
Isolation between transmitter andreceivermightbeobtained withasingleantenna byusinga hybridjunction, circulator, turnstile junction, orwithseparate polarizations.
Separate antennas fortransmitting andreceiving mightalsobeused.Theamountofisolation whichcan bereadilyachieved between thearmsofpractical hybridjunctions suchasthemagic-T,rat race,orshort-slot coupler isoftheorderof20to30dB.Insomeinstances, whenextreme precision isexercised, anisolation ofperhaps60dBormoremightbeachieved.
Onelimitation ofthehybridjunction isthe6-dBlossinoverallperformance whichresultsfromtheinherent wasteofhalfthetransmitted powerandhalfthereceived signalpower.BoththeJossin performance andthedifficulty inobtaining largeisolations havelimitedtheapplication ofthe hybridjunction toshort-range radars.
Ferriteisolation devicessuchasthecirculator donotsufferthe6-dBlossinherent inthe hybridjunction.
Practical deviceshaveisolation oftheorderof20to50dB.Turnstile junc­ tions7achieveisolations ashighas40to60dB.
Theuseoforthogonal polarizations fortransmitting andreceiving islimitedtoshort­ rangeradarsbecauseoftherelatively smallamountofisolation thatcanbeobtained.8 Animportant factorwhichlimitstheuseofisolation deviceswithacommon antenna is thereflections produced inthetransmission linebytheantenna.
Theantenna canneverbe perfectly matched tofreespace,andtherewillalwaysbesometransmitted signalreflected back towardthereceiver.
Thereflection coefficient fromamismatched antenna withavoltage­ standing-wave ratio (JisIpI=(0"-1)/(0"+1).Therefore, ifanisolation of20dBistobe obtained, theVSWRmustbelessthan1.22.If40dBofisolation isrequired, theVSWRmust belessthan1.02.
Thelargestisolations areobtained withtwoantennas-one fortransmission, theotherfor reception-physically separated fromoneanother.
Isolations oftheorderof80dBormore arepossible withhigh-gain antennas.
Themoredirective theantenna beamandthegreaterthe spacing between antennas, thegreaterwillbethe'isolation.
Whentheantenna designer is restricted bythenatureoftheapplication, largeisolations maynotbepossible.
Forexample, typicalisolations· between transmitting andreceiving antennas onmissiles mightbeabout 50dBatXband,70dBatKbandandaslowas20dBatLband.9Metallic baffles,aswellas absorbing material, placedbetween theantennas canprovideadditional isolation.10 Ithasbeenreported 11thatthe·isolationbetween twoX-bandhornantennas of22dB gaincanbeincreased fromanormal.value of70dBtoabout120dBbyseparating thetwo withasmoothsurfacecoveredbyasheetofradar-absorbing material andproviding screening ridgesattheedgesofthehorns.Acommonradome enclosing thetwoantennas shouldbe avoided sinceitlimitstheamountofisolation thatcanbeachieved. CW AND FREQUENCY-MODULATED RADAR 73  The separate antennas of the AN/MPQ-46 CW tracker-illurninator of.tlle Hawk rnissile  system are shown in Fig.
3.3.
The Cassegrain receiving antenna is on the right.
Both antennas  have a " tunnel " around the periphery for further shielding.
 Additional isolation can be obtained by properly introducing a controlled sample of the  transmitted sig:ial directly into the receiver.
The phase and amplitude of this " buck-off" signal  are adjusted to cancel the portion of the transmitter signal that leaks into the receiver.
An  additional 10 dB of isolatiorl might be obtained.12 The phase and amplitude of the leakage  signal, however, can vary as the antenna scans, which results in varying cancellation.
There-  fore.
when additional isolation is necessary, as in the high-power CW tracker-illuminator, a  ~I~II;III~~C C;IIICCIC~ L';\II t>e IISC~ tli;~t SCI~SCS the proper phase r71icI arnplittrdc required or the  nulling ~ignal.~.' Ilynarnic carlcelalion of the leakage by this type of " feedthrough nullirlg"  ca rl exceed 30 i3,3 '  'I'lie traris~liiltcr signal is never a pure CW waveform.
Minute variations ill arnplitucie  (AM) and phase (FM) can result in sideband components that fall within the doppler  frequency band.
These can generate false targets or mask the desired signals.
Therefore both  AM arid FM modulations can result in undesired sidebands.
AM sidebands are typically  120 dB below the carrier, as measured in a 1 kHz band, and are relatively constant across the  Figure 3.3 AN/MP()-46 CW tracker-ill~irninator for the Hawk missile system showing separate transmit-  ring and receiving antentias.
(('ortrresj* Raj~rlreorl ('0.).
 CWANDFREQUENCY-MODULATED RADAR73 Theseparate antennas oftheAN!MPQ~46 CWtracker-illuminator of.theHawkmissile systemareshowninFig.3.3.TheCassegrain receiving antenna isontheright.Bothantennas havea"tunnel" aroundtheperiphery forfurthershielding.
Additional isolation canbeobtained byproperly introducing acontrolled sampleofthe transmitted signaldirectlyintothereceiver.
Thephaseandamplitude ofthis"buck-off" signal areadjusted tocanceltheportion ofthetransmitter signalthatleaksintothereceiver.
An additional 10dBofisolation mightbeobtained.12Thephaseandamplitude oftheleakage signal,however, canvaryastheantenna scans,whichresultsinvarying cancellation.
There­ fore.whenadditional isolation isnecessary, asinthehigh-power CWtracker-illuminator, a dynamic canceler canhelIsedthatsensestheproperphaseandamplitude required ofthe nullingsignal.
5.1JDynamic cancelation oftheleakage bythistypeof"feedthrougl1 nulling" canexceed.10dB.,'I Thetransmitter signalisneverapureCWwaveform.
Minutevariations inamplitude (AM)andphase(FM)canresultinsideband components thatfallwithinthedoppler frequency band.Thesecangenerate falsetargetsormaskthedesiredsignals,Therefore both AMandFMmodulations canresultinundesired sidebands.
AMsidebands aretypically 120dBbelowthecarrier,asmeasured ina 1kHzband,andarerelatively constant acrossthe :'1.Jr;?' 1"~\'f,f.~''t'''~)'......,...,..):.,}.,....\....'.
~".t·.,:~'(: .~[\i..rl,l~t;~;J ::;'1--;::' .t<; , r'o''",•~: • 't" .~..'.
":f Figur£> ~.~i\N/MP{)·46('Wtf<lckcr-illuminatnr fortheHawkmissilesystemshowing separate transmit­ tingandreceiving antennas.
(Courtesy Ra.\'tlreOlI Co.). 74 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  usual doppler spectrum of The normal antenna isolation plus feedthrough nul-  ling usually reduces the AM components below receiver noise in moderate power radars.
FM  sidebands are usually significantly greater than AM, but decrease with increasing offset from  the ~arrier.~ The character of FM noise in the leakage signal is also affected by stabilizing the  output frequency of the CW transmitter and by active noise-degeneration using a microwave  bridge circuit to extract the FM noise components.
These are then fed back to the transmitter  in such a manner as to reduce the original frequency de~iation.~' It has been said69 that  experience indicates that a satisfactory measurement of AM noise over the doppler frequency  band provides assurance that both AM and FM noise generated by the tube are within  required limits.
 The transmitter noise that enters the radar receiver via backscatter from the clutter is  sometimes called transmitted clutter.69 It can appear at the same frequencies as the doppler  shifts from moving targets and can mask desired targets or cause spurious responses.
This  extraneous noise is produced by ion oscillations in the tube (usually a klystron amplifier)  rather than by the thermal noise, or noise figure.
When the ion oscillations appear, they  usually have a magnitude about 40 dB below the carrier, or else they are not mea~urable.~~ 1  Thus there is no need to specify a measurement of this noise to a level better than 40 dB below  the carrier to insure the required noise levels.
Since ion oscillations may occur at some  combination of tube parameters and not at others, the CW radar tube should be tested for  noise-free operation over the expected range of beam voltage, heater voltage, RF drive level,  and load VSWR.
Noise-free operation also requires well-filtered beam power-supplies and a  dc heater supply.
 Since ion osci:lations require's fiiiite time to develop (tens of microseconds), a pulse-  doppler radar with a pulse width of leis than 10 ps should not experience this form of noise.
 Intermediate-frequency receiver.
Thd ieceiver of the simple CW radar of Fig.
3.2 is in some  respects analogous to a superheterodyne receiver.
Receivers of this type are called homodyne  receivers, or superheterodyne receivers with zero IF.14 The function of the local oscillator is  replaced by the leakage signal from the transmittkr.
Such a receiver is simpler than one with a  more conventional intermediate frequency since no IF amplifier or local oscillator is required.
 However, the simpler receiver is not as sensitive because of increased noise at the lower  intermediate frequencies caused by flicker effect.
Flicker-effect noise occurs in semiconductor  devices such as diode detectors'and cathodes of vacuum tubes.
The noise power produced by  the flicker effect varies as lr, where a is approximately unity.
This is in contrast to shot noise  or thermal noise, which is independent of frequency.
Thus, at the lower range of frequencies  (audio or video region), where the doppler frequencies usually are found, the detector of the  CW receiver can introduce a considerable amount of flicker noise, resulting in reduced receiver  sensitivity.
For short-range, low-power, applications this decrease in sensitivity might be  tolerated since it can be cornpensat& by a modest increase in antenna aperture and/or  additional transmitter power.
But for 'maximum efficiency with CW radar, the reduction in  -n.
h sensitivity caused by the simple doppler.r&iver with zero IF, cannot be tolerated.
 or ? 4.+<qLJX".\.
The effects of flicker nois$a"e ov&@pe in the normal superheterodyne receiver by using  an intermediate frequen~y.high;khoight$ci.ender *, .
!is the flicker noise small compared with the  normal receiver noise.
Thisv.
resulk: from.
the' inverse, frequency dependence of flicker noise.
 Figure 3.4 shows a bl&k.diagrarh.of thc*EW radar whose receiver operates with a nonzero IF.
 Separate antennas are ihdwn-for*trans&&ion and reception.
instead of the usual local oxilla-  tor found in the conventiona~~susupirhet'e~6d~ne I '.
receiver, the local oscillator (or reference  signal) is derived in thii receiver from a portion of the transmitted signal mixed with a locally  generated signal of frequency equal to that of the receiver IF.
Since the output of the mixer  74INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS usualdopplerspectrum ofinterest.
31,69Thenormalantenna isolation plusfeedthroughnul­ lingusuallyreduces th~AMcomponents belowreceivernoiseinmoderate powerradars.FM sidebands areusuallysignificantly greaterthanAM,butdecrease withincreasing offsetfrom thecarrier.5Thecharacter ofFMnoiseintheleakagesignalisalsoaffectedbystabilizing the outputfrequency oftheCWtransmitter andbyactivenoise-degeneration usingamicrowave bridgecircuittoextracttheFMnoisecomponents.
Thesearethenfedbacktothetransmitter insuchamannerastoreducetheoriginalfrequency deviation.31Ithasbeensaid69that experience indicates thatasatisfactory measurement ofAMnoiseoverthedopplerfrequency bandprovides assurance thatbothAMandFMnoisegenerated bythetubearewithin required limits.
Thetransmitter noisethatenterstheradarreceiverviabackscatter fromtheclutteris sometimes calledtransmitted clutter.69Itcanappearatthesamefrequencies asthedoppler shiftsfrommovingtargetsandcanmaskdesiredtargetsorcausespurious responses.
This extraneous noiseisproduced byionoscillations inthetube(usuallyaklystron amplifier) ratherthanbythethermalnoise,ornoisefigure.Whentheionoscillations appear,they usuallyhaveamagnitude about40dBbelowthecarrier,orelsetheyarenotmeasurable.69 Thusthereisnoneedtospecifyameasurement ofthisnoisetoalevelbetterthan40dBbelow thecarriertoinsuretherequired noiselevels.Sinceionoscillations mayoccuratsome combination oftubeparameters andnotatothers,theCWradartubeshouldbetestedfor noise-free operation overtheexpected rangeofbeamvoltage,heatervoltage,RFdrivelevel, andloadVSWR.Noise-free operation alsorequireswell-filtered beampower-supplies anda dcheatersupply.
..
SinceionosciUations requinta.finitetimetodevelop(tensofmicroseconds), apulse­ dopplerradarwithapulsewidthoflessthan10JlSshouldnotexperience thisformofnoise.
.
• l...
" Intermediate-frequency receiver.
TheJeceiver ofthesimpleCWradarofFig.3.2isinsome respectsanalogous toasuperheterodyne receiver.
Receivers ofthistypearecalledhomodyne receivers, orsuperheterodyne receivers withzeroIF.14Thefunction ofthelocaloscillator is replaced bytheleakagesignaHrom thetransmitter.
Suchareceiverissimplerthanonewitha moreconventional intermediate frequericy sincenoIFamplifier orlocaloscillator isrequired.
However, thesimplerreceiver isnotassensitive becauseofincreased noiseatthelower intermediate frequencies causedbyflickereffect.Flicker-effect noiseoccursinsemiconductor devicessuchasdiodeqetectors'and cathodes ofvacuumtubes.Thenoisepowerproduced by theflickereffectvariesas-liP',whereIdsapproximately unity.Thisisincontrasttoshotnoise orthermalnoise,whichisindependent offrequency.
Thus,atthelowerrangeoffrequencies (audioorvideoregion),'w'herethedoppler frequencies usuallyarefound,thedetector ofthe CWreceivercanintrOduce aconsiderable amount'offlickernoise,resulting inreducedreceiver sensitivity.
Forshort-range,.
low.:power.! applications thisdecrease insensitivity mightbe ••• c••~••'.tolerated sinceitcan,becompensated byamodest'increase inantenna aperture and/or additional transmitt~r power,But:for'm~"imum efficiency withCWradar,thereduction in sensitivity causedbythesimple dopplei:r~ivefwithzero IF,cannotbetolerated .
.Theeffe.ctsofflicker,:~ol~e~it~:'~Y~~m~in then~~·alsuper.heterodyne receiver b~using anmtermedlate frequencyJ~lgh~eJ1oughJo·render.
theflickernOisesmallcompared Withthe normalreceiver noise~:'Thk, re~uli~ifrom: the'inverse.frequency dependence offlickernoise.,.".......
..'"..
.'.
.Figure,3.4showsablock:~jagra~"oft~c ~Wradar whosereceiveroperates withanonzeroIF.
Separate antennas are'·shown.f9r,transm"ission andreception.
Insteadoftheusuallocaloscilla­ torfou~din.the.con~entjo?~~\~~~~~et~"'O?Yn.e ,receiver, th.eloc~loscill~tor (~rreference signal) ISdenvedmthiSreceiverfromaportionofthetransmitted SignalmixedWithalocally generated signaloffrequency equaltothatofthereceiverIF.Sincetheoutputofthemixer CW AND FREQUENCY-MODUL,ATED RADAR 75  filler  Rece~vlnq  antenna  2 d Doppler  mixer ornplif~er detector amplrfier - Indicator  fo ? (j fd  Figure 3.4 Block diagram of CW doppler radar with nonzero IF receiver, sometimes called sideband  srrperheterodyne.
 consists of two sidebands on either side of the carrier plus higher harmonics, a narrowband  filter selects one of the sidebands as the reference signal.
The improvement in receiver sensi-  tivity with an intermediate-frequency superheterodyne might be as much as 30 dB over the  simple receiver of Fig.
3.2.
 Receiver bandwidth.
One of the requirements of the doppler-frequency amplifier in the simple  CW radar (Fig.
3.2) or the IF amplifier of the sideband superheterodyne (Fig.
3.4) is that it be  wide enough to pass the expected range of doppler frequencies.
In most cases of practical  interest the expected range of doppler frequencies will be much wider than the frequency  spectrum occupied by the signal energy.
Consequently, the use of a wideband amplifier cover-  ing the expected dopplcr range will result in an increase in noise and a lowering of the receiver  5ensitivity.
If the frequency of the doppler-shifted echo signal were known beforehand, a  narrowband filter-one just wide enough to reduce the excess noise without eliminating a  significant amount of signal energy-might be used.
If the waveform of the echo signal were  known, as well as its carrier frequency, the matched filter could be specified as outlined in  See.
10.2.
 Several factors tend to spread the CW signal energy over a finite frequency band.
These  must be known if an approximation to the bandwidth required for the narrowband doppler  filter is to be obtained.
 If the received waveform were a sine wave of infinite duration, its frequency spectrum  would be a delta furiction (Fig.
3.5a) and the receiver bandwidth would be infinitesimal.
But a  sine wave of infinite duration and an infinitesimal bandwidth cannot occur in nature.
The  rnore normal situation is an echo signal which is a sine wave of finite rather than infinite  duration.
The frequency spectrum of a finite-duration sine wave has a shape of the form  [sin n(./'--jb)6]/lc(/-- fb), where f, and 6 are the frequency and duration of the sine wave,  respectively, and f is the frequency variable over which the spectrum is plotted (Fig.
3.5b).
 Practical receivers can only approximate this characteristic.
(Note that this is the same as the  3pectrum ofa pulse of sine wave, the only difference being the relative value of the duration 6.)  In marly instances, the echo is not a pure sine wave of finite duration but is perturbed by  fluctuations in cross section, target accelerations, scanning fluctuations, etc., which tend to  CWANDFREQUENCY-MODULATED RADAR75 Transmitflng antenna ~CW ~---;E------J transmifter fa fa Figure3.4Blockdiagram ofCWdoppler radarwithnonzero IFreceiver, sometimes calledsideband Sliperlleterodpie.
consists oftwosidebands oneithersideofthecarrierplushigherharmonics, anarrowband filterselectsoneofthesidebands asthereference signal.Theimprovement inreceiversensi­ tivitywithanintermediate-frequency superheterodyne mightbeasmuchas30dBoverthe simplereceiverofFig.3.2.
Receiver bandwidth.
Oneoftherequirements ofthedoppler-frequency amplifier inthesimple CWradar(Fig.3.2)ortheIFamplifier ofthesideband superheterodyne (Fig.3.4)isthatitbe wideenoughtopasstheexpected rangeofdoppler frequencies.
Inmostcasesofpractical interesttheexpected rangeofdoppler frequencies willbemuchwiderthanthefrequency spectrum occupied bythesignalenergy.Consequently, theuseofawideband amplifier cover­ ingtheexpected doppler rangewillresultinanincrease innoiseandalowering ofthereceiver s;ensitivity.
Ifthefrequency ofthedoppler-shifted echosignalwereknownbeforehand, a narrowband filter-one justwideenoughtoreducetheexcessnoisewithout eliminating a significant amountofsignalenergy-might beused.Ifthewaveform oftheechosignalwere known,aswellasitscarrierfrequency, thematched filtercouldbespecified asoutlined in Sec.10.2.
SeveralfactorstendtospreadtheCWsignalenergyoverafinitefrequency band.These mustbeknownifanapproximation tothebandwidth required forthenarrowband doppler filteristobeobtained.
Ifthereceived waveform wereasinewaveofinfiniteduration, itsfrequency spectrum wouldbeadeltafunction (Fig.3.5a)andthereceiverbandwidth wouldbeinfinitesimal.
Buta sinewaveofinfiniteduration andaninfinitesimal bandwidth cannotoccurinnature.The morenormalsituation isanechosignalwhichisasinewaveoffiniteratherthaninfinite duration.
Thefrequency spectrum ofafinite-duration sinewavehasashapeoftheform [sinrr(f-.I~)c5]/rr(f -10)'where10andc5arethefrequency andduration ofthe sine wave, respectively, and1isthefrequency variable overwhichthespectrum isplotted(Fig.3.5h).
Practical receivers canonlyapproximate thischaracteristic.
(Notethatthisisthesameasthe spectrum ofapulseofsinewave,theonlydifference beingtherelativevalueoftheduration c5.) Inmanyinstances, theechoisnotapuresinewaveoffiniteduration butisperturbed by fluctuations incrosssection, targetaccelerations, scanning fluctuations, etc.,whichtendto fa  Frequency  (a fo  Frequency  (6)  Figure 3.5 Frequency spectrum of CW oscillation of (u) infinire duration and (h) finite duration.
 broaden the bandwidth still further.
Some of these spectrum-broadening effects are considered  below.
 Assume a CW radar with an antenna beamwidth of 0, deg scanning at the rate of 6, deg/s.
 The time on target (duration of the received signal) is 6 = 6,/i), s.
Thus the signal is of finite  duration and the bandwidth of the receiver must be of the order of the reciprocal of the time on  target 8,/8,.
Although this is not an exact relation, it is a good enough approximation for  purposes of the present discussion.
If the antenna beamwidth were 2" and if the scanning rate  were 36"/s (6 rpm), the spread in the spectrum of the received signal due to the finite time on  target would be equal to 18 Hz, independent of'the transmitted frequency.
 In addition to the spread of the received signal spectrum caused by the finite time on  target, the spectrum may be further widened if the target cross section fluctuates.
The fluctua-  tions widen the spectrum by modulating the echo signal.
In a particular case, it has been  reported12 that the aircraft cross section can change by 15 dB for a change in target aspect of  as little as fO.
The echo signal from a propeller-driven aircraft can also contain modulation  components at a frequency proportional to the propeller rotation.'' The spectrum produced  by propeller modulations.is-more like that produced by a sine-wave signal and its harmonics  rather than a broad, white-noise spectrum.
The frequency range of propeller modulation  depends upon the shaft-rotation speed and the number of propeller blades.
It is i~sually in the  vicinity of 50 to 60 Hz for World War I1 aircraft engines.
This could be a potential soilrct: of  difficulty in a CW radar since it might mask the target's doppler signal or it might cailse an  erroneous measurement of doppler frequency.
In some instances, propeller modulation can be  of advantage.
It might permit the detection of propeller-driven aircraft passing on a tangential  trajectory, even though the doppler frequency shift is zero.
The rotating blades of a helicopter  and the compressor stages of a jet engine can also result in a modulation of the echo and a  widening of the spectrum that can degrade the performance of CW doppler radar.
 If the target's relative velocity is not constant, a further widening of the received signal  spectrum can occur.
If a, is the acceleration of the target with respect to the radar, the sigrlal  will occupy.
a bandwidth  If, for example, a, is twice the acceleration of gravity, the receiver bandwidth must be approxi-  mately 20 Hz when the radar's wavelength is 10 cm.
 When the doppler-shifted echo signal is known to lie somewhere within a relatively wide  band of frequencies, a bank of narrowband filters (Fig.
3.6) spaced throughout the frequency  range permits a measurement of frequency and improves the signal-to-noise ratio.
The  76INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS .<:::n ~ D Co D '0 N I "­ >-e' QJ CW'-- ---'--- _ fa Frequency (a):: D ~ D Co D '0 N I "­ >-e' QJ C W'--- ---""-'LLL.L..-LLLLJ""- __ fa Frequency (b) Figure3.5Frequency spectrum ofCWoscillation of(u)infiniteduration and(b)finiteduration.
broaden thebandwidth still further.
Someofthesespectrum-broadening effectsareconsidaed below.
AssumeaCWradarwithanantenna beamwidth ofDBdegscanning attherateofOsdeg/s.
Thetimeontarget(duration ofthereceived signal)is[)=0B/Oss.Thusthesignalisoffinite duration andthebandwidth ofthereceivermustbeoftheorderofthereciprocal ofthetimeon targetiJs/OB•Although thisisnotanexactrelation, itisagoodenoughapproximation for purposes ofthepresentdiscussion.
Iftheantenna beamwidth were2°andifthescanning rate were36°/s(6rpm),thespreadinthespectrum ofthereceived signalduetothefinitetimeon targetwouldbeequalto18Hz,independent ofthetransmitted frequency.
Inaddition tothespreadofthereceived signalspectrum causedbythefinitetimeon target,thespectrum maybefurtherwidened ifthetargetcrosssectionfluctuates.
The l~lIctua­ tionswidenthespectrum bymodulating theechosignal.Inaparticular case,ithasbeen reported12thattheaircraftcrosssectioncanchangeby15dBforachangeintargetaspectof aslittleas~o.Theechosignalfromapropeller-driven aircraftcanalsocontainmodulation components atafrequency proportional tothepropeller rotation.lsThespectrum produced bypropeller modulations ismorelikethatproduced byasine-wave signalanditsharmonics ratherthanabroad,white-noise spectrum.
Thefrequency rangeofpropeller modulation depends upontheshaft-rotation speedandthenumberofpropeller blades.Itisusuallyinthe vicinityof50to60HzforWorldWarIIaircraftengines.
Thiscouldbeapotential sourceof dirficulty inaCWradarsinceitmightmaskthetarget'sdoppler signaloritmightcausean erroneous measurement ofdoppler frequency.
Insomeinstances, propeller modulation canbe ofadvantage.
Itmightpermitthedetection ofpropeller-driven aircraftpassingonatangential trajectory, eventhoughthedoppler frequency shiftiszero.Therotating bladesofahelicopter andthecompressor stagesofajetenginecanalsoresultinamodulation oftheechoanda widening ofthespectrum thatcandegrade theperformance ofCWdoppler radar.
Ifthetarget'srelativevelocity isnotconstant, afurtherwidening ofthereceived signal spectrum canoccur.IfQ,istheacceleration ofthetargetwithrespecttotheradar,thesignal willoccupyabandwidth (3.3) If,forexample, Q,istwicetheacceleration ofgravity,thereceiverbandwidth mustbeapproxi­ mately20Hzwhentheradar'swavelength is10em.
Whenthedoppler-shifted echosignalisknowntoliesomewhere withinarelatively wide bandoffrequencies, abankofnarrowband filters(Fig.
3.6) spacedthroughout thefrequency rangepermits ameasurement offrequency andimproves thesignal-to-noise ratio.The CW AND FREQUENCY-MODULATED RADAR 77  Mixer -- -- El Ld-Eicx-[&k  Filler No.
2 - Det.
 I IF bandwidth 4  4 f2 f3 f4 fn  Frequency  Figure 3.6 (0) Block diagram of IF doppler filter bank; (h) frequency-response characteristic of doppler  filter bank.
 bandwidth of each individual filter is wide enough to accept the signal energy, but  not so wide as to introduce more noise than need be.
?'he center frequencies of the filters are  staggered to cover the entire range of doppler frequencies.
If the filters are spaced with their  half-power points overlapped, the maximum reduction in signal-to-noise ratio of a signal  1 lies midway between adjacent channels compared with the signal-to-noise ratio at  and is 3 dB.
The more filters used to cover the band, the less will be the maximum loss  perienced, but the greater the probability of false alarm.
 A bank of narrowband filters may be used after the detector in the video of the simple CW  radar of Fig.
3.2 instead of in the IF.
The improvement in signal-to-noise ratio with a video  filter bank is not as good as can be obtained with an IF filter bank, but the ability to measure  the magnitude of doppler frequency is still preserved.
Because of foldover, a frequency which  lies to one side of the IF carrier appears, after detection, at the same video frequency as one  which lies an equal amount on the other side of the IF.
Therefore the sign of the doppler shift is  lost with a video filter bank, and it cannot be directly determined whether the doppler  frequericy corresponds to an approaching or to a receding target.
(The sign of the doppler may  he determined in the video by other means, as described later.) One advantage of the foldover  in ttie video is that only half the number of filters are required than in the IF filter bank.
The  equivalerit of a bank of contiguous bandpass filters may also be obtained by converting the  atinlog IF or video signal 10 a set of sarnplcd, quantized sigrials which are processed with  digital circuitry by means of the fast Fourier transform algorithm.16  A hank of overlapping doppler filters, whether in the IF or video, increases the complexity  the receiver.
When the system requirements permit a time sharing of the doppler frequency  nge, the bank of doppler filters may be replaced by a single narrowband tunable filter which  searches in frequency over the band of expected doppler frequencies until a signal is found.
 CWANDFREQUENCY-MODULATED RADAR77 FilterNo.41FilterNo.1~Del.
FilterNo.2-~ I .~--..IFilterNo.31-~~""-----' Indicator ---~_.
-~'-----' FilterNo.n (al f+-IFbandwidth~ Q) V'l Co D.
V'l (l) 0:: Iif2f3f4 fn Frequency (b) Figure.1.6(a)Alockdiagram ofIFdoppler filterbank;(b)frequency-response characteristic ofdoppler filterbank.
bandwidth ofeachindividual filteriswideenough toacceptthesignalenergy, but notsowideastointroduce morenoisethanneedbe.Thecenterfrequencies ofthefiltersare staggered tocovertheentirerangeofdoppler frequencies.
Ifthefiltersarespacedwiththeir half-power pointsoverlapped.
themaximum reduction insignal-to-noise ratioofasignal whichliesmidway between adjacent channels compared withthesignal-to-noise ratioat 1idband is3dB.Themorefiltersusedtocovertheband,thelesswillbethemaximum loss experienced.
butthegreatertheprobability offalsealarm.
Abankofnarrowband filtersmaybeusedafterthedetector inthevideoofthesimpleCW radarofFig.3.2insteadofintheIF.Theimprovement insignal-to-noise ratiowithavideo filterbankisnotasgoodascanbeobtained withanIFfilterbank,buttheabilitytomeasure themagnitude ofdoppler frequency isstillpreserved.
Because offoldover, afrequency which liestoonesideoftheIFcarrierappears, afterdetection, atthesamevideofrequency asone whichliesanequalamountontheothersideoftheIF.Therefore thesignofthedoppler shiftis lostwithavideofilterbank,anditcannotbedirectly determined whether thedoppler frequency corresponds toanapproaching ortoareceding target.(Thesignofthedoppler may bedetermined inthevideobyothermeans,asdescribed later.)Oneadvantage ofthefoldover inthevideoisthatonlyhalfthenumberoffiltersarerequired thanintheIFfilterbank.The equivalent ofabankofcontiguous bandpass filtersmayalsobeobtained byconverting the analogIForvideosignaltoasetofsampled, quantized signalswhichareprocessed with digitalcircuitry bymeansofthefastFourier transform algorithm.16 Ahankofoverlapping doppler filters.whether intheIForvideo,increases thecomplexity fthereceiver.
Whenthesystemrequirements permitatimesharingofthedoppler frequency range,thebankofdoppler filtersmaybereplaced byasinglenarrowband tunablefilterwhich searches infrequency overthebandofexpected doppler frequencies untilasignalisfound. After detecting and recognizing the signal, the filter may be programmed to continue its search  in frequency for additional signals.
One of the techniques for accomplishing this is similar to  the tracking speed-gate mentioned in Sec.
5.8, the phase-locked filter," or the phase-locked  loop.
 If, in any of the above techniques, moving targets are to be distinguished from stationary  objects, the zero-doppler-frequency component must be removed.
The zero-doppler-frequzncy  component has, in practice, a finite bandwidth due to the finite time on target, clutter tlirctt~a-  tions, and equipment instabilities.
The clutter-rejection band of the doppler filter must be wide  enough to accommodate this spread.
In the multiple-filter bank, removal of those filtc~s in the  vicinity of the RF or IF carrier removes the stationary-target signals.
 Sign of the radial velocity.
In some applications of CW radar it is of interest to know whet her  the target is approaching or receding.
This might be determined with separate filters located  on either side of the intermediate frequency.
If the echo-signal frequency lies below the carrier,  the target is receding; if the echo frequency is greater than the carrier, the target is approaching  (Fig.
3.7).
 Although the doppler-frequency spectrum "folds over" in the video because of the  action of the detector, it is possible to determine its sign from a technique borrowed from  single-sideband communications.
If the transmitter signal is given by  the echo signal from a moving target will be  E, = k, Eo cos [(too +_ (I),)( + 4) (3.5)  where Eo = amplitude of transmitter signal  k, = a constant determined from the radar equation  oo = angular frequency of transmitter, rad/s  o, = dopper angular frequency shift  #I = a constant phase shift, which depends upon range of initial detection  The sign of the doppler frequency, and therefore the direction of target motion, may be found I by splitting the received signal into two channels as shown in Fig.
3.8.
In channel .4 the signal  is processed as in the simple CW radar of Fig.
3.2.
The received signal and a portion of the  transmitter heterodyne in the detector (mixer) to yield a difference signal  Figure 3.7 Spectra of received signals.
(a) No doppler shift, no relative target motion; (h) approaching  target; (c) receding target.
 78INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS Afterdetecting andrecognizing thesignal,thefiltermaybeprogrammed tocontinue itssearch infrequency foradditional signals.Oneofthetechniques foraccomplishing thisissimilarto thetracking speed-gate mentioned inSec.5.8,thephase-locked filler,17orthephase-locked loop.
If,inanyoftheabovetechniques, movingtargetsaretobedistinguished fromstationary objects,thezero-doppler-frequency component mustberemoved.
Thezero-doppler-frequency component has,inpractice, afinitebandwidth duetothefinitetimeontarget,clutterfluctua­ tions,andequipment instabilities.
Theclutter-rejection bandofthedoppler filtermustbewide enoughtoaccommodate thisspread.Inthemultiple-filter bank,removal ofthosefiltersinthe vicinityoftheRForIFcarrierremoves thestationary-target signals.
Signoftheradialvelocity.
Insomeapplications ofCWradaritisofinteresttoknowwhether thetargetisapproaching orreceding.
Thismightbedetermined withseparate filterslocated oneithersideoftheintermediate frequency.
Iftheecho-signal frequency liesbelowthecarrier, thetargetisreceding; iftheechofrequency isgreaterthanthecarrier,thetargetisapproaching (Fig.3.7).
Although thedoppler-frequency spectrum "foldsover"inthevideobecause ofthe actionofthedetector, itispossible todetermine itssignfromatechnique borrowed from single-sideband communications.
Ifthetransmitter signalisgivenby (3.4) theechosignalfromamovingtargetwillbe (35) whereEo=amplitude oftransmitter signal kl=aconstant determined fromtheradarequation Wo=angular frequellcy oftransmitter, racl/s Wd=dopperangular frequency shift c/>=aconstant phaseshift,whichdepends uponrangeofinitialdetection Thesignofthedoppler frequency, andtherefore thedirec'tion oftargetmotion, maybefouod bysplitting thereceived signalintotwochannels asshowninFig.3.8.Inchannel Athesignal isprocessed asinthesimpleCWradarofFig.3.2.Thereceived signalandaportionofthe transmitter heterodyne inthedetector (mixer)toyieldadifference signal IIOJ OJ I"0 "0 ::J ::J .~ -Ci.
a.EIdEId- <{ <{ fa 10' 10 Frequency Frequency Frequency (a) (b) (e)(3.6) Figure3.7Spectraofreceived signals.(a)Nodopplershift,norelativetargetmotion;(b)approaching target;(c)receding target.
. Tr~ln~rni ttinq  ~rltenno CW AND FREQUENCY-MODULATED RADAR 79  phose  Receivinq  ontenna  motor  indicator  Figure 3.8 Measurement of doppler direction using synchronous, two-phase motor.
 The other cliannel is similar, except for a 90" phase delay introduced in the reference signal.
 7'lte outpt~t of tlte chan~lel B mixer is  If the target is approaching (positive doppler).
the outputs from the two channels are  On the other hand, if the targets are receding (negative doppler),  Tlie sign of (I), and the direction of the target's motion may be determined according to  whether the output of channel B leads or lags the output of channel A.
One method of  determining !'he relative phase relationship between the two channels is to apply the outputs to  a synchronous two-phase motor." The direction of motor rotation is an indication of the  direction of the target motion.
 Electronic methods may be used instead of a synchronous motor to sense the relative  phase of the two channels.
One application of this technique has been described for a rate-of-  climb meter for vertical take-off aircraft to determine the velocity of the aircraft with respect to  the ground during take-off and landing.'' It has also been applied to the detection of moving  targets in the presence of heavy foliage," as discussed in Sec.
13.6.
 The Doppler frequency shift.
The expression for the doppler frequency shift given previously  by Eq.
(3.2) is an approximation that is valid for most radar applications.
The correct expres-  sion for the frequency/* from a target moving with a relative velocity v, when the frequency f  is transmitted is2' 23-70  CWANDFREQUENCY-MODULATED RADAR79 Transmitting antenna :\ CW 71'<0"'"'"'' 'Jon phase shift ChannelB'----_-'----O'~n~-el-.4-1 ,-- -, ~~-----, ~Synchronous motor indicatorRt'ceivinq antenna Figure3.8Measurement ofdoppler direction usingsynchronous, two-phase motor.
(3.Sh)Theotherchannel issimilar,exceptfora90°phasedelayintroduced inthereference signal.
Theoutputofthechannel Bmixeris EB=k2Eacos(±Wdt+¢+~) (3.7) Hthetargetisapproaching (positive doppler), theoutputs fromthetwochannels are E.~(+)=k2Eocos(Welt+c/J)EB(+)=k2Eocos(Wdt+c/J+~) (3.8a) Ontheotherhand,ifthetargetsarereceding (negati\'e doppler), ER(- )=k2Eocos(Wdt-¢-~) Thesignof(l)dandthedirection ofthetarget'smotionmaybedetermined according to whether theoutputofchannel Bleadsorlagstheoutputofchannel A.Onemethod of determining therelativephaserelationship between thetwochannels istoapplytheoutputsto asynchronous two-phase motor.18Thedirection ofmotorrotation isanindication ofthe direction ofthetargetmotion.
Electronic methods maybeusedinsteadofasynchronous motortosensetherelative phaseofthetwochannels.
Oneapplication ofthistechnique hasbeendescribed forarate-of­ climbmeterforverticaltake-offaircrafttodetermine thevelocityoftheaircraftwithrespectto thegrounddtiringtake-offandlanding.19Ithasalsobeenappliedtothedetection ofmoving targetsinthepresence ofheavyfoliage,20 asdiscussed inSec.13.6.
TheDoppler frequency shift.Theexpression forthedoppler frequency shiftgivenpreviously byEq.(3.2)isanapproximation thatisvalidformostradarapplications.
Thecorrectexpres­ sionforthefrequency f*fromatargetmovingwitharelativevelocityv,whenthefrequencyf istransmitted isll23.70 r*=r(I+(]Ie) .
.(1-pic)(3.9) 80 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  where c is the velocity of propagation.
When, as is ~rs~ially the case, 1) 6 r., Eq.
(3.9) rtd~rccs to  the classical form of the doppler frequency shift.
The phase shift associated with the return  signal is (4TCfRo/c)/(l - v/c), where R, is the range at time r = 0.
 Applications of CW radar.24s25 The chief use of the simple, unmodulated CW radar is for the  measurement of the relative velocity of a moving target, as in the police speed monitor or in  the previously mentioned rate-of-climb meter for vertical-take-off aircraft.
In support of auto-  mobile traffic, CW radar has been suggested for the control of traffic lights, regulation of toll  booths, vehicle counting, as a replacement for the " fifth-wheel" speedometer in vehicle testlng,  as a sensor in antilock braking systems, and for collision avoidance.
For railways, CW radar  can be used as a speedometer to replace the conventional axle-driven tachometer.
In such an  application it would be unaffected by errors caused by wheelslip on accelerating or wheelslide  when braking.
It has been used for the measurement of railroad-freight-car'velocity during  humping operations in marshalling yards, and as a detection device to give track maintenance  personnel advance warning of approaching trains.
CW radar is also employed for monitorln  the docking speed of large ships.
It nas also seen application for intruder alarms and for th  measurement of the velocity of missiles, ammunition, and baseballs.
 The principal advantage of a CW doppler radar over other (nonradar) methods of meas-  uring speed is that there need not be any physical contact with the object whose speed is be~ng  measured.
In industry this has been applied to the measurement of turbine-blade vibration, the  peripheral speed of grinding wheels, and the monitoring of vibrations in the cables of suspen-  sion bridges.
 ~ost of the above applications can be satisfied with a simple, solid-state CW source with  powers in the tens of milliwatts.
High-power CW radars for the detection of aircraft and other  targets have been developed and have been used in such systems as the Hawk missile systems  (Fig.
3.3).
However, the difficulty of eliminating the leakage of the transmitter signal into the  receiver has limited the utility of unmodulated CW radar for many long-range applications A  notable exception is the Space Surveillance System (Spasur) for the detection of satellites 26.27  The CW transmitter of Spasur at 216 MHz radiates a power of up to one megawatt from an  antenna almost two miles long to produce a narrow, vertically looking fan beam.
The receiver  is separated from the transmitter by a distance of several hundred miles.
Each receiver site  consists of an interferometer antenna to obtain an angle measurement in the plane of the fan  beam.
There are three sets of transmitter-receiver stations to provide fence coverage of the  southern United States.
 The CW radar, when used for short or moderate ranges, is characterized by simpler  equipment than a pulse radar.
The amount of power that .can be used with a CW radar is  dependent on the isolation that can be achieved between the transmitter and receiver since the  transmitter noise that finds its way into the receiver limits the receiver sensitivity.
(The pulse  radar has no similar limitation to its maximum range because the transmitter is not operative  when the receiver is turned on.)  Perhaps one of the greatest shortcomings of the simple CW radar is its inability to obtain  a measurement of range.
This limitation can be overcome by modulating the CW carrier, as in  the frequency-modulated radar described in the next section.
 Some anti-air-warfare guided missile systems employ semiactive homing guidance in  which a receiver in the missile receives energy from the target, the energy having been trans-  mitted from an " illuminator" external to the missile.
The illuminator, for example, might be at  the launch platform.
CW illumination has been used in many successful systems.
An example  is the Hawk tracking illuminator shown in Fig.
3.3.
It is a tracking radar as well as an  illuminator since it must be able to follow the target as it travels through space.
The doppler  80INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS wherecisthevelocityofpropagation.
When,asisusuallythecase,l'~c,Eq.(3.9)reduces [0 theclassical formofthedoppler frequency shift.Thephaseshiftassociated withthereturn signalis(4~tRolc)/(1 -vIc),whereRoistherangeattime(=o.
Applications ofCWradar.24•25Thechiefuseofthesimple,unmodulated CWradarisforthe measurement oftherelativevelocityofamovingtarget,asinthepolicespeedmonitor orin thepreviously mentioned rate-of-climb meterforvertical~take-off aircraft.
Insupportofauto­ mobiletraffic,CWradarhasbeensuggested forthecontroloftrafficlights,regulation oftoll booths,vehiclecounting, asareplacement forthe"fifth-wheel" speedometer invehicletesting, asasensorinantilock brakingsystems, andforcollision avoidance.
Forrailways, CWradar canbeusedasaspeedometer toreplacetheconventional axle-driven tachometer.
Insuchan application itwouldbeunaffected byerrorscausedbywheelslip onaccelerating orwheelslide whenbraking.Ithasbeenusedforthemeasurement ofrailroad-freight-car'velocity during humping operations inmarshalling yards,andasadetection devicetogivetrackmaintenance personnel advance warning ofapproaching trains,CWradarisalsoemployed formonitorinf thedocking speedoflargeships.Ithasalsoseenapplication forintruder alarmsandforthe measurement ofthevelocity ofmissiles, ammunition, andbaseballs.
Theprincipal advantage ofaCWdoppler radaroverother(nonradar) methods ofmeas­ uringspeedisthatthereneednotbeanyphysical contactwiththeobjectwhosespeedisbeing measured.
Inindustry thishasbeenappliedtothemeasurement ofturbine-blade vibration, the peripheral speedofgrinding wheels,andthemonitoring ofvibrations inthecablesofsuspen­ sionbridges.
- Mostoftheaboveapplications canbesatisfied withasimple,solid-state CWsourcewith powersinthetensofmilliwatts.
High-power CWradarsforthedetection ofaircraftandother targetshavebeendeveloped andhavebeenusedinsuchsystemsastheHawkmissilesystems (Fig.3.3).However, thedifficulty ofeliminating theleakageofthetransmitter signalintothe receiverhaslimitedtheutilityofunmodulated CWradarformanylong-range applications.
A notableexception istheSpaceSurveillance System(Spasur) forthedetection ofsatellites.
26.27 TheCWtransmitter ofSpasurat216MHzradiates apowerofuptoonemegawatt froman antenna almosttwomileslongtoproduce anarrow,vertically lookingfanbeam.Thereceiver isseparated fromthetransmitter byadistance ofseveralhundred miles.Eachreceiversite consistsofaninterferometer antenna toobtainananglemeasurement intheplaneofthefan beam.Therearethreesetsoftransmitter-receiver stations toprovide fencecoverage ofthe southern UnitedStates.
TheCWradar,whenusedforshortormoderate ranges,ischaracterized bysimpler equipment thanapulseradar.Theamount ofpowerthat'canbeusedwithaCWradaris dependent ontheisolation thatcanbeachieved between thetransmitter andreceiversincethe transmitter noisethatfindsitswayintothereceiverlimitsthereceiversensitivity.
(Thepulse radarhasnosimilarlimitation toitsmaximum rangebecause thetransmitter isnotoperative whenthereceiver isturnedon.) Perhaps oneofthegreatestshortcomings ofthesimpleCWradarisitsinability toobtain ameasurement ofrange.Thislimitation canbeovercome bymodulating theCWcarrier,asin thefrequency-modulated radardescribed inthenextsection.
Someanti-air-warfare guidedmissilesystems employ semiactive homing guidance in whichareceiver inthemissilereceivesenergyfromthetarget,theenergyhavingbeentrans­ mittedfroman"illuminator" externaltothemissile.Theilluminator, forexample, mightbeat thelaunchplatform.
CWillumination hasbeenusedinmanysuccessful systems.
Anexample istheHawktracking illuminator showninFig.3.3.Itisatracking radarasweltasan illuminator sinceitmustbeabletofollowthetargetasittravelsthrough space.Thedoppler servo system  Narrow Irock- 1 kHz 30kHz  ing f~ller 3-  ~j+~]~XZZ-]~ ,  deteclor ornplif ier  Pedestol control  Figure 3.9 Block diagram of a CW tracking-ill~rninator.~~ (Corlrtesy IEEE.)  discrimination of a CW radar allows operation in the presence of clutter and.has been well  suited for low altitude niissile defense systems.
A block diagram of a CW tracking illuminator  is shown in Fig.
3.9.)' Note that following the wide-band doppler amplifier is a speed gate,  wl~icli is a narrow-band tracking filter that acquires the target's doppler and tracks its chang  ing doppler freq~~ency shift.
 3.3 FREQUENCY-hlOL)ULAI1ED CW RADAR  The inability of the simple CW radar to measure range is related to the relatively narrow  spectrum (bandwidth) of its transmitted waveform.
Some sort of timing mark must be applied  to a CW carrier if range is to be measured.
The timing mark permits the time of transmission  and the time of return to be recognized.
The sharper or more distinct the mark, the more  accurate the measurement of the transit time.
But the more distinct the timing mark, the  broader will be the transmitted spectrum.
This follows from the properties of the Fourier  transform.
Therefore a finite spectrum must of necessity be transmitted if transit time or range  is to be measured.
 The spectrum of a CW transmissiorl can be broadened by the application ofmodulation,  either amplitude.
frequency, or phase.
An example of an amplitude modulation is the pulse  radar.
The narrower the pulse, the more accurate the measurement of range and the broader  the transmitted spectrum.
A widely used technique to broaden the spectrum of CW radar is to  frequency-modulate the carrier.
The timing mark is the changing frequency.
The transit time is  proportiorial to the difference in freqileticy between the echo signal and the transmitter signal.
 The greater the transmitter frequency deviation in a given time interval, the more accurate the  measurement of the transit time and the greater will be the transmitted spectrum.
 CWANDFRE<)lJENCY-MODlJI.ATED RADAR HI Scan reference SCR/584 servosystem 1kHz30kHzM Doppler amplifier e--_K_1Y-,sl_ro_n--,1 AFCSignalIF Reference IFX+D --X Pedestal control Figure3.9Blockdiagram oraCWtracking-illuminator.31(Courtesy IEEE.) discrimination ofaCWradarallowsoperation inthepresence ofclutterand·hasbeenwell suitedforlowaltitude missiledefensesystems.
Ablockdiagram ofaCWtracking illuminator isshowninFig.3.9.31Notethatfollowing thewide-band doppler amplifier isaspeedgate.
whichisanarrow-band tracking filterthatacquires thetarget'sdoppler andtracksitschang ingdoppler frequency shift.
3.3FREQUENCY-!\,10DULATED CWRADAR Theinability ofthesimpleCWradartomeasure rangeisrelatedtotherelatively narrow spectrum (bandwidth) ofitstransmitted waveform.
Somesortoftimingmarkmustbeapplied toaCWcarrierifrangeistobemeasured.
Thetimingmarkpermitsthetimeoftransmission andthetimeofreturntoberecognized.
Thesharperormoredistinct themark.themore accurate themeasurement ofthetransittime.Butthemoredistinct thetimingmark.the broader willbethetransmitted spectrum.
Thisfollowsfromtheproperties oftheFourier transform.
Therefore afinitespectrum mustofnecessity betransmitted iftransittimeorrange istobemeasured.
Thespectrum ofaCWtransmission canbebroadened bytheapplication ofmodulation, eitheramplitude.
frequency, orphase.Anexample ofanamplitude modulation isthepulse radar.Thenarrower thepulse.themoreaccurate themeasurement ofrangeandthebroader thetransmitted spectrum.
Awidelyusedtechnique tobroaden thespectrum ofCWradaristo frequency-modulate thecarrier.Thetimingmarkisthechanging frequency.
Thetransittimeis proportional tothedifference infrequency between theechosignalandthetransmitter signal.
Thegreaterthetransmitter frequency deviation inagiventimeinterval.
themoreaccurate the measurement ofthetransittimeandthegreaterwillbethetransmitted spectrum. 82 1NTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  Range and doppler measurement.
In the frequency-modulated CW radar (abbreviated  FM-CW), the transmitter frequency is changed as a function of time in a known manner.
 Assume that the transmitter frequency increases linearly with time, as shown by the solid line  in Fig.
3.10~.
If there is a reflecting object at a distance R, an echo signal will return after a time  T = 2Rlc.
The dashed line in the figure represents the echo signal.
If the echo signal is  heterodyned with a portion of the transmitter signal in a nonlinear element such as a diode, a  beat note fb will be produced.
If there is no doppler frequency shift, the beat note (difference  frequency) is a measure of the target's range and fb = f,, wheref, is the beat frequency due only  to the target's range.
If the rate of change of the carrier frequency isj,, the beat frequency is  In any practical CW radar, the frequency cannot be continually changed in one direction  only.
Periodicity in the modulation is necessary, as in the triangular frequency-modi~lation  waveform sllown in Fig.
3.10b.
The modulation need not necessarily be triangular; it can be  sawtooth, sinusoidal, or some other shape.
The resulting beat frequency as a function of tinle is ""  shown in Fig.
3.10~ for triangular modulation.
The beat note is of constant frequency except at  the turn-around region.
If the frequency is modulated at a rate fm over a range AL the beat  frequency is  Thus the measurement of the beat frequency determines the range R.
 A block diagram illustrating the principle of the FM-CW radar is shown in Fig.
3.1 1.
A  portion of the transmitter signal acts as the reference signal required to produce the beat  frequency.
It is introduced directly into the receiver via a cable or other direct connection.
 .
.
 A (6) Figure 3.10 Frequency-time relation-  U C w I ships in FM-CW radar.
Solid curve  3 D f XQ  LC  +- 0  0) represents transmitted signal; dashed  curve represents echo.
(a) Linear fre-  quency modulation; (b) trianguJar fre-  m Time --+ quency modulation; (c) beat note of  (el tb).
 82INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS Rangeanddoppler measurement.
Inthefrequency-modulated CWradar(abbreviated FM-CW), thetransmitter frequency ischanged asafunction oftimeinaknownmanner.
Assume thatthetransmitter frequency increases linearlywithtime,asshownbythesolidline inFig.3.lOa.Ifthereisareflecting objectatadistanceR,anechosignalwillreturnafteratime T=2R/c.Thedashedlineinthefigurerepresents theechosignal.Iftheechosignalis heterodyned withaportionofthetransmitter signalinanonlinear element suchasadiode,a beatnotefbwillbeproduced.
Ifthereisnodoppler frequency shift,thebeatnote(difference frequency) isameasure ofthetarget'srangeandfb=j,.,wheref,.
isthebeatfrequency dueonly tothetarget'srange.Iftherateofchangeofthecarrierfrequency isJo,thebeatfrequency is .2R.j,.=foT=-foc(3.10) Inanypractical CWradar,thefrequency cannotbecontinually changed inonedirection only.Periodicity inthemodulation isnecessary, asinthetriangular frequency-modulation waveform showninFig.3.10b.Themodulation neednotnecessarily betriangular; itcanbe sawtooth, sinusoidal', orsomeothershape.Theresulting beatfrequency asafunction oftimeis showninFig.3.10cfortriangular modulation.
Thebeatnoteisofconstant frequency exceptat theturn-around region.Ifthefrequency ismodulated ataratefmoverarangei1f,thebeat frequency is i1f=4Rfm~f c(3.11) Thusthemeasurement ofthebeatfrequency determines therangeR.
Ablockdiagram illustrating theprinciple oftheFM-CW radarisshowninFig.3.11.A portionofthetransmitter signalactsasthereference signalrequired toproduce thebeat frequency.
Itisintroduced directlyintothereceiver viaacableorotherdirectconnection.
>­u c Q) ::Jcr Q).....u..
fofL----"'-=-------------------Time- (a) rb.f (e)Figure3.10Frequency-time relation­ shipsinFM-CW radar.Solidcurve represents transmitted signal;dashed curverepresents echo.(a)Linearfre­ quencymodulation; (b)trianguJar fre­ quencymodulation; (c)beatnoteof (b).------1/1.
-------~m (b)>­u c Q)5-fofL----"'-=------"'----::.....c-"-...:---t--:;:-:----7f""---.."""­ Q) Lu..
>-.
U I!~·If------v,.-------...\../r---- m Time- Receiving.
peference signol ontenno  t :  Figure 3.1 1 Block diagram of FM-CW radar.
FM  t ronsrnitfer Modulator  ant en^+-[^ ~-}-~irniterl-  Ideally.
tile isolation between transmitting and receiving antennas is made sufficiently large so  as to reduce to a negligible level the transmitter leakage signal which arrives at the receiver via  +he coupling between antennas.
The beat frequency is amplified and limited to remove any  amplitude fluctuations.
The frequency of the amplitude-limited beat note is measured with a  cycle-counting frequency meter calibrated it1 distance.
 111 the above, the target was assumed to be stationary.
If this assumptiotl is not applicable,  a doppler frequency shift will be superimposed on the FM range beat note and an erroneous  range measuretnent results.
The doppler frequency shift causes the frequency-time plot of the  echo signal to be shifted up or down (Fig.
3.12a).
On one portion of the frequency-modulation  cycle.
tlie beat frequerlcy (Fig.
3.12b) is increased by the doppler shift, while on the other  portion, it is decreased.
If.
for example, the target is approaching the radar, the beat frequency  f,(up) produced during the increasing, or up, portion of the FM cycle will be the differer~ce  between the beat frequency due to the rangef, and the doppler frequency shift fd [Eq.
(3.12a)l.
 Similarly, on the decreasing portion, the beat frequency &(down) is the sum of the two  [Eq.
(3.12b)l.
 The range frequency fr may be extracted by measuring the average beat frequency; that is,  , f[h(up) + fb(down)] = f,.
If fb(up) and fb(down) are measured separately, for example, by  switching a frequency counter every half modulation cycle, one-half the difference between the  frequencies will yield the doppler frequency.
This assumes.fr > fd .
If, on the other hand,fr < fd,  silcti as might occur with a high-speed target at short range, the roles of the averaging and the  difference-frequency measurements are reversed; the averaging meter will measure doppler  velocity, and the difference meter, range.
If it is not known that the roles of the meters are 1  Indico tor Mixer -t Amplifier  ,- fionsmif fed s/gno/ Frequency  counter  Received signal  w 3 u  V C aI 3 H .+  C-  + 0 w Figure 3.12 Frequency-time relation-  ships in FM-CW radar when the  fr + fd received signal is shifted in frequency 0 by the doppler effect (a) Transmitted  m (solid curve) and echo (dashed curve)  (b) frequencies; (b) beat frequency.
 CWANDFREQUENCY-MODULATED RADAR83 1ransmitfing antenna FM transmitterModulator Receiving.
antennaReference signal Figure3.11Blockdiagram ofFM-CW radar.
Ideally.theisolation between transmitting andreceiving antennas ismadesufficiently largeso astoreducetoanegligible levelthetransmitter leakagesignalwhicharrivesatthereceivervia thecoupling between antennas.
Thebeatfrequency isamplified andlimitedtoremoveany amplitude fluctuations.
Thefrequency oftheamplitude-limited beatnoteismeasured witha cycle-counting frequency metercalibrated indistance.
Intheabove,thetargetwasassumed tobestationary.
Ifthisassumption isnotapplicable, adoppler frequency shiftwillbe'superimposed ontheFMrangebeatnoteandanerroneous rangemeasurement results.Thedoppler frequency shiftcausesthefrequency-time plotofthe echosignaltobeshiftedupordown(Fig.3.12a).Ononeportionofthefrequency-modulation cycle.theheatfrequency (Fig,3.12b)isincreased bythedoppler shift,whileontheother portion.
itisdecreased.
If.forexample, thetargetisapproaching theradar,thebeatfrequency fb(UP)produced duringtheincreasing, orup,portionoftheFMcyclewillbethedifference between thebeatfrequency duetotherangef,andthedoppler frequency shiftfd[Eq.(3.l2a)].
Similarly, onthedecreasing portion, thebeatfrequency Ji,{down) isthesumofthetwo [Eq.(3.12b)]' fb(UP)=f,-fd fb(down)=f,+fd(3.12a) (3.12b) Therangefrequencyf,maybeextracted bymeasuring theaveragebeatfrequency; thatis, ![fb(UP)+fb(down)]=fr.Iffb(up) andfb(down) aremeasured separately, forexample, by switching afrequency countereveryhalfmodulation cycle,one-half thedifference between the frequencies willyieldthedoppler frequency.
Thisassumesf,>fd'If,ontheotherhand,f,<fd' suchasmightoccurwithahigh-speed targetatshortrange,therolesoftheaveraging andthe difference-frequency measurements arereversed; theaveraging meterwillmeasure doppler velocity, andthedifference meter,range.Ifitisnotknownthattherolesofthemetersare ...---.-'Tronsmtlted s/qno/ //--Rece/ved s:.znol ~"'-........>­u C QJ ::Jo ~lo~-----"-.::--''''''r----'".p:c---~~---~",=-­ LL (a) >- t'~1Ir-IdjIr+fd \/m (b)\ TimeFigure3.12Frequency-time relation­ shipsinFM-CW radarwhenthe received signalisshiftedinfrequency bythedopplereffect(a)Transmitted (solidcurve)andecho(dashedcurve) frequencies; (b)beatfrequency. reversed because of a change in the ineqiiality sign \~ctwccn 1, and /,, arl lrlcorrect Interprcta-  tlon of the measurements may result.
 When more than one target is present within the view of the radar, the mixer oiitpilt w~ll  contain more than one difference frequency.
If the system is linear, there will be a frequency  component corresponding to each target.
In principle, the range to each target may be  determined by measuring the individual frequency components and applying Eq.
(3.11) to  each.
To measure the individual frequencies, they must be separated from one another.
This  might he accomplished with a bank of narrowband filters, or alternatively, a single frcqucncy  corresponding to a single target may be singled out and continuously observed with a narrow-  banci tiinable filter.
Hiit if the motion of the targets were to procJ11cc ii doppler frccl~lency sl~ilt,  or if the frequency-modulation waveform were nonlinear, or if the mixer were not operated In  its linear region, the problem of resolving targets and measi~ring the range of each becomes  more complicated.
 If the FM-CW radar is used for single targets only, such as in the radio altimeter, it is not  necessary to employ a linear modulation waveform.
This is certainly advantageous since a  siniisoidal or almost sinusoidal frequency modulation is easier to obtain with practical equip- ,:  ments than are linear modulations.
The beat frequency obtained with sinusoidal modulation 1s  not constant over the modulation cycle as it is with linear modulation.
However, it may be  shown that the average beat frequency measured over a modulation cycle, when substituted  into Eq.
(3.1 1) yields the correct value of target range.
Any reasonable-shape modulation  waveform can be used tb measure the range, provided the average beat frequency is  meas~red.~'.~~ If  he target is in motion and the beat signal contains a component due to the -  doppler frequency shift, the range frequency can be extracted, as before, if the average  frequency is measured.
To extract the doppler frequency, the modulation waveform must have  equal upsweep and downsweep time intervals.
 The FM-CW radar principle was known and used at about the same time as pulse radar,  althoilgh the early development of these two radar techniques seemed to be relatively incicpt'rl-  dent of each other.
FM-CW was applied to the measurement of the height of the ionosphc~.e in  the 1920s~~ and as an aircraft altimeter in the 1930~.~~  FM-CW altimeter.
The FM-CW radar principle is used in the aircraft radio altimeter to  measure height above the surface of the earth.
The large backscatter cross section and the  relatively short ranges required of altimeters permit low transmitter power and low antenna  gain.
Since the relative motion between the aircraft and ground is small, the effect of the  doppler frequency shift may usually be neglected.
 The band from 4.2 to 4.4 GHz is reserved for radio altimeters, altlloligh they have in the  past operated at UHF.
The transmitter power is relatively low and can be obtained from a CW  magnetron, a backward-wave oscillator, or a reflex klystron, but these have been replaced by  the solid state transmitter.
 The altimeter can employ a simple homodyne7' receiver, but for better sensitivity and  stability the superheterodyne is to be prefered whenever its more complex construction can  be tolerated.
A block diagram of the FM-CW radar with a sideband superheterodyne receiver  is shown in Fig.
3.13.
A portion of the frequ~ncy-modulated transmitted signal is applied to a  mlxer along with the oscillator signal.
The selection of the local-oscillator frequency is a bit  different from that in the usual superheterodyne receiver.
The local-oscillator frequency .f;F  should be the same as the intermediate frequency used in the receiver, whereas in the conven-  tional superheterodyne the LO frequency is of the same order of magnitude as the RF signal.
 The output of the mixer consists of the varying transmitter frequency fo(t) plus two sideband  frequencies, one on either side offo(t) and separated from/b(t) by the local-oscillator frequency  84INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS reversed becauseofachangeintheinequality signhdwl:l:nf~ andfJ'anincorrl:ct interpreta­ tionofthemeasurements mayresult.
Whenmorethanonetargetispresentwithintheviewoftheradar,themixeroutputwill contain morethanonedifference frequency.
Ifthesystemislinear,therewillbeafrequency component corresponding t9eachtarget.Inprinciple, therangetoeachtargetmaybe determined bymeasuring theindividual frequency components andapplying Eq.(3.11)to each.Tomeasure theindividual frequencies, theymustbeseparated fromoneanother.
This mightbeaccomplished withabankofnarrowband filters,oralternatively, asinglefrequency corresponding toasingletargetmaybesingled outandcontinuously observed withanarrow­ bandtUllablefilter.Butifthemotionofthetargetswcretoproduce adoppler frequcncy shift, orifthefrequency-modulation waveform werenonlinear, orifthemixerwerenotoperated in itslinearregion,theproblem ofresolving targetsandmeasuring therangeofeachbecomes morecomplicated.
IftheFM-CW radarisusedforsingletargetsonly,suchasintheradioaltimeter, itisnot necessary toemploy alinearmodulation waveform.
Thisiscertainly advantageous sincea sinusoidal oralmostsinusoidal frequency modulation iseasiertoobtainwithpractical equip­ mentsthanarelinearmodulations.
Thebeatfrequency obtained withsinusoidal modulation is notconstant overthemodulation cycleasitiswithlinearmodulation.
However, itmayhe shownthattheaverage beatfrequency measured overamodulation cycle,whensubstituted intoEq.(3.11)yieldsthecorrectvalueoftargetrange.Anyreasonable-shape modulation waveform canbeusedtomeasure therange,provided theaverage beatfrequency is measured.28,29Iflhetargetisinmotionandthebeatsignalcontains acomponent duetothe doppler frequency shift,therangefrequency canbeextracted, asbefore,iftheaverage frequency ismeasured.
Toextractthedoppler frequency, themodulation waveform musthave equalupsweep anddownsweep timeintervals.
TheFM-CW radarprinciple wasknownandusedataboutthesametimeaspulseradar, although theearlydevelopment ofthesetworadartechniques seemedtoberelatively indepcn­ dentofeachother.FM-CW wasappliedtothemeasurement oftheheightoftheionosphcre in the1920S32andasanaircraftaltimeter inthe1930s.33 FM-CW altimeter.
TheFM-CW radarprinciple isusedintheaircraft radioaltimeter to measure heightabovethesurfaceoftheearth.Thelargebackscatter crosssectionandthe relatively shortrangesrequired ofaltimeters permitlowtransmitter powerandlowantenna gain.Sincetherelative motion between theaircraftandground issmall,theeffectofthe doppler frequency shiftmayusuallybeneglected.
Thebandfrom4.2to4.4GHzisreserved forradioaltimeters, allhough theyhaveinthe pastoperated atUHF.Thetransmitter powerisrelatively lowandcanbeobtained fromaCW magnetron, abackward-wave oscillator, orareflexklystron, butthesehavebeenreplaced by thesolidstatetransmitter.
Thealtimeter canemploy asimplehomodyne 71receiver, butforbettersensitivity and stability thesuperheterodyne istobeprefered whenever itsmorecomplex construction can betolerated.
Ablockdiagram oftheFM-CW radarwithasideband superheterodyne receiver isshowninFig.3.13.Aportionofthefrequency-modulated transmitted signalisappliedtoa mixeralongwiththeoscillator signal.Theselection ofthelocal-oscillator frequencyisabit different fromthatintheusualsuperheterodyne receiver.
Thelocal-oscillator frequency.!iF shouldbethesameastheintermediate frequency usedinthereceiver, whereas intheconven­ tionalsuperheterodyne theLOfrequency isofthesameorderofmagnitude astheRFsignal.
Theoutputofthemixerconsists ofthevaryingtransmitter frequency lo{t)plustwosideband frequencies, oneoneithersideof/o(t)andseparated from/o{t) bythelocal-oscillator frequency f- transmitter Tirn~ng signal  r J.
 Average Range  frequency --+  counter fo( l -flF  Sidebond  filter  fo(tI -/I~  Figure 3.13 Block diagram of FM-CW radar using sideband superheterodyne receiver.
 ,/if:.
l'lle filter selects tlie lower sideband ,f"(t) -jiF and rejects the carrier and tlie upper  sidebarid.
l'he sideharid that is passed by the filter is modulated in the same fashion as the  transmitted signal.
The sideband filter must have sufficient bandwidth to pass tlie tnodulation,  but riot the carrier or other sideband.
The filtered sideband serves the function of the local  oscillator.
 When an echo sigrial is present, the output of the receiver mixer is an IF signal of  frequency ./IF +.fb, where .fb is composed of the range frequency S, and the doppler velocity  frequency ,/b.
The IF signal is amplified and applied to the balanced detector along with the  local-oscillator sigtial .fiF.
Tlie output of t11e detector contains the beat frequency (range  frequency and the doppler velocity frequency), which is amplified to a level where it can  actuate the frequency-measuring circuits.
 In Fig.
3.13, the output of the low-frequency amplifier is divided into two channels: one  feeds an average-frequency counter to determine range, the other feeds a switched frequency  counter to determine the doppler velocity (assuming f, > fd).
Only the averaging frequency  counter need be used in an altimeter application, since the rate of change of altitude is usually  small.
 A target at short range will generally result in a strong signal at low frequency, while one  at long range will result in a weak signal at high frequency.
Therefore the frequency character-  istic of tlie low-frequency amplifier in the FM-CW radar may be shaped to provide attenua-  tion at the low frequencies corresponding to short ranges and large echo signals.
Less  attcntuation is applied to tile higher frequencies, where the echo signals are weaker.
 The echo signal from an isolated target varies inversely as the fourth power of the range,  AS is well known from the radar equation.
With this as a criterion, the gain of the low-  frcqueticy amplifier sliould be made to increase at the rate of 12 dB/octave.
The output of the  amplifier would then be independent of the range, for constant target cross section.
Amplifier  response shaping is similar in function to sensitivity time control (STC) employed in conven-  tional pulse radar.
However, in the altimeter, the echo signal from an extended target such as  the ground varies inversely as the square (rather than the fourth power) of the range, since the Doppler Switched  frequency  counter velocity ---+  3 fo(~i) Receiver  mixer f;F+~ amplifier  IF 4?dy]- det:c+or :T amplifier ' Low -frequency Balanced -  CWANDFREQUENCY-MODULATED RADAR85 Doppler velocity1 I I I I I I Switched frequency counter Average Range frequency -~ counterLow-frequency amplifierTirningsignal Local oscillatorModulator fa(t)+Iir foU) foU)-firr----'---, '---__-'~r+If,'---__ ....I (fb=:fa(t-T)-fa(t))0···fO!.j)..
'---,----' Fi~url'3.13Blockdiagram ofFM-CW radarusingsideband superheterodyne receiver.
.til"Thefilterselectsthelowersideband fo(t)-fiFandrejectsthecarrierandtheupper sidehand.
Thesidehand thatispassedbythefilterismodulated inthesamefashionasthe transmitted signal.Thesideband filtermusthavesufficient bandwidth topassthemodulation, butnotthecarrierorothersideband.
Thefilteredsideband servesthefunction ofthelocal oscillator.
Whenanechosignalispresent, theoutputofthereceiver mixerisanIFsignalof frequency.r.F+Ib'whereII>iscomposed oftherangefrequencY!r andthedoppler velocity frequency Jd'TheIFsignalisamplified andappliedtothebalanced detector alongwiththe local-oscillator signal.IiI"Theoutputofthedetector contains thebeatfrequency (range frequency andthedoppler velocity frequency), whichisamplified toalevelwhereitcan actuatethefrequency-measuring circuits.
InFig.3.13,theoutputofthelow-frequency amplifier isdividedintotwochannels: one feedsanaverage-frequency counter todetermine range,theotherfeedsaswitched frequency counter t6determine thedoppler velocity (assuming fr>fd)'Onlytheaveraging frequency counter needbeusedinanaltimeter application, sincetherateofchangeofaltitudeisusually small.
Atargetatshortrangewillgenerally resultinastrongsignalatlowfrequency, whileone atlongrangewillresultinaweaksignalathighfrequency.
Therefore thefrequency character­ isticofthelow-frequency amplifier intheFM-CW radarmaybeshapedtoprovideattenua­ tionatthelowfrequencies corresponding toshortrangesandlargeechosignals.
Less attcntuation isapplicdtothehigherfrequencies, wheretheechosignalsareweaker.
Theechosignalfromanisolated targetvariesinversely asthefourthpoweroftherange, asiswellknownfromtheradarequation.
Withthisasacriterion, thegainofthelow­ frequency amplifier shouldbemadetoincrease attherateof12dB/octave.
Theoutputofthe amplifier wouldthenbeindependent oftherange,forconstant targetcrosssection.Amplifier response shaping issimilarinfunction tosensitivity timecontrol(STC)employed inconven­ tionalpulseradar.However, inthealtimeter, theechosignalfromanextended targetsuchas thegroundvariesinversely asthesquare(ratherthanthefourthpower)oftherange,sincethe 86 lNTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  greater the range, the greater the echo area ill~~minated by the beam For extended targets,  therefore, the low-frequency amplifier gain should increase 6 dB/oc~ave.
A compronlisz  between the isolated (12-dB slope) and extended (6-dB slope) target echoes might be a  characteristic with a slope of 9dBloctave.
The constant output produced by shaping the  doppler-amplifier frequency-response characteristic is not only helpful in lowering the dy-  namlc range requirements of the frequency-measuring device, but the attenuation of the low  frequencies effects a reduction of low-frequency interfering noise.
Lowered gain at low alti-  tudes also helps to reduce interference from unwanted retlections.
The response at the upper  end of the frequency characteristic is rapidly reduced for frequencies beyond that correspond-  ing to maximum range.
If there is a minimum target range, the response is also cut off at the  low-frequency end, to further reduce the extraneous noise entering the receiver.
 Another method of processing the range or height information from an altimeter so as to  reduce the noise output from the receiver and improve the sensitivity uses a narrow-bandwidth  low-frequency amplifier with a feedback loop to maintain the beat frequency c~nstant.~'.'~  When a fixed-frequency excursion (or deviation) is used, as in the usual altimeter, the beat  frequency can vary over a considerable range of values.
The low-frequency-amplifier band- 1  width must be sufficiently wide to encompass the expected range of beat frequencies.
Since tlie  bandwidth is broader than need be to pass the signal energy, the signal-to-noise ratio 1s  reduced and the receiver sensitivity degraded.
Instead of maintaining the frequency excursion  Af constant and obtaining a varying beat frequency, Af can be varied to maintain the beat  frequency constant.
The beat-frequency amplifier need only be wide enough to pass the  received signal energy, thus reducirig the amount of noise with which the signal must compete.
 The frequency excursion is maintained by a servomechanism to that value which permits the  beat frequency to fall within the passband of the narrow filter.
The value of the frequency  excursion is then a measure of the altitude and may be substituted into Eq.
(3.1 1).
 When used in the FM altimeter, the technique of servo-controlling the frequency excirr-  sion is usually applied at all altitudes above a predetermined minimum.
Since the frequency  excursion Af is inversely proportional to range, the radar is better operated at very low  altitudes in the more normal manner with a fixed AJ and hence a varying beat frequency.
 Measurement errors.
The absolute accuracy of radar altimeters is usually of more importance  at low altitudes than at high altitudes.
Errors of a few meters might not be of significance when 3  cruising at altitudes of 10 km, but are important if the altimeter is part of a blind landing  system.
 The theoretical accuracy with which distance can be measured depends upon the band-  width of the transmitted signal and the ratio of signal energy to noise energy.
In addition,  measurement accuracy might be limited by such practical restrictions as the accuracy of thc  frequency-measuring device, the residual path-length error caused by the circuits and trans-  mission lines, errors caused by multiple reflections and transmitter leakage, and the frequency  error due to the turn-around of the frequency modulation.
 A common form of frequency-measuring device is the cycle counter, which mcasurcs thc  number of cycles or half cycles of the beat during the modulation period.
Thc total cycle count  is a discrete number since the, counter is unable to measure fractions of a cycle.
The  discreteness of the frequency measurement gives rise to an error called thefiurd error, or  st^'^)  error.
It has also been called the quantization error, a more descriptive name.
The average  number of cycles N of the beat frequency& in one period of the modulation cyclc 1, is rb /fm,  where the bar over6 denotes time average.
Equation (3.1 1) may be written as  86INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS greatertherange,thegreatertheechoareailluminated hytheheam.Forextended targets, therefore, thelow-frequency amplifier gainshouldincrease 6dB/octave.
Acompromise between theisolated (l2-dBslope)andextended (6-dBslope)targetechoesmightbea characteristic withaslopeof9dB/octave.
Theconstant outputproduced byshaping the doppler-amplifier frequency-response characteristic isnotonlyhelpfulinlowering thedy­ namicrangerequirements ofthefrequency-measuring device,buttheattenuation ofthelow frequencies efTectsareduction oflow-frequency interfering noise.Lowered gainatlowalti­ tudesalsohelpstoreduceinterference fromunwanted rellections.
Theresponse attheupper endofthefrequency characteristic israpidlyreduced forfrequencies beyondthatcorrespond­ ingtomaximum range.Ifthereisaminimum targetrange,theresponse isalsocutofTatthe low-frequency end,tofurtherreducetheextraneous noiseentering thereceiver.
Another methodofprocessing therangeorheightinformation fromanaltimeter soasto reducethenoiseoutputfromthereceiverandimprove thesensitivity usesanarrow-bandwidth low-frequency amplifier withafeedback looptomaintain thebeatfrequency constant.
30.34 Whenafixed-frequency excursion (ordeviation) isused,asintheusualaltimeter, theheat frequency canvaryoveraconsiderable rangeofvalues.Thelow-frequcncy-amplifier hand­ widthmustbesufficiently widetoencompass theexpected rangeofbeatfrequencies.
Sincethe bandwidth isbroader thanneedbetopassthesignalenergy,thesignal-to-noise ratiois reduced andthereceiversensitivity degraded.
Insteadofmaintaining thefrequency excursion 4fconstant andobtaining avarying beatfrequency,4fcanbevariedtomaintain theheat frequency constant.
Thebeat-frequency amplifier needonlybewidecnough topassthe received signalenergy,thusreducing theamountofnoisewithwhichthesignalmustcompdC.
Thefrequency excursion ismaintained byaservomechanism tothatvaluewhichpermitsthe beatfrequency tofallwithinthepassband ofthenarrowfilter.Thevalueofthefrequency excursion isthenameasure ofthealtitudeandmaybesubstituted intoEq.(3.11).
WhenusedintheFMaitimeter, thetechnique ofservo-controlling thefrequency excur­ sionisusuallyappliedatallaltitudes aboveapredetermined minimum.
Sincethefrequency excursion t1fisinversely proportional torange,theradarisbetteroperated atverylow altitudes inthemorenormalmannerwithafixed4f,andhenceavarying beatfrequency.
Measurement errors.Theabsolute accuracy ofradaraltimeters isusuallyofmoreimportance atlowaltitudes thanathighaltitudes.
Errorsofafewmetersmightnotbeofsignificance when cruising ataltitudes of10km,butareimportant ifthealtimeter ispartofahlindlanding system.
Thetheoretical accuracy withwhichdistance canbemeasured depends upontheband­ widthofthetransmitted signalandtheratioofsignalenergytonoiseenergy.Inaddition, measurement accuracy mightbelimitedbysuchpractical restrictions astheaccuracy ofthe frequency-measuring device,theresidual path-length errorcausedbythecircuitsandtrans­ missionlines,errorscausedbymultiple reflections andtransmitter leakage,andthefrequency errorduetotheturn-around ofthefrequency modulation.
Acommon formoffrequency-measuring deviceisthecyclecounter, whichmeasures the numberofcyclesorhalfcyclesofthebeatduringthemodulation period.Thetotalcyclecount isadiscrete- number sincethe.counter isunabletomeasure fractions ofacycle.The discreteness ofthefrequency measurement givesrisetoanerrorcalledthejixed error,or!;[t/p error.Ithasalsobeencalledthequantization error,amoredescriptive name.Theaverage numberofcyclesNofthebeatfrequen<;y fbinoneperiodofthemodulation cycleJ~islblfm, \ wherethebaroverfi,denotes timeaverage.
Equation (3.11)maybewrittenas ......
eN .,.,.R=4t1f (3.13) WIICIC I< - I;III~~ (i~Itit\t<l~).
111  c = velocity of propagatiori, rn/s  A/'= frequeticy cxctlrsiori.
t1z  Since the output of tlic freqitet~cy counter N is an integer, ttie rarige will be an integral multiple  of ci(4 A/ ) atid \\fill givc rise to a qitantizatiorl error equal to  IJ 6 R (rn ) = 41' (MHz)  Note tllat tile fixed error is iridepcndent of the range arid carrier frequency and is a fulictiotl of  tlie frequericy exct~rsiori only.
Large frequency excursions are necessary if the fixed error is to  he sr11aIl.
 Sirice the fixed error is due to the discrete nature of the frequency counter, its effects can  he reduced by wobbling tlie modulation frequency or the phase of the transmitter output.
 Wobblirlg the transmitter phase results in a wobbling of the phase of the beat signal so that an  average reading of the cycle coutiter somewhere between N and N + 1 will be obtained on a  riormal meter rhovement.
In one altimeter,jO the modulation frequency was varied at a 10-Hz  rate.
causi~ig the phase shift of the beat signal to vary cyclically with time.
The indicating  system was designed so that it did not respond to the 10-Hz modulation directly, but it caused  the fixed error to be averaged.
Normal fluctuations in aircraft altitude due to uneven terrain,  waves on the water, or turbulent air can also average out the fixed error provided the time  coristant of the indicating device is large compared with the time between fluctuations.
Over  smooth terrain, such as an airport runway, the fixed error might not be averaged out.
Note that  cveri if thc fixed error werc not present, the accuracy with which the height can be measured  will deperid on the signal-to-noise ratio, as discussed in Sec.
11.3, and can be comparable to  tlie fixed error as given by Eq.(3.14).
 Other errors might be introduced in the CW radar if there are uncontrolled variations in  the transmitter frequency, modulation frequency, or frequency excursion.
Target motion can  cause an error in range equal to v, To, where v, is the relative velocity and To is the observation  time.
A,t short ranges the residual path error can also result in a significant error unless  compensated for.
The residual path error is the error caused by delays in the circuitry and  transmission lines.
Multipath signals also produce error.
Figure 3.14 shows some of the  utiwanted signals that might occur in the FM altimeter.36.37 The wanted signal is shown by  the solid line.
while the unwanted signals are shown by the broken arrows.
The unwanted  signals ir~clude:  I.
The reflection of tlie transmitted signals at the antenna caused by impedance mismatch.
 2.
The standing-wave pattern on the cable feeding the reference signal to the receiver, due to  poor mixer match.
 3.
The leakage signal entering the receiver via coupling between transmitter and receiver  antennas.
This can limit the ultimate receiver sensitivity, especially at high altitudes.
 4.
The interference due to power being reflected back to the transmitter, causing a change in  tile impedance seen by the transmitter.
This is usually important only at low altitudes.
It  can be reduced by ati attenuator introduced in the transmission line at low altitude or by a  directional coupler or an isolator.
 5.
The double-bounce signal.
 Reflections frorri the landing gear can also cause errors.
 ('WANDFRI'<)lIFNC¥-MODULATED RADAR87 wltl'leH.,.,.,range(altitudc).
III c=vclocityofrroragation.
m/s !1f=frcqucncy cxcursion.
Hz Sincctheoutputofthcfrequcncy counterNisaninteger,therangewillbeanintegralmultiple ofc/(4!1f)andwillgiverisctoaquantization errorequalto (3.1417)(3.14a) orc /jR=4tir 75 ('>R(m)=i1r(MHz) Notetltatthefixederrorisindependcnt oftherangeandcarrierfrequency andisafunctionof thefrcqucncy cxcursion only.Largefrequency excursions arenecessary ifthefixederroristo besmall.
Sincethefixederrorisduetothediscretenatureofthefrequency counter, itseffectscan hereduced bywobbling themodulation frequency orthephaseofthetransmitter output.
Wobbling thetransmitter phaseresultsinawobbling ofthephaseofthebeatsignalsothatan averagereadingofthecyclecountersomewhere betweenNandN+1willbeobtained ona normalmetermovement.
Inonealtimeter,3o themodulation frequency wasvariedataIO-Hz rate,causingthephaseshiftofthebeatsignaltovarycyclically withtime.Theindicating systemwasdesigned sothatitdidnotrespondtothelO-Hzmodulation directly,butitcaused thefixederrortobeaveraged.
Normalfluctuations inaircraftaltitudedueto uneven terrain, wavesonthewater,orturbulent aircanalsoaverageoutthefixederrorprovided thetime constant oftheindicating deviceislargecompared withthetimebetween fluctuations.
Over smoothterrain,suchasanairportrunway,thefixederrormightnotbeaveraged out.Notethat evenifthefixederrorwercnotprcscnt,theaccuracy withwhichtheheightcanbemeasured willdependonthesignal-to-noise ratio,asdiscussed inSec.11.3,andcanbecomparable to thefixederrorasgivenbyEq.(3.14).
Othererrorsmightbeintroduced intheCWradarifthereareuncontrolled variations in thetransmitter frequency, modulation frequency, orfrequency excursion.
Targetmotioncan causeanerrorinrangeequaltoVrTo,where VristherelativevelocityandToistheobservation time.Atshortrangestheresidual patherrorcanalsoresultinasignificant errorunless compensated for.Theresidual patherroristheerrorcausedbydelaysinthecircuitry and transmission lines.Multipath signalsalsoproduce error.Figure3.14showssomeofthe unwanted signalsthatmightoccurintheFMaltimeter.36.37Thewantedsignalisshownby thesolidline,whiletheunwanted signalsareshownbythebrokenarrows.Theunwanted signalsinclude: 1.Thereflection ofthetransmitted signalsattheantennacausedbyimpedance mismatch.
2.Thestanding-wave patternonthecablefeedingthereference signaltothereceiver, dueto poormixermatch.
3.Theleakage.signalentering thereceiverviacoupling between transmitter andreceiver antennas.
Thiscanlimittheultimate receiversensitivity, especially athighaltitudes.
4.Theinterference duetopowerbeingreflected backtothetransmitter, causingachangein theimpedance seenbythetransmitter.
Thisisusuallyimportant onlyatlowaltitudes.It canbereducedbyanattenuator introduced inthetransmission lineatlowaltitudeorbya directional coupleroranisolator.
5.Thedouble-bounce signal.
Reflections fromthelandinggearcanalsocauseerrors. Figure 3.14 Unwanted signals in FM  ~apelli,'~ IRE Trans.)  Transmitter leakage.
The sensitivity of FM-CW radar is limited by the noise accompanying  the transmitter signal which leaks into the receiver.
Although advances have been made in  reducing the AM and FM noise generated by high-power CW transmitters, the noise is irsirally  of sufficient magnitude compared with the echo signal to require some means of minimizing  the leakage that finds its way into the receiver.
The techniques described previously for  reducing leakage in the CW radar apply equally well to the FM-CW radar.
Separate antennas  and direct cancellation of the leakage signal are two techniques which give considerable  isolation.
 Sinusoidal modulation.
The ability of the FM-CW radar to measure range provides an addi-  tional basis for obtaining isolation.
Echoes from short-range targets-including the leakage  signal-may be attenuated relative to the desired target echo from longer ranges by properly  processing the difference-frequency signal obtained by heterodyning the transmitted and  received signals.
a If theCW carrier is frequency-modulated by a sine wave, the difference frequency obtained -3  by heterodyning the returned signal with a portion of the transmitter signal may be expanded  in a trigonometric series whose terms are the harmonics of the modulating frequency 1.
.'."  Assume the form of the transmitted signal to be  A f 2?fo t + sin 2?fm t ? fm  where .fo = carrier frequency  ,fm = modulation frequency  Af= frequency excursion (equal to twice the frequency derivation)  The difference frequency signal may be written  L'D = Jo(D) COS (2?fdt - 40) + 2J1(D) sin (2?fdt - $0) COS (2?fmf - (6,,,)  - 2J,(D) cos (2?fd t - 40) cos 2(27rfmt - (6,)  - 2J3(D) sin (2~fdt - (60) COS 3(2?fm t - (6m)  -k 2J4(D) COS (2?fdt - (60) COS 4(2?fm 1 - (6,) + 2J5(D) '' '  88INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS Figure3.14Unwanted signalsinFMaltimeter.
(Frv/II Capelli,30 IRETrans.) (3.15)Transmitter leakage.
Thesensitivity ofFM-CW radarislimitedbythenoiseaccompanying thetransmitter signalwhichleaksintothereceiver.
Although advances havebeenmadein reducing theAMandFMnoisegenerated byhigh-power CWtransmitters, thenoiseisusually ofsufficient magnitude compared withtheechosignaltorequiresomemeansofminimizing theleakage thatfindsitswayintothereceiver.
Thetechniques described previously for reducing leakageintheCWradarapplyequallywelltotheFM-CW radar.Separate antennas anddirectcancellation oftheleakage signalaretwotechniques whichgiveconsiderable isolation.
Sinusoidal modulation.
TheabilityoftheFM-CW radartomeasure rangeprovides anaddi­ tionalbasisforobtaining isolation.
Echoesfromshort-range targets-including theleakage signal-may beattenuated relativetothedesiredtargetechofromlongerrangesbyproperly processing thedifference-frequency signalobtained byheterodyning thetransmitted and received signals.
IftheCW carrierisfrequency-modulated byasinewave,thedifference frequency obtained byheterodyning thereturned signalwithaportionofthetransmitter signalmaybeexp(l.nded inatrigonometric serieswhosetermsaretheharmonics ofthemodulating frequency.l~ .9.2t1 Assume theformofthetransmitted signaltobe sin(2rrfot+~£sin2rrfmt) wherefo=carrierfrequency fm=modulation frequency 11:(=frequency excursion (equaltotwicethefrequency derivation) Thedifference frequency signalmaybewritten eD=Jo(D)cos(2~(dt-¢o)+2J1{D)sin(2~rdt-¢o)cos(2nfmt-¢m) -2J2(D)cos(2rrfdt-¢o)cos2(2~rmt-¢m) -2J3(D)sin(2~(dt-¢o)cos3(2nfmt-¢m) +2J4(D)cos(2rr/dt-¢o)cos4(2~rmr-¢m)+21s(D)." (3.16) C'W AND FREQCJENCY-MO1)ULATED RADAR 89  ivliere .I,, J,.
J2, etc = Bessel functions of first kind anci order 0, 1, 2, etc., respectively  L) = (Afj'fm) sin 2qJ,Ro/c  Ro = distance to target at time t = 0 (distance that would have been meas-  ured if target were stationary)  c = velocity of propagation  ,fd = 21-, ,/;/C = doppler frequency shift  r., = relative velocity of target with respect to radar  4, = pllase sliift approxirnately equal to angi~lar distance 4cf, R,/c  $,,, = phase shift approxirnately equal to 2nJ,, Role  l'lle difference-freque~icy signal of Eq.
(3.16) consists of a doppler-frequency cornpollent  of aniplitude Jo(l)) and a series of cosine waves of frequency f,, 2fm, 3fm, etc.
Each of these  tiarnlorlics of f, is lnodulated by a doppler-frequency component with anlpliti~de proportional  to J,(D).
I'lle product of tile doppler-frequency factor times the 11th harmonic factor is equiva-  lent to a sr~ppressed-carrier double-sideballd modulation (Fig.
3.15).
 In principle, any of the Jn components of the difference-frequency signal can be extracted  ill the FM-CW radar.
Consider first tlie d-c term J,(D) cos (2?fd t - $O).
This is a cosine wave  at tile doppler freque~~cy with an arliplitude proportional to Jo(L)).
Figure 3.16 shows a plot of  several of the Bessel functions.
The argument D of the Bessel function is proportional to range.
 The Jo amplitude applies maximum response to signals at zero range in a radar that extracts  the d-c doppler-frequency component.
This is the range at which the leakage signal and its  noise conlponents (including microphony and vibration) are found.
At greater ranges, where  the target is expected, the effect of the Jo Bessel function is to reduce the echo-signal amplitude  in comparison with the echo at zero range (in addition to the normal range attenuation).
 Therefore.
if the Jo term were used, it would enhance the leakage signal and reduce the target  signal.
a condition opposite to that desired.
 An examination of the Bessel functions (Fig.
3.16) shows that if one of the modulation-  frequency harmonics is extracted (such as the first, second, or third harmonic), the amplitude  of the leakage signal at zero range may theoretically be made equal to zero.
The higher the  number of the harmonic, the higher will be the order of the Bessel function and the less will be the  amount of rnicropllonism-leakage feedthrough.
This results from the property that Jn(.u) be-  haves as .un for srr~all .u.
Although higl~er-order Bessel functions may reduce the zero-range  response.
they may also reduce the response at the desired target range if the target happens to  fall at or near a range corresponding to a zero of the Bessel function.
When only a single target  is involved.
the frequency excursion Afcan be adjusted to obtain that value of D which places  tlie maximum of the Bessel function at the target range.
 aJ u 2 - - - a  E 0  QI 5 - - 0 -  0,  CT ..
fd -" --fd  Figure 3.15 Spectrum of the difference-  i I I at a frequency f;, when the target frequency signal obtained from an  FM-CW radar sinusoidally modulated  0 41 2% 3471 4fm motion produces a doppler frequency  Frequency shift J,.
(Ajler Sa~nders,~ IRE Trans.)  CWANDFREQUENCY-MODULATED RADAR89 whereJ0,JI,J2,etc=Besselfunctions offirstkindandorder0,I,2,etc.,respectively D=(~I/f~)sin2rrf~Role Ro=distance totargetattimet=0(distance thatwouldhavebeenmeas­ urediftargetwerestationary) c=velocity ofpropagation Id=2l',.f~/c=doppler frequency shift 1',=relative velocity oftargetwithrespecttoradar <Po=phaseshiftapproximately equaltoangular distance 4rrfoRole cPm=phaseshiftapproximately equalto2rrfmRole Thedifference-frequcncy signalofEq.(3.16)consists ofadoppler-frequency component ofamplitude Jo(D)andaseriesofcosinewavesoffrequency 1m'~rm,~rm'etc.Eachofthese harmonics off~ismodulatcd byadoppler-frequency component withamplitude proportional toJn(IJ).Theproduct ofthedoppler-frequency factortimesthenthharmonic factorisequiva­ lenttoasuppressed-carrier double-sidcband modulation (Fig.3.15).
Inprinciple, anyoftheJncomponents ofthedifference-frequency signalcanbeextracted inthcFM-CW radar.Consider firstthedoctermJo(D)cos(2rrfdt-4>0)'Thisisacosinewave atthctloppler frequency withanamplitude proportional toJo(D).Figure3.16showsaplotof severaloftheBesselfunctions.
Theargument DoftheBesselfunction isproportional torange.
TheJ0amplitude appliesmaximum response tosignalsatzerorangeinaradarthatextracts thedocdoppler-frequency component.
Thisistherangeatwhichtheleakage signalandits noisecomponents (including microphony andvibration) arefound.Atgreaterranges,where thetargetisexpected, theeffectoftheJ0Besselfunction istoreducetheecho-signal amplitude incomparison withtheechoatzerorange(inaddition tothenormal rangeattenuation).
Therefore, iftheJ0termwereused,itwouldenhance theleakage signalandreducethetarget signal.acondition opposite tothatdesired.
Anexamination oftheBesselfunctions (Fig.3.16)showsthatifoneofthemodulation­ frequency harmonics isextracted (suchasthefirst,second,orthirdharmonic), theamplitude oftheleakage signalatzerorangemaytheoretically bemadeequaltozero.Thehigherthe numberoftheharmonic, thehigherwillbetheorderoftheBesselfunction andthelesswillbethe amount ofmicrophonism-Ieakage feedthrough.
Thisresultsfromtheproperty thatJ"(x)be­ havesasx"forsmallx.Although higher-order Besselfunctions mayreducethezero-rangc response, theymayalsoreducetheresponse atthedesiredtargetrangeifthetargethappens to fallatorncararangecorresponding toazerooftheBesselfunction.
Whenonlyasingletarget isinvolved, thefrequency excursion ~rcanbeadjusted toobtainthatvalueofDwhichplaces themaximum oftheBesselfunction atthetargetrange.
Q) D :oJ a Ea <lJ> a Q)cr o 1m 2/'!1 FrequencyI IIFigure3.15Spectrum ofthedifference­ frequency signalobtained froman FM-CW radarsinusoidally modulated atafrequency fmwhenthetarget motionproduces adoppler frequency shift.r.,.(AfterSaunders,9 IRETrans.) 90 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  Figure 3.16 Plot ol Bessel funcrions  of order 0, 1, 2, and 3; D =  (A/'/'/,) sin 2?L!Rolc.
 The technique of using higher-order Bessel functions has been applied to the type of  doppler-navigation radar discussed in the next section.
A block diagram of a CW radar using  the third harmonic (J3 term) is shown in Fig.
3.17.
The transmitter is sinusoidally frequency-  modulated at a frequency fm to generate the waveform given by Eq.
(3.15).
The doppler-shifted  echo is heterodyned with the transmitted signal to produce the beat-frequency signal of  Eq.
(3.16).
One of the harmorlics of.f, is selected (in this case the third) by a filter centered at  the harmonic.
The filter bandwidth is wide enough to pass both doppler-frequency sidebands.
 The filter output is mixed with the (third) harmonic of,fm.
The doppler frequency is extracted  by the low-pass filter.
 Since the total energy contained in the beat-frequency signal is distributed among all tiit:  harmonics, extracting but one component wastes signal energy contained in the other bar-  monies and results in a loss of signal as compared with an ideal CW radar.
However, the  signal-to-noise ratio is generally superior in the FM radar designed to operate with the ttrh  Circulator Directional  frequency  multiplier coupler - --------  1 4  Figure 3.17 Sinusoidally modulated FM-CW radar extracting the third harmonic (J, Resst.1 componznt).
Transmitter = r- -  Mixer - 3d harmonic  filter - Mixer  L - Low -pass  filter  L Doppler - frequency  90INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS 0.8 0.7 0.6 0.5J3(Dl 04 CJ0.3 -s: 0.2 0.1 012D -0.1 -0.2 -0.3 -0.4Figure3.16PlotofBessel function~ oforder0,1,2,and3;D= (N/fm)sin2nfmRolc.
Thetechnique ofusinghigher-order Besselfunctions hasbeenapplied tothetypeof doppler-navigation radardiscussed inthenextsection.Ablockdiagram ofaCWradarlIsing thethirdharmonic (J3term)isshowninFig.3.17.Thetransmitter issinusoidally frequency­ modulated atafrequency 1mtogenerate thewaveform givenbyEq.(3.15).Thedoppler-shifted echoisheterodyned withthetransmitted signaltoproduce thebeat-frequency signalof Eq.(3.16).Oneoftheharmonics offmisselected (inthiscasethethird)byafiltercentered at theharmonic.
Thefilterbandwidth iswideenoughtopassbothdoppler-frequency sidebands.
Thefilteroutputismixedwiththe(third)harmonic offm.Thedoppler frequency isextracted bythelow-pass filter.
Sincethetotalenergycontained inthebeat-frequency signalisdistributed amongallthe harmonics, extracting butonecomponent wastessignalenergycontained intheotherhar­ monicsandresultsinalossofsignalascompared withanidealCWradar.However, the signal-to-noise ratioisgenerally superior intheFMradardesigned tooperate withthe/lth t--~------1 Transmitter ~-'--"H fmFrequencymodulotion x3 frequency multiplier 3dharmonic filterDoppler frequency Figure3.17Sinusoidally modulated FM-CW radarextracting thethirdharmonic (J3Besselcomponent). harmoriic as compared with a practical CW radar because the transmitter leakage noise is  suppressed by the 11th-order Ressel function.
The loss in signal energy when operating with the  J3 Ikssel component is repor~ed~.~~.~~ to be from 4 to 12 dB.
Altt~ough two separate transmit-  ting and receiving atiterinas rnay be used, it is not necessary in many applications.
A single  anterlna with a circltlator is stiowri in the block diagram of Fig.
3.17.
Leakage introduced by  the circulator and by reflections from the antenna are at close range and thus are attenuated by  the J, factor.
 A plot of J,(D) as a function of distance is shown in Fig.
3.18.
The curve is mirrored  becailsc of the periodicity of D.
The nulls in the curve suggest that echoes from certain ranges  can be suppressed if ttie modulation parameters are properly selected.
 if the target is stationary (zero doppler frequency), the amplitudes of the modulation-  frequeticy llarrnorlics are proportional to either J,(D) sin #, or J,(D) cos (boy where +, =  47th Ro/c = 4xR,/A.
Therefore the amplitude depends on the range to the target in RF  wavelengths.
The sirie or the cosine terms can take any value between + 1 and - 1, including  zero, for a change in range corresponding to one RF wavelength.
For this reason, the extrac-  tion of the higher-order modulation frequencies is not practical with a stationary target, such  as in an altimeter.
 In order to use the properties of the Bessel function to obtain isolation in an FM-CW  altimeter, when tlie doppler frequency is essentially zero, the role of the doppler frequency shift  may be artificially introduced by translating tlie reference frequency to some different value.
 This rriiglit he accor~iplistied with a single-sideband generator (frequency translator) inserted  hetwcerl tllc directional coupler and tile RF rnixer of Fig.
3.17.
The frequency translation in tlie  reference signal path is equivalent to a doppler shift in the antenna path.
The frequency  excursion of the modulation waveform can be adjusted by a servomechanism to maintain the  rnaxirnum of the Bessel function at the aircraft's altitude.
The frequency translator is not  rieeded in an airborne doppler navigator since the antenna beam is directed at a depression  angle ather than 90" and a doppler-shifted echo is produced by the motion of the aircraft.
 blatched filter detection.
The operation of the FM-CW radar described earlier in this section  does not employ optimum signal processing, such as described in Chap.
10.
The receiver is not  designed as a tt~atcltedfilter.
for the particular transmitted waveform.
Therefore, the sensitivity  of the FM-CW receiver described here is degraded and the ability to operate with multiple  targets is usually poor.
For a radio altimeter whose target is the earth, these limitations usually  present no problem.
When used for the long-range detection of air targets, for example, the  rionoptirnum detection of the classical FM-CW radar will seriously hinder its performance  when compared to a properly designed pulse radar.
It is possible, however, to utilize matched-  filter processirlg in the FM-CW radar in a manner similar to that employed with FM (chirp)  pulse compression radar as described in Sec.
11.5, and thus overcome the lower sensitivity and  rrii~ltiple-target prot>lems.3R.39 As the duty cycle of an FM pulse compression waveform in-  creases it becomes more like the FM-CW waveform of unity duty cycle.
Hence, the processing  Figure 3.
I8 Plot of J,(I)) as a filriction of distance.
(F1.0111 Sarrr~drr..~.~ IRE Tt.a~a.)  CWANDFREQUENCY-MODULATED RADAR91 harmonic ascompared withapractical CWradarbecause·thetransmitter leakage noiseis suppressed bythe11th-order Besselfunction.
Thelossinsignalenergywhenoperating withthe }JBesselcomponent isreported9.J5.54tobefrom4to12dB.Although twoseparate transmit­ tingandreceiving antennas mayheused,itisnotnecessary inmanyapplications.
Asingle antenna withacirculator isshownintheblockdiagram ofFig.3.17.Leakage introduced by thecirculator andbyreflections fromtheantenna areatcloserangeandthusareattenuated by the}Jfactor.
Aplotof}J(D)asafunction ofdistance isshowninFig.3.18.Thecurveismirrored becauseoftheperiodicity ofD.Thenullsinthecurvesuggestthatechoesfromcertainranges canbesuppressed ifthemodulation parameters areproperly selected.
Ifthetargetisstationary (zerodoppler frequency), theamplitudes ofthemodulation­ frequency harmonics areproportional toeither}n(D)sin4>0or}n(D)cos4>0'where4>0= 4~roRole=4nRol).,Therefore theamplitude depends ontherangetothetargetinRF wavelengths.
Thesineorthecosinetermscantakeanyvaluebetween+1and-1,including zero.forachangeinrangecorresponding tooneRFwavelength.
Forthisreason,theextrac­ tionofthehigher-order modulation frequencies isnotpractical withastationary target,such asinanaltimeter.
Inordertousetheproperties oftheBesselfunction toobtainisolation inanFM-CW altimeter, whenthedoppler frequency isessentially zero,theroleofthedoppler frequency shift mayheartificially introduced bytranslating thereference frequency tosomedifferent value.
Thismightheaccomplished withasingle-sideband generator (frequency translator) inserted between thedirectional couplerandtheRFmixerofFig.3.17.Thefrequency translation inthe reference signalpathisequivalent toadoppler shiftintheantenna path.Thefrequency excursion ofthemodulation waveform canbeadjusted byaservomechanism tomaintain the maximum oftheBesselfunction attheaircraft's altitude.
Thefrequency translator isnot neededinanairborne doppler navigator sincetheantenna beamisdirected atadepression angle.Jtherthan90°andadoppler-shifted echoisproduced bythemotionoftheaircraft.
l\latched filterdetection.
Theoperation oftheFM-CW radardescribed earlierinthissection doesnotemployoptimum signalprocessing, suchasdescribed inChap.10.Thereceiver isnot designed asamatchedfilterfortheparticular transmitted waveform.
Therefore, thesensitivity oftheFM-CW receiver described hereisdegraded andtheabilitytooperate withmultiple targetsisusuallypoor.Foraradioaltimeter whosetargetistheearth,theselimitations usually presentnoproblem.
Whenusedforthelong-range detection ofairtargets,forexample, the nonoptimum detection oftheclassical FM-CW radarwillseriously hinderitsperformance whencompared toaproperly designed pulseradar.Itispossible, however, toutilizematched­ filterprocessing intheFM-CW radarinamannersimilartothatemployed withFM(chirp) pulsecompression radarasdescribed inSec.11.5,andthusovercome thelowersensitivity and multiple-target problems.
JR.J9AsthedutycycleofanFMpulsecompression waveform in­ creasesitbecomes moreliketheFM-CW waveform ofunitydutycycle.Hence.theprocessing Q) D .2 0.
E <1 Distance FiJ!ure ~.18PlotofJ,(f))asafUllction ofdistallce.
(FromSallllders.9IRETrails.) 92 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  techniques can be similar.
Pseudorandom phase-coded waveforms40 and random noise  waveforms41q42 may also be applied to CW transmission.
When the modulation period is long,  it may be desirable to utilize correlation detection instead of matched filter detection.
 3.4 AIRBORNE DOPPLER  NAVIGATION^^ -s6  An important requirement of aircraft flight is for a self-contained navigation system capable of  operating anywhere over the surface of the earth under any conditions of visibility or weather.
 It should provide the necessary data for piloting the aircraft from one position to another  without the need of navigation information transmitted to the aircraft from a grourd station  One method of obtaining a self-contained aircraft navigation system is based or the CW  doppler-radar principle.
Doppler radar can provide the drift angle and trui spe d of the  aircraft relative to the earth.
The drift angle is the angle between the horizontal projection of  the centerline of the aircraft (heading) and the horizontal component of the aircraft velocity  vector (ground track).
From the ground-speed and drift-angle measurements, the aircraft's  present position can be computed by dead reckoning.
 An aircraft with a doppler radar whose antenna beam is directed at an angle y to the  horizontal (Fig.
3.19a) will receive a doppler-shifted echo signal from the ground.
The shift in  Figure 3.19 (o) Aircraft with single  doppler navigation antenna beam at an  angle y to the horizontal; (b) aircraft  employing four doppler-navigation  beams to obtain vector velocity.
 92INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS techniques canbesimilar.
Pseudorandom phase-coded waveforms40andrandom noise waveforms41.42mayalsobeappliedtoCWtransmission.
Whenthemodulation periodislong, itmaybedesirable toutilizecorrelation detection insteadofmatched filterdetection.
3.4AIRBORNE DOPPLER NAVIGATION43-56 Animportant requirement ofaircraftflightisforaself-contained navigation systemcapableof operating anywhere overthesurfaceoftheearthunderanyconditions ofvisibility orweather.
Itshouldprovide thenecessary dataforpiloting theaircraft fromoneposition toanother without theneedofnavigation information transmitted totheaircraftfromagrour:dstation Onemethod ofobtaining aself-contained aircraft navigation systemisbase.d 01theCW doppler-radar principle.
Doppler radarcanprovide thedriftangleandtruespe.dofthe aircraftrelativetotheearth.Thedriftangleistheanglebetween thehorizontal projection of thecenterline oftheaircraft(heading) andthehorizontal component oftheaircraftvelocity vector(ground track).Fromtheground-speed anddrift-angle measurements, theaircraft's presentposition canbecomputed bydeadreckoning.
Anaircraftwithadoppler radarwhoseantenna beamisdirected atanangle)'tothe horizontal (Fig.3.19a)willreceiveadoppler-shifted echosignalfromtheground.Theshiftin ~-------,------~ v /.
(a) ----------~ v Figure3.19(a)Aircraft withsingle dopplernavigation antenna beamatan angleytothehorizontal; (b)aircraft employing fourdoppler-navigation beamstoobtainvectorvelocity. ('W AND I'REQIJENCY-MOI)IJI,ATED RADAR 93  frequericy is f, = 2(/,/c)v cos I-, wherc is the carrier frequency, v is the aircraft velocity, and c  is the velocity of propagation.
Typically, the depression angle might be in the vicinity of 65 to  70".
A single antenna beam from a doppler radar measures one component of aircraft velocity  relative to the direction of propagation.
A minimum of three noncoplanar beams are needed to  determine the vector velocity, that is, the speed and direction of travel.
 Doppler-navigation radar measures the vector velocity relative to the frame of reference  of the antenna assernbly.
To convert this vector velocity to a horizontal reference on the  grotuid, rile dircctioli of the vcrtical ~ni~st he deterniiried by some auxiliary means.
The heading  of tlie aircraft, as rniglit be obtained fro111 a compass, rrlust also be known for proper naviga-  tion.
Ttie vertical reference rnay be used either to stabilize the antenna beam system so as to  align ~t with tile iiori7or1tal, or alternatively, the antetitias might be fixed relative to the aircraft  arid the ground velocity components calci~lated with a computer.
 A practical for111 of dol~pler-riavigatiori radar nliglit liavc four beams oriented as in  Fig.
3.19h.
A doppler-navigation radar with forward and rearward beams is called a Jarllrs  system, after the Roman god who looked both forward and backward at the same time.
 Assume initially that the two forward and two backward beams are symmetrically disposed  about {lie axis of the aircraft.
If the aircraft's velocity is not in the same direction as the aircraft  Ileading.
the doppler frequency in the two forward beams will not be the same.
This difference  in frequency rnay be used to generate an error signal in a servomechanism which rotates the  antennas until tlie doppler frequencies are equal, indicating that the axis of the antennas is  aligned with tile ground track of the aircraft.
The angular displacement of the antenna from  tlie aircraft heading is the drift angle, and the magnitude of the doppler is a measure of tlie  speed along the ground track.
 Ttie use of the two rearward beams in conjunction with the two forward beams results in  considerable improvement in accuracy.
It eliminates the error introduced by vertical motion of  the aircraft and reduces the error caused by pitching movements of the antenna.
 Navigation may also be performed with only two antenna beams if some auxiliary means  is used to obtain a third coordinate.
Two beams give the two components of the aircraft  velocity tangent to the surface of the earth.
A third component, the vertical velocity, is needed  and may be provided from some nondoppler source such as a barometric rate-of-climb meter.
 The primary advantage of the two-beam system is a reduction in equipment.
However, the  accuracy is not as good as with systems using three or four beams.
 In principle, the CW radar would seem to be the ideal method of obtaining doppler-  navigation information.
However, in practice, leakage between transmitter and receiver can  limit the sehsitivity of the CW doppler-navigation radar, just as it does in any CW radar.
One  method of eliminating the ill eflects of leakage is by pulsing the transmitter on and turning the  receiver ofT for the duration of the transmitted pulse in a manner similar to the pulse-doppler  radar described in Sec.
4.10.
The pulse-doppler mode of operation has the further advantage in  that each beam can operate with a single antenna for both transmitter and receiver, whereas a  CW radar must usually employ two separate antennas in order to achieve the needed isolation.
 fjdwever, pulse systems suffer from loss of coverage and/or sensitivity because of "altitude  holes." These are caused by the high prf commonly used with pulse-doppler radars when it is  necessary to achieve unambiguous doppler measurements.
The high prf, although it gives  unambiguous doppler, usually results in ambiguous range.
But more important, a pulse radar  with ambiguous prf can result in lost targets.
If the transmitter is pulsed just when the ground  echo arrives back at the radar, it will not be detected.
Thus, altitude holes exist at or near those  altitudes where the echo time is an integral multiple of the pulse-repetition period.
Techniques  exist for reducing the undesired eflects of altitude holes, but not without some inconvenience  or possible loss in overall ~erforrnance.~~  CWANDFREQUENCY-MODULATED RADAR93 frequcncy isf~=2(Jo/c)v cos)',wheref~ isthecarrierfrequency, vistheaircraftvelocity, anuc isthevelocity ofpropagation.
Typically, thedepression angle}'mightbeinthevicinityof65to 70°.Asingleantenna beamfromadoppler radarmeasures onecomponent ofaircraftvelocity relativetothedirection ofpropagation.
Aminimum ofthreenoncoplanar beamsareneededto determine thevectorvelocity, tllatis,thespeedanddirection oftravel.
Doppler-navigation radarmeasures thevectorvelocity relativetotheframeofreference oftheantenna assembly.
Toconvert thisvectorvelocity toahorizontal reference onthe grounu, thcdirection oftheverticalmusthedetermincd bysomeauxiliary means.Theheading oftheaircraft.
asmightbeobtained fromacompass, mustalsobeknownforpropernaviga­ tion.Thevertical reference maybeusedeithertostabilize theantenna beamsystemsoasto alignitwiththehorizontal.
oralternatively, theantennas mightbefixedrelativetotheaircraft andthegroundvelocity components calculated withacomputer.
1\practical formofdoppler-navigation radarmighthavefourbeamsoriented asin Fig.3.19b.Adoppler-navigation radarwithforward andrearward beamsiscalledaJanlls system, aftertheRoman godwholookedbothforward andbackward atthesametime.
I\ssume initially thatthetwoforward andtwobackward beamsaresymmetrically disposed aoouttheaxisoftheaircraft.
Iftheaircraft's velocity isnotinthesamedirection astheaircraft heading, thedoppler frequency inthetwoforward beamswillnotbethesame.Thisdifference infrequency maybeusedtogenerate anerrorsignalinaservomechanism whichrotatesthe antennas untilthedoppler frequencies areequal,indicating thattheaxisoftheantennas is alignedwiththegroundtrackoftheaircraft.
Theangular displacement oftheantenna from theaircraft heading isthedriftangle,andthemagnitude ofthedoppler isameasure ofthe speedalongthegroundtracle Theuseofthetworearward beamsinconjunction withthetwoforward beamsresultsin considerable improvement inaccuracy.Iteliminates theerrorintroduced byverticalmotionof theaircraftandreducestheerrorcausedbypitching movements oftheantenna.
Navigation mayalsobeperformed with{)nlytwoantenna beamsifsomeauxiliary means isusedtoobtainathirdcoordinate.
Twobeamsgivethetwocomponents oftheaircraft velocity tangent tothesurfaceoftheearth.Athirdcomponent, theverticalvelocity, isneeded andmaybeprovided fromsomenondoppler sourcesuchasabarometric rate-of-c1imb meter.
Theprimary advantage ofthetwo-beam systemisareduction inequipment.
However, the accuracy isnotasgoodaswithsystems usingthreeorfourbeams.
Inprinciple, theCWradarwouldseemtobetheidealmethod ofobtaining doppler­ navigation information.
However, inpractice, leakage between transmitter andreceiver can limitthesehsitivity oftheCWdoppler-navigation radar,justasitdoesinanyCWradar.One methodofeliminating theilleffectsofleakageisbypulsingthetransmitter onandturningthe receiver offfortheduration ofthetransmitted pulseinamanner similartothepulse-doppler radardescribed inSec.4.10.Thepulse-doppler modeofoperation hasthefurtheradvantage in thateachbeamcanoperate withasingleantenna forbothtransmitter andreceiver, whereas a CWradarmustusuallyemploytwoseparate antennas inordertoachievetheneededisolation.
However, pulsesystems sufferfromlossofcoverage and/orsensitivity becauseof"altitude holes."Thesearecausedbythehighprfcommonly usedwithpulse-doppler radarswhenitis necessary toachieve unambiguous doppler measurements.
Thehighprf,although itgives unambiguous doppler, usuallyresultsinambiguous range.Butmoreimportant, apulseradar withambiguous prfcanresultinlosttargets.Ifthetransmitter ispulsedjustwhentheground echoarrivesbackattheradar,itwillnotbedetected.
ThliS,altitude holesexistatornearthose altitudes wheretheechotimeisanintegralmultiple ofthepulse-repetition period.Techniques existforreducing theundesired effectsofaltitude holes,butnotwithoutsomeinconvenience orpossible lossinoverallperformance.44 94 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  The Janus system can be operated incoherently by using the same transmitter to feed a  pair of beams simultaneously.
Typically, one beam is directed ahead and to the right of the  ground track, and the other aft and to the left.
A forward-left and an aft-right are also fed by  the transmitter as a second channel.
The two channels may be operated simultaneously or  timed-shared.
By heterodyning in a mixing element the echo signal received in the fore and aft  beams, the doppler frequency is extracted.
The difference frequency resulting from the mixing  operation is twice the doppler frequency.
A stable transmitter frequency is not needed in this  system as it is in the coherent system.
Coherence is obtained on a relative basis in the process  of comparing the signals received from the forward and backward direction.
Changes in  transmitter frequency affect the echo signals in the two directions equally and are therefore  canceled when taking the difference frequency.
 Another method of achieving the necessary isolation in a doppler-navigation radar is  with a sinusoidal frequency-modulated CW system.
By frequency-modulating'the transmis-  sion, the leakage signal may be reduced relative to the signal from the ground by extracting a  harmonic of the modulating frequency and taking advantage of one of the higher-order Bessel  functions as described in the previous section.
It has been claimed that a doppler navigation  system based on this principle can provide 150 dB of isolation, the amount necessary to  operate at altitudes of 50,000 ft.49  The frequency band from 13.25 to 13.4 GHz has been allocated for airborne doppler  navigation radar, but such radars may also operate within the band from 8.75 to 8.85 MHz.
 The doppler navigator over land can provide a measurement of ground speed with a  standard deviation of from 0.13 to 0.5 percent.55 The standard deviation of the drift angle can  be less than 0.25".
Over water the accuracies are slightly worse.
The backscatter energy over  water, except for near vertical incidence, is generally less than over land, thus lowering the  signal-to-noise ratio.
Also there is an apparent increase in the angle of depression since the  rapid variation of sea echo (oO) as a function of the depression angle y favors returns from  the lower half of the incident beam.
It results in the center of the doppler spectrum being  shifted, so that the direction as determined from the doppler spectrum will differ from that of  the center of the antenna beam.
This is sometimes called the calibration-shift error.
This error  can be corrected by lobe switching; that is, by periodically switching the antenna beam a small  amount in the y-direction at a low rate (perhaps 20 Hz)." TWO displaced doppler-frequency  spectra are produced at the two antenna positions.
A narrow tracking filter tracks the cross-  over of the two spectra.
The frequency of this crossover is the same for water as for land.
 Hence, there will be no bias error over water.
A very narrow antenna beam will also reduce the  over-water bias error without the need for lobe switching.
Another source of error is the mass  movement of water caused by tides, currents, and winds, which result in a doppler frequency  shift in addition to that caused by the aircraft's motion.
 In order to use the doppler radar for navigation purposes, a heading reference is required  to refer the antenna direction indication to some navigational coordinate system, such as true  north.
A computer is also needed to integrate the velocity measurements so as to give tilt:  distance traveled.
 The AN/APN-200 doppler navigation' radar used in the Navy's S3A aircraft, and the  similar AN/APN-213 in the Air Force's E3A (AWACS) operate at 13.3 GHz with 1 watt of  CW power obtained from a solidktate IMPATT diode tran~mitter.'~ The waveform is unmod-  ulated CW.
The antenna is a fixed array with an integral radome producing four receive  beams and four transmit beams with a minimum of 70 dB of isolation between transmit and  receive.
The one-way'beamwidths arerapproximately 2.5" (fore-aft) by 5" (lateral).
The four  beams are displaced symmetrically'at an outward angle of 25" from the vertical.
The beams are  time shared by a single channel which is switched through the four-beam sequence every  94INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS TheJanussystemcanbeoperated incoherently byusingthesametransmitter tofeeda pairofbeamssimultaneously.
Typically, onebeamisdirected aheadandtotherightofthe groundtrack,andtheotheraftandtotheleft.Aforward-left andanaft-right arealsofedby thetransmitter asasecondchannel.
Thetwochannels maybeoperated simultaneously or timed~shared.
Byheterodyning inamixingelementtheechosignalreceived intheforeandaft beams, the dopplerfrequency isextracted.
Thedifference frequency resulting fromthemixing operation istwicethedoppler frequency.
Astabletransmitter frequency isnotneededinthis systemasitisinthecoherent system.Coherence isobtained onarelativebasisintheprocess ofcomparing thesignalsreceived fromtheforward andbackward direction.
Changes in transmitter frequency affecttheechosignalsinthetwodirections equallyandaretherefore canceled whentakingthedifference frequency.
Another methodofachieving thenecessary isolation inadoppler-navigation radaris withasinusoidal frequency-modulated CWsystem.Byfrequency-modulating 'thetransmis­ sion,theleakagesignalmaybereducedrelativetothesignalfromthegroundbyextracting a harmonic ofthemodulating frequency andtakingadvantage ofoneofthehigher-order Bessel functions asdescribed intheprevious section.Ithasbeenclaimedthatadoppler navigation systembasedonthisprinciple canprovide 150dBofisolation, theamount necessary to operateataltitudes of50,000ft.49 Thefrequency bandfrom13.25to13.4GHzhasbeenallocated forairborne doppler navigation radar,butsuchradarsmayalsooperatewithinthebandfrom8.75to8.85MHz.
Thedoppler navigator overlandcanprovideameasurement ofgroundspeedwitha standard deviation offrom0.13to0.5percent.
5SThestandard deviation ofthedriftanglecan belessthan0.25°.Overwatertheaccuracies areslightlyworse.Thebackscatter energyover water,exceptfornearverticalincidence, isgenerally lessthanoverland,thuslowering the signal-to-noise ratio.Alsothereisanapparent increase intheangleofdepression sincethe rapidvariation ofseaecho(0"0)asafunction ofthedepression angleyfavorsreturnsfrom thelowerhalfoftheincident beam.Itresultsinthecenterofthedoppler spectrum being shifted,sothatthedirection asdetermined fromthedopplerspectrum willdifferfromthatof thecenteroftheantenna beam.Thisissometimes calledthecalibration-shift error.Thiserror canbecorrected bylobeswitching; thatis,byperiodically switching theantenna beamasmall amount inthey-direction atalowrate(perhaps 20HZ).55Twodisplaced doppler-frequency spectraareproduced atthetwoantenna positions, Anarrowtracking filtertracksthecross-] overofthetwospectra.
Thefrequency ofthiscrossover isthesameforwaterasforland.
Hence,therewillbenobiaserroroverwater.Averynarrowantenna beamwillalsoreducethe over-water biaserrorwithouttheneedforlobeswitching.
Another sourceoferroristhemass movement ofwatercausedbytides,currents, andwinds,whichresultinadopplerfrequency shiftinaddition tothatcausedbytheaircraft's motion.
Inordertousethedoppler radarfornavigation purposes, aheadingreference isrequired torefertheantennadirection indication tosomenavigational coordinate system,suchastrue north.Acomputer isalsoneededto'integrate thevelocity measurements soastogivethe distance traveled.
TheAN/APN-200 doppler navigation' radarusedintheNavy'sS3Aaircraft, andthe similarAN/APN-213 intheAirForce'sE3A(AWACS) operateat13.3GHzwith1wallof CWpowerobtained fromasolid~state IMPAITdiodetransmitter.56Thewaveform isunmod­ ulatedCWoTheantennaisafixedarraywithanintegral radome producing fourreceive beamsandfourtransmit beamswithaminimum of70dBofisolation between transmit and receive.Theone-way! beamwidths are'approximately 2.5°(fore-aft) by5°(lateral).
Thefour beamsaredisplaced symmetrically'at anoutward angleof25°fromthevertical.Thebeamsare timesharedbyasinglechannel whichisswitched through thefour-beam sequence every CW AND FREQUENCY-MODULATED RADAR %  250 Ins.
A phase-monopulse tecltrlique is ilsed to reduce the terrain bias effect.68 The unit  weighs 44 poi~rids including radorne, and requires 165 VA of power.
It is required to operate  fro111 50 to 1000 knots at attitudes of 225" pitch and +45" roll of the aircraft, at an altitude  of 40.000 ft over water.
The rrns accuracy is claimed to be within 0.13 percent $0.1 knots of  the true prourid velocity.
 3.5 MULTIPLE-FREQUENCY CW  RADAR'^.'^ 63  Although it has been said in this chapter that CW radar does not measure range, it is possible  undcr sorllc circurns~:t~lccs to do so by measuring the phase of the echo signal relative to the  phase of tile trarlsrnitted signal.
Corlsider a CW radar radiating a single-frequency sine wave of  the form sir1 2?/;, t.
(The amplitude of tile signal is taken to be unity since it does not influence  tllc rcsr~lt.) l'lic sig~lal travels to tllc target at a range R and returns to the radar after a time  'I' = 2R/(., wl~ere (.
is tile velocity of propagation.
The echo signal received at the radar is  sin [2n/o(r - 7')].
If tlie transrnitted and received signals are compared in a phase detector,  the orttpilt is jwoportio11:il to the phase difference between the two and is A4 = 2?f0 T =  4?lo Rlc.
l'llc phase differerice may therefore be used as a measure of the range, or  However, the measurement of the phase difference A4 is unambiguous only if A4 does not  exceed 2n radians.
Substituting A4 = 2n into Eq.
(3.17) gives the maximum unambiguous  range as 112.
At radar frequencies this unambiguous tange is much too small to be of practical  interest.
 The region of i~nambiguous range may be extended considerably by utilizing two separate  CW signals differing slightly in frequency.
The unambiguous range in this case corresponds to  a half wavelength at the difference frequency.
 The transmitted waveform is assumed to consist of two continuous sine waves of  frequency f, and 1; separated by an amount AJ For convenience, the amplitudes of all signals  arc set equal to unity.
'The voltage waveforms of the two components of the transmitted signal  t-, and la2, may be written as  I*, .,.
= sin (2?f1 t + 4]) (3.18~)  1727.
= sin (2nf2t + 42) (3.186)  where 4, and 42 are arbitrary (constarit) phase angles.
The echo signal is shifted in frequency  by the doppler efT'ect.
The form of the doppler-shifted signals at each of the two frequencies f,  and ,1; tnay be written  I 4~4-1 Ro t7,, = sin 2n(f1 +fdl)t - ----  C +  where Ro = range to target at a particular time t = to (range that would be measured if  target were not moving)  .br = doppler frequency shift associated with frequency fl  .f,, = doppler frequency shift associated with frequency f2  (3.17)CWANDFREQUENCY-MODULATED RADAR95 250ms.Aphase-monopulse technique isIIsedtoreducetheterrainbiaseffect.68Theunit weighs44pounds including radome, andrequires 165VAofpower.Itisrequired tooperate from50to1000knotsatattitudes of±25°pitchand±45°rolloftheaircraft, atanaltitude of40,000ftoverwater.Thermsaccuracy isclaimed tobewithin0.13percent ±O.1knotsof thetruegroundvelocity.
3.5l\'lULTIPLE-FREQUENCY CWRADAR 12.57-63 Although ithasbeensaidinthischapterthatCWradardoesnotmeasure range,itispossible undersomecircul11stances todosobymeasuring thephaseoftheechosignalrelativetothe phaseofthetransmitted signal.Consider aCWradarradiating asingle-frequency sinewaveof theformsin2rr!;,r.(Theamplitude ofthesignalistakentobeunitysinceitdoesnotinfluence theresult.)ThesignaltravelstothetargetatarangeRandreturnstotheradarafteratime T=2R/c.wherecisthevelocity ofpropagation.
Theechosignalreceived attheradaris sin[2rrfo(t-T)].Ifthetransmitted andreceived signalsarecompared inaphasedetector, theoutputisproportional tothephasedifference between thetwoandis114>=2rrfoT= 4rr!~Ric.Thephasedifference maytherefore beusedasameasure oftherange,or R=~114>=~114> 4~fo4rr However, themeasurement ofthephasedifference 114>isunambiguous onlyif114>doesnot exceed2nradians.
Substituting 114>=2nintoEq.(3.17)givesthemaximum unambiguous rangeas),/2.Atradarfrequencies thisunambiguous rangeismuchtoosmalltobeofpractical interest.
Theregionofunambiguous rangemaybeextended considerably byutilizing twoseparate CWsignalsdiffering slightlyinfrequency.
Theunambiguous rangeinthiscasecorresponds to ahalfwavelength atthedifference frequency.
Thetransmitted waveform isassumed toconsistoftwocontinuous sinewavesof frequency IIand.l~separated byanamountI1fForconvenience, theamplitudes ofallsignals arcsetequaltounity.Thevoltagewaveforms ofthetwocomponents ofthetransmitted signal I'llandl'21maybewrittenas I'll=sin(2~(1t+4>d PH=sin(2n/2t+4>2)(3.18a) (3.18b) where4>Iand4>2arearbitrary (constant) phaseangles.Theechosignalisshiftedinfrequency bythedoppler effect.Theformofthedoppler-shifted signalsateachofthetwofrequenciesII and.l2maybewritten "IR=SIll [2n(f1±Iddt- 4n/~Ro+4>1] (3.l9a) "2R=Sill[2rr(f2±fll2)t-4n/~Ro+4>2] (3.19b) whereRo=rangetotargetataparticular timet=to(rangethatwouldbemeasured if targetwerenotmoving) .(."=doppler frequency shiftassociated withfrequency/1 .(.12=doppler frequency shiftassociated withfrequency /2 % INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  Since the two RF frequencies f, and f2 are approximately the same (that is, f2 =/, + AS, where  Af 4 fl) the doppler frequency shifts fd, and fd2 are approximately equal to one another.
 Therefore we may write&, =h2 =h .
 The receiver separates the two components of the echo signal and heterodynes each  received signal component with the corresponding transmitted waveform and extracts the two  doppler-frequency components given below:  vl~ = sin (+Ztrfdt - ----  C 4nf1 Ro)  The phase difference between these two components is  Hence  which is the same as that of Eq.
(3.17), with Af substituted in place of.fo.
 The two-frequency CW technique for measuring range was described as using the dopplzr  frequency shift.
When the doppler frequency is zero, as with a stationary target, it is also  possible, in principle, to extract the phase difference.
If the target carries a beacon or some  other form of echo-signal augmentor, the doppler frequency shift may be simulated by trans-  lating the echo frequency, as with a single-sideband modulator.
 The two frequencies of the two-frequency radar were described as being transmitted  simultane~usly.~~ They may also be transmitted sequentially in some applications by rapidly  switching a single RF source.
 A large difference in frequency between the two transmitted signals improves the accuracy  of the range measurement since large Af means a proportionately large change in A4 for a  given range.
However, there is a limit to the value of AJ since A+ cannot be greater than 2n  radians if the range is to remain unambiguous.
The maximum unambiguous range R,,,,, is  Therefore Af must be less than c/2RUnamb.
Note that when Af is replaced by the pulse repetition  rate, Eq.
(3.39) gives the maximum unambiguous range of a pulse radar.
 A qualitative explanation of the operation of the two-frequency radar may be had by  considering both carrier frequencies to'be in phase at zero range.
As they progress outward  from the radar, the relative phase between the two increases because of their difference in  frequency.
This phase difference may be used as a measure of the elapsed time.
When the two  signals slip in phase by 1 cycle, the measurement of phase, and hence range, becomes  ambiguous.
 The two-frequency CW radar is essentially a single-target radar since only one phase  difference can be measured at a time.
If more than one target is present, the echo signal  becomes complicated and the meaning of the phase measurement is doubtful.
The theoretical  accuracy with which range can be measured with the two-frequency CW radar can be found  96INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS SincethetwoRFfrequencies!l and!zareapproximately thesame(thatisJz=/1+AI.where 11/~!dthedoppler frequency shifts!d1and/dZareapproximately equaltooneanother.
Therefore wemaywriteh1=hz=h.
Thereceiver separates thetwocomponents oftheechosignalandheterodynes each received signalcomponent withthecorresponding transmitted waveform andextractsthetwo doppler-frequency components givenbelow: ThephasedilTerence between thesetwocomponents is 11<jJ=~n(fz-!I)Ro=4n4{Ro c c(3.20(1) (3.20/1) (3.2t) Hence (3.22) whichisthesameasthatofEq.(3.17),withI1fsubstituted inplaceofro.
Thetwo-frequency CWtechnique formeasuring rangewasdescribed asusingthedoppla frequency shift.Whenthedoppler frequency iszero,aswithastationary target,itisalso possible, inprinciple, toextractthephasedifference.
Ifthetargetcarriesabeaconorsome otherformofecho-signal augmentor, thedoppler frequency shiftmaybesimulated bytrans­ latingtheechofrequency, aswithasingle-sideband modulator.
Thetwofrequencies ofthetwo-frequency radarweredescribed asbeingtransmitted simultaneously.63 Theymayalsobetransmitted sequentially insomeapplications byrapidly switching asingleRFsource.
Alargedifference infrequency between thetwotransmitted signalsimproves theaccuracy oftherangemeasurement sincelargeI1fmeansaproportionately largechangeinAcPfora givenrange.However, thereisalimittothevalueof4f,since11<jJcannotbegreaterthan2n radiansiftherangeistoremainunambiguous.
Themaximum unambiguous rangeRunambis, ) c Runamb=2I1f (3.23) Therefore I1fmustbelessthanc/2Runllmb.Note thatwhenI1fisreplaced bythepulserepetition rate,Eq.(3.39)givesthemaximum unambiguous rangeofapulseradar.
Aqualitative explanation oftheoperation ofthetwo-frequency radarmaybehadby considering bothcarrierfrequencies to'beinphaseatzerorange.Astheyprogress outward fromtheradar,therelative phasebetween thetwoincreases because oftheirdifference in frequency.
Thisphasedifference maybeusedasameasure oftheelapsedtime.Whenthetwo signalsslipinphaseby1cycle,themeasurement ofphase,andhencerange,becomes ambiguous.
Thetwo-frequency CWradarisessentially asingle-target radarsinceonlyonephase dilTerence canbemeasured atatime.Ifmorethanonetargetispresent, theechosignal becomes ~omplicated andthemeaningofthephasemeasurement isdoubtful.
Thetheoretical accuracy withwhichrangecanbemeasured withthetwo-frequency CWradarcanbefound CW AND FREQUENCY-MODULATED RADAR 97  Irorii tlic ~iietl~ocls descri1,ed ill Scc.
11.1.
It ciiri be sllown that the tlreoretical rrils range error is  bet ere E = energy cor~tairled in received signal and No = noise power per hertz of bandwidth.
 II ,his is cornparecl M it11 the rlns range error tlieoretically possible with the linear FM pitlse-  cc npression waveform whose spectrum occupies the same bandwidth A/; tlie error obtained  w~tli the two-frequency CW waveform is less by the factor 0.29.
 Equation (3.24) indicates that the greater the separation Af between the two frequencies,  the less will be tlic rrns elror fiowever.
tlie frequency difference must riot be too large if  trrlarnbiguoi~s riieasurenients are to be rtiade.
The selection of A/ represents a cornpromise  betweer1 the reqi~ircrllents of accuracy and ambiguity.
Both accurate and unambiguous range  rneasurernents can be rrr,ide by transmitting three or more frequencies instead of just two.
 For example, if [lit: three frequencies f,, f,, and f, are such that f3 - fl = k( f2 -A), where  k is a factor of the order of 10 or 20, the pair of frequencies f3, fl gives an anibiguous but  accurate range rile.
xrernent while the pair of frequencies f2, fl are chosen close to resolve  the ambiguities in the l; , fl nieasurenient.
Likewise, if further accuracy is required a fourth  frequency can be transmitted and its ambiguities resolved by the less accurate but unambiguous  roc:isr~reri~tnt ohtnitied fro111 the three frequencies,f,, f2, f,.
As more frequencies are added.
 tlic sl~ectrunl itrid target rcsolutio~l approach that oblai~led wit11 a pulsc or all ITM-C'W  waveform.
 -I'l~c ~licirstrreillcrlt of range by ~neasuring tlic phase difference between separated frequeri-  cies is analogous to tlie measurement of angle by measuring the phase diflerence betwee11  widely spaced antennas, as in an interferometer antenna.
The interferometer antenna gives an  accurate but ambiguous measurement of angle.
The ambiguities may be resolved by additional  antennas spaced closer together.
The spacing between the individual antennas in the interfer-  ometer systeni corresponds to the separation between frequencies in the multiple-frequency  distance-~iieasuri~ig technique.
The minitrack system is an example of an interferometer in  which angular ambiguities are resolved in a manner sfmilar to that described.64  The multiple-frequency CW radar technique has been applied to the accurate measure-  ment of distance in surveying and in missile guidance.
The Tellurometer is the name given to a  portable electronic surveying instrument which is based on this prin~iple.~'-~~ It consists of a  master unit at one end of the line and a remote unit at the other end.
The master unit transmits  a carrier frequency of 3,000 MHz, with four single-sideband modulated frequencies separated  from the carrier by 10.000, 9.990, 9.900, and 9.000 MHz.
The 10-MHz difference frequency  provides the basic accuracy measurement, while !he difference frequencies of 1 MHz, 100 kHz,  and 10 kHz permit the resolution of ambiguities.
 The remote unit at the other end of the line receives the signals from the master unit and  amplifies arid retrarisrnits tllern.
The phases of the returned signals at the master unit are  compared with tlie phases of the outgoing signals.
Since the master and the remote units are  stationary, there is no doppler frequency shift.
The function of the doppler frequency is  provided by modulating the retransmitted signals at the remote unit in such a manner that a  I -k Hz beat frequency is obtained from the heterodyning process at the receiver of the master  unit.
Tile phase ofthe I-kf-iz signals coritains the same information as the phase of the multiple  frequeqcies.
 7 re MRB 201 Tellurometer is capable of measuring distances from 200 to 250 km,  assuming reasonable line of sight conditions, with an accuracy of 10.5 m 1 3 x d,  where d is the distance being measured.
The transmitter power is 200 mW and the antenna is a  snlall paraboloid with crossed feeds to make the polarizations of the transmitted and received  CWANDFREQUENCY-MODULATED RADAR97 fromthemethods described inSec.11..\.IIcanbeshownthatthetheoretical rmsrangeerroris c()R=.....--...-.-- 4rr~1(2E/N0)112(3.24) ,,"ereE=energycontained inreceived signalandNo=noisepowerperhertzofbandwidth.
II,hisiscompared withtherillsrangeerrortheoretically possible withthelinearFMpulse­ c(npression waveform whosespectrum occupies thesamebandwidth ~r.theerrorobtained wIththetwo-frequency CWwaveform islessbythefactor0.29.
Fquation (3.24)indicates thatthegreatertheseparation ~rbetween thetwofrequencies, thelesswillbethermserror.However, thefrequency difference mustnotbetoolargeif unambiguous measurements arctobemade.Theselection of~rrepresents acompromise between therequirements ofaccuracy andambiguity.
Bothaccurate andunambiguous range measurements canbeIlndebytransmitting threeormorefrequencies insteadofjusttwo.
Forexample, iftht:threefrequencies I"12'and13aresuchthat13-I,=k(f2-II)'where kisafactoroftheorderof10or20,thepairoffrequencies 13,IIgivesanambiguous but accurate rangeme:')urement whilethepairoffrequencies 12,IIarechosenclosetoresolve theambiguities inthe13,IImeasurement.
Likewise, iffurtheraccuracy isrequired afourth frequency canbetransmitted anditsambiguities resolved bythelessaccurate butunambiguous I/lCaSllrelllcnt ohtained fromthethreefrequenciesII'12,.f3'Asmorefrequencies areadded, thespectrum andtargetresolution approach thatobtained withapulseoral\FM-CW waveform.
Themeasurement ofrangebymeasuring the phase difference betweenseparated frequen­ ciesisanalogous tothemeasurement ofanglebymeasuring thephasedifference between widelyspacedantennas, asinaninterferometer antenna.
Theinterferometer antenna givesan accurate butambiguous measurement ofangle.Theambiguities mayberesolved byadditional antennas spacedclosertogether.
Thespacingbetween theindividual antennas intheinterfer­ ometersystemcorresponds totheseparation between frequencies inthemultiple-frequency distance-measuring technique.
Theminitrack systemisanexample ofaninterferometer in whichangular ambiguities areresolved inamannerstmilartothatdescribed.64 Themultiple-frequency CWradartechnique hasbeenappliedtotheaccurate measure­ mentofdistance insurveying andinmissileguidance.
TheTellurometer isthenamegiventoa portable electronic surveying instrument whichisbasedonthisprinciple.57-59Itconsistsofa masterunitatoneendofthelineandaremoteunitattheotherend.Themasterunittransmits acarrierfrequency of3,000MHz,withfoursingle-sideband modulated frequencies separated fromthecarrierby10.000,9.990,9.900,and9.000MHz.ThelO-MHz difference frequency provides thebasicaccuracy measurement, whilethedifference frequencies of1MHz,100kHz, and10kHzpermittheresolution ofambiguities.
Theremoteunitattheotherendofthelinereceivesthesignalsfromthemasterunitand amplifies andretransmits them.Thephasesofthereturned signalsatthemasterunitare compared withthephasesoftheoutgoing signals.Sincethemasterandtheremoteunitsare stationary, thereisnodoppler frequency shift.Thefunction ofthedoppler frequency is provided bymodulating theretransmitted signalsattheremoteunitinsuchamannerthata l-kHzbeatfrequency isobtained fromtheheterodyning processatthereceiverofthemaster UIIit.ThephaseoftheI-kHzsignalscontaiils thesameinformation asthephaseofthemultipie frcque1cics.
1IeMRB201Tellurometer iscapable ofmeasuring distances from200to250km, assuminr reasonable lineofsightconditions, withanaccuracy ofiO.5mi3 x10-6d, wheredisthedistance beingmeasured.
Thetransmitter poweris2()(\mWandtheantenna isa smallparaboloid withcrossedfeedstomakethepolarizations ofthetransmitted andreceived 98 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  signals orthogonal.
The MRA 5 operates within the 10 to 10.5 GHz band, from 100 m to  50 km range with an accuracy of k0.05 m + d, assuming a correction is made for  meteorological conditions.
 In addition to its use in surveying, the multiple CW frequency method of measuring range  has been applied in range-instrumentation radar for the measurement of the distance to a  transponder-equipped missile;65 the distance to satellites;66 in satellite navigation systems  based on range rnea~urement;~~ and for detecting the presence of an obstacle in the path of a  moving automobile by measuring the distance, the doppler velocity, and the sign of the  doppler (whether the target is approaching or re~eding).~'  REFERENCES  1.
Sandretto, P.
C.: The Long Quest, IRE Trans., vol.
ANE-1, no.
2, p.
2, June, 1954.
 2.
Van Vleck, J.
H., and D.
Middleton: A Theoretical Comparison of the Visual, Aural, and Meter  Reception of Pulsed Signals in the Presence of Noise, J.
Appl.
Phys., vol.
17, pp.
940-971, November,  1946.
 3.
Selridge, H.: Proximity Fuzes for Artillery, Electronics, vol.
19, pp.
104-109, February, 1946.
 4.
Bonner, H.
M.: The Radio Proximity Fuse, Elec.
Eng., vol.
66, pp.
888-893, September, 1947.
 5.
Saunders, W.
K.: CW and FM Radar, chap.
16 of " Radar Handbook," M.
I.
Skolnik (ed.), McGraw-  Hill Book Co., New York, 1970.
 6.
Barlow, E.
J.: Doppler Radar, Proc.
IRE, vol.
37.
pp.
340-355, April, 1949.
 7.
Meyer, M.
A., and A.
B.
Goldberg: Applications of the Turnstile Junction, IRE Truns., vol.
MTT-3,  pp.
40-45.
December, 1955.
 8.
Roberts, W.
B.: Rotating Wave Radar, Electronics, vol.
19, pp.
130-133, July, 1946.
 9.
Sanders, W.
K.: Post-war Developments in Continuous-wave and Frequency-modulated Radar, f RE  Trans., vol.
ANE-8, pp.
7-19, March, 1961.
 10.
Saunders, W.
K.: Control of Surface Currents by the Use of Channels, IRE Trans., vol.
AP-4,  pp.
85-87, January, 1956.
 11.
Agar, W.
O., and M.
Morgan: Isolation of Separate Transmitter and Receiver Aerials for Continuous  Wave Radars, Marconi Review, vol.
26, pp.
25-34, 1st qtr., 1963.
 12.
Ridenour, L.
N.: "Radar System Engineering," MIT Radiation Laboratory Series, vol.
1, McGraw-  Hill Book Co., New York, 1947.
 13.
O'Hara, F.
J., and G.
M.
Moore: A High Performance CW Receiver Using Feedthru Nulling, hlicro-  wave J., vol.
6, pp.
63-71,'September; 1963.
 14.
Greene, J.
C., and J.
F.
Lyons: Receivers with Zero Intermediate Frequency, Proc.
IRE, vol.
47.
 pp.
335-336, February, 1959.
 15.
Kerr, D.
E.
(ed.): " Propagation of Short Radio Waves," MIT Radiation Laboratory Series, vol.
13.
 pp.
539-543, McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York, 1951.
 16.
Rabiner, L.
R., and C.
M.
Rader (eds.): "Digital Signal Processing," IEEE Press, New York.
1972.
 17.
Gardner, F.
M.: DOPLOC Uses Phase-locked Filter, Electronic Ind., vol.
18, pp.
96-99, October,  1959.
 18.
Kalmus, H.
P.: Direction Sensitive Doppler Device, Proc, IRE, vol.
43, pp.
698-700, June, 1955.
 19.
Logue, S.
H.: Rate-of-climb Meter Uses Doppler Radar, Electronics, vol.
30, no.
6, pp.
150 -152, June  1, 1957.
 20.
Kalmus, H.
P.: Doppler Wave Recognition with High Clutter Rejection, IEEE Trans., vol.
AES-3,  no.
6 Suppl., pp.
334-339, November, 1967.
 21.
Temes, C.
L.: Relativistic Considerations of Doppler Shift, IRE Trans..
vol.
ANE-6, p.
37.
Marclr.
 1959.
 22.
Knop, C.
M.: A Note on Doppler-Shifted Signals, Proc.
IEEE, vol.
54, pp.
807-808, May.
1966.
 23.
Gill, T.
P.: "The Doppler Effect," Academic Press, New York, 1965.
 24.
Merriman, R.
H., and J.
W.
Rush: Microwave Doppler Sensors, Microware J..
vol.
17, pp.
27-30.
July,  1974.
 25.
Whetton, C.
P.: Industrial and ~cie"tific ~~~lications of Doppler Radar, Micro\rsarr J..
vol.
18.
 pp.
39-42, November, 1975.
 26.
Easton, R.
L., and J.
J.
Fleming: The Navy Space Surveillance System, Proc.
IRE, vol.
48, pp.
663-669.
 April, 1960.
.
., .
.
,.'.
 98INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS signalsorthogonal.
TheMRA5operates withinthe10to10.5GHzband,from100mto 50kmrangewithanaccuracy of±0.05m±10-5d,assuming acorrection ismadefor meteorological conditions.
Inaddition toitsuseinsurveying, themultipleCWfrequency methodofmeasuring range hasbeenappliedinrange-instrumentation radarforthemeasurement ofthedistance toa transponder-equipped missile;65 thedistance tosatellites;66 insatellitenavigation systems basedonrangemeasurement;67 andfordetecting thepresence ofanobstacle inthepathofa movingautomobile bymeasuring thedistance, thedoppler velocity, andthesignofthe doppler(whether thetargetisapproaching orreceding).63 REFERENCES 1.Sandretto, P.c.:TheLongQuest,IRETrans.,vol.ANE-l,no.2,p.2,June,1954.
2.VanVleck,J.H.,andD.Middleton: ATheoretical Comparison oftheVisual,Aural,andMeter Reception ofPulsedSignalsinthePresence ofNoise,J.Appl.Phys.,vol.17,pp.940-971, November, 1946.
3.Selridge, H.:Proximity FuzesforArtillery, Electronics, vol.19,pp.104-109, February, 1946.
4.Bonner, H.M.:TheRadioProximity Fuse,Elec.Eng.,vol.66,pp.888-893, September, 1947.
5.Saunders, W.K.:CWandFMRadar,chap.16of"RadarHandbook," M.I.Skolnik(ed.),McGraw­ HillBookCo.,NewYork,1970.
6.Barlow, E.J.:Doppler Radar,Proc.IRE,vol.37,pp.340-355, April,1949.
7.Meyer,M.A.,andA.B.Goldberg: Applications oftheTurnstile Junction, IRETrails.,vol.MIT-3, pp.40-45,December, 1955.
8.Roberts, W.B.:Rotating WaveRadar,Electronics, vol.19,pp.130-133, July,1946.
9.Sanders, W.K.:Post-war Developments inContinuous-wave andFrequency-modulated Radar,IRE Trans.,vol.ANE-8,pp.7-19,March,1961.
10.Saunders, W.K.:Control ofSurface Currents bytheUseofChannels, IRETrans.,vol.AP-4, pp.85-87,January, 1956.
11.Agar,W.O.,andM.Morgan: Isolation ofSeparate Transmitter andReceiver AerialsforContinuous WaveRadars,Marconi Review,vol.26,pp.25-34,1stqtr.,1963.
12.Ridenour, L.N.:"Radar Sys~emEngineering," MITRadiation Laboratory Series,vol.l,McGraw­ HillBookCo.,NewYork,1947.
13.O'Hara, F.J.,andG.M.Moore:AHighPerformance CWReceiver UsingFeedthru Nulling,Micro­ waveJ.,vol.6,pp.63-71,"September; 1963.
14.Greene, J.c.,andJ.F.Lyons:Receivers withZeroIntermediate Frequency, Proc.IRE,vol.47.
pp.335-33~ February, 195~ 15.Kerr,D.E.(ed.):"Propagation ofShortRadioWaves," MITRadiation Laboratory Series,vol.13, pp.539-543, McGraw-Hili BookCompany, NewYork,1951.
16.Rabiner, L.R.,andC.M.Rade'r(eds.):"Digital SignalProcessing," IEEEPress,NewYork,1972.
17.Gardner, F.M.:DOPLOC UsesPhase-locked Filter,Electronic Ind.,vol.18,pp.96-99,October, 1959.
18.Kalmus, H.P.:Direction Sensitive Doppler Device,Proc.IRE,vol.43.pp.698-700.
June,1955.
19.Logue,S.H.:Rate-of-climb MeterUsesDoppler Radar,Electronics, vol.30,no.6,pp.150152,Jline 1,1957.
20.Kalmus.
H.P.:Doppler WaveRecognition withHighClutterRejection, IEEETrans.,vol.AES-3.
no.6Suppl.,pp.334-339, November, 1967.
21.Temes,C.L.:Relativistic Considerations ofDoppler Shift,IRETrailS.,vol.ANE-6, p.37,March.
1959.
22.Knop,C.M.:ANoteonDoppler-Shifted Signals,Proc.IEEE,vol.54,pp.807-808, May,1966 23.Gill,T.P.:"TheDoppler Effect,"Academic Press,NewYork,1965.
24.Merriman, R.H.,andJ.W.Rush:Microwave Doppler Sensors,MicrowQl'e J.,vol.17,pp.27-30.July.
1974.
...
25.Whetton, C.P.:Industrial andScientific Applications ofDoppler Radar,Microwat't' 1.,vol.18, pp.39-42,November, 1975.
.
26.Easton, R.L.,and1.
1.Fleming: TheNavySpaceSurveillance System,Proc.IRE.vol.48,pp.663-669.
April,1960.
., ..,. CW AND FREQUENCY-MODULATED RADAR 99  27.
Klass.
P.
J.: Navy lniproves Accuracy, Detection Range of Space Surveillance Chain, Aviation Week,  Aug.
16, 1965.
 28.
Ismail, M.
A.
W.: A Study of the Double Modulated FM Radar.
Itrst.
Hockfrequenztech.
atrder E.T.H.
 Rept.
21, Verlag Leemann, Zurich, 1955.
 29.
Luck, D.
G.
C.: " Frequency Modulated Radar." McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York.
1949.
 30.
Wimberley, F.
T., and J.
F.
Lane, Jr.: The AN/APN-22 Radio Altimeter, IRE Tratu., vol.
ANE-I.
 no.
2, pp.
8.- 14.
June.
1954.
 31.
Banks.
I).
S.: Contirii~ous Wave (CW) Radar, EASCON '75 Record, IEEE Publ.
75 CHO 998-5  EASCON.
pp.
107-A 10 107-Ci, 1975.
 32.
Appleton, E.
V., arid M.
A.
F.
Barnett: On Some Direct Evidence for Downward Atmospheric  Reflcctiori of I:lcctric Rays, I'r.oc..
Roy.
Soc., vol.
A109, p.
621, 1925.
 33.
Espenshied.
L..
ant1 R.
C.
Newliouse: A Terrain Clearance Indicator.
Bell Sys.
Teclr.
J., vol.
18,  pp.
222 -234.
1929.
 34.
Block.
A,.
K.
E.
Huecks, arid A.
G.
Heaton: Improved Radio Altimeter, flireless dorld, vol.
60,  pp.
13X 140, March.
1954.
 35.
(ilegg.
K.
C.
M.: A Low Noise CW Doppler Technique, Natl.
Conf Proc.
Aeronaut.
Electronics  (Dayton, Ohio), pp.
133.- 144.
1958.
 36.
Capelli, M.: Radio Altimeter, IRE Trans., vol.
ANE-I, no.
2, pp.
3-7, June, 1954.
 37.
Sollenberger.
T.
E.: Multipath Phase Errors in CW-FM Tracking Systems, IRE Trans., vol.
AP-3.
 pp.
185- 192, October, 1955.
 38.
Withers.
M.
J.: Matched Filter for Frequency-Modulated Continuous-Wave Radar Systems, Proc.
 IEE (Lorrdor~), vol.
113, pp.
405-412, March, 1966.
 39.
Barrick, D.
E.: FM/CW Radar Signals and Digital Processing, National Oceanic and At~nosplteric  Adnritristration, Boulder.
Colorado.
NOAA Technical Report ERL 283-WPL 26, July, 1973.
 40.
Craig.
S.
E., W.
Fishbein, and 0.
E.
Rittenback: Continuous-Wave Radar with High Range Resolu-  tion and Unambiguous Velocity Determination, IRE Trans., vol.
MIL-6, pp.
153-161, April, 1962.
 41.
Horton.
B.
M.: Noise-Modulated Distance Measuring System, Proc.
IRE, vol.
47, pp.
821-828, May,  1959.
 42.
Cliadwick.
R.
B..
and G.
R.
Cooper: Measurement of Distributed Targets with the Random Signal  Radar, iEEE Trans., vol.
AES-8, pp.
743-750, November, 1972.
 42.
Berger.
F.
B.: The Nature of Doppler Velocity Measurement, IRE Trans., vol.
ANE-4, pp.
103-1 12,  September.
1957.
 44.
Rerger, F.
R.: The Design of Airborne Doppler Velocity Measuring Systems, IRE Trans., vol.
ANE-4,  pp.
157 - 175.
December.
1957.
 45.
Fried.
W.
R.: Principles and Performance Analysis of Doppler Navigation Systems, IRE Trans.,  vol.
ANE-4, pp.
176- 196, December, 1957.
 46.
Condie.
M.
A.: Basic Design Considerations: Automatic Navigator AN/APN-67, IRE Trans.,  vol.
ANE-4.
pp.
197-201.
December, 1957.
 47.
McMalion.
F.
A.: TIie AN/APN-81 Doppler Navigation System.
IRE Trans., vol.
ANE-4,  pp.
202-21 1, December.
1957.
 48.
McKay.
M.
W.: The AN/APN-96 Doppler Radar Set, IRE Natl.
Conv.
Record, vol.
6, pt.
5, pp.
71-79,  1958.
 49.
Brown.
R.
K..
N.
F.
Moody.
P.
M.
Thompson, R.
J.
Bibby, C.
A.
Franklin, J.
H.
Ganton, and J.
 Mitchell: A Lightweight and Self-contained Airborne Navigational System, Proc.
IRE, vol.
47,  pp.
778-807.
May, 1959.
 50.
Glegg.
K.
C.
M.: A Low Noise CW Doppler Technique, Natl.
Cot$ Proc.
Aeronaut, Electronics  (Dayton.
Oliio), pp.
133- 144.
1958.
 51.
7'ollefson.
R.
D.: Application of Frequency Modulation Techniques to Doppler Radar Sensors, Natl.
 Corrl: P1.o~.
Aeroriartt.
Electrorrics (Dayton.
Ohio), pp.
683-687.
1959.
 52.
Kramer, E.: A Historical Survey of the Application of the Doppler Principle for Radio Navigation,  lEEE 7-rarrs..
vol.
AES-8.
pp.
258-263, May.
1972.
 53.
Fried, W.
R.: New Developments in Radar and Radio Sensors for Aircraft Navigation, IEEE Trans.,  vol.
AES-10.
pp.
25-33.
January.
1974.
 54.
Gray, T.: Airborne Doppler Navigation Techniques, chap.
13 of "Radar Techniques for Detection,  Tracking, and Navigation." W.
T.
Blackband (ed.), Gordon and Breach Science Publishers, New  York.
1966.
 55.
Fried, W.
R.: Doppler Navigation.
chap.
6 of "Avionics Navigation Systems," M.
Kayton and W.
R.
 Fried (eds.).
John Wiley and Sons.
Inc..
New York, 1969.
 56.
Andreone.
V.
M..
and C.
N.
Bates: 1)oppier Radar Boast Design Innovations, Microwaves, vol.
13,  pp.
72-82.
October.
1974.
 CWANDFREQUENCY-MODULATED RADAR99 27.Klass.P.J.:NavyImrroves Accuracy.
Detection RangeofSpaceSurveillance Chain.Aviation Week.
Aug.16.1965.
28.Ismail.M.A.W.:AStudyoftheDoubleModulated FMRadar.Inst.Hock{requenztecll.
onderE.T.H.
Rerr.21.VerlagLeemann.
Zurich.1955.
29.Luck.D.G.c.:"Frequency Modulated Radar." McGraw-Hili BookCompany.
NewYork.1949.
30.Wimberley.
F.T..andJ.F.Lane.Jr.:TheAN/APN-22 RadioAltimeter.
IRETrans.•vol.ANE-L no.2.pr.R-14.June.1954.
31.Banks.D.S.:Continuous Wave(CW)Radar.EASCON '75Record.
IEEEPubl.75CHO998-5 EASCON.
rr.107-A10107-0.1975.
32.Appleton.
E.V..andM.A.F.Barnell: OnSomeDirectEvidence forDownward Atmospheric ReOeclion ofFleclric Rays.l'roc.RoJ'.Soc..vol.A109.p.621.1925.
33.Esrenshied.
L..andR.C.Newhouse: ATerrain Clearance Indicator.
BellSys.Tee".J.•vol.18.
rr.222-234.
1939.
34.Alock.A..K.E.Ruecks, andA.G.Heaton: Improved RadioAltimeter.
Wireles:) dor/d,vol.60.
rr.13R 140.March.1954 35.Glegg.K.eM.:ALowNoiseCWDoppler Technique.
Natl.Con(Proc.Aeronaut.
Electronics (Dayton.
Ohio).rr.133-144.
1958.
36.Capelli, M.:RadioAltimeter.
IRETrans.•vol.ANE-l, no.2,pp.3-7,June,1954.
37.Sollenberger, T.E.:Multipath PhaseErrorsinCW-FM Tracking Systems.
IRETrans.,vol.AP-3, rr.185-192.
October.
1955.
38.Withers.
M.J.:Matched FilterforFrequency-Modulated Continuous-Wave RadarSystems, Proc.
lEE(London).
vol.113.pp.405-412, March.1966.
39.Barrick, D.E.:FM/CW RadarSignalsandDigitalProcessing, National OceanicandAtmospheric Administration.
Boulder.
Colorado.
NOAATechnical ReportERL283-WPL 26.July,1973.
40.Craig.S.E..W.Fishbein.
andO.E.Rittenback: Continuous-Wave RadarwithHighRangeResolu­ tionandUnambiguous Velocity Determination.
IRETrans.,vol.MIL-6,pp.153-161, April,1962.
41.Horton.
B.M.:Noise-Modulated Distance Measuring System,Proc.IRE,vol.47,pp.821-828, May.
1959.
42.Chadwick.
R.B..andG.R.Cooper: Measurement ofDistributed Targets withtheRandom Signal Radar.IEEETrans.•vol.AES-8.pp.743-750.
November, 1972.
43.Berger.F.B.:TheNatureofDoppler Velocity Measurement, IRETrans.,vol.ANE-4.
pp.103-112, September.
1957.
44.Herger,F.R.:TheDesignofAirborneDoppler Velocity Measuring Systems.
IRETrans.•vol.ANE-4.
pr.157·175.December.
1957.
45.Fried.W.R.:Principles andPerformance Analysis ofDoppler Navigation Systems, IRETrans., vol.ANE-4,pp.176-196.
December.
1957.
46.Condie, M.A.:BasicDesign Considerations: Automatic Navigator AN/APN-67, IRETrans.• vol.ANE-4.
pp.197-201.
December.
1957.
47.McMahon.
F.A.:TheAN/APN-81 Doppler Navigation System.
IRETrans..vol.ANE-4.
pp.202-211.December.
1957.
48.McKay, M.W.:TheAN/APN-96 Doppler RadarSet,IRENatl.Conv.Record.vol.6.pI.5.pp.71-79, 1958.
49.Brown.
R.K..N.F.Moody.
P.M.Thompson, R.J.Bibby,C.A.Franklin, J.H.Ganton, and1.
Mitchell: ALightweight andSelf-contained Airborne Navigational System, Proc.IRE,vol.47, pp.778-807.
May,1959_ 50.Glegg.K.C.M.:ALowNoiseCWDoppler Technique, Natf.ConfProc.Aeronaut, Electronics (Dayton.
Ohio).pro133-144.
1958.
51.Tollefson.
R.D.:Application ofFrequency Modulation Techniques toDoppler RadarSensors, Natl.
CalifProc.Aeronaut.
ElectrO/lies (Dayton, Ohio),pp.683-687, 1959.
52.Kramer.
E.:AHistorical SurveyoftheApplication oftheDoppler Principle forRadioNavigation, IEEETrans..vol.AES-8.pp.258-263.
May.1972.
53.Fried.W.R.:NewDevelopments inRadarandRadioSensors forAircraft Navigation.
IEEETrans..
vol.AES-IO.
pp.25-33.January.
1974.
54.Gray,T.:Airborne Doppler Navigation Techniques, chap.13of"RadarTechniques forDetection, Tracking.
andNavigation." W.T.Blackband (ed.).Gordon andBreachScience Publishers, New York.1966.
55.Fried.W.R.:Doppler Navigation, chap.6of"Avionics Navigation Systems," M.KaytonandW.R.
Fried(eds.).JohnWileyandSons.Inc..NewYork.1969.
56.Andreone.
V.M..andC.N.Bates:Doppler RadarBoastDesignInnovations, Microwal'es.
vol.13, pp.72-82.October.
1974. 100 1NTHOI)CICTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  57.
Wadley, T.
L.: Electronic Principles of the Tellurometer, Trans.
So~rrl~ African inst.
Elcc.
Engrs..
 vol.
49, pp.
143-161, May, 1958; discussion, pp.
161.- 172.
 58.
Poling, A.
C.: Tellurometer Manual, U.S.
Dept.
Commerce P~tbl.
62-1, 1959.
 59.
Robinson, T.
A.: Application of Electronic Distance Measuring Equipment in Surveying, IRE Trans..
 vol.
MIL-4, pp.
263-267, April-July, 1960.
 60.
Varian, R.
H., W.
W.
Hansen, and J.
R.
Woodyard: Object Detecting and Locating System, 1J.S.
 Patent 2,435,615, Feb.
10, 1948.
 61.
Skolnik, M.
I.: An Analysis of Bistatic Radar, Appendix, IRE Trans., vol.
ANE-8, pp.
19- 27, March,  1961.
 62.
Hastings, C.
E.: Raydist: A Radio Navigation and Tracking System, Trle-Teclr, vol.
6, pp.
30-33,  100-103, June, 1947.
 63.
Boyer, W.
D.: A Diplex, Doppler Phase Comparison Radar, IEEE Truns., vol.
ANE-10, pp.
27-33,  March, 1963.
 64.
Mengel, J.
T.: Tracking the Earth Satellite and Data Transmission by Radio, Proc.
IRE, vol.
44,  pp.
755-760, June, 1956.
 65.
Mertens, L.
E., and R.
H.
Tabeling: Tracking 1nstrumentati-m and Accuracy on the.Eastern Test  Range, IEEE Trans., vol.
SET-11, pp.
14-23, March, 1965.
 66.
McCaskill, T.
B., J.
A.
Buisson, and D.
W.
Lynch: Principles and Techniques of Satellite Navigation  Using the Timation I1 Satellite, Naval Research Laboratory Rep.
7252, June 17, 1971, Washington.
 D.C.
 67.
Easton, R.
L.: The Role of TimeIFrequency in Navy Navigation Satellites, Proc.
IEEE, vol.
60.
 pp.
557-563, May, 1972.
 68.
Bates, C.
N.: New Advances in Doppler Radar, Countermeasures, vol.
2, pp.
34-37, April, 1976.
 69.
Acker, A.
E.: Eliminating Transmitted Clutter in Doppler Radar Systems, Microwaot~ J., vol.
18.
 pp.
47-50, November, 1975.
 70.
Gupta, P.
D.: Exact Derivation of the Doppler Shift Formula for a Radar Echo Without Using  Transformation Equations, Am.
J.
Phys., vol.
45, pp.
674-675, July, 1977.
 71.
King, R.
J.:" Microwave Homodyne Systems," Peter Peregrinus Ltd., Stevenage, Herts.
England, 1978  (an Inst.
Elect.
Engs.
pub].).
 72.
Blomfield, D.
L.
H.: Low-Noise Microwave Sources, International Conference on Radar-Present ad  Future, Oct.
23-25, 1973, IEE (London) Publ.
no.
105, pp.
178-183.
 73.
Ashley, J.
R., T.
A.
Barley, and G.
J.
Rasr, Jr.: The Measurement of Noise in Microwave Transmitters,  IEEE Trans., vol.
MTT-25, pp.
294-318, April, 1977.
 100INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS 57.Wadley,T.L.:Electronic Principles oftheTellurometer, Trans.SOl/thAfrican Inst.Elec.Engrs., vol.49,pp.143-161, May,1958;discussion, pp.161--172.
58.Poling,A.c.:Tellurometer Manual, U.S.Dept.Commerce PI/bl.62-1,1959.
59.Robinson, T.A.:Application ofElectronic Distance Measuring Equipment inSurveying, IRETrans., vol.MIL-4,pp.263-267, April-July, 1960.
60.Varian, R.H.,W.W.Hansen, andJ.R.Woodyard: ObjectDetecting andLocating System, LJ.S.
Patent2,435,615, Feb.10,1948.
61.Skolnik, M.I.:AnAnalysis ofBistaticRadar,Appendix, IRETrans.,vol.ANE-8,pp.1927,March, 1961.
62.Hastings, C.E.:Raydist: ARadioNavigation andTracking System, Tele-Tech, vol.6,pp.30-33, 100-103, June,1947.
63.Boyer,W.D.:ADiplex,Doppler PhaseComparison Radar,IEEETrans.,vol.ANE-lO, pp.27-33.
March,1963.
64.Mengel, J.T.:Tracking theEarthSatellite andDataTransmission byRadio,Proc.IRE,vol.44, pp.755-760, June,1956.
65.Mertens, L.E.,andR.H.Tabeling: Tracking Instrumentati)n andAccuracy onthe;Eastern Test Range,IEEETrans.,vol.SET-ll, pp.14-23,March,1965.
66.McCaskill, T.8.,J.A.Buisson, andD.W.Lynch:Principles andTechniques ofSatellite Navigation UsingtheTimation IISatellite, NavalResearch Laboratory Rep.7252,June17,1971,Washington, D.C.
67.Easton, R.L.:TheRoleofTime/Frequency inNavyNavigation Satellites, Proc.IEEE,vol.60, pp.557-563, May,1972.
68.Bates,C.N.:NewAdvances inDoppler Radar,Countermeasures, vol.2,pp.34-37,April,1976.
69.Acker,A.E.:Eliminating Transmitted ClutterinDoppler RadarSystems, Microwave J.,vol.1l:l, pp.47-50,November, 1975.
70.Gupta,P.D.:ExactDerivation oftheDoppler ShiftFormula foraRadarEchoWithout Using Transformation Equations, Am.J.Phys.,vol.45,pp.674-675, July,1977.
71.King,R.J.:"Microwave Homodyne Systems," PeterPeregrinus Ltd.,Stevenage, Herts,England, 1971:l (anInst.Elect.Engs.publ.).
72.B1omfield, D.L.H.:Low-Noise Microwave Sources, International CO'1ference onRadar-Present arul Future,Oct.23-25,1973,lEE(London) Puhl.no.105,pp.178-183.
73.Ashley,1.R.,T.A.Barley,andG.J.Rast,Jr.:TheMeasurement ofNoiseinMicrowave Transmitters, IEEETrans.,vol.MTT-25, pp.294-318, April,1977. CHAPTER  FOUR  MTI AND PULSE DOPPLER RADAR  4.1 INTRODUCTION  The doppler frequency shift [Eq.
(3.2)] produced by a moving target may be used in a pulse  radar.
just as in the CW radar discussed in Chap.
3, to determine the relative velocity of a  target or to separate desired moving targets from undesired stationary objects (clutter).
 Althougll there are applications of pulse radar where a determination of the target's relative  velocity is made from the doppler frequency shift, the use of doppler to separate small moving  targets in the presense of large clutter has probably been of far greater interest.
Such a pulse  radar that utilizes the doppler frequency shift as a means for discriminating moving from fixed  targets is called an AITI (moving target indication) or a pulse doppler radar.
The two are based  on tile same physical principle, but in practice there are generally recognizable differences  between them (Sec.
4.10).
The MTI radar, for instance, usually operates with ambiguous  doppler measurement (so-called hlirtd speeds) but with unambiguous range measurement (no  second-time'-around eclloes).
The opposite is generally the case for a pulse doppler radar.
Its  pi~lse repetition frequency is usually high enough to operate with unambiguous doppler (no  blinti speeds) but at the expense of range ambiguities.
The discussion in this chapter, for the  most part, is based on tile MTI radar, but much of what applies to MTI can be extended to  pulse dol~plcr radar as well.
 MTI is a necessity in high-quality air-surveillance radars that operate in the presence of  clutter.
Its design is more challenging than that of a simple pulse radar or a simple CW radar.
 An MTI capability adds to a radar's cost and con~plexity and often system designers must  accept compron~ises they might not wish to make.
The basic MTI concepts were introduced  during World War 11, and most of the signal processing theory on which MTI (and pulse  doppler) radar depends was formulated during the mid-1950s.
However, the reduction of  theory to practice was paced by the availability of the necessary signal-processing technology.
 It took almost twenty years for the full capabilities offered by MTI signal-processing theory to  be converted into practical and economical radar equipment.
The chief factor that made this  possible was the introduction of reliable.
small, and inexpensive digital processing hardware.
 CHAPTER FOUR MTIANDPULSEDOPPLER RADAR 4.1INTRODUCTION Thedoppler frequency shift[Eq.(3.2)]produced byamovingtargetmaybeusedinapulse radar.justasintheCWradardiscussed inChap.3,todetermine therelativevelocityofa targetortoseparate desired moving targetsfromundesired stationary objects(clutter).
Although thereareapplications ofpulseradarwhereadetermination ofthetarget'srelative velocity ismadefromthedoppler frequency shift,theuseofdoppler toseparate smallmoving targetsinthepresense oflargeclutterhasprobably beenoffargreaterinterest.
Suchapulse radarthatutilizesthedoppler frequency shiftasameansfordiscriminating movingfromfixed targetsiscalledanMT!(moving targetindication) orapulsedopplerradar.Thetwoarebased onthesamephysical principle, butinpractice therearegenerally recognizable differences between them(Sec.4.10).TheMTIradar,forinstance, usuallyoperates withambiguous doppler measurement (so-called hli"dspeeds)butwithunambiguous rangemeasurement (no second-t ime-around echoes).
Theopposite isgenerally thecaseforapulsedoppler radar.Its pulserepetition frequency isusuallyhighenoughtooperate withunambiguous doppler (no blindspeeds)butattheexpense ofrangeambiguities.
Thediscussion inthischapter, forthe mostpart,isbasedontheMTIradar,butmuchofwhatappliestoMTIcanbeextended to pulsedoppler radaraswell.
MTIisanecessity inhigh-quality air-surveillance radarsthatoperateinthepresence of clutter.Itsdesignismorechallenging thanthatofasimplepulseradarorasimpleCWradar.
AnMTIcapability addstoaradar'scostandconlplexity andoftensystemdesigners must acceptcompromises theymightnotwishtomake.ThebasicMTIconcepts wereintroduced duringWorldWarII.andmostofthesignalprocessing theoryonwhichMTI(andpulse doppler) radardepends wasformulated duringthemid-1950s.
However, thereduction of theorytopractice waspacedbytheavailability ofthenecessary signal-processing technology.
Ittookalmosttwentyyearsforthefullcapabilities offeredbyMTIsignal-processing theoryto beconverted intopractical andeconomical radarequipment.
Thechieffactorthatmadethis possible wastheintroduction ofreliable, small,andinexpensive digitalprocessing hardware.
tilt 102 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  Description of operation.
A simple CW radar such as was described in Sec.
3.2 is shown in  Fig.
4.10.
It consists of a transmitter, receiver, indicator, and the necessary antennas.
In princi-  ple, the CW radar may be converted into a pulse radar as shown in Fig.
4.Ih by providing a  power amplifier and a modulator to turn the amplifier on and off for tllc purpose ofgenerating  pulses.
The chief difference between the pulse radar of Fig.
4.lh and the one described in  Chap.
1 is that a small portion of the CW oscillator power that generates the transmitted  pulses is diverted to the receiv'er to take the place of the local oscillator.
However, this CW  signal does more than function as a replacement for the local oscillator.
It acts as tlw collcrent  reference needed to detect the doppler frequency shift.
By COIIC'~.LJII~ it is meant that the pliast: of  the transmitted signal is preserved in the reference signal.
The reference signal is the distin-  guishing feature of coherent MTI radar.
 If the CW oscillator voltage is represented as A, sin 2?/; t, WIIL'TC ..I , is t11c amplitirde and  .i; the carrier freqi~ency.
the reference signal is  Vr/rFr = Az sin 27r/; t  and the doppler-shifted echo-signal voltage is  Vecho = A, sin 2n(,/; + ,/;)t - -----  L'  where A, = amplitude of reference signal  A, = amplitude of signal received from a target at a range R,  ,& = doppler frequency shift  t = time  c = velocity of propagation  The reference signal and the target echo signal are heterodyned in the mixer stage of the  receiver.
Only the low-frequency (difference-frequency) component from the mixer is of inter-  est and is a voltage given by  Vdirr = A, sin (2?fdt -  C  oscillator w  l~eference signal  Receiver Indicator  Pulse  Power  amplifier oscillator  Reference sianol  v  %I\= 5% 1 , r'd Indicator Figure 4.1 (a) Simple CW radar; (b) pulse radar using doppler informa- +  Receiver -  (4.2)(4.1)102INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS Description ofoperation.
AsimpleCWradarsuchaswasdescribed inSec.3.2isshownin Fig.4.ta.Itconsistsofatransmitter, receiver, indicator, andthenecessary antennas.
Inprinci­ ple,theCWradarmaybeconverted intoapulseradarasshowninFig.4.thbyproviding a poweramplifier andamodulator toturntheamplifier onandoffforthepurposeofgenerating pulses.Thechiefdifference between thepulseradarofFig.4.thandtheonedescribed in Chap.1isthatasmallportionoftheCWoscillator powerthatgenerates thetransmitted pulsesisdiverted tothereceiv"ertotaketheplaceofthelocaloscillator.
However, thisCW signaldoesmorethanfunction asareplacement forthelocaloscillator.
Itactsasthecoherent reference neededtodetectthedopplerfrequency shift.Bycoherent itismeantthatthephaseof thetransmitted signalispreserved inthereference signal.Thereference signalisthedistin­ guishing featureofcoherent MTIradar.
IftheCWoscillator voltageisrepresented asA1sin2rrt;r,whereA1istheamplitude and .r,thecarrierfrequency.thereference signalis Vrer=A1sin2rr.f;r andthedoppler-shifted echo-signal voltageis V .[2(rt')4rrt;Ro]echo=A3Sillrr.ll±.dr--~.-- whereA1=amplitude ofreference signal A3=amplitude ofsignalreceived fromatargetatarangeRo ,f.J=doppler frequency shift t=time c=velocityofpropagation Thereference signalandthetargetechosignalareheterodyned inthemixerstageofthe receiver.
Onlythelow-frequency (difference-frequency) component fromthemixerisofinter­ estandisavoltagegivenby ,(a)(4.3) (b)Figure4.1(a)SimpleCWradar;(b) pulseradarusingdoppler informa­ tion. Nntc that Itqs.
(4.1) to (4.3) rcprescnt siiic-wave carriers upon whicli the pulse modulatiori is  iinposcd.
'I'lle differericc frequency is equal to tlie doppler frequency,fd.
For stationary targets  tlie dopplcr frequcrlcy sliift will be 'ero; Iience Vdirr will not vary with time and may take on  ariy coilstant value fr-on1 1- .I, to - ,(I,, ir~cluding zero.
However, when the target is iii rtiotioii  relative to the radar, ,/* lias a value other than zero arid the voltage corresponding to tlie  dilTcr-cncc freqrrcilcy froin tlie inixer [Eq.
(4.3)) will be a functioii of time.
 Ail cxar~~plc of tile outpt~t frorn tlie r~lixer wlien the doppler frequency,/; is large compared  with the reciprocal of the pirlse width is showti in Fig.
4.21~.
Tlie doppler signal may be readily  discerrled from tlie information corltairied in a single pulse.
If, on the other hand,,/b is small  compared witli tlie reciprocal of the pulse duration, the pulses will be modulated with an  aiiiplitude given by Eq.
(4.3) (Fig.
4.2~) and many pulses will be needed to extract the doppler  inforniation.
Tlie case illustrated in Fig.
4.2~ is more typical of aircraft-detection radar, while  tlie waveform of Fig.
4.2h might be more applicable to a radar whose primary function is the  detcctioii of extraterrestrial targets such as ballistic missiles or satellites.
Ambiguities in the  rneasuremerit ofdoppler frequency can occur in the case of the discontinuous measurement of  Fig.
4.2~.
hut not when the measurement is made on the basis of a sing!e pulse.
The video  signals shown in Fig.
4.2 are called bipolar, since they contain both positive and negative  arnplit udes.
 Movirig targets may be distinguished from stationary targets by observing the video  output on an A-scope (amplitude vs.
range).
A single sweep on an A-scope might appear as in  Fig.
4.3f1.
Tliis sweep sliows several fixed targets and two moving targets indicated by the two  arrows.
On the basis of a single sweep, rnoving targets cannot be distinguislied from fixed  targets.
(It may be possible to distinguish extended ground targets from point targets by the  strctcl~irig of the echo pulse.
However, this is not a reliable means of discriminating moving  from fixed targets since some fixed targets can look like point targets, e.g., a water tower.
Also,  sorne moving targets such as aircraft flying in formation can look like extended targets.)  Successive A-scope sweeps (pulse-repetition intervals) are shown in Fig.
4.3h to e.
Echoes from  fixed targets rernain constant throughout, but echoes from moving targets vary in amplitude  from sweep to sweep at a rate corresponding to the doppler frequency.
The superposition of  ( c I  Figure 4.2 (a) RF echo pulse train; (h) video pulse train for doppler frequency f, > I/?; (c) video pulse  train for doppler freuqncy /, < I/T.
 MTIANDPULSE DOPPLER RADAR103 NotethatEqs.(4.1)to(4.J)represent sine-wave carriers uponwhichthepulsemodulation is imposed.
Thedifference frequency isequaltothedoppler frequencYfd' Forstationary targets thedoppler frequency shiftldwillbezero;henceVdiffwillnotvarywithtimeandmaytakeon anyconstant valuefrom1-.'14to-/14,including zero.However, whenthetargetisinmotion relative totheradar.!d hasavalueotherthanzeroandthevoltagecorresponding tothe difference frequency fromthemixer[Eq.(4.3)]willbeafunction oftime.
Anexample oftheoutputfromthemixerwhenthedoppler frequencY!d islargecompared withthereciprocal ofthepulsewidthisshowninFig.4.2b.Thedoppler signalmaybereadily discerned fromtheinformation contained inasinglepulse.If,ontheotherhand,fd issmall compared withthereciprocal ofthepulseduration, thepulseswillbemodulated withan amplitude givenbyEq.(4.3)(Fig.4.2c)andmanypulseswillbeneededtoextractthedoppler information.
Thecaseillustrated inFig.4.2cismoretypicalofaircraft-detection radar.while thewaveform ofFig.4.2bmightbemoreapplicable toaradarwhoseprimary function isthe detection ofextraterrestrial targetssuchasballistic missilesorsatellites.
Ambiguities inthe measurement ofdoppler frequency canoccurinthecaseofthediscontinuous measurement of Fig.4.2c.hutnotwhenthemeasurement ismadeonthebasisofasinglepulse.Thevideo signalsshowninFig.4.2arecalledbipolar, sincetheycontain bothpositive andnegative amplitudes.
Moving targetsmaybedistinguished fromstationary targetsbyobserving thevideo outputonanA-scope (amplitude vs.range).AsinglesweeponanA-scope mightappearasin Fig.4.)a.Thissweepshowsseveralfixedtargetsandtwomoving targetsindicated bythetwo arrows.
Onthehasisofasinglesweep.moving targetscannotbedistinguished fromfixed targets.(Itmayhepossible todistinguish extended groundtargetsfrompointtargetsbythe stretching oftheechopulse.However, thisisnotareliablemeansofdiscriminating moving fromfixedtargetssincesomefixedtargetscanlool<.likepointtargets,e.g.,awatertower.Also, somemoving targetssuchasaircraft nyinginformation canlooklikeextended targets.) Successive A-scope sweeps(pulse-repetition intervals) areshowninFig.4.3btoe.Echoesfrom fixedtargetsremainconstant throughout.
butechoesfrommoving targetsvaryinamplitude fromsweeptosweepataratecorresponding tothedoppler frequency.
Thesuperposition of r·T-j__ r---~--------'WJ\Mr----------'WIMJv- (al (b) <--------n------ _L---"" (el Figure4.2(a)RFechopulsetrain;(h)videopulsetrainfordopplerfrequency fd>l/T;(c)videopulse trainfordorrlerfreuqney fd<I/T. Figure 4.3 (a-e) Successive sweeps of .
 an MTI radar A-scope display (echo  amplitude as a function of time);  (f) superposition of many sweeps;  arrows indicate position of moving  targets.
 the successive A-scope sweeps is shown in Fig.
4.3J The moving targets produce, with time, a  " butterfly" effect on the A-scope.
 Although the butterfly effect is suitable for recognizing moving targets on an A-scope, it is  not appropriate for display on the PPI.
One method commonly employed to extract doppler  information in a form suitable for display on the PPI scope is with a delay-line canceler  (Fig.
4.4).
The delay-line canceler acts as a filter to eliminate the d-c component of fixed targets  and to pass the a-c components of moving targets.
The video portion of the receiver is tfividetl  into two channels.
One is a normal video channel.
In the other, the video signal expericnccs a  time delay equal to one pulse-repetition period (equal to the reciprocal of the pulse-repetition  frequency).
The outputs from the two channels are subtracted from one another.
The fixed  targets with unchanging amplitudes from pulse to pulse are canceled on subtraction.
 flowever, the amplitudes of the moving-target echoes are not constant from piilsc to I>~I~SC, ii11C1  subtraction results in an uncanceled residue.
The output of the subtraction circuit is bipolar  Figure 4.4 MTI receiver with delay-line canceler.
B~polor video Un~polor wdeo - Deloy-line , Receiver T= VPrf Subtroctor  circuit  104INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS (al {b1 (c1 (d) (of) (f)Figure4.3(a-e)Successive sweepsof anMTIradarA-scope display(echo amplitude asafunction oftime); (f)superposition ofmanysweeps; arrowsindicate position ofmoving targets.
thesuccessive A-scope sweepsisshowninFig.4.3fThemovingtargetsproduce, withtime,a "butterfly" effectontheA-scope.
Although thebutterfly effectissuitable forrecognizing movingtargetsonanA-scope, itis notappropriate fordisplayonthePPI.Onemethodcommonly employed toextractdoppler information inaformsuitable fordisplayonthePPIscopeiswithadelay-line cancder (Fig.4.4).Thedelay-line canceler actsasafiltertoeliminate thedoccomponent offixedtargets andtopassthea-ccomponents ofmoving targets.Thevideoportionofthereceiver isdivided intotwochannels.
Oneisanormalvideochannel.
Intheother,thevideosignalexperiences a timedelayequaltoonepUlse-repetition period(equaltothereciprocal ofthepUlse-repetition frequency).
Theoutputs fromthetwochannels aresubtracted fromoneanother.
Thefixed targets withunchanging amplitudes frompulsetopulsearecanceled onsubtraction.
However, theamplitudes ofthemoving-target echoesarcnotconstant frompulse10pulse,and subtraction resultsinanuncanceled residue.Theoutputofthesubtraction circuitisbipolar Unipolarvideo Toindicator Figure4.4MTIreceiverwithdelay-line canceler. MTI AND PULSE DOPPLER RADAR 105  video, just as was tlie input.
Uefore bipolar video can intensity-modulate a PPI display, it nlusl  bc cnnvcrtctf to u~iil,otential voltages (unipolar video) by a full-wave rectifier.
 The simple MT1 radar sliown in Fig.
4.lh is not necessarily the most typical.
The block  diagram of a rnorc common MTI radar employing a power amplifier is shown in Fig.
4.5.
The  significant differcricc bctwec~i this MTI cotifiguration and that of Fig.
4.1h is the manlier in  which the reference signal is generated.
In Fig.
4.5, the coherent reference is supplied by at1  oscillator called the c.ollo, which stands for coherent oscillator.
The coho is a stable oscillator  whose frequency is the same as the intermediate frequency used in the receiver.
In addition to  ~>sovitli~ig Ilie rcfcrcncc sig~ial.
the output of the co1io.f; is also mixed with the local-oscillator  freqi~cl~cy /, .
'I'llc local oscillatol- rnilst also hc a stahlc oscillator and is callcd strrlo, for sttrhlc  local oscillator.
The RF echo signal is heterodyned with the stalo signal to produce the IF  sigr~:rl j~rsl ;IS ill !l~c co~ivcr)!io~i;~l srrl~crlictc~~otlyr~c receiver.
7'11~ stnlo, col~o, and the rnixer- in  wliicll tlicy arc co~ilbitlcd plus any low-level aniplificatio~i are called the r~ccc~iuc~r~-c.uc~iti~t~ Iw-  carlsc of tlic dr~al rolc they scrve in both the receiver and the transmitter.
 I'lic cliaractcristic feature of collcrc~lt MTI radar is that tile transmitted signal must hc  colicreiit (in pliase) witli the reference signal in the receiver.
This is accomplished in tlie radar  system diagramed in Fig.
4.5 by generating the transmitted signal from rile coho reference  sigtial.
The function of the stalo is to provide the necessary frequency translation from the IF  to the transmitted (Kf;) frequency.
Altllough the pliase of the stalo influences the phase of the  transnlitted signal, any stalo phase shift is canceled on reception because the stalo that  generates the transniitted signal also acts as the local oscillator in the receiver.
The reference  signal from the coho and the IF echo signal are both fed into a mixer called the pllase dctec-tor..
 T11e phase detector differs frorn the normal amplitude detector since its output is proportional  to the phase difference between the two input signals.
 Any one of a number of transmitting-tube types might be used as the power amplifier.
 These iticlirde thc triode, tetrode, klystron, traveling-wave tube, and the crossed-field amplifier.
 Pulse  Duplexer amplifier  '; "c  TI ompljfier ,~~ld I I  detector Mix  Figure4.5 Block diagram of MTI radar with  power-amplifier transmitter.
canceler I I Mix / Stolo  fr  MTIANDPULSE DOPPLER RADAR105 video,justaswastheinput.Beforebipolarvideocanintensity-modulate aPPJdisplay, itmust heconverted tounipotential voltages (unipolar video)byafull-wave rectifier.
ThesimpleMTlradarshowninFig.4.lbisnotnecessarily themosttypical.Theblock diagram ofamorecommon MTIradaremploying apoweramplifier isshowninFig.4.5.The significant difference betwecn thisMTIconfiguration andthatofFig.4.11>isthemanner in whichthereference signalisgenerated.
InFig.4.5,thecoherent reference issupplied byan oscillator calledthecoho,whichstandsforcoherent oscillator.
Thecohoisastableoscillator whosefrequency isthesameastheintermediate frequency usedinthereceiver.
Inaddition to providing therefcrence signal.theoutputoCthecoho.fcisalsomixedwiththelocal-oscillator fre4ucIlcy I,.Thclocaloscillator Illustalsobeastableoscillator andiscalleds(a!o,fors(c/bk localoscillalor.
TheRFechosignalisheterodyned withthestalosignaltoproduce lheIF si~naJ,illslasintheconventional slIperhetcrodyne receiver.
Thestalo.coho.andthemixerin whichtheyarccombined plusanylow-level amplification arecalledthereceiver-exci(cr be­ causcofthedualroletheyserveinhoththereceiver andthetransmitter.
Thecharacteristic featureofcoherent MTIradaristhatthetransmitted signalmustbe coherent (inphase)withthereference signalinthereceiver.
Thisisaccomplished intheradar systemdiagramed inFig.4.5bygenerating thetransmitted signalfromthecohoreference signal.Thefunction ofthestaloistoprovide thenecessary frequency translation fromtheIF tothelransmitted (RF)frequency.
Although thephaseofthestaloinfluences thephaseofthe transmitted signal,anystalophaseshiftiscanceled onreception because thestalothat generates thetransmitted signalalsoactsasthelocaloscillator inthereceiver.
Thereference signalfromthecohoandtheIFechosignalarebothfedintoamixercalledtheplwsedetector.
Thephasedetector differsfromthenormalamplitude detector sinceitsoutputisproportional tothephasedifference between thetwoinputsignals.
Anyone ofanumber oftransmitting-tube typesmightbeusedasthepoweramplifier.
Theseincludethetriode,tetrode.
klystron.
traveling-wave tube,andthecrossed-field amplifier.
fd To delay-line canceler~Coho-I'-----fc~ Reference signal Figure4.5BlockdiagramofMTIradarwith power-amplifier transmitter. 106 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  RF locking pulse  J1 L I\  Stalo s  To  delay-line  canceler Duplexer  Figure 4.6 Block diagram of MTI radar with power-oscillator transmitter.
 Each of these has its advantages and disadvantages, which are discussed in Chap.
6.
A trans-  mitter which consists of a stable low-power oscillator followed by a power amplifier is  sometimes called MOPA, which stands for master-oscillator power amplifier.
 Before the development of the klystron amplifier, the only high-power transmitter avail-  able at microwave frequencies for'radar application was the magnetron oscillator.
In an  oscillator the phase of the RF bears no relationship from pulse to pulse.
For this reason the  reference signal cannot be generated by a continuously running oscillator.
However, a coher-  ent reference signal may be readily obtained with the power oscillztor by readjusting the phase  of the coho at the beginning of each sweep according to the phase of the transmitted pulse.
The  phase of the coho is locked to the phase of the transmitted pulse each time a pulse is generated.
 A block diagram of an MTI radar (with a power oscillator) is shown in Fig.
4.6.
A portion  of the transmitted signal is mixed with the stalo output to produce an IF beat signal whose  phase is directly related to the phase of the transmitter.
This IF pulse is applied to the coho -1  and causes the phase of the coho CW oscillation to "lock" in step with the phase of the IF  reference pulse.
The phase of the coho is then related to the phase of the transmitted pi~lse and  may be used as the reference signal for echoes received from that particular transmitted pulse.
 Upon the next transmission another IF locking pulse is generated to relock the phase of the  CW coho until the next locking pulse comes along.
The type of MTI radar illustrated in  Fig.
4.6 has had wide application.
Mognetron  oscillator  4.2 DELAY-LINE CANCELERS  The simple MTI delay-line canceler shown in Fig.
4.4 is an example of a time-domain filter.
 The capability of this device depends on the quality of the medium used iis the delay line.
The Pulse  modulotor  delay line must introduce a time delay equal to the pulse repetition interval.
For typical  ground-based air-surveillance radars this might be several milliseconds.
Delay times of this  magnitude cannot be achieved with practical electromagnetic transmission lines.
By convert-  ing the electromagnetic signal to an 'acoustic signal it is possible to utilize delay lines of a Trigger  generotor  106INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS Magnetron oscillator RFlockingpulse IFlocking pulse cwreference signal To delay-line canceler Figure4.6Blockdiagram ofMTIradarwithpower-oscillator transmitter.
Eachofthesehasitsadvantages anddisadvantages, whicharediscussed inChap.6.Atrans­ mitterwhichconsists ofastable'low-power oscillator followed byapoweramplifier is sometimes calledMqPA,whichstandsformaster-oscillator poweramplifier.
Beforethedevelopment oftheklystronamplifier, theonlyhigh-power transmitter avail­ ableatmicrowave frequencies for\radarapplication wasthemagnetron oscillator.
Inan oscillator thephaseoftheRFbearsnorelationship frompulsetopulse.Forthisreasonthe reference signalcannotbegenerated byacontinuously runningoscillator.
However, acoher­ entreference signalmaybereadilyobtained withthepower oscill~tor byreadjusting thephase ofthecohoatthebeginning ofeachsweepaccording tothephaseofthetransmitted pulse.The phaseofthecohoislockedtothephaseofthetransmitted pulseeachtimea pulseisgenerated.
AblockdiagramofanMTIradar(withapoweroscillator) isshowninFig.4.6.Aportion ofthetransmitted signalismixedwiththestaloo!JtputtoproduceanIFbeatsignalwhose phaseisdirectly related tothephaseofthetransmitter.
ThisIFpulseisappliedtothecoho andcausesthephaseofthecohoCWoscillation to"lock"instepwiththephaseoftheIF reference pulse.Thephaseofthecohoisthenrelatedtothephaseofthetransmitted pulseand maybeusedasthereference signalforechoesreceivedfromthatparticular transmitted pulse.
Uponthenexttransmission anotherIFlockingpulseisgenerated torelockthephaseofthe CWcohountilthenextlockingpulsecomesalong.ThetypeofMTIradarillustrated in Fig.4.6hashadwideapplication.
4.2DELAY-LINE CANCELERS ThesimpleMTIdelay-line cancelershowninFig.4.4isanexample ofatime-domain filter.
Thecapability ofthisdevicedependsonthequalityofthemediumusedasthedelayline.The delaylinemustintroduce atimedelayequaltothepulserepetition interval.
Fortypical ground-based air-surveillance radarsthismightbeseveralmilliseconds.
Delaytimesofthis magnitude cannotbe·achieved withpractical electromagnetic transmission lines.Byconvert­ ingtheelectromagnetic signaltoan'acoustic signalitispossible toutilizedelaylinesofa MTI AND PULSE DOPPLER RADAR 107  reasonable physical length since the velocity of propagation of acoustic waves is about lo-'  that of electromagnetic waves.
After the necessary delay is introduced by the acoustic line, the  signal is converted back to an electromagnetic signal for further processing.
The early acoustic  delay lines developed during World War 11 used liquid delay lines filled with either water or  mercury.' Liquid delay lines were large and inconvenient to use.
They were replaced in the  mid-1950s by the solid fused-quartz delay line that used multiple internal reflections to obtain  a compact device.
These analog acoustic delay lines were, in turn supplanted in the early 1970s  by storage devices based on digital computer technology.
The use of digital delay lines requires  that the output of the MTI receiver phase-detector be quantized into a sequence of digital  words.
The compactness and convenience of digital processing allows the implerfientation of  more complex delay-line cancelers with filter characteristics not practical with analog  met hods.
 One of the advantages of a time-domain delay-line canceler as compared to the more  conventional frequency-domain filter is that a single network operates at all ranges and does  not require a separate filter for each range resolution cell.
Frequency-domain doppler filter-  banks are of interest in some forms of MTI and pulse-doppler radar.
 Filter characteristics of the delay-line canceler.
The delay-line canceler acts as a filter which  rejects the d-c component of clutter.
Because of its periodic nature, the filter also rejects energy  in the vicinity of the pulse repetition frequency and its harmonics.
 The video signal [Eq.
(4.3)] received from a particular target at a range R, is  V, = k sin (2nfdt - 4,) (4.4)  where 4o = phase shift and k = amplitude of video signal.
The signal from the previous  transmission, which is delayed by a time T = pulse repetition interval, is  Vz = k sin [2n&(t - T) -  Everything else is assumed to.remain essentially constant over the interval T so that k is the  same for both pulses.
The output from the subtractor is  V= V, - V2 =2k sin nfdTcos 2n& t -- I ( :)-+,I  It is assumed that the gain through the delay-line canceler is unity.
The output from ttie  canceler [Eq.
(4.6)] consists of a cosine wave at the doppler frequency& with an amplitude  2k sin nhT: Thus the amplitude of the canceled video output is a function of the doppler  frequency shift and the pulse-repetition interval, or prf.
The magnitude of the relative  frequency-response of the delay-line canceler [ratio of the amplitude of the output from the  delay-line canceler, 2k sin (nfd T), to the amplitude of the normal radar video kj is shown in  Fig.
4.7.
 Frequency  Figure 4.7 Frequency response of the single delay-line canceler; T = delay time = lfP.
 MTIANDPULSEDOPPLER RADAR107 reasonable physical lengthsincethevelocityofpropagation ofacoustic wavesisabout10-5 thatofelectromagnetic waves.Afterthenecessary delayisintroduced bytheacoustic line,the signalisconverted backtoanelectromagnetic signalforfurtherprocessing.
Theearlyacoustic delaylinesdeveloped duringWorldWarnusedliquiddelaylinesfilledwitheitherwateror mercury.1Liquiddelaylineswerelargeandinconvenient touse.Theywerereplaced inthe mid-1950s bythesolidfused-quartz delaylinethatusedmultiple internalreflections toobtain acompact device.Theseanalogacoustic delaylineswere,inturnsupplanted intheearly19705 bystoragedevicesbasedondigitalcomputer technology.
Theuseofdigitaldelaylinesrequires thattheoutputoftheMTIreceiver phase-detector bequantized intoasequence ofdigital words.Thecompactness andconvenience ofdigitalprocessing allowstheimplementation of morecomplex delay-line cancelers withfiltercharacteristics notpractical withanalog methods.
Oneoftheadvantages ofatime-domain delay-line canceler ascompared tothemore conventional frequency-domain filteristhatasinglenetwork operates atallrangesanddoes notrequireaseparate filterforeachrangeresolution cell.Frequency-domain doppler filter­ banksareofinterestinsomeformsofMTIandpulse-doppler radar.
Filtercharacteristics ofthedelay-line canceler.
Thedelay-line canceler actsasafilterwhich rejectsthed-ccomponent ofclutter.Becauseofitsperiodic nature,thefilteralsorejectsenergy inthevicinityofthepulserepetition frequency anditsharmonics.
Thevideosignal[Eq.(4.3)]received fromaparticular targetatarangeRois (4.4) wheretPo=phaseshiftandk=amplitude ofvideosignal.Thesignalfromtheprevious transmission, whichisdelayed byatimeT=pulserepetition interval, is (4.5) Everything elseisassumed toremainessentially constant overtheinterval Tsothatkisthe sameforbothpulses.Theoutputfromthesubtractor is V=VI-V2=2ksin7tfdTcos[27tfd(t-~)-tPo] (4.6) Itisassumed thatthegainthrough thedelay-line canceler isunity.Theoutputfromthe canceler [Eq.(4.6)]consists ofacosinewaveatthedoppler frequency f4withanamplitude 2ksinnfAT:Thustheamplitude ofthecanceled videooutputisafunction ofthedoppler frequency shiftandthepulse-repetition interval, orprf.Themagnitude oftherelative frequency-response ofthedelay-line canceler [ratiooftheamplitude oftheoutputfromthe delay-line canceler, 2ksin(7thT),totheamplitude ofthenormalradarvideok]isshownin Fig.4.7.
( o1Ir 21r 31T 41r Sir Frequency Figure4.7Frequency responseofthesingledelay-line canceler; T=delaytime=llf". 108 INI'KODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  Blind speeds.
The response of the single-delay-line canceler will be zero whenever the argu-  ment ?/; T in the amplitude factor of Eq.
(4.6) is 0, rr, 2n, .
.., etc., or when  where rl = 0, 1, 2, .
.
.
, and j, = pulse repetition frequency.
The delay-line canceler not orlly  eliminates the d-c component caused by clutter (n = O), but unfortunately it also rejects any  moving target whose doppler frequency happens to be the same as the prf or a mt~ltiple  thereof.
Those relative target velocities which result in zero MTI response are called hli~ld  SIIL~LY~S and are given by  nll nllfp v =-=- " 2T 2 n= l,2, 3, ...
 where 17, is the nth blind speed.
If J.
is measured in meters,.fp in Hz, and the relative velocity in  knots, the blind speeds are , ,  The blind speeds are one of the limitations of pulse MTI radar which do not occur with  CW radar.
They are present in pulse radar because doppler is measured by discrete samples -  (pulses) at the prf rather than continuously.
If the first blind speed is to be greater than the  maximum radial velocity expected from the target, the product ,Ifp must be large.
Thus the  MTI radar must operate at long wavelengths (low frequencies) or with high pulse repet~tion  frequencies, or both.
Unfortunately, there are usually constraints other than blind speeds  which determine the wavelength and the pulse repetition frequency.
Therefore blind speeds  might not be easy to avoid.
Low radar frequencies have the disadvantage that antenna beam-  widths, for a given-size antenna, are wider than at the higher frequencies and would not be  satisfactory in applications where angular accuracy or angular resolution is important.
The  pulse repetition frequency cannot always be varied over wide limits since it is primar~ly  determined by the unambiguous range requirement.
In Fig.
4.8, the first blind speed 11, IS  plotted as a function of the maximum uniimbiguous range (Rundmb = c7/2), with radar  frequency as the parameter.
If the first blind speed were 600 knots, the maximum unambiguous  range would be 130 nautical miles at a frequency of 300 MHz (UHF), 13 nautical miles at  3000 MHz (S band), and 4 nautical miles at 10,000 MHz (X band).
Since commercial jet  aircraft have speeds of the order of 600 knots, and military aircraft even higher, blind speeds in  the MTI radar can be a serious limitation.
,  In practice, long-range MTI radars that operate in the region of L or S band or higher and  are primarily designed for the detection of aircraft must usually operate with ambiguous  doppler and blind speeds if they are to operate with unambiguous range.
The presence of hl~nd  speeds within the doppler-frequency band reduces the detection capabilities of the radar.
Blind  speeds can sometimes be traded for ambiguous range, so that in systems applications which  require good MTI performance, the first blind speed might be placed outside the range of  expected doppler frequencies if ambiguous range can be tolerated.
(Pulse-doppler radars  usually operate in this manner).
As will be described later, the effect of blind speeds can be  significantly reduced, without incurring range ambiguities, by operating with more than one  pulse repetition frequency.
This is called a staggered-prfMT1.
Operating at more than one KF  frequency can also reduce the effect of blind speeds.
 108INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS Blindspeeds.Theresponse ofthesingle-delay-line canceler willbezerowhenever theargu­ mentrrJjTintheamplitude factorofEq.(4.6)is0,n,2n,...,etc.,orwhen (4.7) where II=0,1,2,...,andj~=pulserepetition frequency.
Thedelay-line cancela notonly eliminates thed-ccomponent causedbyclutter(n=0),butunfortunately italsorejectsany moving targetwhosedoppler frequency happens tobethesameastheprforamultiple thereof.
Thoserelative targetvelocities whichresultinzeroMTIresponse arecalledhlilld speedsandaregivenby n=1,2,3,...
(4.8) where I'nisthenthblindspeed.IfAismeasured inmeters,fp inHz,andtherelativevelocity in knots,theblindspeedsare (4.9) Theblindspeedsareoneofthelimitations ofpulseMTIradarwhichdonotoccurwith CWradar.Theyarepresentinpulseradarbecausedoppler ismeasured bydiscrete samples (pulses)attheprfratherthancontinuously.
Ifthefirstblindspeedistobegreaterthanthe maximum radialvelocity expected fromthetarget,theproduct AJpmustbelarge.Thusthe MTIradarmustoperateatlongwavelengths (lowfrequencies) orwithhighpulserepetition frequencies, orboth.Unfortunately, thereareusuallyconstraints otherthanblindspeeds whichdetermine thewavelength andthepulserepetition frequency.
Therefore blindspeeds mightnotbeeasytoavoid.Lowradarfrequencies havethedisadvantage thatantenna beam­ widths,foragiven-size antenna, arewiderthanatthehigherfrequencies andwouldnotbe satisfactory inapplications whereangular accuracy orangular resolution isimportant.
The pulserepetition frequency cannotalwaysbevariedoverwidelimitssinceitisprimarily determined bytheunambiguous rangerequirement.
InFig.4.8,thefirstblindspeed IIIis plotted asafunction ofthemaximum unambiguous range(Runamb=c1f2),withradar frequency astheparameter.
Ifthefirstblindspeedwere600knots,themaximum unambiguous rangewouldbe130nautical milesatafrequency of300MHz(UHF), 13nautical milesat 3000MHz(5band),and4nautical milesat10,000MHz(Xband).Sincecommercial jet aircrafthavespeedsoftheorderof600knots,andmilitary aircraftevenhigher,blindspeedsin theMTIradarcanbeaseriouslimitation, ." Inpractice, long-range MTIradarsthatoperateintheregionofLor5bandorhigherand areprimarily designed forthedetection ofaircraft mustusuallyoperate withambiguous dopplerandblindspeedsiftheyaretooperatewithunambiguous range.Thepresence ofblind speedswithinthedoppler-frequency bandreducesthedetection capabilities oftheradar.Blind speedscansometimes betradedforambiguous range,sothatinsystems applications which requiregoodMTIperformance, thefirstblindspeedmightbeplacedoutside therangeof expected doppler frequencies ifambiguous rangecanbetolerated.
(Pulse-doppler radars usuallyoperate inthismanner).
As.willbedescribed later,theeffectofblindspeedscanbe significantly reduced, without incurring rangeambiguities, byoperating withmorethanone pulserepetition frequency.
Thisiscalledastaggered-prJ MTI.Operating atmorethanoneRF frequency canalsoreducetheeffectofblindspeeds. 10 100  Maximum unombiguous range, nautical miles  Figure 4.8 Plot of MTI radar first blind speed as a function of maximum unambiguous range.
 Double cancellation.
The frequency response of a single-delay-line canceler (Fig.
4.7) does not  always have as broad a clutter-rejection null as might be desired in the vicinity of d-c.
The  clutter-rejection notches may be widened by passing the output of the delay-line canceler  through a second delay-line canceler as shown in Fig.
4.9~.
The output of the two single-delay-  line cancelers in cascade is the square of that from a single canceler.
Thus the frequency  response is 4 sin2 nfd T.
The configuration of Fig.
4.9~ is called a double-delay-line canceler, or  simply a do~rhle cartccler.
The relative response of the double canceler compared with that of a  single-delay-line canceler is shown in Fig.
4.10.
The finite width of the clutter spectrum is also  shown in this figure so as to illustrate the additional cancellation of clutter offered by the  double canceler.
 The two-delay-line configuration of Fig.
4.9b has the same frequency-response character-  istic as the double-delay-line canceler.
The operation of the device is as follows.
A signal f (t) is  inserted into the adder along with the signal from the preceding pulse period, with its ampli-  tude weightkd by the factor - 2, plus the signal from two pulse periods previous.
The output of  the adder is therefore  /(t) - 2f(t + T) +f (t + 2T)  Input - Output  (a 1  Input Output  -2  Figure 4.9 (a) Double-delay-iine canceler; (h) three-pulse canceler.
 MTIANDPULSE DOPPLER RADAR109 V>oc ..><.
u OJ OJa V> +­ V> L i.L 100'--_-----'-_---'------'-.JU........1-WoI-L.l...:"--_~___'_~L..J......uJ...L..L_"'_ _____'_">O"'_....1__L...:"_I_!....L:loJ._L.J 1 10 100 1,000 Maximum unambiguous range,nauticalmiles Figure4.8PlotofMTIradarfirstblindspeedasafunction ofmaximum unambiguous range.
Uoublecancellation.
Thefrequency response ofasingle-delay-line canceler (Fig.4.7)doesnot alwayshaveasbroadaclutter-rejection nullasmightbedesiredinthevicinityofd-c.The clutter-rejection notches maybewidened bypassingtheoutputofthedelay-line canceler through aseconddelay-line canceler asshowninFig.4.9a.Theoutputofthetwosingle-delay­ linecancelers incascade isthesquareofthatfromasinglecanceler.
Thusthefrequency response is4sin2nfdT.Theconfiguration ofFig.4.9aiscalledadouble-delay-line canceler, or simplyadOlllJlecallceler.
Therelativeresponse ofthedoublecanceler compared withthatofa single-delay-line canceler issho\yninFig.4.10.Thefinitewidthoftheclutterspectrum isalso showninthisfiguresoastoillustrate theadditional cancellation ofclutterofferedbythe doublecanceler.
Thetwo-delay-line configuration ofFig.4.9bhasthesamefrequency-response character­ isticasthedouble-delay-line canceler.
Theoperation ofthedeviceisasfollows.Asignalf(t) is inserted intotheadderalongwiththesignalfromthepreceding pulseperiod,withitsampli­ tudeweighted bythefactor-2,plusthesignalfromtwopulseperiodsprevious.
Theoutputof theadderistherefore f(t)-~f(t+T)+f(t+2T) Input -~-~DelaylineT=l/fp Output (a) Output DeloylineT=tlfpt--------...---i----l"Delay lineT=llfp1---'-~-1Input-- (b) Figure4.9(a)Double-delay-line canceler; (b)three-pulse canceler. 110 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  Clutter foldo ver  1.0  QI g 0.8  0 a 2 0.6 L  al .? 0.4 + 0 - ,g 0.2  n  Frequency  Figure 4.10 Relative frequency response of the single-delay-line canceler (solid curve) aqd the double-  delay-line canceler (dashed curve).
Shaded area represents clutter spectrum.
 which is the same as the output from the double-delay-line canceler.
 f (t) - f (t + T) -f (t + T) +f (t + 2T)  This configuration is commonly called the three-pulse canceler.
 Transversal filters The three-pulse canceler shown in Fig.
4.9b is an example of a trar~soersal  filter.
Its general form with N pulses and N - 1 delay lines is shown in Fig.
4.1 1.
It is also  sometimes known as afeedforwardfilter, a nonrecursioefilter, afinite memoryfilter or a tapped  delay-linefilter.
The weights wf for a three-pulse canceler utilizing two delay lines arranged as a  transversal filter are 1.
-2, 1.
The,frequency response function is proportional to sin2 n/,T.
 A transversal filter with three delay lines whose weights are 1, - 3, 3, - 1 gives a sin3 nfdT  response.
This is a four-pulse'canceler.
Its response is equivalent to a triple canceler consisting  of a cascade of three singledelay-line cancelers.
(Note the potentially confusing nomenclature.
 A cascade configuration of three delay line's, each connected as a single canceler, is called  a triple canceler, but when connected as a transversal filter it is called a jbur-pulse canceler.)  d The weights for a transversal filter with n delay lines that gives a response sinn n, T are the  coefficients of the expansion of (1 - x)", which are the binomial coefficients with alternating  signs :  Input - -  Delay Delay ...- Delay  T2 -  T3 -  , Delay  T~  r L -  Summer I  I Fipre dl 1 General form of a trans-  versal (or nonrecursive) filter for MTI  Output signal processing.
 110INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS Clutter fOldover~ /'"I "-/ \ / \ / \ / \ / \ / \ tp=Yr FrequencySingle concellotionClutter spectrum /' I I / /Double \ /concellotion--"'" I \ I \1.0 <I.l ~0.8 o0.:a0.6 L..
.~0.4­o£0.2 O~L- l- ~II'l.a:~--_L-_-_.rLAJ/Lll.:..:L-- o Figure4.10Relative frequency response ofthesingle-delay-line canceler (solidcurve)al}dthedouble­ delay-line canceler (dashedcurve).Shadedarearepresents clutterspectrum.
whichisthesameastheoutputfromthedouble-delay-line canceler.
f(t)-f(t+T)-f(t+T)+f(t+2T) Thisconfiguration iscommonly calledthethree-pulse canceler.
Transversal'tnters.
Thethree-pulse canceler showninFig.4.9bisanexample ofatransversal filter.ItsgeneralformwithNpulsesandN - 1delaylinesisshowninFig.4.11.Itisalso sometimes knownasafeedforward filter,anonrecursive filter,afinitememoryfilteroratapped delay-line filter.Theweights WIforathree-pulse cancelerutilizingtwodelaylinesarranged asa transversal filterare1,-2,1.The/requency response function isproportional tosin2nhT.
Atransversal filterwiththreedelaylineswhoseweightsare1,-3, 3,- 1givesasin3nfdT response.
Thisisafour-pulse·canceler.
Itsresponse ise~uivalent toatriplecancelerconsisting ofacascadeofthreesingle-delay-line cancelers.
(Notethepotentially confusing nomenclature.
Acascadeconfiguration ofthreedelaylines,eachcon,nected asasinglecanceler, iscalled atriplecanceler, butwhenconnected asatransversal filteritiscalledafour~pulse canceler.) Theweightsforatransversal filterwithndelaylinesthatgivesaresponse sin"nf"Tarethe coefficients oftheexpansion of(1-xY'.whicharethebi~omial coefficients withalternating sIgns: ( }1-1 n! Wj=-1(n-i+l}!(i-l)!'i=1,2,...,n+1 (4.10) Input Summer OutputFigure4.11General formofatrans­ versal(ornonrecursive) filterforMTI signalprocessing. MTI AND PUL23E.DOPPLER RADAR 111  Tlie transversal filter with alterriating binomial weights is closely related to the filter  which maximizes the average of the ratio I, = (S/C),,,/(S/C)i,, where (SIC),,, is the signal-to-  clutter ratio at the output of the filter, and (S/C)i, is the signal-to-clutter ratio at the inp~t.~.~  Tlie average is taken over the range of doppler frequencies.
This criterion was first formulated  in a limited-distribution report by Erner~on.~ Tfie ratio I, was called in theearly literature the  refcretrce gclit~, but it is now called the intprovernent factor for clutter.
It is independent of the  target velocity atid depends only on the weights wi, the autocorrelation function (or power  spectrum) describing the clutter, arid the number of pulses.
For the two-pulse canceler (a single  delay lirie).
the optirnurn weights based on the above criterion are the same as the binomial  weights, when the clutter spectrum is represented by a gaussian f~nction.~ The difference  between a tratisversal filter with optimal weights and one with binomial weights for a three-  pulse cariceler (two delay lines) is less than 2 dB.4.5 The difference is also small for higher-  order cancelers.
Tlius the improvement obtained with optimal weights as compared with  binoniial weigl~ts is relatively small.
This applies over a wide range of clutter spectral widths.
 Similarly.
it is fouiid that tile use of a criterion which maximizes the clutter attenuation (ratio  of iili'i~t cluttcr power to tllc output clutter power) is also well approximated by a transversal  filter with binomial weights of alternating sign when the clutter spectrum can be represented  by a gairssian function whose spectral width is small compared to the pulse repetition  frequency.' Tlius the delay line cancellers with response sin" nfd Tare "optimum" in the sense  that they approximate the filters which maximize the average signal-to-clutter ratio or  the average clutter attentuation.
It also approximates the filter which maximizes the probabil-  ity of detection for a target at the midband doppler frequency or its  harmonic^.^  In spite of the fact that such filters are "optimum" in several senses as mentioned above,  they do not necessarily have characteristics that are always desirable for an MTI filter.
The  notches at dc, at the prf, and the harmonics of the prf are increasingly broad with increasing  number of delay lines.
Although added delay lines reduce the clutter, they also reduce the  number of moving targets detected because of the narrowing of the passband.
For example, if  the - 10 dB response of the filter characteristic is taken as the threshold for detection and if  the targets are distributed uniformly across the doppler frequency band, 20 percent of all  targets will be rejected by a two-pulse canceler (single delay-line canceler), 38 percent will be  rejected by a three-pulse canceler (double canceler), and 48 percent by a four-pulse canceler  (triple canceler).
These filters might be "optimum" in that they satisfy the specified criterion,  but the criterion might not be the best for satisfying MTI requirements.
(Optimum is not a  synonym for best; it means the best under the given set of assumptions.) Maximizing the  signal-to-clbtter ratio over all doppler frequencies, which leads to the binomial weights and  sinn njd T filters, is not necessarily a pertinent criterion for design of an MTI filter since this  criterion is independent of the target signal  characteristic^.^-^ It would seem that the MTI  filter should be shaped to reject the clutter at d-c and around the prf and its harmonics, but  have a flat response over the region where no clutter is expected.
That is, it would be desirable  to have the freedom to shape the filter response, just as with any conventional filter.
 The transversal, or nonrecursive, filter of Fig.
4.11 can be designed to achieve filter  responses suitable for MT17-'O but a relatively large number of delay lines are needed for  filters with desirable characteristics.
An N - 1 delay-line canceler requires N pulses, which sets  a restriction on the radar's pulse repetition frequency, beamwidth, and antenna rotation rate,  or dwell time.
 Figure 4.1226 shows the amplitude response for (1) a classical three-pulse canceler with  sin2 nfd T response, (2) a five-pulse "optimum " canceler designed to maximize the improve-  ment factor3 and (3) a 15-pulse canceler with a Chebyshev filter characteristic.
(The amplitude  N  is normalized by dividing the output of each tap by the square root of w:, where  I- I  MTIANDPULSE'DOPPLER RADARtil Thetransversal filterwithalternating binomial weights iscloselyrelatedtothefilter whichmaximizes theaverageoftheratioIe=(SjC)outj(SjC)in, where(SjC)OU!isthesignal-to­ clutterratioattheoutputofthefilter,and(SIC);nisthesignal-to-clutter ratioattheinput.3•4 Theaverageistakenovertherangeofdopplerfrequencies.
Thiscriterion wasfirstformulated inalimited-distribution reportbyEmerson.5TheratioIewascalledintheearlyliterature the referellce gaill,butitisnowcalledtheimprovement factorforclutter.Itisindependent ofthe targetvelocity anddepends onlyontheweights Wi,theautocorrelation function (orpower spectrum) describing theclutter,andthenumberofpulses.Forthetwo-pulse canceler (asingle delayline).theoptimum weightsbasedontheabovecriterion arethesameasthebinomial weights.
whentheclutterspectrum isrepresented byagaussian function.6Thedifferenc~ between atransversal filterwithoptimal weightsandonewithbinomial weightsforathree­ pulsecanceler (twodelaylines)islessthan2dB.4.5Thedifference isalsosmallforhigher­ ordercancelers.
Thustheimprovement obtained withoptimal weightsascompared with binomial weights isrelatively small.Thisappliesoverawiderangeofclutterspectral widths.
Similarly.
itisfoundthattheuseofacriterion whichmaximizes theclutterattenuation (ratio ofinputclutterpowertotheoutputclutterpower)isalsowellapproximated byatransversal filterwithbinomial weightsofalternating signwhentheclutterspectrum canberepresented hyagaussian function whosespectral widthissmallcompared tothepulserepetition frequency.7 Thusthedelaylinecancellers withresponse sin"1tfdTare"optimum" inthesense thattheyapproximate thefilterswhichmaximize theaverage signal-to-clutter ratioor theaverageclutterattentuation.
Italsoapproximates thefilterwhichmaximizes theprobabil­ ityofdetection foratargetatthemidband doppler frequency oritsharmonics.6 Inspiteofthefactthatsuchfiltersare"optimum" inseveralsensesasmentioned above, theydonotnecessarily havecharacteristics thatarealwaysdesirable foranMTIfilter.The notchesatdc,attheprf,andtheharmonics oftheprfareincreasingly broadwithincreasing number ofdelaylines.Although addeddelaylinesreducetheclutter,theyalsoreducethe numberofmovingtargetsdetected becauseofthenarrowing ofthepassband.
Forexample, if the-10dBresponse ofthefiltercharacteristic istakenasthethreshold fordetection andif thetargetsaredistributed uniformly acrossthedoppler frequency band,20percentofall targetswillberejectedbyatwo-pulse canceler (singledelay-line canceler), 38percentwillbe rejected byathree-pulse canceler (doublecanceler), and48percentbyafour-pulse canceler (triplecanceler).
Thesefiltersmightbe"optimum" inthattheysatisfythespecified criterion, butthecriterion mightnotbethebestforsatisfying MTIrequirements.
(Optimum isnota synonym fo.rbest;itmeansthebestunderthegivensetofassumptions.) Maximizing the signal-to-clutter ratiooveralldoppler frequencies, whichleadstothebinomial weightsand sin"1tjdTfilters,isnotnecessarily apertinent criterion fordesignofanMTIfiltersincethis criterion isindependent ofthetargetsignalcharacteristics.3-5ItwouldseemthattheMTI filtershouldbeshapedtorejecttheclutteratd-candaroundtheprfanditsharmonics, but haveaflatresponse overtheregionwherenoclutterisexpected.
Thatis,itwouldbedesirable tohavethefreedom toshapethefilterresponse, justaswithanyconventional filter.
Thetransversal, ornonrecursive, filterofFig.4.11canbedesigned toachievefilter responses suitable forMTI7-1obutarelatively largenumber ofdelaylinesareneededfor filterswithdesirable characteristics.
AnN-1delay-line canceler requiresNpulses,whichsets arestriction ontheradar'spulserepetition frequency, beamwidth, andantenna rotation rate, ordwelltime.
Figure4.1226showstheamplitude response for(1)aclassical three-pulse canceler with sin2rrf&Tresponse, (2)afive-pulse" optimum" canceler designed tomaximize theimprove­ mentfactor3and(3)aI5-pulse canceler withaChebyshev filtercharacteristic.
(Theamplitude N isnormalized bydividing theoutputofeachtapbythesquarerootofLwl,where /'"I 112 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  1 Frequency  Figure 4.12 Amplitude responses for three MTI delay-line cancelers.
(1) Classical three-pulse canceler,  (2) five-pulsedelay-linecanceler with "optimum" weights, and (3) 15-pulse Chebyshev design.
(Afrer Ilours  and B~rlage.~~)  wi = weight at the ith tap.) A large number of delay lines are seen to be required of a  nonrecursive canceler if highly-shaped filter responses are desired.
It has been ~uggested,'~  however, that even with only a five-pulse canceler, a five-pulse Chebyshev design provides  significantly wider bandwidth 'than the-five-pulse " optimum " design.
To achieve the wider  band the Chebyshev design has a lower improvement factor (since it is not " optimum "), but in  many cases the trade is worthwhile especially if the clutter spectrum is narrow.
However, when  only a few pulses are available f~r'~rocessin~ there is probably little that can be done to  control the shape of the filter dharskteriitic.
Thus, there is not much to be gained in trying to  shape the nonrecursive filtkr response for three- or four-pulse cancelers other than to use the  classical sin2 or sin3 response of the :' optimum " canceler.
 The N-pulse nonrecursive delay-line canceler allows the designer N zeros for synthesizing  the frequency response.
The result is that many delay lines are required for.highly-shaped filter  responses.
There are limits to the' number of delay lines (and pulses) that can be emplcycd.
 Therefore other approaches to MTI filter implementation are sometimes desired.
 Shaping the frequency resporrs;   on recursive filters employ only feedforward loops.
If feed-  back loops are used, as well as feedforward loops, each delay line can provide one pole as well  as one zero for increased design flexibility.
The canonical configuration of a time-domain filter  with feedback as well as feedforward loops is illustrated in Fig.
4.13.
When feedback loops are  'I'  Figure 4.13 Canonical-configuration comb filter.
(Afrer White and Ruvin,l IRE Natl.
Conv.
Record.)  112INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS 2.0,--,-----.---.-----,---,--,----,----,----,-----, (1) LJ..
:I: I \1)1.2 VIco0­ VI \1)...
~0.8 ~0- E4 0.4 Frequency Figure4.12Amplitude responses forthreeMTIdelay-line cancelers.
(1)Classical three-pulse canceler, (2)five-pulse delay-line cancelerwith"optimum" weights,and(3)IS-pulseChebyshev design.(AflerHouts andBurlage.26) Wj=weightattheithtap.)Alargenumber ofdelaylinesareseentoberequired ofa nonrecursive canceler ifhighly-shaped filterresponses aredesired.Ithasbeensuggested,26 however, thatevenwithonlyafive,.pulse c'anceler, afive-pulse Chebyshev designprovides significantly widerbandwidth'tha'n the'five-pulse" optimum" design.Toachievethewider bandtheChebyshev designhas"alowerimprovement factor(sinceitisnot"optimum "),butin manycasesthetradeisworthwhile especially iftheclutterspectrum isnarrow.However, when onlyafewpulsesareavailablefo'i'processing ~hereisprobably littlethatcanbedoneto controltheshapeofthefilterCluiracteristic.
Thus,thereis~otmuchtobegainedintryingto shapethenonrecursive filterresponse fOfthree-orfour-pulse cancelers otherthantousethe classical sin2orsin3response' ofthe,"optimum ·'canceler.
TheN-pulsenonrecufsive delay-line canceler allowsthedesignerNzerosforsynthesizing thefrequency response.
Theresultisthatmanydelaylinesarerequired for.highly-shaped filter responses.
Therearelimitstothe'n'umberofdelaylines(andpulses)thatcanheemplGyed, Therefore otherapproaches toMTlfilter implementation aresometimes desired.
Shaping thefrequency respons~ Nonrecursive filtersemployonlyfeedforward loops.Iffeed­ backloopsareused,aswellasfeedfcirwaid'loops, eachdelaylinecanprovideonepoleaswell asonezeroforincreased designflexibility.
Thecanonical configuration ofatime-domain filter withfeedback aswellasfeedforWardloopsisillustrated inFig.4.13.Whenfeedback loopsare .
tI • Vout Figure4.13Canonical-configuration combfilter.(AfterWhiteandRuvin,2IRENatl.Conv.Record.) used tile filter is called rectrrsive.
Using the Z-trarisform as the basis for design it is possible in  principle to synthesize almost any frequency-response f~nction.~~"-'~  Ttie canoriical configuration is useful for conceptual purposes, but it may not always be  desirable to design a filter in this manner.
White and Ruvin2 state that the canonical  configuration may be broken into cascaded sections, no section having more than two delay  elements.
Thus no feedback or feedforward path need span more than two delay elements.
This  type of corifiguratiorl is sometimes preferred to the canonical configuration.
 The synthesis technique described by White and Ruvin may be applied with any k~iown  low-pass filter characteristic, whether it is a Butterworth, Chebyshev, or Bessel filter or one of  the filters based on the elliptic-function transformatibn which has equal ripple in the rejection  band as well as in the passband.
An example of the use of these filter characteristics applied to  the design of a delay-line periodic filter is given in either of White's Consider the  frequency-response characteristic of a three-pole Chebyshev low-pass filter having 0.5 dB  ripple in the passband (Fig.
4.14).
The three different delay-line-filter frequency-response char-  acteristics shown in Fig.
4.14b to d were derived from the low-pass filter characteristic of  Fig.
4.14a.
This type of filter characteristic may be obtained with a single delay line in cascade  with a double delay line as shown in Fig.
4.15.
The weighting factors shown on the feedback  paths apply to tile characteristic of Fig.
4.14~.
 Tile additional degrees of freedom available in the design of recursive delay-line filters  offer a steady-state response that is superior to that of comparable nonrecursive filters.
How-  ever ttie feedback loops in the recursive filter result in a poor transient response.
The presence  Angular frequency, w  (a)  :::I ,  Figure 4.14 (a) Three-pole Chebyshev low-pass filter  OO 1/T characteristic with 0.5 dB ripple in the passband; (b-d)  Frequency delay-line filter ,:haracteristics derived from (a).
(AJter  (dl White.
' ')  (blMTIANUPULSE UOPI'LER RADAR113 uscdtilefiltcriscallcdrecursive.
Usingthc Z-lransformas thebasisfordesignitispossible in principle tosynthesize almostanyfrequency-response function.2.11-13 Thecanonical configuration isuscfulforconceptual purposes, butitmaynotalwaysbe desirable todesignafilterinthismanner.
WhiteandRuvin2statethatthecanonical configuration maybebrokenintocascaded sections, nosectionhavingmorethantwodelay elements.
Thusnofeedback orfeedforwardpathneedspanmorethantwodelayelements.
This typeofconfiguration issometimes preferred tothecanonical configuration.
Thesynthesis technique described byWhiteandRuvinmaybeappliedwithanyknown low-pass filtercharacteristic, whether itisaButterworth, Chebyshev, orBesselfilteroroneof thefiltersbasedontheelliptic-function transformation whichhasequalrippleintherejection bandaswellasinthepassband.
Anexample oftheuseofthesefiltercharacteristics appliedto thedesignofadelay-line periodic filterisgivenineitherofWhite'spapers.2,12Consider the frequency-response characteristic ofathree-pole Chebyshev low-pass filterhaving0.5dB rippleinthepassband (Fig.4.14).Thethreedifferent delay-line-filter frequency-response char­ acteristics showninFig.4.14btodwerederived fromthelow-pass filter characteri~tic of Fig.4.14a.Thistypeoffiltercharacteristic maybeobtained withasingledelaylineincascade withadoubledelaylineasshowninFig.4.15.Theweighting factorsshownonthefeedback pathsapplytothecharacteristic ofFig.4.14c.
Theadditional degreesoffreedom available inthedesignofrecursive delay-line filters offcrasteady-state response thatissuperior tothatofcomparable nonrecursive filters.How­ everthefeedback loopsintherecursive filterresultinapoortransient response.
Thepresence -10 1 2 3 4 Angular frequency, W (al Cll '"co 5t10 ­ ~ " ~0.5­ "g0__~.1_~l_","-,-o<..-----'-_--'- ~0 liT (el ~~t.c:\.
IL00 liT Frequency (d)Figure4.14(a)Three-pole Chebyshev low-pass filter characteristic with0.5dBrippleinthepassband; (b-d) delay-line filter';haracteristics derivedfrom(a).(After WhiteY) 114 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  i I Gut Delay T % c v  ' 0.61  Delay T ~Fl-e  / -  Figure 4.15 Form of the delay-line filter required to achieve the characteristic of Fig.
4.14~.
 of large clutter returns can effectively appear as a large step input to the filter with the result  that severe ringing is produced in the filter output.
The ringing can mask the target signal until  the transient response dies out.
In the, usual surveillance radar application, the number of  pulses from any target is limited, hence the operation of an MTI filter is almost always in the  transient state for most recursive filters.16 It has been said that a frequency response character-  istic with steep sides might allow 15 to 30 or more pulses to be generated at the filter output  because of the feedback.14 This might make the system unusable in situations in the presence ^ i .i  of large discrete clutter, and where interference from nearby radars or intentional jamming is  encountered.
The poor transient response might also be undesirable in a radar with a step-scan  antenna (as in a phased array), since these extra pulses might have to be gated out after the  beam is moved to a new position, In the step-scan antenna it has been suggested that the  undesirable transient effects can be mitigated by using the initial return from each new beam  position, or an average of the first few returns, to apply initial conditions to the MTI filter for - -  processing the remaining returns from that position.15 The clutter returns can be approxi-  mated by a step-input equal in magnitude to the first return for that beam position so that the  steady-state values that would normally appear in the filter memory elements after an  infinitely long sequence of these inputs can be immediately calculated and loaded into the filter  to suppress the transient response.
 Although the undesirable transient effects of a recursive filter can be reduced to some  extent, other approaches to MTI filtering are often desired.
One alternative the designer has  available is the use of multiple pulse-repetition frequencies for achieving the desired MTI filter  characteristics, as described next.
 4.3 MULTIPLE, OR STAGGERED, PULSE REPETITION FREQUENC~S~, 17-22'8 1.82  The use of more than one pulse repetition frequency offers additional flexibility in the design of  MTI doppler filters.
It not only reduces the effect of the blind speeds [Eq.
(4.8)], but it also  allows a sharper low-frequency cutoff in the frequency response than might be obtained with a  cascade of single-delay-line cancelers with sinn nf,Tresponse.
 The blind speeds of two independent radars operating at the same frequency will be  different if their pulse repetition frequencies are different.
Therefore, if one radar were " blind "  to moving targets, it would be unlikely that the other radar would be " blind" also.
Instead of  using two separate radars, the same result can be obtained with one radar which time-shares  its pulse repetition frequency between two or more different values (multiple prf's).
The pulse  repetition frequency might be switched every other scan or every time the antenna is scanned a  half beamwidth, or the period might be alternated on every other pulse.
When the switching is  pulse to pulse, it is known as a staggered prf.
 An example of the composite (average) response of an MTI radar operating with two  separate pulse repetition frequencies on a time-shared basis is shown in Fig.
4.16.
The pulse  114INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS -11DelayT~+1 Vout>-_._-----------'--'--1 Figure4.15Formofthedelay-line filterrequired toachievethecharacteristic ofFig.4.14c.
oflargeclutterreturnscaneffectively appearasalargestepinputtothefilterwiththeresult thatsevereringingisproduced inthefilteroutput.Theringingcanmaskthetargetsignaluntil thetransient response diesout.Inthe.usualsurveillance radarapplication, thenumber of pulsesfromanytargetislimited,hence'theoperation ofanMTIfilterisalmost'alwaysinthe transient stateformostrecursive filters.16Ithasbeensaidthatafrequency response character­ isticwithsteepsidesmightallow15to30ormorepulsestobegenerated atthefilteroutput becauseofthefeedback.14Thismightmakethesystemunusable insituations inthepresence oflargediscrete clutter,andwhereinterference fromnearbyradarsorintentional jamming is encountered.
Thepoortransient response mightalsobeundesirable inaradarwithastep-scan antenna (asinaphasedarray),sincetheseextrapulsesmighthavetobegatedoutafterthe beamismovedtoanewposition.
Inthestep-scan antenna ithasbeensuggested thatthe undesirable transient effectscanbemitigated byusingtheinitialreturnfromeachnewbeam position, oranaverageofthefirstfewreturns,toapplyinitialconditions totheMTIfilterfor processing theremaining returnsfromthatposition.15Theclutterreturnscanbeapproxi­ matedbyastep-input equalinmagnitude tothefirstreturnforthatbeamposition sothatthe steady-state valuesthatwouldnormally appearinthefiltermemory elements afteran infinitely longsequence oftheseinputscanbeimmediately calculated andloadedintothefilter tosuppress thetransient response.
Although theundesirable transient effectsofarecursive filtercanbereduced tosome extent,otherapproaches toMTIfiltering areoftendesired.Onealternative thedesigner has available istheuseofmultiple pulse-repetition frequencies forachieving thedesiredMTIfilter characteristics, asdescribed next.
4.3MULTIPLE, ORSTAGGERED, PULSE REPETITION FREQUENCIES8,1 7-22,81,82 Theuseofmorethanonepulserepetition frequency offersadditional flexibility inthedesignof MTIdoppler filters.Itnotonlyreducestheeffectoftheblindspeeds[Eq.(4.8)],butitalso allowsasharperlow-frequency cutoffinthefrequency response thanmightbeobtained witha cascadeofsingle-delay-line cancelers withsin"1tfdTresponse.
Theblindspeedsoftwoindependent radarsoperating atthesamefrequency willbe different iftheirpulserepetition frequencies aredifferent.
Therefore, ifoneradarwere"blind" tomovingtargets,itwouldbeunlikelythattheotherradarwouldbe"blind"also.Insteadof usingtwoseparate radars,thesameresultcanbeobtained withoneradarwhichtime-shares itspulserepetition frequency between twoormoredifferent values(multiple prf's).Thepulse repetition frequency mightbeswitched everyotherscanoreverytimetheantenna isscanned a halfbeamwidth, ortheperiodmightbealternated oneveryotherpulse.Whentheswitching is pulsetopulse,itisknownasastaggered prf..
Anexample ofthecomposite (average) response ofanMTIradaroperating withtwo separate pulserepetition frequencies onatime-shared basisisshowninFig.4.16.Thepulse MTI AND PULSE DOPPLER RADAR 115  o ?/r,  1- r equericy  o 3/r.
 Frequency  (b)  Frequency  (c)  Figure 4.16 (a) Frequency-response of a single-delay-line canceler for f, = 1/T,; (b) same for fp = l/Tz;  (c) composite response with TIIT, = $.
 repetition frequencies are in the ratio of 5 : 4.
Note that the first blind speed of the composite  response is increased several times over what it would be for a radar operating on only a single  pulse repetition frequency.
Zero response occurs only when the blind speeds of each prf  coincide.
In the example of Fig.
4.16, the blind speeds are coincident for 4/Ti = SIT2.
 Although the first blind speed may be extended by using more than one prf, regions of low  sensitivity might appear within the composite passband.
 The closer the ratio TI : T2 approaches unity, the greater will be the value of the first blind  speed.
However, the first null in the vicinity of fd = l/Tl becomes deeper.
Thus the choice of  T, /T2 is a compromise between the value of the first blind speed and the depth of the nulls  within the filter pass band.
The depth of the nulls can be reduced and the first blind speed  increased by operating with more than two interpulse periods.
Figure 4.17 shows the response  of a five-pulse stagger (four periods) that might be used with a long-range air traffic control  radar.' In this example the periods are in the ratio 25 : 30 : 27 : 31 and the first blind speed is  28.25 times that of a constant prf waveform with the same average period.
If the periods of the  staggered waveforms have the relationship nl /TI = n2 /& = .
= nN/TN, wherenl,n2, ..., n~  are integers, and if UB is equal to the first blind speed of a nonstaggered waveform with a  MTJANDPULSE DOPPLER RADAR115 w1.0 V160.8- 0.
~0.6 .~0.4 0 di0.2n: 03/T, 4/T, 0 liT, 21T, rrequellcy (a) lO-w <I>6 0.8- 0.
:G0.6 L .~0.4- ~0.2 n: 0 0 l1T221T231T24/12SIr.2 Frequency (b) 1.0- '"<I> - 60.8- a :G06 L ~0.4 ~0.2 n: l1r2l/Tj 21T,2/Tj31r2 2 Frequency (C) Figure4.16(a)Frequency-response ofasingle-delay-line canceler forfp=liT.;(b)sameforfp=IITz; (c)compm;ite response withTdTz=t.
repetition fr~quencies areintheratioof5 :4.Notethatthefirstblindspeedofthecomposite response isincreased severaltimesoverwhatitwouldbeforaradaroperating ononlyasingle pulserepetition frequency.
Zeroresponse occursonlywhentheblindspeedsofeachprf coincide.
Intheexample ofFig.4.16,theblindspeedsarecoincident for4fTI=5/T2• Although thefirstblindspeedmaybeextended byusingmorethanoneprf,regionsoflow sensitivity mightappearwithinthecomposite passband.
TheclosertheratioT1:T2approaches unity,thegreaterwillbethevalueofthefirstblind speed.However, thefirstnullinthevicinityofId=1fTIbecomes deeper.Thusthechoiceof T1/T2isacompromise between thevalueofthefirstblindspeedandthedepthofthenulls withinthefilterpassband.Thedepthofthenullscanbereduced andthefirstblindspeed increased byoperating withmorethantwointerpulse periods.Figure4.17showstheresponse ofafive-pulse stagger(fourperiods) thatmightbeusedwithalong-range airtrafficcontrol radar.8Inthisexample theperiodsareintheratio25:30:27:31andthefirstblindspeedis 28.25timesthatofaconstant prfwaveform withthesameaverageperiod.Iftheperiodsofthe staggered waveforms havetherelationship nllTI=n2IIi=.,.=nNITN,wherent.n1.•...,nN areintegers, andifVBisequaltothefirstblindspeedofanonstaggered waveform witha 116 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  Figure 4.17 Frequency response of a five-pulse (four-period) stagger.
(Fronr Shroder,"o~rrlesj~ AfcGruw-  Hill Book Co.)  constant period equal to the average period T,, = (TI + T2 + .
.
.
TN)/N, then the first blind  speed o, is  It is also possible to apply weighting to the received pi~lses of a staggered prf waveform.
 An example is shown in Fig.
4.18.22 The dashed curve is the response of a five-pulse canceler  with fixed prf and with weightings of i, 1, - 32, 1,;.
The solid curve is for a staggered prf with  ---- Fixed prf  Staggered prf  Target veiocity relative to first blind velocity at fixed prf  Figure 4.18 Response of a weighted five-pulse canceler.
Dashed curve, constant prf; solid curve, staggered  prf's.
(From ~uerev,~' Courtesy IEEE.)  116INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS Symmetflcal --15 aboLlt v/v8=\4\25 -105 o -35 -40-30--25--5 --20-5 -15 ill-0 -;;;-10 Vlc0 ~-20 Q) a::-25 -30 -35 -402 4 6 Figure4.17Frequency response ofafive-pulse (four-period) stagger.(FromShrader,s COl/rces}J McGraw­ HillBookCo.) constant periodequaltotheaverage periodYav=(TI+T2+...TN)/N,thenthefirstblind speed (11is VInl+n2+...+nN= VB N(4.11) Itisalsopossible toapplyweighting tothereceived pulsesofastaggered prfwaveform.
Anexample isshowninFig.4.18.22Thedashedcurveistheresponse ofafive-pulse canceler withfixedprfandwithweightings of~,1,-3!,1,1.Thesolidcurveisforastaggered prfwith o -10 CD-20~ Q) Vl C 0Q.
Vl Q)-30a:: -40-I I I, I I I I I 'III , II 1/IIf I \/I I\!,1 It· 1/II ---- Fixedprf --- Staggered prfII \ I I I \ I \ I \ fIJ I/', II \ I\I 1/ "\ I I I \, \ \ I I I I I 4.0 1.0 2.0 3.0 Targetvelocityrelativetofirstblindvelocityatfixedprf-50l-------.i...:----------:::-'=--------:::-'-::------::-'-:o Figure4.18Response ofaweighted five-pulse canceler.
Dashedcurve,constant prf;solidcurve,staggered prf's.(FromZverev,22 Courtesy IEEE.) tlie same weightings, but with 4 interpulse periods of - 15 percent, - 5 percent, f 5 percent,  and + 15 percent of tile fixed period.
The response at the first blind speed of the fixed period  waveform is down only 6.6 dB.
 A disadvantage of the staggered prf is its inability to cancel second-time-around clutter  echoes.
Such clutter does not appear at the same range from pulse to pulse and thus produces  uncanceled residue.
Second-time-around clutter echoes can be removed by use of a constant  prf.
provitlirlg tlicrc is 13ulse-to-pulse collerellce as in the power amplifier form of MTI.
The  constant prf rnigl~t l~c ~iliployed only over tllose allgillar sectors wlierc second-tilne-around  clutter is expected (as in the ARSR-3 of Sec.
14.3), or by changing the prf each titne the  antenna scans half-a-bearnwidth (as in the MTD of Sec.
4.7), or by changing the prf every scan  ~~crioct (rotation of the antenna).
 4.4 UANGE-GA'I'ED DOPPLER FILTERS  The delay-line canceler, which can be considered as a time-domain filter, has been widely used  in MTI radar as the means for separating moving targets from stationary clutter.
It is also  possible to employ the more usual frequency-domain bandpass filters of conventional design  in MTI radar to sort the doppler-frequency-shifted targets.
The filter configuration must be  more complex, however, than the single, narrow-bandpass filter.
A narrowband filter with a  passband designed to pass the doppler frequency components of moving targets will " ring"  when excited by the usual short radar pulse.
That is, its passband is much narrower than the  reciprocal of the input pulse width so that the output will be of much greater duration than the  input.
The narrowband filter "smears" the input pulse since the impulse response is approxi-  ~riately the reciprocal of tlie filter bandwidth.
This smearing destroys the range resolution.
If  more than one target is present they cannot be resolved.
Even if only one target were present,  the noise from the other range cells that do not contain the target .vill interfere with the desired  target signal.
The result is a reduction in sensitivity due to a collapsing loss (Sec.
2.12).
 The loss of the range information and the collapsing loss may be eliminated by first  quantizing the range (time) into small intervals.
This process is called range gating.
The width  of the range gates depends upon the range accuracy desire! and the complexity which can be  tolerated, but they are usually of tlie order of the pulse width.
Range resolution is established by  gating.
Once the radar return is quantized into range intervals, the output from each gate may  be applied to a narrowband filter since the pulse shape need no longer be preserved for range   resolution.'^ collapsing loss does not take place since noise from the other range intervals is  excluded.
 A block diagram of the video of an MTI radar with multiple range gates followed by  clutter-rejection filters is shown in Fig.
4.19.
The output of the phase detector is sampled  sequentially by tlie range gates.
Each range gate opens in sequence just long enough to sample  the voltage of the video waveform corresponding to a different range interval in space.
The  range gate acts as a switch or a gate which opens and closes at the proper time.
The range gates  are activated once each pulse-repetition interval.
The output for a stationary target is a series  of pulses of constant amplitude.
An echo from a moving target produces a series of pulses  which vary in amplitude according to the doppler frequency.
The output of the range gates is  st retched in a circuit called the boxcar generator, or sample-and-hold circuit, whose purpose is  to aid in the filtering and detection process by empliasizing the fundamental of the modulation  frequency and eliminating harmonics of the pulse repetition frequency (Sec.
5.3).
The clutter-  reject ion filter is a bandpass filter whose bandwidth depends upon the extent of the expected  clutter spectrum.
 MTlANDPULSEDOPPLER RADAR117 thesameweightings, butwith4interpulse periodsof-15percent, .,..,.5percent,+5percent, and+15percentofthefixedperiod.Theresponse atthefirstblindspeedofthefixedperiod waverorm isdownonly6.6dB.
Adisadvantage ofthestaggered prfisitsinability tocancelsecond-time-around clutter echoes.Suchclutterdoesnotappearatthesamerangefrompulsetopulseandthusproduces uncanceled residue.Second-time-around clutterechoescanberemoved byuseofaconstant prf.providing thereispulse-to-pulse coherence asinthepoweramplifier formofMTI.The constant prfmightbe~ll1ployed onlyoverthoseangularsectorswheresecond-time-around clutterisexpected (asintheARSR-3 ofSec.14.3),orbychanging theprfeachtimethe antenna scanshalf-a-beamwidth (asintheMTDofSec.4.7),orbychanging theprfeveryscan period(rotation oftheantenna).
4.4RANGE-GATED DOPPLER FILTERS Thedelay-line canceler, whichcanbeconsidered asatime-domain filter,hasbeenwidelyused inMTIradarasthemeansforseparating moving targetsfromstationary clutter.Itisalso possible toemploythemoreusualfrequency-domain bandpass filtersofconventional design inMTIradartosortthedoppler-frequency-shifted targets.Thefilterconfiguration mustbe morecomplex, however, thanthesingle,narrow-bandpass filter.Anarrowband filterwitha passband designed topassthedoppler frequency components ofmovingtargetswill"ring" whenexcitedbytheusualshortradarpulse.Thatis,itspassband ismuchnarrower thanthe reciprocal oftheinputpulsewidthsothattheoutputwillbeofmuchgreaterduration thanthe input.Thenarrowband filter"smears" theinputpulsesincetheimpulse response isapproxi­ matelythereciprocal ofthefilterbandwidth.
Thissmearing destroys therangeresolution.
If morethanonetargetispresenttheycannotberesolved.
Evenifonlyonetargetwerepresent, thenoisefromtheotherrangecellsthatdonotcontainthetarget.villinterfere withthedesired targetsignal.Theresultisareduction insensitivity duetoacollapsing loss(Sec.2.12).
Thelossoftherangeinformation andthecollapsing lossmaybeeliminated byfirst quantizing therange(time)intosmallintervals.
Thisprocessiscalledrangegating.Thewidth oftherangegatesdepends upontherangeaccuracy desiredandthecomplexity whichcanbe Itolerated, buttheyareusuallyoftheorderofthepulsewidth.Rangeresolution isestablished by gating.Oncetheradarreturnisquantized intorangeintervals, theoutputfromeachgatemay beappliedtoanarrowband filtersincethepulseshapeneednolongerbepreserved forrange resolution.
~Acollapsing lossdoesnottakeplacesincenoisefromtheotherrangeintervals is excluded.
Ablockdiagram ofthevideoofanMTIradarwithmultiple rangegatesfollowed by clutter-rejection filtersisshowninFig.4.19.Theoutputofthephasedetector issampled sequentially bytherangegates.Eachrangegateopensinsequence justlongenoughtosample thevoltageofthevideowaveform corresponding toadifferent rangeinterval inspace.The rangegateactsasaswitchoragatewhichopensandclosesatthepropertime.Therangegates areactivated onceeachpulse-repetition interval.
Theoutputforastationary targetisaseries ofpulsesofconstant amplitude.
Anechofromamoving targetproduces aseriesofpulses whichvaryinamplitude according tothedoppler frequency.
Theoutputoftherangegatesis stretched inacircuitcalledtheboxcargenerator, orsample-ami-hold circuit,whosepurpose is toaidinthefilteringanddetection processbyemphasizing thefundamental ofthemodulation frequency andeliminating harmonics ofthepulserepetition frequency (Sec.5.3).Theclutter­ rejection filterisabandpass filterwhosebandwidth depends upontheextentoftheexpected clutterspectrum. 118 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  Phase Ronge  detector NO.
3 Boxcar --t- +  Figure 4.19 Block diagram of MTI radar using range gates and filters.
Ronge  gate  No.
1 +  Following the doppler filter is a full-wave linear detector and an integrator (a low-pass  filter).
The purpose of the detector is to convert the bipolar video to unipolar video.
Tf~c  output of the integrator is applied to a threshold-detection circuit.
Only those signals which  cross the threshold are reported as targets.
Following the threshold detector, the outputs from  each of the range channels must be properly combined for display on the PPI or A-scope or for  any other appropriate indicating or data-processing device.
The CRT display from this type of  MTI radar appears "cleaner" than the display from a normal MTI radar, not only because of  better clutter rejection, but also because the threshold device eliminates many of the unwanted  false alarms due to noise.
The frequency-response characteristic of the range-gated MTI might  appear as in Fig.
4.20.
The shape of the rejection band is determined primarily by the shape  of the bandpass filter of Fig.
4.19.
 The bandpass filter can be designed with a variable low-frequency cutoff that can be  selected to conform to the prevailing clutter conditions.
The selection of the lower ciitoff might  be at the option of the operator or it can be done adaptively.
A variable lower cutoff might be  advantageous when the width of the clutter spectrum changes with time as when the radar  receives unwanted echoes from birds.
A relatively wide notch at zero frequency is needed to  remove moving birds.
If the notch were set wide enough to remove the birds, it might be wider  than necessary for ordinary clutter and desired targets might be removed.
Since the appear-  ance of birds varies with the time of day and the season, it is important that the width of the  notch be controlled according to the local conditions.
-t.
 Boxcar  generator Range  gate  No.
2 --t.
 Range Boxcar  gate - generotor No.
n  ..
..
.
'.
 Figure 4.20 Frequency-response characteristic of an MTI using range gates and filters.
--t + -  ---t 1  Bandposs  (Doppler)  filter  -t -  - -+- Threshold  Threshald Low poss  filter Threshold  (integrator) - Full -wave  lineor  detector -t-  118INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS RangeBoxcarBandpass Full-wove Lowpass--gate~-(Doppler)r-linear4--- tilter I~ThresholdL_ NO.1generatorfilter detector (integrator) RangeBoxcarr-gater--generatorr----f----Threshold f-- No.2 ~ PhoseRange ~--detectorr-f--gater----- -- NO.3 --..
~.,," r+Todata processi/i., ordisplay Range gate No.nBoxcar generatorThreshOld Figure4.19Blockdiagram ofMTIradarusingrangegatesandfilters.
Following thedoppler filterisafull-wave lineardetector andanintegrator (alow-pass filter).Thepurpose ofthedetector istoconvert thebipolarvideotounipolar video.The outputoftheintegrator isappliedtoathreshold-detection circuit.Onlythosesignalswhich crossthethreshold arereported astargets.Following thethreshold detector, theoutputsfrom eachoftherangechannels mustbeproperly combined fordisplayonthePPIorA-scopeorfor anyotherappropriate indicating ordata-processing device.TheCRTdisplayfromthistypeof MTIradarappears" cleaner" thanthedisplayfromanormalMTIradar,notonlybecauseof betterclutterrejection, butalsobecausethethreshold deviceeliminates manyoftheunwanted falsealarmsduetonoise.Thefrequency-response characteristic oftherange-gated MTlmight appearasinFig.4.20.Theshapeoftherejection bandisdetermined primarily bytheshape ofthebandpass filterofFig.4.19.' Thebandpass filtercan'bedesigned withavariable low-frequency cutoffthatcanbe selected toconform totheprevailing clutterconditions.
Theselection ofthelowercutoffmight beattheoptionoftheoperator oritcanbedoneadaptively.
Avariable lowercutoffmightbe advantageous whenthewidthoftheclutterspectrum changes withtimeaswhentheradar receives unwanted echoesfrombirds.Arelatively widenotchatzerofrequency isneededto removemovingbirds.Ifthenotchweresetwideenoughtoremovethebirds,itmightbewider thannecessary forordinary clutteranddesiredtargetsmightberemoved.
SinceIheappear­ anceofbirdsvarieswiththetimeofdayandtheseason,itisimportant thatthewidthofIhe notchbecontrolled according tothelocalconditfons .
• J w iI!},fLJL[ w0 ~='1r 2~' 3~ a: .,Frequency Figure4.20Freq!Jency-response characteristic ofanMTIusingrangegatesandfilters. MTI AND PULSE DOPPLER RADAR 119  hITI radar using range gates atld filters is usually more complex than an MTI with a  s~ngle-delay-line canceler.
The additional complexity is justified in those applications where  good MTI performance and the flexibility of the range gates and filter MTI are desired.
The  better MTI performance results from tile better match between the clutter filter characteristic  and the clutter spectrum.
 4.5 OIGITAL SIGNAL PROCESSING  The itltroduction of practical and ecorlomical digital processing to MTI radar allowed a  significant increase in the options open to the signal processing designer.
The convenience of  tligirill ~~ioccssi~~g IIIL';~I)S tl~ilt ~l~\tltil>l~ dolay-line cancelers with tailored frequency-response  characteristics can he readily achieved.
A digital MTI does not, in principk,do any  hcttcr tl~ar~ :I well-dcsigr~ed analog canceler; but it is Inore dependable, it requires less adjust-  nierits and attet~tiot~, and can do some tasks easier.
Most of the advantages of a digital MTI  Ilrocessor are due to its use of digital delay --- lim rather than analog delay lines which are  cllaracteri7ed by variations due to temperature, critical gains, and poor on-line availability.
 A simple block diagram of a digital MTI processor is shown in Fig.
4.21.
From the output  of the IF amplifier the signal is split into two channels.
One is denoted I, for in-phase channel.
 The ottler is denoted Q, for q~tadrature charrt~el, since a 90" phase change (n/2 radians) is  two detectors to be 90" out of phase.
The purpose of the quadrature channel is to eliminate the 1 i~itrodtrced into the col~o reference signal at the phase detector.
This causes the outputs of the ,  \  \ efTects of hlitrd phases, as will be described later.
It is desirable to eliminate blind phases in any  MTI processor, but it is seldom done with analog delay-line cancelers because of the complex-  ity of the added analog delay lines of the second channel.
The convenience of digital processing  allows the quadrature channel to be added without significant burden so that it is often  included in digital processing systems.
It is for this reason it is shown in this block diagram,  but was not included in the previous discussion of MTI dehy-line cancelers.
 Following the phase detector the bipolar video signal is sampled at a rate sufficient to  obtain one or more samples within each range resolution cell.
These voltage samples are  corlverted to a series of digital words by the analog-to-digital (A/D) c~nverter.~~,~~ The digital  1, or tn- phase, channel  C Diqilol Sub-  converter - store tractor  From Magnitude -+  IF (1' + 02)"~ -  detector converter tractor  Q, or quadrature, channel  Figure 4.21 Block diagram of a simple digital MTI signal processor.
 MTIANDPULSE DOPPLER RADAR119 MTIradarusingrangegatesandfiltersisusuallymorecomplex thananMTIwitha single-delay-line canceler.
Theadditional complexity isjustified inthoseapplications where goodMTIperformance andtheOexibility oftherangegatesandfilterMTIaredesired.The bellerMTIperformance resultsfromthebettermatchbetween theclutterfiltercharacteristic andtheclutterspectrum.
' 4.5DIGITAL SIGNAL PROCESSING Theintroduction ofpractical andeconomical digitalprocessing toMTIradarallowed a significant increase intheoptionsopentothesignalprocessing designer.
Theconvenience of digitalprocessing meansthatIllultiple _~~Iay-line canc~I_~rs_wi\h tailoredJrc'l-l1ency-response characteristics canbereadilyachieved.
1\digitalMTIprocessor doesnot,inprinclpte-;do any hettcrthanawcll-designed analogcanceler; butitismoredependable, itrequires lessadjust­ mentsandattention, andcandosometaskseasier.Mostoftheadvantages ofadigitalMTI processor areduetoitsuseofdigital~Ji~ ratherthananalogdelaylineswhichare characterized byvariations duetotemperature, criticalgains,andpooron-lineavailability.
1\simpleblockdiagram ofadigitalMTIprocessor isshowninFig.4.21.Fromtheoutput\ oftheIFamplifier thesignalissplitintotwochannels.
Oneisdenoted I,forin-phasechannel.
Theotherisdenoted Q,forquadrature clw1I1zel, sincea900phasechange(rr/2radians) is introduced intothecohoreference signalatthephasedetector.
Thiscausestheoutputsofthe, twodetectors tobe900outofphase.Thepurposeofthequadrature channel istoeliminate the\ effectsofMindphases,aswillbedescribed later.Itisdesirable toeliminate blindphasesinany) MTJprocessor, butitisseldomdonewithanalogdelay-line cancelers becauseofthecomplex­ ityoftheaddedanalogdelaylinesofthesecondchannel.
Theconvenience ofdigitalprocessing allowsthequadrature channel tobeaddedwithout significant burdensothatitisoften included indigitalprocessing systems.Itisforthisreasonitisshowninthisblockdiagram, butwasnotincluded intheprevious discussion ofMTIdethy-line cancelers.
Following thephasedetector thebipolarvideosignalissampled ataratesufficient to obtainoneormoresamples withineach'range resolution cell.Thesevoltagesamples are converted toaseriesofdigitalwordsbytheanalog-to-digital (AID) converterY~,24 Thedigital !,orIn-phase.channel From--lFPho~~SampleAID Digital Sub--..and..
r-~storef-tractor~ de'~ctorholdconverter • I Coho Mognitude DIA To $(12+02)112--converler--..
display LlI PhoseSample AID Digital Sub-'- f-andf.-canverler storef-Iractor-detectorhold O.orQuadrature, channel Figure4.21Blockdiagram ofasimpledigitalMTIsignalprocessor. 120 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  words are stored in a digital memory for one pulse repetition period and are then stlbtracted  from the digital words of the next sweep.
The digital outputs of the I and Q channels are  combined by taking the square root of IZ + Q~.
An alternative method of combining, which is  adequate for most cases, is to take 11 I + I Q I.
The combined output is then converted to an  analog signal by the digital-to-analog (D/A) converter.
The unipolar video output is then  ready to be displayed.
The digital MTI processor depicted in Fig.
4.21 is that of a single-delay-  line canceler.
Digital processors are likely to employ more complex filtering schemes, but the  simple canceler is shown here for convenience.
Almost any type of digital storage device can be  used.
A shift register is the direct digital analogy of a delay line, but other digital computer  memories can also be used effectively.
 The A/D converter has been, in the past, one of the critical parts of the MTI signal  processor.
It must operate at a speed high enough to preserve the information content of the  radar signal, and the number of bits into which it quantizes the signal must be sufficient for the  precision required.
The number of bits in the AID converter determines the maximum inl-  provement factor the MTI radar can achie~e.~.~~.'~ Generally the AID converter is designed to  cover the peak excursion of the phase detector output.
A limiter may be necessary to ensure  this.
An N-bit converter divides the output of the phase detector into 2N - 1 discrete intervals.
 According to Shrader,' the quantization noise introduced by the discrete nature of the A/D  converter causes, on the average, a limit to the improvement factor which is  This is approximately equal t6 6 dB per bit since each bit represents a factor of two in  amplitude resolution.22 When a fixed signal of maximum level is present, a possible error of  one quantization interval is possible.
A 9-bit AID converter therefore has a maximum diicri-  mination of 1 out of 511 levels; or approximately 54 dB.
(Equation (4.12) on the other hand,  predicts 52.9 dB for 9-bit quantization.)  In the above it was said that the addition of the Q channel removed the problem of  reduced sensitivity due to blind phases.
This is different than the blind speeds which occur when  the pulse sampling appears at the same point in the doppler cycle at each sampling instant, as  shown in Fig.
4.22~.
Figure 4.22b shows the in-phase, or I, channel with the pulse train such  Doppler  I frequency Radar  echo  , Figure 4.22 (a) Blind speed in an MTI radar.
 The target doppler frequency is equal to the  prf.
(b) Effect of blind phase in the I channel,  and (c) in the Q channel.
 120INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS wordsarestoredinadigitalmemory foronepulserepetition periodandarethensuhtracted fromthedigitalwordsofthenextsweep.Thedigitaloutputsofthe[andQchannels are combined bytakingthesquarerootof[2+Q2.Analternative methodofcombining, whichis adequate formostcases,istotakeIII+IQI.Thecombined outputisthenconverted toan analogsignalbythedigital-to-analog (01A)converter.
Theunipolar videooutputisthen readytobedisplayed.
ThedigitalMTIprocessor depicted inFig.4.21isthatofasingle-delay­ linecanceler.
Digitalprocessors arelikelytoemploymorecomplex filteringschemes, butthe simplecanceler isshownhereforconvenience.
Almostanytypeofdigitalstoragedevicecanhe used.Ashiftregister isthedirectdigitalanalogy ofadelayline,butotherdigitalcomputer memories canalsobeusedeffectively.
TheAIDconverter hasbeen,inthepast,oneofthecriticalpartsoftheMTIsignal processor.
Itmustoperateataspeedhighenoughtopreserve theinformation contentofthe radarsignal,andthenumberofbitsintowhichitquantizes thesignalmustbesufficient forthe precision required.
ThenumberofbitsintheAIDconverter determines themaximum im­ provementfactor theMTIradarcanachieve.a.75.76 Generally theAIDconverter isdesigned to coverthepeakexcursion ofthephasedetector output.Alimitermaybenecessary toensure '" this.AnN-bitconverter dividestheoutputofthephasedetector into2N-1discreteintervals.
According toShrader,athequantization noiseintroduced bythediscrete natureoftheAID converter causes,ontheaverage, alimittotheimprovement factorwhichis (dB) (4.12) Thisisapproximately equalto6dBperbitsinceeachbitrepresents afactoroftwoin amplitude resolution.22Whenafixedsignalofmaximum levelispresent, apossible errorof onequantization intervalispossible.
A9-bitAIDconverter therefore hasamaximum di.>cri­ mination ofloutof511levels;orapproximately 54dB.(Equation (4.12)ontheotherhand, predicts 52.9dBfor9-bitquantization.) Intheaboveitwassaidthattheaddition oftheQchannel removed theproblem of reducedsensitivity duetoblindphases.Thisisdifferent thantheblindspeedswhichoccurwhen thepulsesampling appearsatthesamepointinthedoppler cycleateachsampling instant,as showninFig.4.22a.Figure4.22bshowsthein-phase, orI,channelwiththepulsetrainsuch Doppler frequency /,"""~//, \Radar echo .....-, pulses"-~ / A---- /------\I (0) 0102/- <l.> U/ ::lI (i1'------JL-------'----'t----.---.---+----L--->--- E Time-- <l:(b) \"/.......-(c)Figure4.22 (a)BlindspeedinanMTIradar.
Thetargetdopplerfrequency isequaltothe prf.(b)EffectofblindphaseintheIchannel, and(c)intheQchannel. MI'I AND PULSE DOPPLER RADAR 121  that the signals are of the same amplitude and with a spacing such that when pulse al is  subtracted from pulse a2, the result is zero.
However, a residue is produced when pulse a, is  subtracted from pulse a4, but not when as is subtracted from a4, and so on.
In the quadrature  channel, the doppler-frequency signal is shifted 90" so that those pulse pairs that were lost in  the 1 channel are recovered in tlie Q c!iatinel, arid vice versa.
The combination of the I and Q  channels thus results in a uniform signal with no loss.
The phase of the pulse train relative to  that of the doppler signal in Fig.
4.226 arid c is a special case to illustrate the effect.
With other  phase arid freqiierlcy relationsliips, there is still a loss with a single chatinel MTI that car1 be  recovered by tlie use of both tlie 1 and (2 channels.
An extreme case where tile blind pliase with  only a single channel results in a complete loss of signal is when the doppler frequency is half  the prf arid tlie phase relationship between the two is such that the echo pulses lie on the zeros  of the doppler-frequency sine wave.
This is not tlie condition for a blind speed but nevertlleless  there is no signal.
However, if the phase relationship is shifted 90", as it is in the Q channel,  then all the echo pulses occur at the peaks of the doppler-frequency sine wave.
Thus, to ensure  the signal will be obtaitied without loss, both I and Q channels are desired.
 Digital signal processing has some significant advantages over analog delay lines, parti-  cularly those that use acoustic devices.
As with most digital technology, it is possible to achieve  greater stability, repeatability, and precision with digital processing than with analog delay-  line cancelers.
Thus the reliability is better.
No special temperature control is required, and it  can be packaged in convenient size.
The dynamic range is greater since digital MTI processors  do not experience the spurious responses which limit signals in acoustic delay lines to about 35  to 40 dB above minimum detectable signal leveL2' (A major restriction on dynamic range in  a digital MTI is that imposed by the A/D converter.) In an analog delay-line canceler the delay  time and the pulse repetition period must be made equal.
This is simplified in a digital MTI  since tlie timing of the sampling of the bipolar video can be controlled readily by the timing of  the transmitted pulse.
Thus, different pulse repetition periods can be used without the necessity  of switching delay lines of various lengths in and out.
The echo signals for each interpulse  period can be stored in the digital memory with reference to the time of transmission.
This  allows more elaborate stagger periods.
The flexibility of the digital processor also permits more  freedom in the selection and application of amplitude weightings for shaping the filters.
It has  also allowed the ready incorporation of the quadrature channel for elimination of blind  phases.
In short, digital MTI has allowed the radar designer the freedom to take advantage of  the full theoretical capabilities of doppler processing in practical radar systems.
 The development of digital processing technology has not only made the delay-line  canceler a more versatile tool for the MTI radar designer, but it has also allowed the applica-  tion of the contiguous filter bank for added flexibility in MTI radar design.
One of the major  factors in this regard has been the introduction of digital devices for conveniently computing  the Fourier transform.
 Digital filter banks and the FFT.
A transversal filter with N outputs (N pulses and N - 1  delay lines) can be made to form a bank of N contiguous filters covering the frequency range  from 0 to f,, where .fp = pulse repetition frequency.
A filter bank covering the doppler  frequency range is of advantage in some radar applications and offers another option in the  design of MTI signal processors.
Consider the transversal filter that was shown in Fig.
4.1 1 to  have N - 1 delay lines each with a delay time T = llf,.
Let the weights applied to the outputs  of the N taps be:  MTIANDPULSEDOPPLER RADARIII thatthesignalsareofthesameamplitude andwithaspacing suchthatwhenpulseatis subtracted frompulsea2,theresultiszero.However, aresidueisproduced whenpulsea3is subtracted frompulsea4,butnotwhenasissubtracted froma4,andsoon.Inthequadrature channel, thedoppler-frequency signalisshifted90°sothatthosepulsepairsthatwerelostin theIchannel arerecovered intheQdlatlllel, andviceversa.Thecombination oftheIandQ channels thusresultsinauniform signalwithnoloss.Thephaseofthepulsetrainrelativeto thatofthedoppler signalinFig.4.220andcisaspecialcasetoillustrate theeffect.Withother phaseandfrequency relationships, thereisstillalosswithasinglechannelMTIthatcanbe recovered bytheuseofboththeIandQchannels.
Anextreme casewheretheblindphasewith onlyasinglechannel resultsinacomplete lossofsignaliswhenthedopplerfrequency ishalf theprfandthephaserelationship between thetwoissuchthattheechopulseslieonthezeros ofthedoppler-frequency sinewave.Thisisnotthecondition forablindspeedbutnevertheless thereisnosignal.However, ifthephaserelationship isshifted90°,asitisintheQchannel, thenalltheechopulsesoccuratthepeaksofthedoppler-frequency sinewave.Thus,toensure thesignalwillbeobtained without loss,bothIandQchannels aredesired.
Digitalsignalprocessing hassomesignificant advantages overanalogdelaylines,parti­ cularlythosethatuseacoustic devices.Aswithmostdigitaltechnology, itispossibletoachieve greaterstability, repeatability, andprecision withdigitalprocessing thanwithanalogdelay­ linecancelers.
Thusthereliability isbetter.Nospecialtemperature controlisrequired, andit canbepackaged inconvenient size.Thedynamic rangeisgreatersincedigitalMTIprocessors donotexperience thespurious responses whichlimitsignalsinacoustic delaylinestoabout35 to40dBaboveminimum detectable signalleveI.2s(Amajorrestriction ondynamic rangein adigitalMTIisthatimposed bytheAIDconverter.) Inananalogdelay-line canceler thedelay timeandthepulserepetition periodmustbemadeequal.Thisissi~plified inadigitalMTI sincethetimingofthesampling ofthebipolarvideocanbecontrolled readilybythetimingof thetransmitted pulse.Thus,different pulserepetition periodscanbeusedwithoutthenecessity ofswitching delaylinesofvariouslengthsinandout.Theechosignalsforeachinterpulse periodcanbestoredinthedigitalmemory withreference tothetimeoftransmission.
This allowsmoreelaborate staggerperiods.Theflexibility ofthedigitalprocessor alsopermitsmore freedom intheselection andapplication ofamplitude weightings forshapingthefilters.Ithas alsoallowed thereadyincorporation ofthequadrature channel forelimination ofblind phases.Inshort,digitalMTIhasallowed theradardesigner thefreedom totakeadvantage of thefulltheoretical capabilities ofdoppler processing inpractical radarsystems.
Thedevelopment ofdigitalprocessing technology hasnotonlymadethedelay-line canceler amoreversatile toolfortheMTIradardesigner, butithasalsoallowed theapplica­ tionofthecontiguous filterbankforaddedflexibility inMTIradardesign.Oneofthemajor factorsinthisregardhasbeentheintroduction ofdigitaldevicesforconveniently computing theFouriertransform.
DigitalfilterbanksandtheFIT.Atransversal filterwithNoutputs(NpulsesandN-1 delaylines)canbemadetoformabankofNcontiguous filterscovering thefrequency range from0tofp,wherefp=pulserepetition frequency.
Afilterbankcovering thedoppler frequency rangeisofadvantage insomeradarapplications andoffersanotheroptioninthe designofMTIsignalprocessors.
Consider thetransversal filterthatwasshowninFig.4.11to haveN-IdelaylineseachwithadelaytimeT=l/fp'Lettheweightsappliedtotheoutputs oftheNtapsbe: W-e-J12n(i-l)It{N) fit- (4.13) 122 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  where i = 1, 2, .
.
.
, N represents the ith tap, and k is an index from O to N - I.
Each value of k  corresponds to a different set of N weights, and to a different doppler-filter response.
The N  filters generated by the index k constitute the filter bank.
Note that the weights of Eq.
(4.13)  and the diagram of Fig.
4.1 1 are similar in form to the phased array antenna as described in  Sec.
8.2.
 The impulse response of the transversal filter of Fig.
4.1 1 with the weights given by  Eq.
(4.13) is  The Fourier transform of the impulse response is the frequency response function  The magnitude of the frequency response function is the amplitude passband characteristic of  the filter.
Therefore  N  &2rt(i- 1 )IfT-klNI = I I sin [nN(.jT - k/N)]  I Hk(.f) 1 = 1  i= I sin [n(,fr - k/N)]  By analogy to the discussion of the array antenna in Sec.
8.2, the peak response of the filter  occurs when the denominator of Eq.
(4.16) is zero, or when n(fT - k/N) = 0, n, 2n, .
.
.
.
For  k = 0, the peak response of the filter occurs at f = 0, 1/T, 2/T, .
.., which defines a filter  centered at dc, the prf, and its harmonics.
This filter passes the clutter component at dc, hence  it has no clutter rejection capability.
(Its output is useful, however, in some MTI radars for  providing a map of the clutter.) The first null of the filter response occurs when the numerator  is zero, or when!= 1/NT, The bandwidth between the first nulls is 2/NT and the half-power  bandwidth is approximately 0.9/NT (Fig.
4.23).
 When k = 1, the peak response occurs at f= l/NT as well as .f'= 1/T + 1/NT, 2/T +  IINT, etc.
For k = 2, the peak response is at f = 2/NT, and so forth.
Thus each value of the  index k defines a separate filter response, as indicated in Fig.
4.23, with the total response  covering the region from j'= 0 to f= 1/T =.f,.
Each filter has a bandwidth of 2/NT as  measured between the first nulls.
Because of the sampled nature of the signals, the remainder of 1  the frequency band is also covered with similar response, but with ambiguity.
A bank of filters,  as in Fig.
4.23, is sometimes called a cohere~~t ititegratior~ filter.
 To generate the N filters simultaneously, each of the taps of the transversal filter of  Fig.
4.1 1 would have to be divided into N separate outputs with separate weights corrrspond-  Figure 4.23 MTI doppler filter  bank resulting from the processing  of N = 8 pulses with the weights of  Eq.
(4.13), yielding the response of  Eq.
(4.16).
Filter sidelobes not  Frequency shown.
 122INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS wherei=1,2,...,Nrepresents theithtap,andkisanindexfrom0toN-1.Eachvalueofk corresponds toadifferent setofNweights, andtoadifferent doppler-filter response.
TheN filtersgenerated bytheindexkconstitute thefilterbank.NotethattheweightsofEq.(4.13) andthediagram ofFig.4.11aresimilarinformtothephasedarrayantenna asdescribed in Sec.8.2.
Theimpulse response ofthetransversal filterofFig.4.11withtheweights givenby Eq.(4.13)is N hk(t)=Lb[t-(i-1)T]e-j2rt(i-llkIN i"=I TheFourier transform oftheimpulse response isthefrequency response function NHlf)=e-j2rtflLej2rt(i-111fT-kiN! i"=1(4.14) (4.15) (4.16)Themagnitude ofthefrequency response function istheamplitude passband characteristic of thefilter.Therefore IH(f)I=If.ei2tr(i-IlffT-klNII =Isi~[nN(.fT-~LN)JI k.
i=1 sm[n(fr-kiN)] Byanalogy tothediscussion ofthearrayantenna inSec.8.2,thepeakresponse ofthefilter occurswhenthedenominator ofEq.(4.16)iszero,orwhennUT-kiN)=0,n,2n,....For k=0,thepeakresponse ofthefilteroccursatf=0,liT,21T,...,whichdefines afilter centered atdc,theprf,anditsharmonics.
Thisfilterpassesthecluttercomponent atdc,hence ithasnoclutterrejection capability.
(Itsoutputisuseful,however, insomeMTIradarsfor providing amapoftheclutter.) Thefirstnullofthefilterresponse occurswhenthenumerator iszero,orwhenf= liNT.Thebandwidth between thefirstnullsis21NTandthehalf-power bandwidth isapproximately O.9INT (Fig.4.23).
Whenk=I,thepeakresponse occursat/=liNTaswellasf=liT+liNT,21T+ liNT,etc.Fork=2,thepeakresponse isatf=2INT,andsoforth.Thuseachvalueofthe indexkdefines aseparate filterresponse, asindicated inFig.4.23,withthetotalresponse covering theregionfromf=0tof=liT=/p.Eachfilterhasabandwidth of21NTas measured between thefirstnulls.Because ofthesampled natureofthesignals,theremainder of thefrequency bandisalsocovered withsimilarresponse, butwithambiguity.
Abankoffilters, asinFig.4.23,issometimes calledacoherellt integratio1J filter.
Togenerate theNfilterssimultaneously, eachofthetapsofthetransversal filterof Fig.4.11wouldhavetobedivided intoNseparate outputs withseparate weightscorrespond- 1oNT FrequencyFigure4.23MTIdoppler filter bankresulting fromtheprocessing ofN=8pulseswiththeweightsof Eq.(4.13),yielding Iheresponse of Eq.(4.16).FiltersideJobes not shown. ing to tlie k = 0 to N - 1 weighting as given by Eq.
(4.13).
(This is analogous to generating N  irldcpendetlt bcanls from an N-clenle~lt array by use of the Blass multiple-beam array as in  Fig.
8.26.) Wherl generating the filter bank by digital processing it is not necessary literally to  subdivide each of tlie N taps.
The equivalent can be accomplished in the digital computations.
 Ttie generation by digital processing of N filters from the outputs of N taps of a transver-  sit1 filtcr requires n total of (N - multiplications.
Tlie process is equivalent to the cornputa-  t ioil ol' it (lisc.r.(~~c I.'crirr.ic~t.
tr.(rrt.s/Or.r,t.
1 lowcvcr., wllcti N is so~llc power of 2, tllat is, N = 2.
4, 8.
 16.
.
.
.
, ari ;ilgor.itll~il is available tllat requires approximately (N/2) log2 N multiplications  i~lstc.;~rl of (N 1 )2, wl~icli I.CSIIIIS ill ;I cotlsic!c~-able saving it1 processi~ig tirnc.
This is tlie,jirst  I.'orrr.ic~r trtrrrs/or-~,r (1-f:'I'), wllicll tias bee11 widely described in the literature.".27 29  Sirice cacll filtcr occi~pies approximately 1/Nth the bandwidth of a delay-line canceler, its  signal-to-~loisc ratio will be greater than tliat of a delay-line canceler.
Tlie dividing of the  freqlrcncy band into N independent parts by the N filters also allows a measure of the doppler  frequency to be made.
Furtlierniore if moving clutter, such as from birds or weather, appears  at other-than-zero frequency, the threshold of each filter may be individually adjusted so as to  adapt to tlie clutter contained witllin it.
This selectivity allows clutter to be removed wliicli  would be passed by a delay-line canceler.
The first sidelobe of the filters described by Eq.
(4.16)  llas a valire of - 13.2 dB with respect to the peak response of the filter.
If this is too high for  proper clutter rejection, it tnay be reduced at the expense of wider bandwidth by applying  arnpliti~de weights \sti.
Just as is done in antenna design, the filter sidelobe can be reduced by  using Cliebyshev, Taylor, sin2 .u/.u2, or other ~eightings.~' (In the digital signal processing  literature, filter weighting is called window it^^.^^ Two popular forms of windows are the  Ha~rlrning and I~anning.) It may not be convenient to display the outputs of all the doppler  filters of !lie filter bank.
One approach is to connect the output of the filters to a greatest-of  circuit so tliat only a single output is obtained, that of the largest signal.
(The filter at dc which  contains clutter would not be inc!uded.)  .
-  I he improvement factor for each of the 8 filters of an 8-pulse filter bank is shown in  Fig.
4.24 as a function of tlie standard deviation of the clutter spectrum assuming the spectruni  to he represented by the gaussian function described by Eq.
(4.19).
The average improvement  for all filters is indicated by the dotted curve.
For comparison, the improvement factor for an  N-l~~lse canceler is sllown in Fig.
4.25.
Note that the improvement factor of a two-pulse  canceler is almost as good as that of the 8-pulse doppler-filter bank.
The three-pulse canceler is  ever1 better.
(As mentioned previously, maximizing the average improvement factor might not  be tlie only criterion used in judging the effectiveness of MTI doppler processors.)  If a two- or three-pulse canceler is cascaded with a doppler-filter bank, better clutter  rejection is provided.
Figure 4.26 shows the improvement factor for a three-pulse canceler and  an eight-pulse filter bank in cascade, as a function of the clutter spectral width.
The upper  figure assumes uniform amplitude weighting (- 13.2 dB first sidelobe) and the lower figure  shows the elfect of Chebyshev weighting designed to produce equal sidelobes with a peak value  of -25 dB.
It is found that doubling to 16 the number of pulses in the filter bank does not  offer significant -advantage over an eight-pulse More pulses do not necessarily mean  !nore gain in signal-to-clutter ratio, because the filter widths and sidelobe levels change relative  to the clutter spectrum as the number of pulses (and number of filters) is varied.
If the sidelobes  of the individual filters of the doppler filter bank can be made low enough, the inclusion of  the delay-line canceler ahead of it might not be needed.
 MTIANDPULSE DOPPLER RADAR123 ingtothek=0toN-1weighting asgivenbyEq.(4.13).(Thisisanalogous togenerating N independent beamsfromanN-element arraybyuseoftheBlassmultiple-beam arrayasin Fig.8.26.)Whengenerating thefilterbankbydigitalprocessing itisnotnecessary literally to subdivide eachoftheNtaps.Theequivalent canbeaccomplished inthedigitalcomputations.
Thegeneration bydigitalprocessing ofNfiltersfromtheoutputsofNtapsofatransver­ salfilterrequires atotalof(N-1)2multiplications.
Theprocess isequivalent tothecomputa­ 1iOltoradiscrete Fourit'r trails/in.",.
Ilowever, whenNisSOIllCpowerof2,thatis,N=2,4,H.
16.....analgorithm isavailable thatrequires approximately (N/2)log2Nmultiplications insteadof(NI)1.whichresultsinaconsiderable savinginprocessing time.Thisisthe/lISt Four;('/' tl'll/ls/im" (FFT),whichhasbecnwidelydescribed intheliterature.ll.n29 Sinceeachfilteroccupies approximately l/Nththebandwidth ofadelay-line canceler, its signal-to-noise ratiowillbegreaterthanthatofadelay-line canceler.
Thedividing ofthe frequcncy bandintoNindependent partsbytheNfiltersalsoallowsameasure ofthedoppler frequency tobemade.Furthermore ifmovingclutter,suchasfrombirdsorweather, appears atother-than-zero frequency, thethreshold ofeachfiltermaybeindividually adjusted soasto adapttothcc1ullercontained withinit.Thisselectivity allowscluttertoberemoved which wouldbepassedbyadelay-line canceler.
Thefirstsidelobe ofthefiltersdescribed byEq.(4.16) hasavalueof-13.2dBwithrespecttothepeakresponse ofthefilter.Ifthisistoohighfor propcrclutterrejection, itmaybereduced attheexpense ofwiderbandwidth byapplying amplitude weights Wi'Justasisdoneinantenna design,thefiltersidelobe canbereduced by usingChebyshev, Taylor, sin2x/x2,orotherweightings.39(Inthedigitalsignalprocessing literature, filterweighting iscalledwindowing.8oTwopopular formsofwindows arethe Hamming andhanning.) Itmaynotbeconvenient todisplaytheoutputsofallthedoppler filtcrsofthcfilterbank.Oneapproach istoconnect theoutputofthefilterstoagreatest-of circuitsothatonlyasingleoutputisobtained, thatofthelargestsignal.(Thefilteratdcwhich contains clutterwouldnotbeincluded.) theimprovement factorforeachofthe8filtersofan8-pulsefilterbankisshownin Fig.4.24asafunction ofthestandard deviation oftheclutterspectrum assuming thespectrum toherepresented bythegaussian function described byEq.(4.19).Theaverage improvement forallfiltersisindicated bythedottedcurve.Forcomparison, theimprovement factorforan N-pulsecanceler isshowninFig.4.25.Notethattheimprovement factorofatwo-pulse canceler isalmostasgoodasthatofthe8-pulsedoppler-filter bank.Thethree-pulse canceler is evenbetter.(Asmentioned previously, maximizing theaverage improvement factormightnot betheonlycriterion usedinjudging theeffectiveness ofMTIdoppler processors.) Ifatwo-orthree-pulse canceler iscascaded withadoppler-filter bank,betterclutter rejection isprovided.
Figure4.26showstheimprovement factorforathree-pulse canceler and aneight-pulse filterbankincascade, asafunction oftheclutterspectral width.Theupper figureassumes uniform amplitude weighting (-13.2dBfirstsidelobe) andthelowerfigure showstheeITectofChebyshev weighting designed toproduce equalsidelobes withapeakvalue of-25dB.Itisfoundthatdoubling to16thenumber ofpulsesinthefilterbankdoesnot offersignificant "advantage overaneight-pulse filter.30Morepulsesdonotnecessarily mean moregaininsignal-to-c1utter ratio,becausethefilterwidthsandsidelobe levelschangerelative totheclutterspectrum asthenumberofpulses(andnumberoffilters)isvaried,Ifthesidelobes oftheindividual t!ltersofthedoppler filterbankcanbemadelowenough, theinclusion of thedelay-line canceler aheadofitmightnotbeneeded. Figure 4.24 Improvement factor for each filter of an 8-pulse doppler filter bank with uniform weighting as  a function of the clutter spectral width (standard deviation).
The average improvement for all filters is  indicated by the dotted curve.
(From ~ndrews.~')  0 0.001 0.01  Clutter spectral width /radar prf  Figure 4.25 Improvement factor for an N-pulse delay-line canceler with optimum weights (solid curves)  and binomial weights (dashed curves), as a function of the clutter spectral width.
(A,fier ~~ldrrws.",")  124INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS 2,83,7.
5 4,6II J---r-[-I·j ,!iI-t----I+-t-- r..
+_.._- 1020C I1l ~30----- -._.--!""-~ t--l---"l"I-.;\,-4~<J:: i5 5­E60--._-------.._--- o U40.£aJ50­ "0 a1...- ..l.-_-I-_...l.---l..---L.--l....J-.l....J.
---I__...l.-_.l.-.-'"""==::...L-...L...l-l 0.001 0.01 0.1 Clullerspectral width/radar prf Figure4.24Improvement factorforeachfilterofan8-pulsedopplerfilterbankwithuniformweighting as afunctionoftheclutterspectralwidth(standard deviation).
Theaverageimprovement forallfiltersis indicated bythedottedcurve.(FromAndrews.30) 0.1i_..t'- I _--__.._.L.I I· II .~._--j_.
-LJ-..
~-1~------_._-- 0.01 Clutterspectral width!radarprf140 120 aJ100 "0 080U -2 c I1lE60-I1l::-ea..§ 40 20_.-.------- 0 0.001 Figure4.25Improvement factorforanN-pulsedelay-line canceler withoptimum weights(solidcurves) andbinomial weights(dashedcurves),asafunctionoftheclutterspectralwidth.(AleerAndrews.31.32) 5  416  '- ave.
 3,7  0 01  (:lutl~r speclrol widtti/rodor prf  (11)  5  ove.
 4, 6  3,7  2, 8  Figure 4.26 Improvement factor for a 3-pulse (double-canceler) MTI cascaded with an 8-pulse doppler  filter hank.
or integrator.
((1) Uniform amplitude weights and (h) 25-dB Chebyshev weights.
The average  inlprnvement for all filters is indicated by t lie dotted curve.
(From ~t~drews.~~)  MTIi\NDPULSE DOPPLER RADAR125 o L 0001~ ~60----- ! >o D.
E-~rTr!-----r II I ~ I Ii 01I 0.01II I 5 I 4,6l---ave.
.----~---_.- 3, 7 2,8 L....C----------'-------'----------'----'-----'-----1- 2040100120-140 £80u J? Clutlp.rr,reclral widlhIradarprf (a) lD100"0 I £u802 C GJ E60GJ>e 0 E 40 20 0 0001 001 015 ave.4,6 3 , 7 2,8 Clutterspectral widthfradarprf (h) Figure4.26Improvement factorfora3-pulse(double-canceler) MTIcascaded withan8-pulsedoppler filterhank.orintegrator.
(a)Uniform amplitude weightsand(h)25-dBChebyshev weights.Theaverage improvement forallfiltersisindicated bythedottedcurve.(FromAlldrews.30) 126 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  4.6 OTHER MTI DELAY LINES  There are delay lines other than digital devices that have been used in MTI signal processors.
 Originally, MTI radar used acoustic delay lines in which electromagnetic signals were con-  verted into acoustic waves; the acoustic signals were delayed, and then converted back into  electromagnetic signals.
The process was lossy (50 to 70 dB might be typical), of limited  dynamic range, and spurious responses were generated that could be confused for legitimate  echoes.
Since acoustic waves travel with a speed about lo-' that of electromagnetic waves, an  acoustic line can be of practical size whereas an electromagnetic delay is not.
However,  acoustic delay lines are larger and heavier than digital lines and must usually be kept in a  temperature-controlled environment to prevent unwanted changes in delay time.
They  typically operate at frequencies from 5 to 60 MHz.
The first MTI acoustic delay lines were  liquid and used water or mercury.
The development of the solid quartz delay iine for MTI  application in the 1950s offered greater convenience than the liquid lines.j3 The solid line is  constructed of many facets so that a relatively long delay time can be obtained with a small  volume by means of multiple internal reflections.
In one popular design the quartz was cut as  a 15-sided polygon in which the acoustic signal made 31 internal passes to achieve a total  delay time of 1 ms.
 Electrostatic storage tubes have also been used for MTI delay  line^.^^-^'' The signals are  stored in the form of electrostatic charges on a mosaic or mesh similar to that of a TV camera  tube.
The first sweep reads the signal on the storage tube.
The next sweep is written on the same  space and generates the difference between it and the first sweep, as required for two-pulse  MTI cancellation.
Two storage tubes are required: one to write and store the new sweep, the  other to subtract the new sweep from the old sweep.
One advantage of a storage tube  compared to an acoustic delay line is that it can be used with different pulse repetition  frequencies.
That is, a constant prf is not needed.
The matching of the delay time and the pulse  repetition period is not critical as in an acoustic line because the timing of the transmitter  pulse starts the sweep of the storage tube.
 The charge transfer device (CTD) is a sampled-data, analog shift-register that may be used  in MTI processors as delay lines, transversal filters, and recursive  filter^.^^-^' There are two  basic types of CTDs.
One is the bucket-brigade device (BBD) which consists of capacitive  storage elements separated by switches.
Analog information is transferred through the BBD at  a rate determined by the rate at which the switches are operated.
The delay time can be varid  by changing either the number of stages (a capacitive storage element and its associated  switch) or by changing the switching frequency controlled by a digital clock.
CCDs provide a  similar function except that charge packets are transferred to adjacent potential wells by  clocked voltage gradients.
The sampling frequency must be such as to obtain one or two  samples per range resolution cell.
Since the timing is controlled by a digital clock, the delay  can be made very stable, just as with digital processors.
However, no A/D or D/A converters  are required as in digital systems.
It has been claimed that such devices are more economical in  cost, consume less power, are of less size, and of greater reliability than digital processing.
 The MTI cancellation may also be done at IF rather than in the video after the phase  detector.' Although there may be some advantages in IF cancellation (such as no blind  phases), it is more complicated than video cancellation.
It is difficult for IF cancelers to  compete with the flexibility and convenience of digital processing containing I and Q channels.
 FM delay-line cancelers have also been considered for MTI application.
The signals are  frequency modulated so as to avoid the problems associated with the amplitude stability of  acoustic delay-line cancelers."  126INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS 4.6OTHER MTIDELAY LINES TherearedelaylinesotherthandigitaldevicesthathavebeenusedinMTIsignalprocessors.
Originally, MTIradarusedacoustic delayJinesinwhichelectromagnetic signalswerecon­ vertedintoacoustic waves;theacoustic signalsweredelayed, andthenconverted backinto electromagnetic signals.Theprocesswaslossy(50to70dBmightbetypical), oflimited dynamic range,andspurious responses weregenerated thatcouldbeconfused forlegitimate echoes.Sinceacoustic wavestravelwithaspeedabout10-Sthatofelectromagnetic waves,an acoustic linecanbeofpractical sizewhereas anelectromagnetic delayisnot.However, acoustic delaylinesarelargerandheavierthandigitallinesandmustusuallybekeptina temperature-controlled environment toprevent unwanted changes indelaytime.They typically operateatfrequencies from5to60MHz.ThefirstMTIacoustic del",ylineswere liquidandusedwaterormercury.
Thedevelopment ofthesolidquartzdelayiineforMTI application inthe19508offeredgreaterconvenience thantheliquidlines.33Thesolidlineis constructed ofmanyfacetssothatarelatively longdelaytimecanbeobtained withasmall volumebymeansofmultiple internalreflections.
Inonepopulardesignthequartzwascutas aIS-sided polygon inwhichtheacoustic signalmade31internal passestoachieveatotal delaytimeof1ms.
Electrostatic storagetubeshavealsobeenusedforMTIdelaylines.34,40Thesignalsare storedintheformofelectrostatic chargesonamosaicormeshsimilartothatofaTVcamera tube.ThefirstsweepreadsthesIgnalonthestoragetube.Thenextsweepiswrittenonthesame spaceandgenerates thedifference between itandthefirstsweep,asrequired fortwo-pulse MTIcancellation.
Twostoragetubesarerequired: onetowriteandstorethenewsweep,the othertosubtract th~newsweepfromtheoldsweep.Oneadvantage ofastoragetube compared toanacoustic delaylineisthatitcanbeusedwithdifferent pulserepetition frequencies.
Thatis,aconstant prfisnotneeded.Thematching ofthedelaytimeandthepulse repetition periodisnotcriticalasinanacoustic linebecause thetimingofthetransmitter pulsestartsthesweepofthestoragetube.
Thechargetransferdevice(CTO)isasampled-data, analogshift-register thatmaybeused inMTIprocessors asdelaylines,transversal filters,andrecursive filters.3S-38Therearetwo basictypesofCTDs.Oneisthebucket-brigade device(BHO)whichconsistsofcapacitive storageelements separated byswitches.
Analoginformation istransferred throughtheBBDat aratedetermined bytherateatwhichtheswitches areoperated.
Thedelaytimecanbevarioo bychanging eitherthenumberofstages(acapacitive storageelement anditsassociated switch)orbychanging theswitching frequency controlled byadigitalclock.CCDsprovidea similarfunction exceptthatchargepacketsaretransferred toadjacent potential wellsby clocked voltagegradients.
Thesampling frequency mustbesuchastoobtainoneortwo samples perrangeresolution cell.Sincethetimingiscontrolled byadigitalclock,thedelay canbemadeverystable,justaswithdigitalprocessors.
However, noAjDorDjAconverters arerequired asindigitalsystems.Ithasbeenclaimedthatsuchdevicesaremoreeconomical in cost,consume lesspower,areoflesssize,andofgreaterreliability thandigitalprocessing.
TheMTIcancellation mayalsobedoneatiFratherthaninthevideoafterthephase detector.8Although theremaybesomeadvantages inIFcancellation (suchasnoblind phases), itismorecomplicated thanvideocancellation.
Itisdifficult forIFcancelers to compete withtheflexibility andconvenience ofdigitalprocessing containing 1andQchannels.
FMdelay-line cancelers havealsobeenconsidered forMTIapplication.
Thesignalsare frequency modulated soastoavoidtheproblems associated withtheamplitude stability of acoustic delay-iine cancelers.4! 4.7 EXAMPLE 01; AN MTI RADAR PROCESSOR  The Moving Target Detector (MTD) is an MTI radar processor originally developed by the  MIT Lincoln Laboratory for the FAA's Airport Surveillance Radars (ASR).~~-~~ The ASR is a  nlediurn range (61) nrni) radar located at   no st rnajor United States airports.
It operates at S  band (2.7- 2.9 GHz) with a pulse width of less than 1 ps, a 1.4" azimuth beamwidth, an antenna  rotati011 rate of from 12.5 to 15 rprll depending on the tnodcl, a prf from 700 to 1200 ttz  (1030 Hz typical), and an average power of from 400 to 600 W.
The MTD processor employs  several techniques for the increased detection of moving targets in clutter.
Its implementation  is based on the application of digital tech~iology.
It utilizes a three-pulse canceler followed by  an 8-pulse FFT doppler filter-bank with weighting in the frequency domain to reduce the filter  sidelobes, alternate prfs to eliminate blind speeds, adaptive thresholds, and a clutter map that  is used in detecting crossing targets with zero radial velocity.
The measured MTI improvement  factor of the M1.1) on as1 ASR radar was about 45 dB, which represented a 20 dB increase over  the ASR's conventional three-pulse MTI processor with a limiting IF amplifier.
In addition,  the MTI) achieves a narrower t~otcli at zero velocity and at the blind speeds.
 7'11e processor is preceded by a large dynamic range receiver to avoid the reduction in  improvement factor caused by limiting (Sec.
4.8).
The output of the IF amplifier is fed to I and  Q phase detectors.
The analog signals from the phase detectors are converted into 10-bit  digital words by A/D converters.
The range coverage, which totaled 47.5 nmi in the original  implementation, is divided into nmi intervals and the azimuth into $-degree intervals, for a  total of 365,000 range-azimuth resolution cells.
In each $-degree azimuth interval (about  one-half the beamwidth) ten pulses are transmitted at a constant prf.
On receive, this is called a  coherent processing interval (CPI).
These ten pulses are processed by the delay-line canceler  and the doppler filter-bank, to form eight doppler filters.
Thus, the radar output is divided into  approximately 2,920,000 range-azimuth-doppler cells.
Each of these cells has its own adaptive  threshold.
In the alternate $degree azimuth intervals another 10 pulses are transmitted at  a different prf to eliminate blind speeds and to unmask moving targets hidden by weather.
 Changing the prf every 10 pulses, or every half beamwidth, eliminates second-time-around  clutter returns that would normally degrade an MTI with pulse-to-pulse variation of the prf.
 A block diagram of the MTD processor is shown in Fig.
4.27.
The input on the left is from  the output of the I and Q AID converters.
The three-pulse canceler and the eight-pulse doppler  filter-bank eliminate zero-velocity clutter and generate eight overlapping filters covering the  doppler interval, as described in the previous section.
The use of a three-pulse canceler ahead  of the fi1ter:bank eliminates stationary clutter and thereby reduces the dynamic range required  8 -pulse doppler Weighting  filler bank and  magnitude  Zero velocity Clutter mop  filter Mogni t ude .recursive  filter  Figure 427 Simple block diagram of the Moving Target Detector (MTD) signal processor.
 MTIANDPULSEDOPPLER RADAR127 4.7EXAMPLE OFANMTIRADAR PROCESSOR TheMovingTargetDetector (MTD)isanMTIradarprocessor originally developed bythe MITLincolnLahoratory fortheFAA'sAirportSurveillance Radars(ASR).42-44 TheASRisa medium range(60nmi)radarlocatedatmostmajorUnitedStatesairports.Itoperates atS band(2.7--2.9GHz)withapulsewidthoflessthan1ps,a1.4°azimuth beamwidth, anantenna rotation ratcoffrom12.5to15rpmdepending onthemodel,aprffrom700to1200Hz (1030Hztypical),andanaveragepoweroffrom400to600W.TheMTDprocessor employs severaltechniques fortheincreased detection ofmovingtargetsinclutier.Itsimplementation isbasedontheapplication ofdigitaltechnology.
Itutilizesathree~pulse canceler followed by an8-pulseFFTdoppler filter-bank withweighting inthefrequency domaintoreducethefilter sidelobes, alternate prrstoeliminate blindspeeds,adaptive thresholds, andacluttermapthat isusedindetecting crossing targetswithzeroradialvelocity.
Themeasured MTIimprovement factoroftheMTDonanASRradarwasabout45dB,whichrepresented a20dBincreaseover theASR'sconventional three-pulse MTIprocessor withalimitingIFamplifier.
Inaddition, theMTDachieves anarrower notchatzerovelocityandattheblindspeeds.
Theprocessor ispreceded byalargedynamic rangereceivertoavoidthereduction in improvement factorcausedbylimiting(Sec.4.8).TheoutputoftheIFamplifier isfedtoIand Qphasedetectors.
Theanalogsignalsfromthephasedetectors areconverted into10-bit digitalwordsbyAIDconverters.
Therangecoverage, whichtotaled47.5nmiintheoriginal implementation, isdividedintol~nmiintervals andtheazimuth intoi-degree intervals, fora totalof365,000 range-azimuth resolution cells.Ineachi-degree azimuth interval (about one-half thebeamwidth) tenpulsesaretransmitted ataconstant prf.Onreceive,thisiscalleda coherent processing interval(CPI).Thesetenpulsesareprocessed bythedelay-line canceler andthedoppler filter-bank, toformeightdopplerfilters.Thus,theradaroutputisdividedinto approximately 2,920,000 range-azimuth-doppler cells.Eachofthesecellshasitsownadaptive threshold.
Inthealternate l-degree azimuth intervals another 10pulsesaretransmitted at adifferent prftoeliminate blindspeedsandtounmask movingtargetshiddenbyweather.
Changing theprfevery10pulses,oreveryhalfbeamwidth, eliminates second-time-around clutterreturnsthatwouldnormally degrade anMTIwithpulse-to-pulse variation oftheprf.
Ablockdiagram oftheMTDprocessor isshowninFig.4.27.Theinputontheleftisfrom theoutputoftheIandQAIDconverters.
Thethree-pulse canceler andtheeight-pulse doppler filter-bank eliminate zero-velocity clutterandgenerate eightoverlapping filterscovering the dopplerinterval, asdescribed intheprevious section.Theuseofathree-pulse canceler ahead ofthefilter2bankeliminates stationary clutterandtherebyreducesthedynamic rangerequired 1,0 Zerovelocity filter8-pulsedoppler filterbank MagnitudeWeighting and magnitude Cluttermap -recursive ~ -J filterHitreport Figure4.27Simpleblockdiagram oftheMovingTargetDetector (MTD)signalprocessor. of the doppler filter-bank.
The fast Fourier tra~lsform algorittl~n 1s ilsed to in~plenlcnt the  doppler filter-bank.
Since the first two pulses of a three-pulse canceler are n~eaningless, only  the last eight of the ten pulses output from the canceler are passed to the filter-bank.
Following  the filter-bank, weighting is applied in the frequency domain to reduce the filter sidelobes.
 Although unweighted filters with - 13.2-dB sidelobes might be satisfactory for most ground  clutter, the frequency spectrum of rain and other windblown clutter often requires lower  sidelobe levels.
The magnitude operation forms (1' + Q')"'.
Separate thresholds are applied  to each filter.
The thresholds for the nonzero-velocity resolution cells are established by  summing the detected outputs of the signals in the same velocity filter in 16 range cells, eight  on either side of the cell of interest.
Thus, each filter output is averaged over cne mile in range  to establish the statistical mean level of nonzero-velocity clutter (such as rain) or noise.
The  filter thresholds are determined by multiplying the mean levels by an appropriate constant to  obtain the desired false-alarm probability.
This application of an adaptive threshold to each  doppler filter at each range cell provides a constant false-alarm rate (CFAR) and results in  strbweather visibility in that an aircraft with a radial velocity sufficiently different from the rain  so as to fall into another filter can be seen even if the aircraft echo is substantially less than the  weat her echo.
 A digital clutter map is generated which establishes the thresholds for the zero-velocity  cells.
The map is implemented with one word for each of the 365,000 range-azimuth cells.
The  original MTD stored the map on a magnetic disc memory.
The purpose of the zero-velocity  filter is to recover the clutter signal eliminated by the MTI delay-line canceler and to use this  signal as a means for detecting targets on-crossing trajectories with zero velocities that would  normally be lost in the usual MTI.
Only targets larger than the clutter would be so detected.
In  each cell of the ground clutter map is stored the average value of the output of the zero-  velocity filter for the past eight scans (32 seconds).
On each scan, one-eighth of the oi~tput of  the zero-velocity filter is added to seven-eighths of the value stored in the map.
Thus, the map  is built up in a recursive manner.
About 10 to 20 scans are required to establish steady-clutter  v2lues.
As rain moves into the area, or as propagation conditions result in changing ground-  clutter levels, the clutter map changes accordingly.
The values stored in the map are milltiplied  by an appropriate constant to establish the threshold for zero-relative-velocity targets.
This  eliminates the usual MTI blind speed at zero radial velocity and permits the detection of  crossing targets in clutter if the target cross section is sufficiently large.
 ~hus, in Fig.
4.28 the zero-velocity filter (No.
1) threshold is determined by the output of  the clutter map.
The thresholds for filters 3 through 7 are obtained from the mean level of the  signals in the 16 range cells centered around the range cell of interest.
Both a mean-level  Filter number 5 6 A 7 8 1 2 3 4 5  C  prf -1  /  A  prf -2  // L" A  Aircraft aliases True Figure 4.28 Detection of aircraft in  oircrof t - rain using two prf's with a doppler  veloclt y filter bank, illustrating the effect of  0 doppler foldover.
(From M~ehe,~'  Radial velocity Courtesy IEEE.)  128INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS ofthedoppler filter-bank.
ThefastFourier transform algorithm isllsedtoimplement the doppler filter-bank.
Sincethefirsttwopulsesofathree"plt!se canceler aremeaningless, only thelasteightofthetenpulsesoutputfromthecanceler arepassedtothefilter-bank.
Following thefilter-bank, weighting isappliedinthefrequency domain toreducethefiltersiddobes.
Although unweighted filterswith-13.2-dB sidelobesmightbesatisfactory formostground clutter,thefrequency spectrum ofrainandotherwindblown clutterortenrequires lower sidelobe levels.Themagnitude operation forms(12+Q2)112.Separate thresholds areapplied toeachfilter.Thethresholds forthenonzero-velocity resolution cellsareestablished by summing thedetected outputsofthesignalsinthesamevelocity filterin16rangecells,eight oneithersideofthecellofinterest.
Thus,eachfilteroutputisaveraged overonemileinrange toestablish thestatistical meanlevelofnonzero-velocity clutter(suchasrain)ornoise.The filterthresholds aredetermined bymultiplying themeanlevelsbyanappropriate constant to obtainthedesiredfalse-alarm probability.
Thisapplication ofanadaptive threshold toeach doppler filterateachrangecellprovides aconstant false-alarm rate(CFAR)andresultsin sllbweather visibility inthatanaircraftwitharadialvelocitysufficiently different fromtherain soastofallintoanother filtercanbeseeneveniftheaircraftechoissubstantially lessthanthe weather echo.
Adigitalcluttermapisgenerated whichestablishes thethresholds forthezero-velocity cells.Themapisimplemented withonewordforeachofthe365,000range-azimuth cells.The originalMTDstoredthemaponamagnetic discmemory.
Thepurpose ofthezero-velocity filteristorecoverthecluttersignaleliminated bytheMTIdelay-line canceler andtousethis signalasameansfordetecting targetson·crossing trajectories withzerovelocities thatwould normally belostintheusualMTI.Onlytargetslargerthantheclutterwouldbesodetected.
In eachcellofthegroundcluttermapisstoredtheaverage valueoftheoutputofthezero­ velocity filterforthepasteightscans(32seconds).
Oneachscan,one-eighth oftheoutputof thezero-velocity filterisaddedtoseven-eighths ofthevaluestoredinthemap.Thus,themap isbuiltupinarecursive manner.
About10to20scansarerequired toestablish steady-clutter v31ues.Asrainmoves in~othearea,oraspropagation conditions resultinchanging ground­ clutterlevels,thecluttermapchangesaccordingly.
Thevaluesstoredinthemaparemultiplied byanappropriate constant toestablish thethreshold forzero-relative-velocity targets.This eliminates theusualMTIblindspeedatzeroradialvelocity andpermits thedetection of crossing ~argetsinclutterifthetargetcrosssectionissufficiently large.
Thus,inFig.4.28thezero-velocity filter(No.1)threshold isdetermined bytheoutputof thecluttermap.Thethresholds forfilters3through 7areobtained fromthemeanlevelofthe signalsinthe16rangecellscentered aroundtherangecellofinterest.
Bothamean-level o RadiolvelocityFilternumber 5 6 prf -I prf -2 Aircraft aliases8 2 3 4 5 True aircraft velocityFigure4.28Detection ofaircraftin rainusingtwoprf'swithadoppler filterbank, illustrating theeffectof dopplerfoldover.
(FromMuehe,43 Courtesy IEEE.) M'rt AND PIJI.SE DOPP1,ER RADAR 129  tlircshold frorn tlie 16 range cells and a clutter thresliold from the clutter map are calcitlated  for filters 2 and 8 adjacent to the zero-velocity filter, and the larger of the two is used as the  threshold.
 The advantage of using two prf's to detect targets in rain is illustrated by Fig.
4.28.
Tile  prf's differ by about 20 percent.
A typical rain spectrum with a nonzero average velocity is  depicted on the bottom line.
(Precipitation at S band might typically have a spectral width of  about 25 to 30 knots centered anywhere from -60 to +60 knots, depending on the wind  coriditiotis and tlie antenna pointing.42) Tlie narrow spectrutn of tile nioving aircraft is at the  right of the figure.
Because of foldover it is shown as occupying filters 6 and 7 on prf-I, and  filters 7 and 8 on prf-2.
With prf-2, the aircraft velocity is shown competing with the rain  clutter; but with prf-1 it appears in one filter (No.
6) without any rain clutter).
Thus, by  using two prf's which are alternated every 10 pulses (one-half beamwidth), aircraft targets will  usui~lly appear in at least one filter free from rain except for a sinall region (approximately 30  kriots wide) wiierl tlie target's radial velocity is exactly that of the rain.
 Intcrfercricc froni otiicr radars might appear as one large return among the ten returns  normally processed.
111 the MTD, an interference eliminator compares the magnitude of each  of the 10 pi~lses against the average magnitude of the ten.
If any pulse is greater than five times  tlie average, all inforination from that range-azimuth cell is discarded.
A saturation detector  detects whether any of the 10 pulses within a processing interval saturates the AID converter  and if it does, the entire 10 pulses are discarded.
 Tile output of the MTD is a hit report which contains the azimuth, range, and amplitude  of tl~c target rctilrrl as well as the filter number and prf.
On a particular scan, a large aircraft  niiglit be reported from more than one doppler filter, from several coherent processing inter-  vals.
and from adjacent range gates.
As many as 20 hit-reports might be generated by a single  large target.43 A post processor groups together all reports which appear to originate from the  sarlie target and interpolates to find the best azimuth, range, amplitude, and radial velocity.
 The target amplitude and doppler are used to eliminate small cross section and low-speed  angel echoes before the target reports are delivered to the automatic tracking circuits.
The  tracking circuits also eliminate false hit-reports which do not form logical tracks.
The output  of the automatic tracker is what is displayed on the scope.
Since the MTD processor eliminates  a large anloi~nt of tlie clutter and lias a low false-detection rate, its output can be reliably  rcnlotcd via narrow baridwidtl~ tclcplione circuits.
 4.8 LI~II'I'A'I'IONS TO MTI PERFORMANCE  Tlie iinprovement in signal-to-clutter ratio of an MTI is affected by factors other than the  design of the doppler signal processor.
Instabilities of the transmitter and receiver, physical  niotions of the clutter, the finite time on target (or scanning modulation), and limiting in the  receiver can all detract from the performance of an MTI radar.
Before discussing these effects,  soii~e dcfiriitioris will be stated.
 Af TI iir~pr.ovenrertt factor.
The signal-to-clutter ratio at the output of the MTI system divided  by the signal-to-clutter ratio at the input, averaged uniformly over all target radial veloci:  ties of interest.
 Srrhclrrtt~r visibility.
The ratio by which the targ& echo power may be weaker than the  coincident clutter echo power and still be detected with specified detection and false-  alarm probabilities.
All target radial velocities are assumed equally likely.
A subclutter  visibility of, for example, 30 dB implies that a moving target can be detected in the  presence of clutter even though the clutter echo power is 1000 times the target echo  MTIANDPULSEDOPPLER RADAR129 threshold fromthe16rangecellsandaclutterthreshold fromthec1uttcrmaparecalculated forfilters2and8adjacent tothczero-velocity filter,andthelargerofthetwoisusedasthe threshold.
Theadvantage ofusingtwoprf'stodetecttargetsinrainisillustrated byFig.4.28.The prf'sdifferbyabout20percent.
Atypicalrainspectrum withanonzero average velocity is depicted onthebottomline.(Precipitation atSbandmighttypically haveaspectral widthof ahout25to30knotsccntercd anywhere from-60to+60knots,depending onthewind conditions andtheantenna pointing.42)Thcnarrowspectrum ofthemovingaircraft isatthe rightofthefigure.Because offoldover itisshownasoccupying filters6and7onprf-l,and filters7and8onprf-2.Withprf-2,theaircraft velocity isshowncompeting withtherain clutter;butwithprf-litappears inonefilter(No.6) without anyrainclutter).
Thus,by usingIwoprf'swhicharealternated everytopulses(one-half beamwidth), aircrafttargetswill usuallyappcarinatleastoncfilterfrecfromrainexceptforasmallregion(approximately 30 knotswidc)whcnthetarget'sradialvelocity isexactlythatoftherain.
Intcrfcrence fromotherradarsmightappearasonelargereturnamongthetenreturns normally processed.
IntheMTD,aninterference eliminator compares themagnitude ofeach ofthe10pulsesagainstthcaverage magnitude oftheten.Hanypulseisgreaterthanfivetimes theaverage, allinformation fromthatrange-azimuth cellisdiscarded.
Asaturation detector dctectswhether anyofthe10pulseswithinaprocessing intervalsaturates theAIDconverter andifitdocs,theentire10pulsesarediscarded.
TheoutputoftheMTDisahitreportwhichcontains theazimuth, range,andamplitude ofthetargetreturnaswellasthefilternumber andprr.Onaparticular scan,alargeaircraft mighthereported frommorethanonedoppler filter,fromseveralcoherent processing inter­ vals,andfromadjacent rangegates.Asmanyas20hit-reports mightbegenerated byasingle largetarget.43Apostprocessor groupstogether allreportswhichappeartooriginate fromthe sametargetandinterpolates tofindthebestazimuth, range,amplitude, andradialvelocity.
Thetargetamplitude anddoppler areusedtoeliminate smallcrosssectionandlow-speed angelechoesbeforethetargetreportsaredelivered totheautomatic tracking circuits.
The tracking circuitsalsoeliminate falsehit-reports whichdonotformlogicaltracks.Theoutput oftheautomatic trackeriswhatisdisplayed onthescope.SincetheMTDprocessor eliminates alargeamount oftheclutterandhasalowfalse-detection rate,itsoutputcanbereliably n:motcd vianarrowbandwidth telephonc circuits.
4.8LllVlITATIONS TOMTIPERFORMANCE Theimprovement insignal-to-clutter ratioofanMTIisaffected byfactorsotherthanthe designofthedoppler signalprocessor.
Instabilities ofthetransmitter andreceiver, physical motions oftheclutter,thefinitetimeontarget(orscanning modulation), andlimiting inthe receiver canalldetractfromtheperformance ofanMTIradar.Beforediscussing theseeffects, somedefinitions willbestated.
MTIil1lrrove111ellt factor.Thesignal-to-clutter ratioattheoutputoftheMTIsystemdivided hythesignal-to-c1utter ratioattheinput,averaged uniformly overalltargetradialveloci: tiesofinterest.
SlIhcllltter visihility.
Theratiobywhichthetarg~techopowermaybeweakerthanthe coincident clutterechopowerandstillbedetected withspecified detection andfalse­ alarmprohahilities.
Alltargetradialvelocities areassumed equallylikely.Asubclutter visibility of,forexample, 30dBimpliesthatamoving targetcanbedetected inthe presence ofcluttereventhoughtheclutterechopoweris1000timesthetargetecho power.
Two radars with the same subclutter visibility might not have the same ability to  detect targets in clutter if the resolution cell of one is greater than the other and accepts a  greater clutter signal power; that is, both radars might reduce the clutter power equally,  but one starts with greater clutter power because its resolution cell is greater and "secs"  more clutter targets.
 Clutter visibility factor.
The signal-to-clutter ratio, after cancellation or doppler filtering, that  provides stated probabilities of detection and false alarm.
 Cltrtter attenuation.
The ratio of clutter power at the canceler input to the clutter residue at the  output, normalized to the attenuation of a single pulse passing through the unprocessed  channel of the canceler.
(The clutter residue is the clutter power remaining at the output of  an MTI system.)  Cancellation ratio.
The ratio of canceler voltage amplification for the fixed-target echoes  received with a fixed antenna, to the gain for a single pulse passing tllrotlgh the Lrn-  processed channel of the canceler.
 The improvement factor (I) is equal to the subclutter visibility (SCV) times the clutter  visibility factor (Kc).
In decibels, I(dB) = SCV(dB) + Voc(dB).
When the MTI is limited by  noiselike system instabilities, the clutter visibility factor should be chosen as is the signal-to-  noise ratio of Chap.
2.
When the MTI performance is limited by the antenna scanning fluctua-  tions, Shrader8 suggests letting Voc = 6 dB.
(Although not stated by Shrader, it seems this  value is for a single pulse.) The improvement factor is the preferred measure of MTI radar  performance.
 Still another term sometimes employed in MTI radar is the intercllctter visibility.
This  describes the ability of an MTI radar to detect moving targets which occur in the relatively  clear resolution cells between patches of strong clutter.
Clutter echo power is not uniform, so  if a radar has sufficient resolution it can see targets in the clear areas between clutter patches.
 The higher the radar resolution, the better the interclutter visibility.
Radars with "moderate"  resolution might require only enough improvement factor to deal with the median clutter  power, which may be 20 dB less than the average clutter power.45 According to Shrader a  medium-resolution radar with a 2ps pulse width and a 1.5" beamwidth, is of sufficient resolution  to achieve a 20 dB advantage over low-resolution radars for the detection of targets in ground  clutter.'O  Equipment instabilities.
Pulse-to-pulse changes in the amplitude, frequency, or phase of the  transmitter signal, changes in the stalo or coho oscillators in the receiver, jitter in the timing of  the pulse transmission, variations in the time delay through the delay lines, and changes in the  pulse width can cause the apparent frequency spectrum from perfectly stationary clutter to  broaden and thereby lower the improvement factor of an MTI radar.
The stability of the  equipment in an MTI radar must be considerably better than that of an ordinary radar.
It can  limit the performance of an MTI radar if sufficient care is not taken in design, construction,  and maintenance.
 Consider the effect of phase variations in an oscillator.
If the echo from stationary clutter  on the first pulse is represented by A cos &t and from the second pulse is A cos (or + A4).
 where A$ is the change in oscillator phase between the two, then the difference between the  two after subtraction is A cos wt - A cos (wt + A4) = 2A sin (A4/2) sin (wt + A4/2).
For  small phase errors, the amplitude of the resultant difference is 2A sin A412 - A Ad.
Therefore  the limitation on the improvement factor due to oscillator instability is  130INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS power.Tworadarswiththesamesubclutter visibility mightnothavethesameabilityto detecttargetsinclutteriftheresolution cellofoneisgreaterthan theother andacceptsa greatercluttersignalpower;thatis,bothradarsmightreducetheclutterpowerequally, butonestartswithgreaterclutterpowerbecauseitsresolution cellisgreaterand"sees" morecluttertargets.
Clutlervisibility factor.Thesignal-to-c1utter ratio,aftercancellation ordoppler filtering, that provides statedprobabilities ofdetection andfalsealarm.
Cllltlerattenuation.
Theratioofclutterpoweratthecanceler inputtotheclutterresidueatthe output,normalized totheattenuation ofasinglepulsepassingthrough theunprocessed channelofthecanceler.
(Theclutterresidueistheclutterpowerremaining attheoutputof anMTIsystem.) Cancellation ratio.Theratioofcanceler voltageamplification forthefixed-target echoes received withafixedantenna, tothegainforasinglepulsepassingthrollgh theun­ processed channelofthecanceler.
Theimprovement factor(1)isequaltothesubclutter visibility (SCY)timestheclutter visibility factor (~c).Indecibels, l(dB)=SCV(dB)+Voc(dB).
WhentheMTIislimitedby noiselike systeminstabilities, thecluttervisibility factorshouldbechosenasisthesignal-to­ noiseratioofChap.2.WhentheMTIperformance islimitedbytheantenna scanning fluctua­ tions,Shrader8suggests lettingVoc=6dB.(Although notstatedbyShrader, itseemsthis valueisforasinglepulse.)Theimprovement factoristhepreferred measure ofMTIradar performance.
Stillanother termsometimes employed inMTIradaristheintercllltter visibility.
This describes theabilityofanMTIradartodetectmovingtargetswhichoccurintherelatively clearresolution cellsbetween patchesofstrongclutter.Clutterechopowerisnotuniform, so ifaradarhassufficient resolution itcanseetargetsintheclearareasbetween clutterpatches.
Thehighertheradarresolution, thebettertheinterclutter visibility.
Radarswith"moderate" resolution mightrequireonlyenoughimprovement factortodealwiththemedianclutter power,whichmaybe20dBlessthantheaverage clutterpower.4SAccording toShrader a medium-resolution radarwitha 2J.lSpulsewidthanda1.5°beamwidth,isofsufficient resolution toachievea20dBadvantage overlow-resolution radarsforthedetection oftargetsinground clutter.so Equipment instabilities.
Pulse-to-pulse changes intheamplitude, frequency, orphaseofthe transmitter signal,changes inthestaloorcohooscillators inthereceiver, jitterinthetimingof thepulsetransmission, variations inthetimedelaythrough thedelaylines,andchanges inthe pulsewidthcancausetheapparent frequency spectrum fromperfectly stationary clutterto broaden andthereby lowertheimprovement factorofanMTIradar.Thestability ofthe equipment inanMTIradarmustbeconsiderably betterthanthatofanordinary radar.Itcan limittheperformance ofanMTIradar ifsufficient careisnottakenindesign,construction, andmaintenance.
Consider theeffectofphaseyar!ations, inanoscillator.
Htheechofromstationary clutter onthefirstpulseisrepresented t>yAcoswtandfromthesecondpulseisAcos(wt+!itt», where!itt>isthechangeinoscillator phasebetween thetwo,thenthedifference between the twoaftersubtraction isAcoswt-Acos(wt+tic/»=2Asin(tic/>/2)sin(wt+!ic/>/2).For smallphaseerrors,theamplitude oftheresultant difference is2Asintic/>/2::::Atitt>.Therefore thelimitation ontheimprovement.
fa~tordue.tooscillator instability is ..{ ,,~" :I, ' ,;'1' I=(tic/>)2(4.17) This woiild apply to tile coho locking or to the phase change introduced by a power amplifier.
 A phase change pulse-to-pulse of 0.01 radians results in an improvement-factor limitation of  40 dB.
I'lie limits to tlie improvement factor imposed by pulse-to-pulse instability are listed  below :R.J6.47  Transmitter frequency (~Afr)-~  Stalo or coho frequency (2n A f T)-2  Transmitter phase shift (A@)--'  Coho lockirlg (A+) --  Pulse timing ~~/(At)~2Br  Pulse width r2/(Ar)'Br  Pulse amplitude (AIAA )2  where A/ = interpulse frequency change, r = pulse width, 'r = transmission time to and from  target, Aq5 = interpulse phase change, At = time jitter, Br = time-bandwidth product of pulse  cornpression systern (= unity for simple pulses,) As = pulse-width jitter, A = pulse amplitude,  A,1 = interpulse amplitude cl~atige.
In a digital signal processor tlie improvement factor is also  limited by the quantization noise introduced by the AID converter, as was discussed in  Sec.
4 5.
The digital processor, however, does not experience degradation due to time jitter of  the transmitted pulse since the system clock controlling the processor timing may be started  from the detected rf envelope of the transmitted pulse.
 Internal fluctuation of clutter.48 Although clutter targets such as buildings, water towers, bare  llills.
or mountains produce echo signals that are constant in both phase and amplitude as a  function of time, there are many types of clutter that cannot be considered as absolutely  stationary.
Echoes from trees, vegetation, sea, rain, and chaff fluctuate with time, and these  fluctuations can limit the performance of MTI radar.
 Decause of its varied nature, it is difficult to describe precisely the clutter echo signal.
 However, for purposes of analysis, most fluctuating clutter targets may be represented by a  model consisting of many independent scatterers located within the resolution cell of the radar.
 The echo at the radar receiver is the vector sum of the echo signals received from each of the  individual scatters; that is, the relative phase as well as the amplitude from each scatterer  influences the resultant composite signal.
If the individual scatters remain fixed from pulse to  pulse, the resultant echo signal will also remain fixed.
But any motion of the scatterers relative to  the radar will result in different phase relationships at the radar receiver.
Hence the phase and  aniplitude of the new resultant echo signal will differ pulse to pulse.
 Exattlples of the power spectra of typical clutter are shown in Fig.
4.29.
These data apply  at a frequency of 1000 MHz.
The experimentally measured power spectra of clutter signals  rnay he approximated by  where lV(f) = clutter-power spectrum as a function of frequency  g(,f) = Fourier transform of input waveform (clutter echo)  .fb = radar carrier frequency  a = a parameter dependent upon clutter  Values of the parameter a which correspond to the clutter spectra in Fig.
4.29 are given in the  caption.
 MTIANDPULSE DOPPLER RADAR131 Thiswouldapply10thecoholockingortothephasechangeintroduced byapoweramplifier.
Aphasechangepulse-to-pulse of0.01radiansresultsinanimprovement-factor limitation of 40dB.Thelimitstotheimprovement factorimposed bypulse-to-pulse instability arelisted below:A.46.47 Transmitter frequency Staloorcohofrequency Transmitter phaseshift Coholocking Pulsetiming Pulsewidth Pulseamplitude(rrl\frrz (2rrl\fTrz (l\¢rz (l\¢rz rZj(l\t)Z2Br rZj(l\rfBr (Ajl\A)! wherel\(=interpulse frequency change,r=pulsewidth,T=transmission timetoandfrom target.l\¢=interpulse phasechange,M=timejitter,Br=time-bandwidth productofpulse compression system(=unityforsimplepulses,)l\r=pulse-width jitter,A=pulseamplitude, l\A=intcrpulse amplitude change.Inadigitalsignalproccssor theimprovement factorisalso limitedbythequantization noiseintroduced bytheAjDconverter, aswasdiscussed in Sec.4.5.Thedigitalprocessor, however, doesnotexperience degradation duetotimejitterof thetransmitted pulsesincethesystemclockcontrolling theprocessor timingmaybestarted fromthedctected rfenvelope ofthetransmitted pulse.
Internal fluctuation ofclutter.48Although cluttertargetssuchasbuildings, watertowers,bare hills.ormountains produce echosignalsthatareconstant inbothphaseandamplitude asa function oftime,therearemanytypesofclutterthatcannotbeconsidered asabs01utely stationary.
Echoesfromtrees,vegetation, sea,rain,andchafffluctuate withtime,andthese fluctuations canlimittheperformance ofMTIradar.
Because ofitsvariednature,itisdifficult todescribe precisely theclutterechosignal.
However, forpurposes ofanalysis, mostfluctuating cluttertargetsmayberepresented bya modelconsisting ofmanyindependent scatterers locatedwithintheresolution celloftheradar.
Theechoattheradarreceiver isthevectorsumoftheechosignalsreceived fromeachofthe individualscatters; thatis,therelativephaseaswellastheamplitude fromeachscatterer influences theresultant composite signal.Iftheindividual scattersremainfixedfrompulseto pulse.theresultant echosignalwillalsoremainfixed.Butanymotionofthescatterers relativeto theradarwillresultindifferent phaserelationships attheradarreceiver.
Hencethephaseand amplitude ofthenewresultant echosignalwilldifferpulsetopulse.
Examples ofthepowerspectraoftypicalclutterareshowninFig.4.29.Thesedataapply atafrequency of1000MHz.Theexperimentally measured powerspectraofcluttersignals mayheapproximatcd by (4.18) whereW(f)=clutter-power spectrum asafunction offrequency g(f)=Fouriertransform ofinputwaveform (clutterecho) .f~=radarcarrierfrequency a=aparameter dependent uponclutter Valuesoftheparameter awhichcorrespond totheclutterspectrainFig.4.29aregiveninthe caption. 0 5 10 15 20 25  Frequency, Hz Figure4.29 Power spectra of various clutter targets.
 (1) Heavily wooded hills, 20 mi/h wind blowing  (a = 2.3 x lo"); (2) sparsely wooded hills, calm  day (a = 3.9 x 10''); (3) sea echo, windy day  (a = 1.41 x loL6); (4) rain clouds (a = 2.8 x 10'');  (5) chaff (a = 1 x 10'~).
(From ~arlow,~~ Proc.
 IRE.)  The clutter spectrum can also be expressed in terms of an rills clutter frequency spread cr,  in hertz or by the rms velocity spread a, in m/s.46 Thus Eq.
(4.18) can be written  f 2A2 w(f) = wo exp (- <) 20, = Wo exp (- -)  8%  where Wo = (go 12, a, = 2a,/A, L = wavelength = c/ fo, and c = velocity of propagation.
It can  be seen that a = c2/8cr;.
The rms velocity spread a, is usually the preferred method for  describing the clutter fluctuation spectrum.
 The improvement factor can be written as  where S,/C, = output signai-to-clutter ratio, Si/Ci = input signal-to-clutter ratio, and  CA = clutter attentuation.
The average is taken over all target doppler frequencies of interest.
 For a single-delay-line canceler, the clutter attentuation is  where H(f) is the frequency response function of the canceler.
Since the frequency response  function of a delay line of time delay T is exp (-j2nf T), IZ( f) for the single-delay-line  canceler is  ~(f) = 1 - exp (-j2nf T) = 2jsin (nf T)exp (-jnf T) (4.22)  Substituting Eqs.
(4.19) and (4.22) into Eq.
(4.21) and assuming that a, 4 1/T, the clutter  attentuation is  CA=-- 1: Wo exp ( -f2/2af) df 1, Wo exp (-f2/20:)4 sin2 nf T df  - - 0.5  1 - exp (- 2n2T2a:)  132INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS 0.2 0.1­ ::t: 0.05 2 0.02 5101520 Frequency, Hz25Figure4.29 Powerspectraofvariouscluttertargets.
(I)Heavily wooded hills,20mi/hwindblowing (a=2.3x1017);(2)sparsely wooded hills,calm day(a=3.9x)019);(3)seaecho,windyday (a=1.41x1016);(4)rainclouds(a=2.8x)015); (5)chaff(a=I x1016).(FromBarlow,49 Proc.
IRE.) Theclutterspectrum canalsobeexpressed intermsofanrmsclutterfrequency spread (I,.
inhertzorbythermsvelocity spread(Jvinm/s.46ThusEq.(4.18)canbewritten ((2)((2).2)W(f)=Woexp-2(J;=Woexp-'8(J~ (4.19) whereWo=Igol2,(Jc=2(Jv!).,).=wavelength =clfo,andc=velocity ofpropagation.
Itcan beseenthata=c2/8(J~.Thermsvelocity spread (Jvisusuallythepreferred method for describing theclutterfluctuation spectrum.
Theimprovement factorcanbewrittenas I=(SoIC0)=(So)XCj=(So) xCA (4.20) Si/CjaveSjaveCoSjave whereSolCo=output signal-to-clutter ratio,Si/Ci=inputsignal-to-clutter ratio,and CA=clutterattentuation.
Theaverage istakenoveralltargetdoppler frequencies ofinterest.
Forasingle-delay-line canceler, theclutterattentuation is $:Wendf CA=s:W(f)\H(f)12~1 (4.21) whereH(f)isthefrequency response function ofthecanceler.
Sincethefrequency response function ofadelaylineoftimedelayTisexp(-j2nfT),1l(f)forthesingle-delay-line canceler is H(f)=I -exp(-j2nfT)=2jsin(nfT)exp(-jnfT) (4.22) Substituting Eqs.(4.19)and(4.22)intoEq.(4.21)andassuming that(Jc~liT,theclutter attentuation is f~Woexp(-f2/2(J;)dfCA=-;;w-:;: ..~_":'----=--'''-:---~-'----~:-=--,---foWoexp(-f2j2(J;)4sin2nfTdf 0.5(4.23) If tlie exponent in the denorniriator of Eq.
(4.23) is small, tlie exponential term can be replaced  by the first two terms of a series expansion, or  where ,f,, the pulse repetition frequency, has been substituted for 1/T.
The average gain  (S,,/S,):,,., of tlic sitiglc dclay-litlc-caricclcr.
can hc sllown to be eqrlal to 2.
Therefore.
the  itnproven~ent faclor is  Si~nilarly.
for a tlor~ldc carlcclcr.
wllose average gain is 6, the improvement factor is  A plot of I'q.
(4.26) for tlic doublc cat~cclcr is shown in Fig.
4.30.
The parameter describing the  curves is f,A.
Example prf's and frequencies are shown.
Several "representative" examples of  clutter are indicated, based on published data for o,, which for the most part dates back to  World War 11.46.49 Although each type ofclutter is shown at a particular value ofa,, nature is  more variable than this.
Actual measurements cover a range of values.
The spectral spread in  velocity is with respect to tlie mean velocity, which for ground clutter is usually zero.
Rain and  I I I I1 l Ill 1 I I I11111 I I I I1111  Sparse Wooded hills Wooded hills Sea echo Rain  woods 10 knots 40 knots Chof f -  -  -  -  -  -  I I I 1 11111 I I I 1 11 111 I I I1 1111~  uv = rms velocity spread, rn/s  Figure 4.30 Plot of double-canceler clutter improvement factor [Eq.
(4.26)] as a function of a, = rms  velocity spread of the clutter.
Parameter is the product of the pulse repetition frequency (f,) and the  radar wavelength (A).
 MTIANDPULSEDOPPLER RADAR133 Iftheexponent inthedenominator ofEq.(4.23)issmall,theexponential termcanbereplaced hythefirsttwotermsofaseriesexpansion, or f/ f/).2 af/CA=----= =-- (4.24).4rr2a; l6rr2a~ 2rr2fo2 wheref",thepulserepetition frequency.
hasbeensubstituted forliT.Theaverage gain (So/S,)",tofthcsinglcdclay-linc-cancelcr canbeshowntobeequalto2.Therefore.
the improvement factoris (4.25) (4.26)Similarly.
foradoublecanceler.
whoseaverage gainis6,theimprovement factoris f/ fp4).4a2fp412c""_.._-=--~-=-- -8rr4a: l28rr4a~ 2n4fo4 !\plotofEq.(4.26)forthedouhlecanceler isshowninFig.4.30.Theparameter describing the curvesisfpA.Example pre'sandfrequencies areshown.Several" representative" examples of clutterareindicated, basedonpublished dataforav,whichforthemostpartdatesbackto WorldWar11.46.49Although eachtypeofclutterisshownataparticular valueofav,natureis morevariable thanthis.Actualmeasurements coverarangeofvalues.Thespectral spreadin velocity iswithrespecttothemeanvelocity, whichforgroundclutterisusuallyzero.Rainand Sparse woods 60- 50rou 240uo- C Ql ~30- >o....0.
E 20- 10-Wooded hillS 10knotsWooded hillsSeaecho 40knots ChaffRain 10 1·0 010'--__ ..L.-_.L.--'--'-...J....-.1-.J---'-L -'-----"'----'----...J....-..J-..JL.......l-..L...L __ ---'_--'-_.L.--l--LJ.....L...L..J 0001 0"11==rmsvelocity spread tm/s Figure4.30Plotofdouble-canceler clutterimprovement factor[Eq.(4.26)]asafunction of(Tv=rms velocity spreadoftheclutter.Parameter istheproductofthepulserepetition frequency (fp)andthe radarwavelength (..1.). chaff, however, as well as sea echo, can have a nonzero mean velocity4' which must be  properly accounted for when designing MTI signal processors.
 The frequency dependence of the clutter spectrum as given by Eqs.
(4.25) and (4.26)  cannot be extended over too great a frequency range since account is not taken of any  variation in radar cross section of the individual scatterers as a function of frequency.
The  leaves and branches of trees, for example, might have considerably different reflecting proper-  ties at K, band (A = 0.86 cm), where the dimensions are comparable with the wavelength, from  those at VHF (A = 1.35 m), where the wavelength is long compared with the dimensions.
 The general expression for improvement factor for an N-pulse canceler with N, = N - 1  delay lines is6'  Antenna scanning rn~dulation.~~.~~-~~ As the antenna scans by a target, it observes the target  for a finite time equal to to = n$ fp = 88/8,, where n, = number of hits received, fp = pulse  repetition frequency, 0, = antenna beamwidth and 0, = antenna scanning rate.
The received Y*  pulse train of finite duration to has a frequency spectrum (which can be found by taking the  Fourier transform of the waveform) whose width is proportional to l/to.
Therefore, even if the  clutter were perfectly stationary, there will still be a finite width to the clutter spectrum because  of the finite time on target.
If the clutter spectrum is too wide because the observation time is  too short, it will affect the improvement factor.
This limitation has sometimes been called  scanning jluctuations or scanning modulation.
 The computation of the limitation to the improvement factor can be found in a manner  similar to that of the clutter fluctuations described previously.
The clutter attentuation is first  found using Eq.
(4.21), except that the power spectrum W,(f) describing the spectrum  produced by tpe finite time on target is used.
The clutter attenuation is  where H(f) is the frequency response function of the MTI signal processor.
If the antenna  main-beam pattern is approximated by the gaussian shape, the spectriim will also be gaussian.
4  Therefore, the results previously derived for a gaussian clutter spectrum can be readily applied.
9  Equations 4.25 and 4.26 derived for the clutter fluctuation improvement factor apply for the  antenna scanning fluctuations by proper interpretation of a,, the standard deviation, or the  rms spread of the frequency spectrum about the mean.
 The voltage waveform of the received signal is modulated by the square of the antenna  electric-field-strength-pattern, which is equal to the (one-way) antenna power pattern C;(f)),  described by the gaussian function as  Since the antenna is scanning at a rate of 0, deg/s the time waveform may be found from  Eq.
(4.29) by dividing both the numerator and denominator of the exponent by 8,.
Lctting  8/b, = t, the time variable, and noting that B,/B, = to, the time on target, the modulation of  the received signal due to the antenna pattern is  134INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS chaff,however, aswellasseaecho,canhaveanonzero meanvelocity47whichmustbe properly accounted forwhendesigning MTIsignalprocessors.
Thefrequency dependence oftheclutterspectrum asgivenbyEqs.(4.25)and(4.26) cannotbeextended overtoogreatafrequency rangesinceaccount isnottakenofany variation inradarcrosssectionoftheindividual scatterers asafunction offrequency.
The leavesandbranches oftrees,forexample, mighthaveconsiderably different reflecting proper­ tiesatKgband(,.t=0.86cm),wherethedimensions arecomparable withthewavelength.
from thoseatVHF(tl=1.35m),wherethewavelength islongcompared withthedimensions.
Thegeneralexpression forimprovement factorforanN-pulse canceler withN,=N- I delaylinesis61 (4.27) Antenna scanning modulation.
46.49-52 Astheantenna scansbyatarget,itobserves thetarget forafinitetimeequaltoto=nBIjp=8BI{)s'wherenB=number ofhitsreceived, jp=pulse repetition frequency, 8B=antenna beamwidth and{}s=antenna scanning rate.Thereceived pulsetrainoffiniteduration tohasafrequency spectrum (whichcanbefoundbytakingthe Fouriertransform ofthewaveform) whosewidthisproportional tol/to.Therefore, evenifthe clutterwereperfectly stationary, therewillstiltbeafinitewidthtotheclutterspectrum because ofthefinitetimeontarget.Iftheclutterspectrum istoowidebecause theobservation timeis tooshort,itwillaffecttheimprovement factor.Thislimitation hassometimes beencalled scanning fluctuations orscanning modulation.
Thecomputation ofthelimitation totheimprovement [actorcanbe[oundinamanner similartothatoftheclutterfluctuations described previously.
Theclutterattentuation isfirst foundusingEq.(4.21),exceptthatthepowerspectrum ~(f)describing thespectrum produced byt~efinitetimeontargetisused.Theclutterattenuation is C-s;~(f)df A-J;~(f)IH(f)12df (4.28) whereH(f)isthefrequency response function oftheMTIsignalprocessor.
Iftheantenna main-beam patternisapproximated bythegaussian shape,thespectrum willalsobegaussian.
Therefore, theresultspreviously derivedforagaussian clutterspectrum canbereadilyapplied.
Equations 4.25and4.26derivedfortheclutterfluctuation improvement factorapplyforthe antenna scanning fluctuations byproperinterpretation of(J"thestandard deviation, orthe rmsspreadofthefrequency spectrum aboutthemean.
Thevoltagewaveform ofthereceived signalismodulated bythesquareoftheantenna electric-field-strength-pattern, whichisequaltothe(one-way) antenna powerpatternG(O), described bythegaussian function as (2.776(2)G(8)=Goexp-Or (4.29) (4.30)Sincetheantenna isscanning atarateofb.deg/sthetimewaveform maybefoundfrom Eq.(4.29)bydividing boththenumerator anddenominator oftheexponent byb•.Letting 81{)s=t,thetimevariable, andnotingthat8Blbs=to,thetimeontarget,themodulation of thereceived signalduetotheantenna patternis ()k(2.776(2 ) Sa1=exp- 2to where k = constant.
The angular frequency spectrum of this time waveform is found by taking  its Fourier transform.
which is  OD 2.776t2  exp ( -j2nfr) dt .
-a3  n2f2ti = k, exp ---- 1 2.776 1  where k, = constant.
Since this is a gaussian function, the exponent is of the form f 2/2a; where  aI = standard deviation.
Therefore  I'liis applies to the voltage spcctrum.
Since the standard deviation of the power spcctrum is  less than that of the voltage spectrum by fi, tile power spectrum due to antenna scanning can  be described by a standard deviation  %, number of hits within 3 dB beamwidth  Figure 4.31 Limitation to improvement factor due to a scanning antenna.
Antenna pattern assumed to be  of gaussian shape.
 MTIANDPULSEDOPPLER RADAR135 wherek=constant.
Theangular frequency spectrum ofthistimewaveform isfoundbytaking itsFourier transform, whichis 00(2776t2 )SoU)=ktooexp- .t5exp(-j2nJt) dt In2J2t5]=klexp-2.776 (4.31) wherek1=constant.
Sincethisisagaussian function, theexponent isoftheformJ2/2aJ where aJ=standard deviation.
Therefore (4.32) Thisappliestothevoltagespectrum.
Sincethestandard deviation ofthej.)owerspectrum is lessthanthatofthevoltagespectrum byfl,thepowerspectrum duetoantenna scanning can bedescribed byastandard deviation 50 rn "0 a40- u 2 C '"E30- '"> 0a E 20-1.178 1 a$=J2nto=3.77to ~.numberofhitswithin(4.33) Figure4.31Limitation toimprovement factorduetoascanning antenna.
Antenna patternassumed tobe ofgaussian shape. This can be substituted for cr, in Eqs.
(4.25) and (4.26) to obtain the limitation to the improve-  ment factor caused by antenna scanning.
These are  ni Ils= - (single canceler) 1.388  11 ",  IZs = - (double canceler) 3.853  These are plotted in Fig.
4.31.
 A stepped-scan antenna that dwells at a particular region in space, rather than scan  continuously, also is limited in MTI performance by the finite time on target to.
The rime  waveform is constant so that it will have a different spectral shape and a different improvement  factor than that produced by the gaussian beam assumed in the above.
 Limiting in MTI radar.853-55 A limiter is usually employed in the IF amplifier just before the  MTI processor to prevent the residue from large clutter echoes from saturating the display.
x%-dp  Ideally an MTI radar should reduce the clutter to a level comparable to receiver noise.
 136INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS Thiscanbesubstituted for(JcinEqs.(4.25)and(4.26)toobtainthelimitation totheimprove­ mentfactorcausedbyantenna scanning.
Theseare n~ /ls=1.388 n~ 12s=3.853(singlecanceler) (double canceler)(4.34) (4.35) TheseareplottedinFig.4.31.
Astepped-scan antenna thatdwellsataparticular regioninspace,ratherthanscan continuously, alsoislimitedinMTIperformance bythefinitetimeontargetto.Thetime waveform isconstant sothatitwillhaveadifferent spectralshapeandadifferent improvement factorthanthatproduced bythegaussian beamassumed intheabove.
Limiting inMTIradar.8.53-55 Alimiterisusuallyemployed intheIFamplifier justbeforethe MTIprocessor toprevent theresiduefrom large clutterechoesfromsaturating thedisplay..._»'f IdeallyanMTIradarshouldreducethecluttertoalevelcomparable torece.iver noise.
60 50 (J) 'U I ....
040ti 0 CIL=0dB -CCIL=10dB 41E 4130>0nE 20CIL=20dB na=100 na=50 na=20 na=10 na=5 0010L-_-I-__ ---l..__L-.J'--_..l..-_'----'-----L..L-----l---'---'-_----''-- __..l..-_--'---'---_----' 0·001 (a) Figure 4.32 Effect of limit level on the improvement factor for (a) two-pulse delay-line canceler and  (b) three-pulse delay-line canceler.
C/L = ratio of rms clutter power to limit level.
(Fror,~ Ward arrd  Shradcr," Courtesy 1 EE E.)  However, when tlie MTI improvement factor is not great enough to reduce the clutter  sufficiently..the clutter residue will appear on the display and prevent the detection of aircraft  targets wliose cross sections are larger than the clutter residue.
This condition may be pre-  vcritcd by setting tlic liniit level L, relative to the noise N, equal to the MTI improvement  factor I; or L/N = 1.
If tlie liniit level relative to noise is set higher than the improvement  factor.
clutter residue obscures part of the display.
If it is set too low there may be a " black  liolc" effect or1 the display.
'I'he liriiiter provides a constant false aiarrn rate (CFAR) arid is  essential to usable MTI l~erforma~ice.su  Unfortunately, nonlinear devices such as limiters have side-effects that can degrade  performarice.
Limiters cause tlie spcctrirrri of strong clutter to spread into the canceler pass-  band, and result in the generation of additional residue that can significaritly degrade MTI  performance as compared with a perfect linear system.
 An example of tile effect of limiting is sliown in Fig.
4.32, which plots the improvement  factor for two-pulse arid tllree-pulse cancelers witti various levels of limiting.53 The abscissa  applies to a gaussian clutter spectrum that is generated either by clutter motion with standard  deviation rr,, at a wavelengtli R and a prf .f,, or by antenna scanning modulation with a  MTIANDPULSE DOPPLER RADAR137 60 50 mu I E40- u l? C Q) E Q)30>0 0.E 20i--~rl 0011()- nB=lOa nB=50 a-'I -'---_-'I---'__-'------'_-'- ..LL--'--'--'--_-'- __---L_---'.__-' 0001 Fi~ure4.32Effectoflimitlevelontheimprovement factorfor(a)two-pulse delay-line canceler and (b)three-pulse delay-line canceler.elL=ratioofrmsclutterpowertolimitlevel.(FromWardand Shrader,s3 Courtesy IEEE.) However, whentheMTIimprovement factorisnotgreatenough toreducetheclutter sufficientlYAhe clutterresiduewillappearonthedisplayandpreventthedetection ofaircraft targetswhosecrosssections arelargerthantheclutterresidue.
Thiscondition maybepre­ ventedhysettingthelimitlevelLrelative tothenoiseN,equaltotheMTIimprovement factorI;orLIN=I.Ifthelimitlevelrelativetonoiseissethigherthantheimprovement factor.clutterresidueobscures partofthedisplay.Ifitissettoolowtheremaybea"black hole"effectonthedisplay.
Thelimiterprovides aconstant falsealarmrate(CFAR) andis essential tousableMTIperformance.5o Unfortunately, nonlinear devices suchaslimiters haveside-effects thatcandegrade performance.
Limiters causethespectrum ofstrongcluttertospreadintothecanceler pass­ band,andresultinthegeneration ofadditional residuethatcansignificantly degrade MTI performance ascompared withaperfectlinearsystem.
Anexample oftheeffectoflimiting isshowninFig.4.32,whichplotstheimprovement factorfortwo-pulse andthree-pulse cancelers withvarious levelsoflimiting.s3Theabscissa appliestoagaussian clutterspectrum thatisgenerated eitherbycluttermotionwithstandard deviation CT,.atawavelengl hA.andaprffp,orbyantenna scanning modulation witha 138 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  gaussian-shaped beam and ns pulses between the half-power beamwidth of the one-way  antenna pattern.
The parameter CIL is the ratio of the rms clutter power to the receiver-IF  limit level.
 The loss of improvement factor increases with increasing complexity of the canceler.
 Limiting in the three-pulse canceler will cause a 15 to 25 dB reduction in the performance  predicted by linear theory.5% four-pulse canceler (not shown) with limiting is typically only  2 dB better than the three-pulse canceler in the presence of limiting clutter and offers little  advantage.
Thus the added complexity of higher-order cancelers is seldom justified in such  situations.
The linear analysis of MTI signal processors is therefore not adequate when limit-  ing& employed and can lead to disappointing differences between theory and measurement of  actual systems.
 Limiters need not be used if the MTI is linear over the entire range of clutter signals and if  the processor has sufficient improvement factor to reduce the largest clutter to the noise level.
 To accomplish this the signal processor must provide at least 60 dB improvkment factor,  which is a difficult task.56 Not only must the signal processor be designed to reduce the clutter  by this amount, but the receiver must be linear over this range, there must be at least eleven  ">, bits in the AID converter of the digital processor, the equipment must be sufficiently stablc,  and the number of pulses processed (for reducing antenna scanning modulation) must be  sufficient to achieve this large value of improvement factor.
 4.9 NONCOHERENT MTI  The composite echo signal from a moving target and clutter fluctuates in both phase and  amplitude.
The coherent MTI and the pulse-doppler radar make use of the phase fluctuations  in the echo signal to recognize the doppler component produced by a moving target.
In these  systems, amplitude fluctuations are removed by the phase detector.
The operation of this type  of radar, which may be called coherent MTI, depends upon a reference signal at the radar  receiver that is coherent with.
the transmitter signal.
 It is also possible to use the amplitude fluctuations to recognize the doppler component  produced by a moving target.
MTI radar which uses amplitude instead of phase fluctuations is  called noncoherent (Fig.
4.33).
It has also been called externally coherent, which is a more  descriptive name.
The noncoherent MTI radar does not require an internal coherent reference  signal or a phase detector as does the coherent form of MTI.
Amplitude limiting cannet be  amplifier '7  Amplitude  detector _, Modulator  4 To cancellation circuits t -.
 Mixer --c LO Power  oscillator 1  T R  Figure 4.33 Block diagram of a noncoherent MTI radar.
_,  138INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS gaussian-shaped beamand118pulsesbetween thehalf-power beamwidth oftheone-way antenna pattern.
Theparameter CIListheratioofthermsclutterpowertothereceiver-IF limitlevel.
Thelossofimprovement factorincreases withincreasing complexity ofthecanceler.
Limiting in'thethree-pulse canceler willcausea15to25dBreduction inthe performance predicted bylineartheory.50 Afour-pulse canceler (notshown)withlimiting istypically only 2dBbetterthanthethree-pulse canceler inthepresence oflimiting clutterandofferslittle advantage.
Thustheaddedcomplexity ofhigher-order cancelers isseldomjustified insuch situations.
Thelinearanalysis ofMTIsignalprocessors istherefore notadequate whenIimit­ ing,isemployed andcanleadtodisappointing differences between theoryandmeasurement of actualsystems.
Limiters neednotbeusediftheMTIislinearovertheentirerangeofcluttersignalsandif theprocessor hassufficient improvement factortoreducethelargestcluttertotrenoiselevel.
Toaccomplish thisthesignalprocessor mustprovide atleast60dBimprovement factor, whichisadifficulttask.56Notonlymustthesignalprocessor bedesigned toreducetheclutter bythisamount, butthereceivermustbelinearoverthisrange,theremustbeatleasteleven bitsintheAIDconverter ofthedigitalprocessor, theequipment mustbesufficiently stable, andthenumber ofpulsesprocessed (forreducing antenna scanning modulation) mustbe sufficient toachievethislargevalueofimprovement factor.
4.9NONCOHERENT MTI Thecomposite echosignalfromamovingtargetandclutterfluctuates inbothphaseand amplitude.
Thecoherent MTIandthepulse-doppler radarmakeuseofthephasefluctuations intheechosignaltorecognize thedopplercomponent produced byamovingtarget.Inthese systems, amplitude fluctuations areremoved bythephasedetector.
Theoperation ofthistype ofradar,whichmaybecalledcoherent MTI,depends uponareference signalattheradar receiver thatiscoherent withthetransmitter signal.
Itisalsopossible tousetheamplitude fluctuations torecognize thedopplercomponent produced byamovingtarget.MTIradarwhichusesamplitude insteadofphasefluctuations is callednoncoherent (Fig.4.33).Ithasalsobeencalledexternally coherent, whichisamore descriptive name.Thenoncoherent MTIradardoesnotrequireaninternalcoherent reference signaloraphasedetector asdoesthecoherent formofMTI.Amplitude limitingcannotbe Tocancellation circuits Figure4.33Blockdiagramofanoncoherent MTIradar. en~ployed in tile ~ioncollere~it MTI receiver, else the desired anlplitude fluctuations would be  lost.
Therefore tile IF amplifier must be linear, or if a large dynamic range is required, it can  be logarithmic.
A logaritlimic gain characteristic not only provides protection from saturation,  but it also tends to make the clutter fluctuations at its output more uniform with variations in  the clutter input amplitude [Sec.
(13.8)].
The detector following the IF amplifier is a conven-  tional amplitude detector.
The phase detector is not used since phase information is of no  interest to the tioncolierent radar.
Tile local oscillator of the noncoherent radar does not have  to he as frequency-stable as in the coherent MTI.
The transmitter must be sufficiently stable  over t lie pulse ditratiorl to prevent beats between overlapping ground clutter, but this is not as  severe a requirement as in the case of coherent radar.
The output of the amplitude detector is  followed by an MTI processor sucli as a delay-line canceler.
The doppler component con-  taitied ill tlic al~iplitilde fluctl~atiotls Itlay also be detected by applying tlie output of the  amplitude detector to an A-scope.
Amplitude fluctuations due to doppler produce a butterfly  modulation similar to that in Fig.
4.3, but in this case, they ride on top of the clutter echoes.
 Except for the inclusion of means to extract the doppler amplitude component, the noncoher-  ent MTI block diagram is similar to that of a conventional pulse radar.
 The advantage of the noncoherent MTI is its simplicity; hence it is attractive for those  applications where space and weight are limited.
Its chief limitation is that the target must be  in the presence of relatively large clutter signals if moving-target detection is to take place.
 Clutter echoes may not always be present over the range at which detection is desired.
The  clutter serves the same function as does the reference signal in the coherent MTI.
If clutter  were not present, tlie desired targets would not be detected.
It is possible, however, to provide  a switch to disconnect the noncoherent MTI operation and revert to normal radar whenever  sufficient clutter echoes are not present.
If the radar is stationary, a map of the clutter might be  stored in a digital memory and used to determine when to switch in or out the noncoherent  hlT1.
 The improvement factor of a noncoherent MTI will not, in general, be as good as can be  obtained with a coherent MTI tliat employs a reference oscillator (coho).
The reference signal  in the noncoherent case is tlie clutter itself, which will not be as stable as a reference oscillator  because of tlie finite width of the clutter spectrum caused by its own internal motions.
If a  nonlinear IF ariiplifier is used, it will also limit the improvement factor that can be achieved.
 4.10 PULSE DOPPLER  RADAR'^  ?.
 A pulse radar that extracts the doppler frequency shift for the purpose of detecting moving  targets in the presence of clutter is either an MTI radar or a pulse doppler radar.
The distinc-  tion between them is based on the fact that in a sampled measurement system like a pulse  radar, ambiguities can arise in both the doppler frequency (relative velocity) and the range  (time delay) measurenients.
Range ambiguities are avoided with a low sampling rate (low pulse  repetition frequency), and doppler frequency ambiguities are avoided with a high sampling  rate.
However, in most radar applications the sampling rate, or pulse repetition frequency,  cannot be selected to avoid both types of measurement ambiguities.
Therefore a compromise  must be made arid the nature of tlie compromise generally determines whether the radar is  called an MTI or a pitlsc doppler.
MTI usually refers to a radar in which the pulse repetition  frequency is clloseti low enougli to avoid ambiguities in range (no multiple-time-around  echoes).
but with the consequence tliat tile frequency measurement is ambiguous and results in  blind speeds, Eq.
(4.8).
The pulse doppler radar, on the other hand, has a high pulse repetition  frequency that avoids blind speeds, but it experiences ambiguities in range.
It performs doppler  MTIANDPULSE DOPPLER RADAR139 employed inthenoncoherent MTIreceiver, elsethedesiredamplitude fluctuations wouldbe lost.Therefore theIFamplifier mustbelinear,orifalargedynamic rangeisrequired, itcan belogarithmic.
Alogarithmic gaincharacteristic notonlyprovides protection fromsaturation, butitalsotendstomaketheclutterfluctuations atitsoutputmoreuniform withvariations in theclutterinputamplitude [Sec.(13.8)].Thedetector following theIFamplifier isaconven­ tionalamplitude detector.
Thephasedetector isnotusedsincephaseinformation isofno interesttothenoncoherent radar.Thelocaloscillator ofthenoncoherent radardoesnothave toheasfrequency-stahle asinthecoherent MTI.Thetransmitter mustbesufficiently stable overthepulseduration toprevent beatsbetween overlapping groundclutter,butthisisnotas severearequirement asinthecaseofcoherent radar.Theoutputoftheamplitude detector is followed byanMTiprocessor suchasadelay-line canceler.
Thedoppler component con­ tClilledillthealllplituue nuctuations mayalsobedetected byapplying theoutputofthe amplitude detector toanA-scope.
Amplitude fluctuations duetodoppler produce abutterfly modulation similartothatinFig.4.3,butinthiscase,theyrideontopoftheclutterechoes.
Exceptfortheinclusion ofmeanstoextractthedoppler amplitude component, thenoncoher­ entMTiblockdiagram issimilartothatofaconventional pulseradar.
Theadvantage ofthenoncoherent MTIisitssimplicity; henceitisattractive forthose applications wherespaceandweightarelimited.
Itschieflimitation isthatthetargetmustbe inthepresence ofrelatively largecluttersignalsifmoving-target detection istotakeplace.
Clutterechoesmaynotalwaysbepresentovertherangeatwhichdetection isdesired.The clutterservesthesamefunction asdoesthereference signalinthecoherent MTI.Ifclutter werenotpresent, thedesiredtargetswouldnotbedetected.
Itispossible, however, toprovide aswitchtodisconnect thenoncoherent MTIoperation andreverttonormalradarwhenever sufficient clutterechoesarenotpresent.Iftheradarisstationary, amapofthecluttermightbe storedinadigitalmemory andusedtodetermine whentoswitchinoroutthenoncoherent MTI.
Theimprovement factorofanoncoherent MTIwillnot,ingeneral, beasgoodascanbe obtained withacoherent MTIthatemploys areference oscillator (coho).Thereference signal inthenoncoherent caseistheclutteritself,whichwillnotbeasstableasareference oscillator because ofthefinitewidthoftheclutterspectrum causedbyitsowninternal motions.
Ifa nonlinear IFamplifier isused,itwillalsolimittheimprovement factorthatcanbeachieved.
4.10PULSE DOPPLER RADAR5? ~.
Apulseradarthatextracts thedoppler frequency shiftforthepurpose ofdetecting moving targetsinthepresence ofclutteriseitheranMTIradarorapulsedopplerradar.Thedistinc­ tionbetween themisbasedonthefactthatinasampled measurement systemlikeapulse radar,ambiguities canariseinboththedoppler frequency (relative velocity) andtherange (timedelay)measurements.
Rangeambiguities areavoided withalowsampling rate(lowpulse repetition frequency), anddoppler frequency ambiguities areavoided withahighsampling rate.However, inmostradarapplications thesampling rate,orpulserepetition frequency, cannotbeselected toavoidbothtypesofmeasurement ambiguities.
Therefore acompromise mustbemadeandthenatureofthecompromise generally determines whether theradaris calledanMTIorapulsedoppler.
MTIusuallyreferstoaradarinwhichthepulserepetition frequency ischosen lowenough toavoidambiguities inrange(nomultiple-time-around echoes).
butwiththeconsequence thatthefrequency measurement isambiguous andresultsin blindspeeds,Eq.(4.8).Thepulsedoppler radar,ontheotherhand,hasahighpulserepetition frequency thatavoidsblindspeeds,butitexperiences ambiguities inrange.Itperforms doppler 140 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  filtering on a single spectral line of the pulse spectrum.
(A radar which employs multiple pulse  repetition frequencies to avoid blind speeds is usually classed as an MTI if its average prf  would cause blind speeds.
The justification for this definition is that the technology and design  philosophy of a multiple prf radar are more like that of an MTI than a pulse doppler.)  The pulse doppler radar is more likely to use range-gated doppler filter-banks than  delay-line cancelers.
Also, a power amplifier such as a klystron is more likely to be used than a  power oscillator like the magnetron.
A pulse doppler radar operates at a higher duty cycle  than does an MTI.
Although it is difficult to generalize, the MTI radar seems to be the more  widely used of the two, but pulse doppler is usually more capable of reducing clutter.
 When the prf must be so high that the number of range amb~guiiies is too large to be  easily resolved, the performance of the pulse-doppler radar approaches that of the CW doppler  radar.
The pulse-doppler radar, like the CW radar, may be limited in its ability to measure  range under these conditions.
Even so, the pulse-doppler radar has an advantaee over the CW  radar in that the detection performance is not limited by transmitter leakage or by signals  reflected from nearby clutter or from the radome.
The pulse-doppler radar avoids this  difficulty since its receiver is turned off during transmission, whereas the CW radar receiver 1s  always on.
On the other hand, the detection capability of the pulse-doppler radar is rcd~~~cd  because of the blind spots in range resulting from the high prf.
 One other method should be mentioned of achieving coherent MTI.
If the number of  cycles of the doppler frequency shift contained within the duration of a single pulse is  sufficient, the returned echoes from moving targets may be separated from clutter by suitable  RF or IF filters.
This is possible if the doppler frequency shift is at least comparable with or  greater than the spectral width of the transmitted signal.
It is not ilsually applicable to aircraft  targets, but it can sometimes be applied to radars designed to detect extraterrestrial targets  such as satellites or astronomical bodies.
In these cases, the transmitted pulse width is rela-  tively wide and its spectrum is narrow.
The high speed of extraterrestrial targets results in  doppler shifts that are usually significantly greater than the spectral width of the transmitted  signal.
 4.11 MTI FROM A MOVING PLATFORM  9 When the radar itself is in motion, as when mounted on a ship or an aircraft, the detcctiotl of a  nloving target in tlle presence ofclutter is more difficult than if tile radar were statiollar;~.
'I'llc  doppler frequency shift of the clutter is no longer at dc.
It varies with the speed of tlie radar  ~~lutforrn, the direction of the antentla in a~irnt~tli, sn<i tile elevation ittlglc to tl~c clt~tter.
7'1111s  the clutter rejection notch needed to cancel clutter cannot be fixed, but must vary.
'l'lie dzsig~l  of an MTI is more difficult with an airborne radar than a shipborne radar becailse the higher  speeds and the greatcr range of elevation angles result in a greater variation of the clt~ltc~  spectrum.
 In addition to shifting the center frequency of the clutter, its spectritm is also widened.
An  approximate measure of the spectrum width can be found by taking the differential of the  doppler frequency ,fd = 2(v/l) cos 0, or  2 v Af, = - sin 0 A0 .
l  where 11 = platform speed, A = wavelength, and 0 is the azimuth angle between the aircraft's  velocity and the direction of the antenna beam.
(The negative sign introduced by differentia-  tion of cos O is ignored and the elevation angle is assumed to be zero.) If the beamwidth is  140INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS filteringonasinglespectral lineofthepulsespectrum.
(Aradarwhichemploys multiple pulse repetition frequencies toavoidblindspeedsisusuallyclassedasanMTIifitsaverage prf wouldcauseblindspeeds.Thejustification forthisdefinition isthatthetechnology anddesign philosophy ofamultiple prfradararemorelikethatofanMTIthanapulsedoppler.) Thepulsedoppler radarismorelikelytouserange-gated doppler filter-banks than delay-line cancelers.
Also,apoweramplifier suchasaklystron ismorelikelytobeusedthana poweroscillator likethemagnetron.
Apulsedoppler radaroperates atahigherdutycycle thandoesanMTI.Although itisdifficulttogeneralize, theMTIradarseemstobethemore widelyusedofthetwo,butpulsedoppler isusuallymorecapableofreducing clutter.
Whentheprfmustbesohighthatthenumber ofrangeambiguities istoolargetobe easilyresolved, theperformance ofthepulse-doppler radarapproaches thatoftheCWdoppler radar.Thepulse-doppler radar,liketheCWradar,maybelimitedinitsabilitytomeasure rangeundertheseconditions.
Evenso,thepulse-doppler radarhasanadvanta&e overtheCW radarinthatthedetection performance isnotlimitedbytransmitter leakageorhysignals reflected fromnearbyclutterorfromtheradome.
Thepulse-doppler radaravoidsthis difficulty sinceitsreceiver isturnedoffduringtransmission, whereas theCWradarreceivcr is alwayson.Ontheotherhand,thedetection capability ofthepulse-doppler radarisreducl:J becauseoftheblindspotsinrangeresulting fromthehighprf.
Oneothermethod shouldbementioned ofachieving coherent MTI.Ifthenumber of cyclesofthedoppler frequency shiftcontained withintheduration ofasinglepulseis sufficient, thereturned echoesfrommovingtargetsmaybeseparated fromclutterbysuitable RForIFfilters.Thisispossible ifthedoppler frequency shiftisatleastcomparable withor greaterthanthespectral widthofthetransmitted signal.Itisnotusuallyapplicable toaircrafl targets,butitcansometimes beappliedtoradarsdesigned todetectextraterrestrial targets suchassatellites orastronomical bodies.Inthesecases,thetransmitted pulsewidthisrela­ tivelywideanditsspectrum isnarrow.Thehighspeedofextraterrestrial targetsresultsin doppler shiftsthatareusuallysignificantly greaterthanthespectral widthofthetransmitted signal.
4.11MTIFROMAMOVING PLATFORM Whentheradaritselfisinmotion, aswhenmounted onashiporanaircraft, thedetection ofa movingtargetintheprescnce ofclutterismoredifficultthaniftheradarwerestationary.
The doppler frequency shiftoftheclutterisnolongeratdc.Itvarieswiththespeedoftheradar platform, thedirection oftheantenna inazimuth, andtheel.evation angletotheclutter.Thlls theclutterrejection notchneededtocancelcluttercannotbefixed,butmustvary.Thedesign ofanMTIismoredifficult withanairborne radarthanashipborne radarbecause thehigher speedsandthegreaterrangeofelevation anglesresultinagreatervariation oftheclutter spectrum.
Inaddition toshiftingthecenterfrequency oftheclutter,itsspectrum isalsowidened.
An approximate measure ofthespectrum widthcanbefoundbytakingthedifferential ofthe doppler frequency.td =2(v/l)cos0,or 4fd=2;sin0/10 (4.36) wherev=platform speed,l=wavelength, and0istheazimuth anglebetween theaircraft's velocity andthedirection oftheantenna beam.(Thenegative signintroduced bydifferentia­ tionofcos0isignoredandtheelevation angleisassumed tobezero.)Ifthebeamwidth is take11 as AO, tlien A!, is a rneasttre of the widtli of doppler frequency spectrum.
When the  ;111te1lrla j)oitits ill tl~e dircctioll of tl~c platforrll velocity (0 = O), the dopplcr shift of tlic cluttcr  is maximum, but the width of tlie doppler spectrum AId is a minimum.
On the other hand,  when the antenna is directed perpendicular to tlie direction of the platform velocity (0 = 90°),  the clutter doppler center-frequency is zero, but tlie spread is maximum.
This widening of the  clutter spectrum can set a limit on the improvement factor.
 Thus the effect of platforrn velocity can be considered as liaving two components.
One is  iri the direction of anteiina poiutitig and shifts the center frequency of the clutter doppler  spectrum.
The other is rlor~nal to tlle direction of antenna pointing and results in a widening of  the clutter doppler spectrum.
These two components are compensated by two different  techniques.
 Ari MI'] radar on a movitig platforni is called AMTI.
Altliougli the "A" originally stood  for airhorr~e, the term is now often applied to an MTI radar on any moving platform.
Most of  tile interest in AMTI, however, is for airborne radar."  ~'arnpcnsation for clutter dopplcr shift.
Wl~en the clutter doppler frequency is other than at  dc, the null of the frequency response of tlie MTI processor must be shifted accordingly.
The  effect 011 tlie improvement factor when tlie center of the clutter doppler frequency is shifted by  all anlou11t ,I, is shown ill Fig.
4.34 for a tlirec-pulse delay-line ~anceler.~',~~ Tliere are two  basic methods for providing the doppler frequency compensation.
In one implementation the  frequency of tlie coheretit oscillator (coho) is changed to compensate for the shift in the clutter  doppler frequency.
This may be accomplished by mixing the output of the coho with a signal  from a tunable oscillator, the frequency of which is made equal to the clutter doppler.
The  other ilnplementation is to insert a phase shifter in one branch of the delay-line canceler and  adjust its phase to sliift the null of the frequen'cy response.
(A phase shin Y in one branch of the  canceler corresponds to a frequency shift 2nfd = y/Tp, where Tp = pulse repetition interval.)  Tlie clutter-doppler-frequency compensation can, in some cases, be made open loop by  using the a priori knowledge of the velocity of the platform carrying the radar and the  direction of the antenna pointing.
This is more practical with a shipborne radar rather than  with an airborne radar.
When the clutter-doppler-frequency compensation cannot be obtained  0 001 0 01 0 1  oc'fp  Figure 4.34 Effect of a nonzero clutter doppler frequency on the improvement factor of a three-pulse  canceler.
f, = mean frequency of the clutter spectrum, o, = standard deviation of clutter spectrum,  .f, = pulse repetition frequency.
(From Andrews6')  MTIANDPULSE DOPPLER RADAR141 takenasMJ,thenM~isameasure ofthewidthofdoppler frequency spectrum.
Whenthe antcnna pointsintllcdirection oftileplatform velocity(0=0),thedoppler shiftoftileclutter ismaximum, butthewidthofthedoppler spectrum !!tIdisaminimum.
Ontheotherhand, whentheantenna isdirected perpendicular tothedirection oftheplatform velocity(0=90°), theclutterdoppler center-frequency iszero,butthespreadismaximum.
Thiswidening ofthe clutterspectrum cansetalimitontheimprovement factor.
Thustheeffectofplatform velocity canbeconsidered ashavingtwocomponents.
Oneis inthedirection ofantenna pointing andshiftsthecenterfrequency oftheclutterdoppler spectrum.
Theotherisnormaltothedirection ofantenna pointing andresultsinawidening of theclutterdoppler spectrum.
Thesetwocomponents arecompensated bytwodifferent techniques.
AnMTIradaronamovingplatform iscalledAMTI.Although the"A"originally stood forai"bome, thetermisnowoftenappliedtoanMTIradaronanymovingplatform.
Mostof theinterestinAMTl,however, isforairborne radar.58 Compensation fordutterdoppler shift.Whentheclutterdoppler frequency isotherthanat dc,thenullofthefrequency response oftheMTIprocessor mustbeshiftedaccordingly.
The effectontheimprovement factorwhenthecenteroftheclutterdoppler frequency isshiftedby anamount .I~isshowninFig.4.34forathree-pulse delay-line canceler.6t.69Therearetwo basicmethods forproviding thedoppler frequency compensation.
Inoneimplementation the frequency ofthecoherent oscillator (coho)ischanged tocompensate fortheshiftintheclutter doppler frequency.
Thismaybeaccomplished bymixingtheoutputofthecohowithasignal fromatunable oscillator, thefrequency ofwhichismadeequaltotheclutterdoppler.
The otherimplementation istoinsertaphase s~ifterinonebranchofthedelay-line canceler and adjustitsphasetoshiftthenullofthefrequency response.
(Aphaseshift\{Jinonebranchofthe canceler corresponds toafrequency shift2nId=\{J/Tp,whereTp=pulserepetition interval.) Theclutter-doppler-frequency compensation can,insomecases,bemadeopenloopby usingtheaprioriknowledge ofthevelocity oftheplatform carrying theradarandthe direction oftheantenna pointing.
Thisismorepractical withashipborne radarratherthan withanairborne radar.Whentheclutter-doppler-frequency compensation cannotbeobtained 100,-----,.----.--,----.---.--.-,.-,-,-----,-----r---.----r---,---,--,.--,--, 0·1m "0 L­a u J? c Q) E Q) >a 0.E O'-- .L...-_---"---_-'--------"------'---'--'--'---'- ----'-_---'_-'----'-----JL-J.--L..J.....J 0001 Figure4.34Effectofanonzero clutterdoppler frequency ontheimprovement factorofathree-pulse canceler.
fr=meanfrequency oftheclutterspectrum, fJ,=standard deviation ofclutterspectrum, fp=pulserepetition frequency.
(FromAndrews.61) 142 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  in this fashion, the clutter frequency can be measured directly by sampling the received echo  signal over an interval of range.
The sampled range interval is selected so that clutter is likely  to be the dominant signal.
From this measurement of clutter doppler within the sampled range  interval, compensation is made over the entire range of observation either by changing the  reference signal from the coho or by adjusting the phase shifter inserted in one of the arms of  the delay-line canceler.
Generally, the average doppler frequency or phase shift is obtained by  averaging the sampled range-interval over a number of pulse repetition periods.
A single  doppler measurement and subsequent compensation might not suffice over the entire range of  the radar, especially if the radar is elevated as in an aircraft.
The doppler shift from clutter will  be range dependent with an elevated radar since the doppler frequency is a function of the  elevation angle from the radar to the clutter cell.
Thus more than one doppler measurement  may be necessary to compensate for the variation of the clutter doppler with range.
 An MTI radar that measures the average doppler frequency shift of clutter qver a sampled  range interval and uses this measurement to cause the clutter mean-doppler-frequency to  coincide with the null of the MTI doppler-filter-frequency response over the remainder of the  range of observation is called a clutter-lock MTI.
 One version of a clutter-lock MTI is TACCAR, which stands for time-averaged-clutter  coherent airborne radar.' Although the name was originally applied to a particular airborne  MTI radar system developed by MIT Lincoln Laboratory, it continues to be used to refer to  the clutter-lock technique that was the special feature of that system.
The name is even  retained when the technique is applied to a shipboard radar or when the radar is on land and  used for the compensation of moving clutter.
The chief feature of TACCAR is the use of a  voltage-controlled oscillator arranged in a phase-lock loop.
As with other clutter-lock  methods, the correction for the clutter doppler is obtained from the averaged measurement of  the clutter doppler frequency within a sampled range interval.
 Other methods that have been proposed for compensating the clutter doppler shift seen  by a moving radar include the "matrix MTIW6O for implementation in digital MTI, and a  "trial and error" techniq~e~~*~' that provides simultaneously a number of possible d~ppler  corrections and uses that one which produces the minimum residue over the sampled range  interval.
 Still another technique that is attractive when it can be applied, is to use a doppler  processor with a rejection notch wide enough to reject the clutter doppler even when the radar  platform is in motion.
This is applicable only when the first blind speed is high (a low radar  frequency and/or high prf) and when the platform speed is low, as it would be with a ship-  mounted radar.
 Generally, most clutter-lock MTI techniques do not adequately eliminate both stationary  and moving clutter when they appear simultaneously within the same range resolution cell.
A  TACCAR, for example, might be designed to reject ground clutter close in, and weather or  chaff at a different doppler at ranges beyond the ground clutter; but not to cancel two different  clutter doppler frequencies simultaneously.' An exception is the adaptive MT162.65 which can  adapt to any type of clutter.
Using technology similar to that of the antenna sidelobe canceler,  nulls are adaptively placed at those frequencies containing large clutter.
A three-loop adaptive  canceler, for example, can adaptively place three nulls at three different frequencies or it can  place the three nulls so as to make a single wide notch, depending on the nature of the clutter  spectrum.
 Compensation for clutter doppler spread.
The simple expression of Eq.
(4.36) shows that the  spread in the clutter spectrum is a function of the angle 6 between the velocity vector of the  moving platform and the antenna beam-pointing direction.
It also depends on the wavelength.
 142INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS inthisfashion,theclutterfrequency canbemeasured directlybysampling thereceived echo signaloveranintervalofrange.Thesampled rangeintervalisselectedsothatclutterislikely tobethedominant signal.Fromthismeasurement ofclutterdopplerwithinthesampled range interval, compensation ismadeovertheentirerangeofobservation eitherbychanging the reference signalfromthecohoorbyadjusting thephaseshifterinsertedinoneofthearmsof thedelay-line canceler.
Generally, theaveragedopplerfrequency orphaseshiftisobtained by averaging thesampled range-interval overanumberofpulserepetition periods.
Asingle dopplermeasurement andsubsequent compensation mightnotsufficeovertheentirerangeof theradar,especially iftheradariselevated asinanaircraft.Thedopplershiftfromclutterwill berangedependent withanelevated radarsincethedoppler frequency isafunction ofthe elevation anglefromtheradartothecluttercell.Thusmorethanonedopplermeasurement maybenecessary tocompensate forthevariation oftheclutterdopplerwithrange.
AnMTIradarthatmeasures theaveragedopplerfrequency shiftofclutteroyerasampled rangeintervalandusesthismeasurement tocausethecluttermean-doppler-frequency to coincide withthenulloftheMTIdoppler-filter-frequency response overtheremainder ofthe rangeofobservation iscalledaclutter-lock MTI.
Oneversionofaclutter-lock MTIisTACCAR, whichstandsfortime-averaged-c1utter coherent airborne radar.8Although thenamewasoriginally appliedtoaparticular airborne MTIradarsystemdeveloped byMITLincolnLaboratory, itcontinues tobeusedtoreferto theclutter-lock technique thatwasthespecialfeatureofthatsystem.Thenameiseven retainedwhenthetechnique isappliedtoashipboard radarorwhentheradarisonlandand usedforthecompensation ofmovingclutter.ThechieffeatureofTACCAR istheuseofa voltage-controlled oscillator arranged inaphase-lock loop.Aswithotherclutter-lock methods, thecorrection fortheclutterdoppler isobtained fromtheaveraged measurement of theclutterdopplerfrequency withinasampled rangeinterval.
Othermethods thathavebeenproposeq forcompensating theclutterdopplershiftseen byamovingradarincludethe"matrixMTI"60forimplementation indigitalMTI,anda "trialanderror" tech~iques9.68 thatprovides simultaneously anumberofpossibledoppler corrections andusesthatonewhichproduces theminimum residueoverthesampled range interval.
Stillanother technique thatisattractive whenitcanbeapplied, istouseadoppler processor witharejection notchwideenoughtorejecttheclutterdopplerevenwhentheradar platform isinmotion.Thisisapplicable onlywhenthefirstblindspeedishigh(alowradar frequency and/orhighprf)andwhentheplatform speedislow,asitwouldbewithaship­ mounted radar.
Generally, mostclutter-lock MTItechniques' donotadequately eliminate bothstationary andmovingclutterwhentheyappearsimultaneously withinthesamerangeresolution cell.A TACCAR, forexample, mightbedesigned torejectgroundclutterclosein,andweatheror chaffatadifferent doppleratrangesbeyondthegroundclutter;butnottocanceltwodifferent clutterdopplerfrequencies simultaneously.8 Anexception istheadaptive MTI62.6swhichcan adapttoanytypeofclutter.Usingtechnology similartothatoftheantennasidelobe canceler, nullsareadaptively placedatthosefrequencies containing largeclutter.Athree-loop adaptive canceler, forexample, canadaptively placethreenullsatthreedifferent frequencies oritcan placethethreenullssoastomakeasinglewidenotch,depending onthenatureoftheclutter spectrum.
Compensation forclutterdopplerspread.Thesimpleexpression ofEq.(4.36)showsthatthe spreadintheclutterspectrum isafunction oftheangle8betw~n thevelocityvectorofthe movingplatform andtheantennabeam-pointing direction.
Italsodependsonthewavelength. Based on an analysis of antenna radiation patterns and experimental data, StaudaherS8 gives  the standard deviation of the clutter spectrum due to platform motion as  where ox is the horizontal component of the velocity perpendicular to the antenna pointing-  direction and a is the effective horizontal aperture width.
The antenna beamwidth is assumed  to be approximated by 0, = A/a.
[Equation (4.37) is not inconsistent with thesimple derivation  of Eq.
(4.36).] If the mean doppler-frequency shift of the clutter echo is perfectly com-  pensated, the limitations on the improvement factor due to clutter spread can be found by  assuming a gaussian spectral shape and substituting the standard deviation of Eq.
(4.37) into  the expression of Eq.
(4.27) to obtain  where NI is tlle riurrlbcr of delay lilies it1 the MTI processor.
If the clutter spread a,, due to the  platform motion combines with the clutter spread a, due to internal clutter motion such that  tile total storidard deviation n,.
of ttie clutter spectrum is a: = af + a;,, the MTI improve-  ment factor for the total clutter spectrum is  'The solid curves of Fig.
4.35 plot this equation for a three-pulse delay-line canceller (N, = 2).
 If the widening ofthe spectrum is a result of the radar platform's velocity, its effects can be  mitigated by making the radar antenna appear stationary.
This might be accomplished with  Ratio of clutter spectral width to pulse repetition frequency (uc/fp)  Figure 4.35 Solid curves show the improvement factor of a three-pulse canceler limited by platform  motion [Eq.
(4.39)].
Dashed curves show the effect of the DPCA compensation.
x is the fraction of the  antenna aperture that the antenna is displaced per interpulse period (x = 0 corresponds to no platform  motion.) (From Andrew~.~~)  MTIANDPULSE DOPPLER RADAR143 Basedonananalysis ofantenna radiation patterns andexperimental data, Staudaher~8 gives thestandard deviation oftheclutterspectrum duetoplatform motionas v"apm::::0.6-a(4.37) (4.38)where l'"isthehorizontal component ofthevelocity perpendicular totheantenna pointing­ direction andaistheeffective horizontal aperture width.Theantenna beamwidth isassumed tobeapproximated by08=A./a.[Equation (4.37)isnotinconsistent withthesimplederivation ofEq.(4.36).]Ifthemeandoppler-frequency shiftoftheclutterechoisperfectly com­ pensated, thelimitations ontheimprovement factorduetoclutterspreadcanbefoundby assuming agaussian spectral shapeandsubstituting thestandard deviation ofEq.(4.37)into theexpression ofEq.(4.27)toobtain 2N1(1a)2NI Ipm=N;!1.2n~"Tp (4.39)whereN,isthenumberofdelaylinesilltheMTIprocessor.
Iftheclutterspreadarmduetothe platform motioncombines withtheclutterspreadacduetointernal cluttermotionsuchthat lhetotalstandard deviation al'oftheclutterspectrum isaf=a;+a:m,theMTIimprove­ mentfactorforthetotalclutterspectrum is 2N, [J;12N1 /cs=N,!2rc(a;: <1:m)I/2 ThesolidcurvesofFig.4.35plotthisequation forathree-pulse delay-line canceller(N,=2).
Ifthewidening orthespectrum isaresultoftheradarplatform's velocity, itseffectscanbe mitigated bymakingtheradarantenna appearstationary.
Thismightbeaccomplished with 100.-----------------....---------------~ ---......:--80--_ lD u L-a60U 0- C AIE40., >a ~E 20x=001 ----------=----.............
-----.-:..--.:t.~ 0'0x=O"--__--1-----::::.......--.., ..............:::........---..--­.....~--­.....................--- x=0·07 -- x=01 0·1 0·01OL-------------------I.------------------l 0001 Ratioafclulterspectral widthtopulserepetition frequency (eTcI'pI Figure 4.3~Solidcurvesshowtheimprovement factorofathree-pulse canceler limitedbyplatform motion[Eq.(4.39)].DashedcurvesshowtheeffectortheDPCAcompensation.
xisthefractionofthe antenna aperture thattheantenna isdisplaced perinterpulse period(x=0corresponds tonoplatform motion.) (FromAndrews.63) two separate antennas with the distance between them equal to TPv, = Tpu sin 0,, where  0, = angle between velocity vector of the vehicle and the antenna beam-pointing direction,  and Tp = pulse repetition period.
One pulse is transmitted on the forward antenna, and tllc  other pulse is transmitted on the rear antenna so that the two pulses from the two different  antennas are transmitted and received at the same point in space.
The result is as if the  radar antenna were stationary.
The distance traveled between pulses is generally less than  the antenna dimension so that the two antenna beams might be generated with two  overlapping reflector antennas or with a phased array divided into two overlapping  sub array^.^^ The effective separation between the antennas, Tpox, varies with the angle  6, as well as the aircraft velocity v.
With reflector antennas, it is not convenient to change  the antenna physical separation to compensate for changes in 0, or o.
The pulse repetition  period Tp might be varied to provide compensation, but this can introduce other complica-  tions into the radar design and the signal processing.
With a phased array divided into two  overlapping subarrays, a constant pulse repetition frequency can be used and the horizontal  separation of the two overlapping subarrays can be controlled electronically to compensate for  platform motion.
However, it is possible to change the effective phase center of a rellt.ctor  antenna by employing two feeds to produce two squinted overlapping beams, as in ati  amplitude-comparison monopulse radar (Sec.
5.4).
The outputs of the two feeds are combined  using a hybrid junction to produce a sum pattern C and a difference pattern A.
By taking  C Ifl jkA, the effective phase center can be shifted depending on the value of k.
(The factor j  multiplying the difference pattern signifies a 90" phase shift added to the difference signal  relative to the sum signal.) The use of this technique in an AMTI radar to compensate for the  effects of platform motion is called DPCA, which stands for Displaced Phase Center Anter~nn.
 The sum and difference patterns can be obtained by connecting a hybrid junction to the  outputs of the two antenna feeds as described in Sec.
5.4.
The sum pattern is used on transmit  and both the sum and the difference patterns are extracted on receive.
The signal received on  the difference pattern is weighted by the factor k, shifted in phase by 90" and is added to the  sum-pattern signal in the delayed channel and subtracted from the sum-pattern signal in the  undelayed channel.
Because of the phase relationships between the lobes of the difference  pattern and the sum pattern, the result is an apparent forward displacement of the pattern on  the first transmission, and a displacement to the rear on the second transmission.
Wlicn tt~c  gains of the sum and difference channels are properly adjusted, and when the distance between  the phase centers of the two antenna beams is 2Tpvx the combined sum and diKerence patterns  on successive pulses illuminate the same region and the antenna appears sta~ionary.~' (The  f:~ctor 2 appears in the distance between phase centers.
as a result of using both feeds for  transmission.
The phase center on transmit is half-way between the two feeds, and the phase  center on receive alternates from one feed to the other.) As the antenna pointing-direction  changes from the port to starboard side of the vehicle, the sign of the difference signal must be  reversed to keep the displaced beams in the proper orientation.
 The dashed curves of Fig.
4.35 show the improvement in MTI processing that is theo-  retically possible with DPCA and a three-pulse delay-line canceler.
(Note that the DPCA  corrects only one canceler of a multiple-stage MTI.63) The curve for x = 0 applies for no  platform motion and represents the maximum improvement offered by an idea platform-  motion cancellation method.
It is seen that when the clutter spectral width is small, as for  overland clutter, a significant improvement is offered by DPCA.
 The limitation to the improvement factor due to antenna rotation, or scanning modula-  tion, can be reduced 'by a method,similar to DPCA.51.58166 DPCA applies the difference  pattern in quadrature (900 phase shift) to thesum pattern while compensation for scanning  modulation requires the difference pattern to be applied in phase with the sum pattern.
Thus it  144INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS twoseparate antennas withthedistance between themequaltoTpVx=TpvsinOa,where Oa=anglebetween velocity vectorofthevehicleandtheantenna beam-pointing direction, andTp=pulserepetition period.Onepulseistransmitted ontheforward antenna, andthe otherpulseistransmitted ontherearantenna sothatthetwopulsesfromthetwodifferent antennas aretransmitted andreceived atthesamepointinspace.Theresultisasifthe radarantenna werestationary.
Thedistance traveled between pulsesisgenerally lessthan theantenna dimension sothatthetwoantenna beamsmightbegenerated withtwo overlapping reflector antennas orwithaphasedarraydivided intotwooverlapping subarrays.64 Theeffective separation between theantennas, TpVx'varieswiththeangle 8aaswellastheaircraftvelocity v.Withreflector antennas, itisnotconvenient tochange theantenna physical separation tocompensate forchanges inOaorv.Thepulserepetition periodTpmightbevariedtoprovidecompensation, butthiscanintroduce othercomplica­ tionsintotheradardesignandthesignalprocessing.
Withaphasedarraydividedintotwo overlapping subarrays, aconstant pulserepetition frequency canbeusedandthehorizontal separation ofthetwooverlapping subarrays canbecontrolled electronically tocompensate for platform motion.
However, itispossible tochangetheeffective phasecenterofarellector antenna byemploying twofeedstoproduce twosquinted overlapping beams,asinan amplitude-comparison monopulse radar(Sec.5.4).Theoutputsofthetwofeedsarecombined usingahybridjunction toproduce asumpattern1:andadifference pattern L\.Bytaking 1:±jkL\,theeffective phasecentercanbeshifteddepending onthevalueofk.(Thefactorj multiplying thedifference patternsignifies a90°phaseshiftaddedtothedifference signal relativetothesumsignal.)Theuseofthistechnique inanAMTIradartocompensate forthe effectsofplatform motioniscalledDPCA,whichstandsforDisplaced PhaseCenterAntenna.
Thesumanddifference patterns canbeobtained byconnecting ahybridjunction tothe outputsofthetwoantenna feedsasdescribed inSec.5.4.Thesumpatternisusedo~transmit andboththesumandthedifference patterns areextracted onreceive.Thesignalreceived on thedifference patternisweighted bythefactork,shiftedinphaseby90°andisaddedtothe sum-pattern signalinthedelayedchannel andsubtracted fromthesum-pattern signalinthe undelayed channel.
Because ofthephaserelationships between thelobesofthedifference patternandthesumpattern,theresultisanapparent forward displacement ofthepatternon thefirsttransmission, andadisplacement totherearonthesecondtransmission.
Whenthe gainsofthesumanddifference channels areproperly adjusted, andwhenthedistance between thephasecentersofthetwoantenna beamsis2TpVxthecombined sumanddifference p=llterns onsuccessive pulsesilluminate thesameregionandtheantenna appears stationary.SIl (The factor2appea'rs inthedistance between phasecenters.asaresultofusingbothfeedsfor transmission.
Thephasecenterontransmit ishalf-way between thetwofeeds,andthephase centeronreceivealternates fromonefeedtotheother.)Astheantenna pointing-direction changes fromtheporttostarboard sideofthevehicle,thesignofthedifference signalmustbe reversed tokeepthedisplaced beamsintheproperorientation.
ThedashedcurvesofFig.4.35showtheimprovement inMTJprocessing thatistheo­ retically possible withDPCAandathree-pulse delay-line canceler.
(NotethattheDPCA corrects onlyonecanceler ofamultiple-stage MTI.63)Thecurveforx=0appliesforno platform motionandrepresents themaximum improvement offeredbyanideaplatform­ motioncancellation method.Itisseenthatwhentheclutterspectral widthissmall,asfor overland clutter,asignificant improvement isofferedbyDPCA.
Thelimitation totheimprovement factorduetoantenna rotation, orscanning modula­ tion,canbereducedbyamethod similartoDPCA.S1,58,66DPCAappliesthedifference patterninquadrature (90°phaseshift)tothesumpatternwhilecompensation forscanning modulation requires thedifference patterntobeappliedinphasewiththesumpattern.Thusit 1.; ~~ossit~lc to corrll~iric tlic two tecl~tiiqr~cs for col~il,crlsatiug ~>latfol.rn rnotiorl arid scanrri~lg  rnodi~lation.~~  If the antenna sidelobes of arl airborrie MTI radar are not sufficiently low, tlie clutter that  enters tile receiver via the sidelobes call set a limit to the improvement factor equal toS8  wliere (;((I) is tlie orle-way power gain of tlie arlteriria in the plalie of the grourid surface.
Tlie  lower integral is taker1 outside the main-beam region.
This assumes the sidelobes are well  distributed in azirni~tl~.
Tile constant K is the average gain of the delay line canceler (K = 2 for  a two-pulse canceler arid 6 for a three-pulse catlceler.) The combined improvement factor for  I3PCA arid the sibelobe lirnitation is  Adaptive array antennas may be employed to compensate for platform motion in an  AMTI radar.6' The full array is illilrninated otl transmission so that the transmit pattern is the  sarne from pulse to pulse.
On receive, tlie array is made adaptive by obtaining a separate  output from each element.
Each element output can be weighted separately and the outputs  added together to form an aperture illurnir~ation function that adaptively permits motion of  tlie antenna phase center so as to compensate for platform motion.
Adaptive loops are also  used in the delay-line canceler to control the doppler response of the canceler as well as the  antenna angular response.
In addition, compensation for scattering from near-field aircraft  structure that distorts the antenna pattern and degrades AMTI performance can also be  performed with this adaptive circuitry, as can the adaptive nulling of external interference  soilrces.
 For applications that cannot afford a fully adaptive array antenna, a design procedure can  he formulated that applies an optimal correction to an arbitrary receive array antenna pattern  based on the use of a least-mean-squares algorithm to minimize the total clutter residue of an  AMTI radar averaged over all angles.74  Sidelobes and pulsedoppler radar.
Since the pulse-doppler radar is capable of good MTI  performance, it is also a good AMTI radar.
However, if the antenna sidelobes are not low, the  clutter that ent'irs tlie radar via the sidelobes can limit the improvement factor, as mentioned  previoilsly [Eq.
(4.40)].
The effect of the sidelobe clutter must often be considered in the design  of the signal processor of an airborne pulse-doppler radar.
 The spectrum of the signal received by an airborne pulse-doppler radar might appear as  in Fig.
4.36.
Only that portion of the spectrum in the vicinity of the carrier frequencyfo is  sllown since tlie prf of a pulse-doppler radar is chosen to avoid overlap of target signals from  adjacent spectral lines (no blind speeds).
Thus the prf is at least twice the maximum target  doppler-frequency.
The leakage of the transmitter signal into the receiver produces the spike at  a frequency fo and the spikes at fo + nfp where 11 is an integer andf, is the pulse repetition  frequency.
Also in the vicinity offo is the clutter energy from the sidelobes which illuminate the  ground directly beneath the aircraft.
The echo from the ground directly beneath the aircraft is  called the altitrrde retttrn.
The altitude return is not shifted in frequency since the relative  velocity between radar and ground is essentially zero.
Clutter to either side of the perpendicu-  lar will have a relative-velocity component and hence some doppler frequency shift; con-  sequently the clutter spectrum from the altitude return will be of finite width.
The shape of the  MTIANnPliLSF DOPPLER RAnAR145 ispossihle tocomhinc tllctwotechniqucs forcompcnsating platform motionandscanning modulation.
5R Iftheantenna sidelobes ofanairborne MTIradararenotsufficiently low,theclutterthat entersthereceiver viathesidelobes cansetalimittotheimprovement factorequalt058 (4.40) whereG(O)istheonc-way powergainoftheantenna intheplaneofthegroundsurface.The lowerintegral istakenoutside themain-beam region.Thisassumes thesideJobes arewell distrihuted inazimuth.
Theconstant Kistheaverage gainofthedelaylinecanceler (K=2for atwo-pulse canceler and6forathree-pulse canceler.) Thecombined improvement factorfor DPCAandthesibelobe limitation is I=+._--- ItotaII.,IDI'CA(4.41) Adaptive arrayantennas maybeemployed tocompensate forplatform motion inan 1\MTIradar.61Thefullarrayisilluminated ontransmission sothatthetransmit patternisthe samefrompulsetopulse.Onreceive, thearrayismadeadaptive byobtaining aseparate outputfromeachelement.
Eachelement outputcanbeweighted separately andtheoutputs addedtogether toformanaperture illumination function thatadaptively permits motionof theantenna phasecentersoastocompensate forplatform motion.
Adaptive loopsarealso usedinthedelay-line canceler tocontrolthedoppler response ofthecanceler aswellasthe antenna angular response.
Inaddition, compensation forscattering fromne'ar-field aircraft structure thatdistorts theantenna patternanddegrades AMTIperformance canalsobe performed withthisadaptive circuitry, ascantheadaptive nullingofexternal interference sources.
Forapplications thatcannotaffordafullyadaptive arrayantenna, adesignprocedure can heformulated thatappliesanoptimal correction toanarbitrary receivearrayantenna pattern hasedontheuseofaleast-mean-squares algorithm tominimize thetotalclutterresidueofan AMTIradaraveraged overallangles.14 Sidelobes andpulse-doppler radar.Sincethepulse-doppler radariscapable ofgoodMTI performance, itisalsoagoodAMTIradar.However, iftheantenna sidelobes arenotlow,the clutterthatenthstheradarviathesidelobes canlimittheimprovement factor,asmentioned previously [Eq.(4.40)].Theeffectofthesidelobe cluttermustoftenbeconsidered inthedesign ofthesignalprocessor ofanairborne pulse-doppler radar.
Thespectrum ofthesignalreceived byanairborne pulse-doppler radarmightappearas inFig.4.36.Onlythatportion ofthespectrum inthevicinityofthecarrierfrequency fois shownsincetheprfofapulse-doppler radarischosentoavoidoverlapoftargetsignalsfrom adjacent spectral lines(noblindspeeds).
Thustheprfisatleasttwicethemaximum target doppler-frequency.
Theleakageofthetransmitter signalintothereceiverproduces thespikeat afrequency foandthespikesatfo±nfpwherenisanintegerandfpisthepulserepetition frequency.
Alsointhevicinityoffoistheclutterenergyfromthesidelobes whichilluminate the grounddirectly beneath theaircraft.
Theechofromthegrounddirectly beneath theaircraft is calledtheaitilllde relllm.Thealtitude returnisnotshiftedinfrequency sincetherelative velocity between radarandground isessentially zero.Cluttertoeithersideoftheperpendicu­ larwillhavearelative-velocity component andhencesomedoppler frequency shift;con­ sequently theclutterspectrum fromthealtitude returnwillbeoffinite width.Theshapeofthe 146 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  I J Tronsmitter to receiver leokoge  I  Altitude return 7, , Main-lobe clutter   torg get echo (head-on)  to - 2 ;/A fo + 2v/~  Frequency  Figure 4.36 Portion of the received signal spectrum in the vicinity of rtie RF carrier frequency 11, fur a pul>  doppler AMTI radar.
f Afier ~a~uire," Proc.
Natl.
Con/.
on Aeronaut.
Elrcrrottics.)  altitude-return spectrum will depend upon the variation of the clutter crdss section as a  function of antenna depression angle.
The cross section of the clutter directly beneath [lit.
 aircraft for a depression angle of 90" can be quite large compared with that at small depress~on  angles.
The large cross section and the close range can result in considerable altitude ret Llrri  The clutter illuminated by the antenna sidelobes in directions other than directly benoatti  the aircraft may have any relative velocity from + v to - v, depending on the angle made by  the antenna beam and the aircraft vector velocity (v is the aircraft velocity).
The clutter  spectrum contributed by these sidelobes will extend 2vlA Hz on either side of the transmitter  frequency.
The shape of the spectrum will depend upon the nature of the clutter illuminated  and the shape of the antenna sidelobes.
For purposes of illustration it is shown in Fig.
4.36 as a  uniform spectrum.
 The altitude return may be eliminated by turning the receiver off (gating) at that range  corresponding to the altitude of the aircraft.
Gating the altitude return has the disadvantage  that targets at ranges corresponding to the aircraft altitude will also be eliminated from the  receiver.
Another method of suppressing the altitude return in the pulse radar is to  eliminate the signal in the frequency domain, rather than in the time domain, by inserting a  rejection filter at the frequency.fo .%The same rejection filter will also siippress the transmlttor-  to-receiver leakage.
The clutter energy from the main beam may also be suppressed by a  rejection filter, but since the doppler frequency of this clutter component is tlot fixcd, the  rejection filter must be tunable and servo-controlled to track the main-beam cli~tter as ~t  changes because of scanning or because of changes in aircraft velocity.
 The position of the target echo in the frequency spectrum depends upon its velocity  relative to that of the radar aircraft.
If the target aircraft approaches the radar aircraft head on  (from the forward sector), the doppler frequency shift of the target will be greater than the  doppler shifts of the clutter echoes, as shown in Fig.
4.36.
A filter can be used to exclude the  clutter but pass the target echo.
Similarly, if the targets are receding from one another along  headings 180" apart, the target doppler frequency shift will again lie outside the clutter spec-  trum and may be readily separated from the clutter energy by filters.
In other situations where  t tie radar may be closing on the target from the tail or from the side, the relative velocities may  be small and the target doppler will#lie within the clutter doppler spectrum.
In such situations  the target echo must compete with the clutter energy for recognition.
A large part of the clutter  energy may be removed with a bank of fixed narrowband filters covering the expected range of  doppler frequencies.
The bandwidth of each individual filter must be wide eno~~gh to accept  the energy contained in the target echo signal.
The width of the filter will depend upon the time  on target, equipment fluctuations, and other effects which broaden the echo-signal spectrum as  discussed previously.
Each of the doppler filters can have its own individually set threshold  whose level is determined by the amount of noise or clutter within the filter.
This can be done  146INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS Altitudereturn__~Transmitter toreceiver leakage /'Main-lobe cluttery -,-~Target echo(head-on) fo+fctfo+fd fo+2v/AReceiver noise Frequency Figure4.36Portion ofthereceived signalspectrum inthevicinity oftheRFcarrierfrequencyh.forapub doppler AMTIradar.(AfterMaquire, 70Proc.Natl.ConfonAeronaut.
Electronics.) altitude-return spectrum willdepend uponthevariation ofthecluttercrosssectionasa function ofantenna depression angle.Thecrosssectionoftheclutterdirectly beneath the aircraftforadepression angleof90°canbequitelargecompared withthatatsmalldepression angles.Thelargecrosssectionandthecloserangecanresultinconsiderable altitude return.
Theclutterilluminated bytheantenna sidelobes indirections otherthandirectlybeneath theaircraftmayhaveanyrelativevelocity from+vto-v,depending ontheanglemadeby theantenna beamandtheaircraftvectorvelocity(vistheaircraftvelocity).
Theclutter spectrum contributed bythesesidelobes willextend2v/A.Hzoneithersideofthetransmitter frequency.
Theshapeofthespectrum willdependuponthenatureoftheclutterilluminated andtheshapeoftheantenna sidelobes.
Forpurposes ofillustration itisshowninFig.4.36asa uniform spectrum.
The ~ltitude returnmaybeeliminated byturningthereceiver off(gating) atthatrange corresponding tothealtitudeoftheaircraft.
Gatingthealtitude returnhasthedisadvantage thattargetsatrangescorresponding totheaircraftaltitude willalsobeeliminated fromthe receiver.
Another method ofsuppressing thealtitude returninthepulseradaristo eliminate thesignalinthefrequency domain, ratherthaninthetimedomain, byinserting a rejection filteratthefrequency fa.·Thesamerejection filterwillalsosuppress thetransmitter­ to-receiver leakage.
Theclutterenergyfromthemainbeammayalsobesuppressed bya rejection filter,butsincethedoppler frequency ofthiscluttercomponent isnotfixed,the rejection filtermustbetunableandservo-controlled totrackthemain-beam clutterasit changes becauseofscanning orbecauseofchanges inaircraftvelocity.
Theposition ofthetargetechointhefrequency spectrum depends uponitsvelocity relativetothatoftheradaraircraft.Ifthetargetaircraftapproaches theradaraircraftheadon (fromtheforward sector),thedoppler frequency shiftofthetargetwillbegreaterthanthe doppler shiftsoftheclutterechoes,asshowninFig.4.36.Afiltercanbeusedtoexcludethe clutterbutpassthetargetecho.Similarly, ifthetargetsarereceding fromoneanotheralong headings 1800apart,thetargetdoppler frequency shiftwillagainlieoutsidetheclutterspec­ trumandmaybereadilyseparated.
fromtheclutterenergybyfilters.Inothersituations where theradarmaybeclosingonthetargetfromthetailorfromtheside,therelativevelocities may besmallandthetargetdoppler will,liewithin theclutterdoppler spectrum.
Insuchsituations thetargetechomustcompete withthedutter energyforrecognition.
Alargepartoftheclutter energymayberemoved withabankoffixednarrowband filterscovering theexpected rangeof doppler frequencies.
Thebandwidthof eachindividual filtermustbewideenoughtoaccept theenergycontained inthetargetechosignal.Thewidthofthefilterwilldependuponthetime ontarget,equipment fluctuations~ andothereffectswhichbroaden theecho-signal spectrum as discussed previously ..Eachofthedoppler filterscanhaveitsownindividually setthreshold whoselevelisdetermined bytheamountofnoiseorclutterwithinthefilter.Thiscanbedone adaptively.
A separate set of filters is required for each range gate.
A consequence of the high  prf of the pulse doppler radar is that there are fewer range gates so that fewer sets of filter-  banks are needed.
In sonie pulse-doppler radars, the duty factor might be as high as 0.3 to 0.5  so tliat only oric sct of filters is needed.
Sucll a high-duty factor radar is sometinles called  i~lrer.r.rr/~ft~d C'IY, or ICW.
 Noncoherent Ahl'I'i.
The norlcollerent MTI principle that uses the clutter echo instead of a  col~o as the reference signal cat1 also be applied to a radar on a moving platform.
Althougi~ it is  ltttractivc for opcratiori ill aircraft wliere space and weight must be kept to a mininli~ltl, its  MI'I performance is limited, as is its ground-based counterpart, by the lack of spectral purity  of the clutter when used as a reference signal, and by the spatial inhomogeneity (or patchiness)  of tlie clutter.
 hloving clutter and stationary radar.
The discussion in this section has been concerned with  tlie operation of an MTI radar wlien the clutter doppler-frequency was not at dc but had some  - lirlitc vnluc hccausc of tlre n~otioti of the vehicle carrying tlie radar.
The clutter doppler  frequency will also be other than at dc if the radar is stationary and the clutter has a compo-  nent of velocity relative to tile radar, as when tlle clutter is due to rain storms, chaff, or birds.
 Many of the AMTI tecliriiques described above can be applied to the stationary MTI radar  that must cope with moving clutter.
Most conventional techniques fail, however, when both  stationary and moving clutter are within the same range resolution cell.
In such situations the  hlTI signal processor milst have tile capability of placing separate rejection notches at the  dolyjlet fr cqucrlcics of tlic cli~ttcr." ''  4.12 O'TtiER 'TYPES OF MTI  'i'wo-frequency MT1.78.79 The first blind speed of an MTI radar is inversely proportional to the  carrier frequency, as described by Eq.
(4.8).
This can result in the appearance of many blind  speeds in conventional MTI radar that operate at the higher microwave frequencies.
One of  tile nletliods sometimes suggested for increasing the first blind speed is to transmit two carrier  freqileticies ,lo and l;, + A/'and extract the difference frequency At for MTI processing.
TIle  resulting blind speeds will be tlie same as if the radar transmitted the difference frequency  rather than tlie carrier.
For example, if Af = O.lfo, the first blind speed corresponding to the  difference frequency is 10 times that of an MTI radar at the carrier frequencyfo :Thus, it would  seern that the advantages of a VHF or UHF MTI might be obtained with radars operating at  the higher microwave frequencies.
A two-frequency MTI transmits a pair of pulses, either  simultarieously or in close sequence, at two separate carrier frequencies.
The two received  signals are mixed in a nonlinear device and the difference frequency is extracted for normal  MTI signal processing.
 Ttie advantage of tlle greater first blind speed obtained with the two-frequency MTI is  accorrlpanied by several disadvat~tages.~~ If the ratio of the two frequencies is r < 1, the  standard deviatiori of the clutter doppler spectrum a, for a single-frequency MTI is increased  to n,(l t r.Z)"Z it1 a two-freqi~ency MTI.
(This assumes that the clutter-velocity spectrurn  width n,.
is the same for both carriers, or a, = i.a2 where a, and o2 are the clutter doppler-  frequency spreads.
This results in less improvement factor for a two-frequency MTI as  compared witti a single-frequeticy MTI.
Note also that the clutter doppler spread of a radar  wliicll actually radiated a carrier frequency Aj-would be less than that of a radar at carrier  frequency ,fb .
by the amount A/%fb.
The two-frequency MTI might have the blind speeds of a  MTIANDPULSE DOPPLER RADAR147 adaptively.
Aseparate setoffiltersisrequired foreachrangegate.Aconsequence ofthehigh prfofthepulsedoppler radaristhattherearefewerrangegatessothatfewersetsoffilter­ banksareneeded.Insomepulse-doppler radars,thedutyfactormightbeashighas0.3to0.5 sothatonlyonesctoffIltcrsisneeded.Suchahigh-duty factorradarissometimes called iJllerntl'ted CW.orICW.
Noncoherent AMTI.Thenoncoherent MTIprinciple thatusestheclutterechoinsteadofa cohoasthereference signalcanalsobeappliedtoaradaronamovingplatform.
Although itis attractive foroperation inaircraftwherespaceandweightmustbekepttoaminimum, its MTIperformance islimited,asisitsground-based counterpart, bythelackofspectralpurity oftheclutterwhenusedasareference signal,andbythespatialinhomogeneity (orpatchiness) ofthec1uller.
MOl'ingclutterandstationary radar.Thediscussion inthissectionhasbeenconcerned with theoperation ofanMTIradarwhentheclutterdoppler-frequency wasnotatdcbuthadsome finitevaluehccausc ofthemotionofthevehiclecarrying theradar.The.clutterdoppler frequency willalsobeotherthanatdciftheradarisstationary andtheclutterhasacompo­ nentofvelocityrelativetotheradar,aswhentheclutterisduetorainstorms,chaff.orbirds.
ManyoftheAMTItechniques described abovecanbeappliedtothestationary MTIradar thatmustcopewithmovingclutter.Mostconventional techniques fail,however.
whenboth stationary andmovingclutterarewithinthesamerangeresolution cell.Insuchsituations the MTIsignalprocessor musthavethecapability ofplacingseparate rejection notchesatthe dopplerfrequcncicsofthee1u!leI'.7 I.72 4.12OTHER TYPESOFMTl Two-frequency MTI.78.79ThefirstblindspeedofanMTIradarisinversely proportional tothe carrierfrequency.
asdescribed byEq.(4.8).Thiscanresultintheappearance ofmanyblind speedsinconventional MTIradarthatoperateatthehighermicrowave frequencies.
Oneof themethodssometimes suggested forincreasing thefirstblindspeedistotransmit twocarrier frcqucncies .f~andf;)+I~fandextractthedifference frequency I1fforMTIprocessing.
The resulting blindspeedswillbethesameasiftheradartransmitted thedifference frequency ratherthanthecarrier.Forexample.
if11.f=O.lfo,thefirstblindspeedcorresponding tothe difference frequency is10timesthatofanMTIradaratthecarrierfrequency 10.Thus,itwould seemthattheadvantages ofaVHForUHFMTImightbeobtained withradarsoperating at thehighermicrowave frequencies.
Atwo-frequency MTItransmits apairofpulses,either simultaneously orinclosesequence.
attwoseparate carrierfrequencies.
Thetworeceived signalsaremixedinanonlinear deviceandthedifference frequency isextracted fornormal MTIsignalprocessing.
Theadvantage ofthegreaterfirstblindspeedobtained withthetwo-frequency MTI is accompanied byseveraldisadvantages.73Iftheratioofthetwofrequencies is,.<1,the standard deviation oftheclutterdopplerspectrum a,forasingle-frequency MTIisincreased tofT<(1I-,.2)''2inatwo-frequency MTI.(Thisassumes thattheclutter-velocity spectrum width fT,.isthesameforbothcarriers.
orat=/'(}2wherea,anda2aretheclutterdoppler­ frequency spreads.
Thisresultsinlessimprovement factorforatwo-frequency MTIas compared withasingle-frequency MTI.Notealsothattheclutterdopplerspreadofaradar whichactually radiated acarrierfrequency !J.fwouldbelessthanthatofaradaratcarrier frequency.f~.
bytheamount !J.rlf~.Thetwo-frequency MTImighthavetheblindspeedsofa radar at the difference frequency but it has none of its other favorable clutter characteristics.
 Althoilgh the first blind speed is greater in a two-frcqi~ency MTI, there may he deeper riiills  than one might desire in the doppler response cflaracteristic, just as tliere would be in a  staggered MTI with only two pulse repetition frequencies.
The two-frequency MTI Itas the  advantage of being less sensitive than a single-frequency MTI to a mean clutter-doppler-  frequency other than dc, assuming the single-frequency MTI employs no compensation such  as TACCAR.
This also results, however, in the loss of detection of targets with low doppler-  frequency shift that otherwise would have been detected with the single-frequency MTI.
 In general, the two-frequency MTI does not offer any obvious net advantage over  properly designed single-frequency MTI systems for most MTI radar applications.
 Area MTI.
This form of MTI does not use doppler information directly as do the other MTI  techniques discussed in this chapter.
The early area MTI systems stored a complete scan of  radar video in a memory, such as a storage tube, and subtracted the stored video scan to scan.
 Instead of subtracting successive scans, the subtraction can be on a pulse-to-pulse basis with  much less memory required, if a shortpulse is used.77 The pulse widths required for aircraft  detection are of the order of nanoseconds.
This technique reiies on the Fact that the echoes -  from moving targets change range from pulse to pulse and those from stationary and slowly  moving targets do not.
The short-pulse area MTI has no blind speeds and can be designed to  have no range ambiguities.
It is more attractive for application at the higher microwave  freqi~encies where the available bandwidths are large and the normal MTI suffers from exces-  sive blind speeds.
 REFERENCES  1.
Ridenour, L.
N.: "Radar System Engineering," MIT Radiation Laboratory Series, vol.
I, chap.
16,  McGraw-Hill Book Co., New York, 1947.
 2.
White, W.
D., and A.
E.
Ruvin: Recent Advances in the Synthesis of Comb Filters, IRE Natl.
Con~.
 Record, vol.
5, pt.
2, pp.
186-199, 1957.
 3.
Capon, J.: Optimum Weighting Functions for the Detection of Sampled Signals in Noise, IEEE  Trans., vol.
IT-10, pp.
152-159, April, 1964.
 4.
Murakami, T., and R.
S.
Johnson: Clutter Suppression by Use of Weighted Pulse Trains, RC.4 Rev.,  vol.
32, pp.
402-428, September, 1971.
 5.
Emerson, R.
C.: Some Pulsed Doppler MTI and AMTI Techniques, RAND Corp.
Report no.
R-274,  March, 1954.
 6.
Kretschmer, F.
F.: MTI Weightings, IEEE Trans., vol.
AES-10, pp.
153-155, January, 1974.
 7.
Benning, C., and D.
Hunt: Coefficients fa- Feed-Forward MTI Radar Filters, Proc.
IEEE, vol.
57,  pp.
1788-1789, October, 1969.
 8.
Shrader, W.
W.: MTI Radar, chap.
17 of" Radar Handbook," M.
I.
Skolnik (ed.), McGraw-Hill Book  Co., New York, 1970.
 9.
Shreve, J.
S.: Digital Signal Processing, chap.
35 of" Radar Handbook," M.
I.
Skolnik (ed.), McGraw-  Hill Book Co., New York, 1970.
 10.
Hill, J.
J.: Design of Nonrecursive Digital Moving-Target-Indicator Radar Filters, Electronics 1-ettrr,  vol.
8, pp.
359-360, July 13, 1972.
 1 I.
Rabiner, L, R., and C.
M.
Radar: "Digital Signal Processing," IEEE Press, New York, 1972.
 12.
White, W.
D.: Synthesis of Comb ~ilters, Proc.
Narl.
ConJ on Aeronaut.
Electronics, 1958, pp.
279-285.
 13.
Urkowitz, H.: Analysis and Synthesis of Delay Line Periodic Filters, IRE Trans., vol.
CT-4, pp.
41 -53,  June, '1957.
 14.
Ellis, J.
G.: Digital MTI, A New Tool for the Radar User, Marconi Rev., vol.
36, pp.
237-248,4th qtr.,  1973.
 15.
Fletcher, R.
H., Jr., and D.
W.
Burlage: An Initialization Technique for Improved MTI Performance in  Phased Array Radars, Proc.
IEEE, vol.
60, pp.
1551-1552, December, 1972.
 16.
Hsiao, J.
K.: Comb Filter Design, Naval Research Laboratory, Washington, D.C.
Mrmorand~rm Report  2433, May, 1972.
 148INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS radaratthedifference frequency butithasnoneofitsotherfavorable cluttercharacteristics.
Although thefirstblindspeedisgreaterinatwo-frequency MTI,theremayhedeeper null~ thanonemightdesireinthedoppler response characteristic, justastherewouldbeina staggered MTIwithonlytwopulserepetition frequencies.
Thetwo-frequency MTIhasthe advantage ofbeinglesssensitive thanasingle-frequency MTItoameanc1utter-doppkr­ frequency otherthandc,assuming thesingle-frequency MTIemploys nocompensation such asTACCAR.
Thisalsoresults,however, inthelossofdetection oftargetswithlowdoppler­ frequency shiftthatotherwise wouldhavebeendetected withthesingle-frequency MTI.
Ingeneral, thetwo-frequency MTIdoesnotofferanyobvious netadvantage over properly designed single-frequency MTIsystems formostMT[radarapplications.
AreaMTI.ThisformofMTIdoesnotusedoppler information directlyasdotheotherMTI techniques discussed inthischapter.
TheearlyareaMTIsystemsstoredacOl\lplete scanof radarvideoinamemory, suchasastoragetube,andsubtracted thestoredvideoscantoscan.
Insteadofsubtracting successive scans,thesubtraction canbeonapulse-to-pulse basiswith muchlessmemory required, ifashort"pulseisused.77Thepulsewidthsrequired foraircraft detection areoftheorderofnanoseconds.
Thistechnique reliesonthefactthattheechoes frommovingtargetschangerangefrompulsetopulseandthosefromstationary andslowly movingtargetsdonot.Theshort-pulse areaMTIhasnoblindspeedsandcanbedesigned to havenorangeambiguities.
Itismoreattractive forapplication atthehighermicrowave frequencies wheretheavailable bandwidths arelargeandthenormalMTIsuffersfromexces­ siveblindspeeds.
REFERENCES 1.Ridenour, L.N.·:"Radar SystemEngineering," MITRadiation Laboratory Series,vol.I,chap.16, McGraw-Hill BookCo.,NewYork,1947.
2.White,W.D.,andA.E.Ruvin:RecentAdvances intheSynthesis ofCombFilters,IR£Noel.CO/Ill.
Record,vol.5,pt.2,pp.186-199, 1957.
3.Capon,J.:Optimum Weighting Functions fortheDetection ofSampled SignalsinNoise,IEEE Trans.,vol.IT-I0,pp.152-159, April,1964.
4.Murakami, T.,andR.S.Johnson: ClutterSuppression byUseofWeighted PulseTrains,RCARev., vol.32,pp.402-428, September, 1971.
5.Emerson, R.c.:SomePulsedDoppler MTIandAMTITechniques, RANDCorp.Report 110.R-274, March,1954.
6.Kretschmer, F.F.:MTIWeightings, IEEETrans.,vol.AES-IO, pp.153-155, January, 1974.
7.Benning,c.,andD.Hunt:Coefficients forFeed-Forward MTIRadarFilters,Proc.IEEE,vol.57, pp.1788-1789, October, 1969.
8.Shrader, W.W.:MTIRadar,chap.17of"RadarHandbook," M.LSkolnik(ed.),McGraw-Hili Book Co.,NewYork,1970.
9.Shreve,J.S.:DigitalSignalProcessing, chap.35of"RadarHandbook," M.l.Skolnik(cd.),McGraw­ HillBookCo.,NewYork,1970.
10.Hill,J.J.:DesignofNonrecursive DigitalMoving-Target-lndicator RadarFilters,Electrollics teller, vol.8,pp.359-360, July13,1972.
11.Rabiner,L.R.,andC.M.Radar:..DigitalSignalProcessing," IEEEPress,NewYork,1972.
12.White,W.D.:Synthesis ofCombFiiters,Proc.Natl.Conf.011Aeronaut.
Electronics, 1958,pp.279-285.
13.Urkowitz, H.:Analysis andSynthesis ofDelayLinePeriodic Filters,IRETrans.,vol.CT-4,pp.41-53, June,1957.
1.4.Ellis,J.G.:DigitalMTI,ANewToolfortheRadarUser,MarconiRev.,vol.36,pp.237-248, 4thqtr., 1973.
15.Fletcher, R.H.,Jr.,andD.W.Burlage: AnInitialization Technique forImproved MTIPerformance in PhasedArrayRadars,Proc.IEEE,vol.60,pp.1551-1552, December, 1972.
16.Hsiao,J.K.:CombFilterDesign,NavalResearch Laboratory, Washington, D.C.Memorandum Report 2433,May,1972. 17.
Drerinan, L.
E., and I.
S.
Reed: Optimum Processing of Unequally Spaced Radar Pulse Trains for  Clutter Rejection.
IEEE Tratts., vol.
AES-4, pp.
474-477, May, 1968.
 18.
Jacornini, 0.
J.: Weighting Factor and Transmission Time Optimization in Video MTI Radar, IEEE  Tratts., vol.
AES-8, pp.
517-527, July.
1972.
 19.
Prinsen, P.
J.
A.: Elimination of Blind Velocitiqs of MTI Radar by Modulating the Interpulse Period,  IEEE Traru., vol.
AES-9, pp.
7 14-724, September, 1973.
 20.
Hsiao.
J.
K..
arid F.
F.
Kretschmer, Jr.: Design of a Staggered-prf Moving Target Indication Filter,  T~P Rndio atrd Elc~crrottic Ertgitreer, vol.
43, pp.
689-693, November, 1973.
 21.
Owen.
P.
L.: The Effect of Random PRF Staggering on MTI Performance, IEEE 1975 Itttentatiotral  Rndar Cor~[;.retrcc.
pp.
73--78.
IEEE Publ.
75 CHO 938-1 AES.
 22.
Zvcrcv, A.
1.: Digital MTI Radar Filters, IEEE Trarts.
vol.
AU-16, pp.
422-432, September, 1968.
 2.1.
Taylor.
J.
W..
Jr.
arid J.
Mattern: Receivers.
chap.
5 of "Radar Handbook," M.
I.
Skolnik (ed.).
 McCiraw-Hill Rook Co., New York, 1970, sec.
5.12.
 24.
Sllciripold.
I).
If..
arid R.
A.
Ferrero: Clriderstanding AID atid D/A Converters, IEEE Spectrtrm, vol.
9.
 1111.
47 56.
Scptctttl~cr.
1972.
 25.
'I'nylor.
J.
W., Jr.: Iligital M'I'I Ratiar Systcln, U.S.
Patent No.
3,797,017, Mar.
12, 1974.
 26.
tlouls.
R.
C., arid L).
W.
Burlage: Design Procedure for Improving tlie Usable Bandwidth ofan MTI  itatlar Signal Proccssor.
I EEE Cot!fi.retrcc Record 1976 Itttertrational Corferetrce on Acoustics.
Specclt.
 crtrd .'iigt~ctl I'i.oc.ersiirq, Ap.
12 - 14.
1976.
Pliila.
PA.
IEEE Cat.
no.
76 CH1067-8 ASSP.
See also by  s:lrrlc at~tl~ors: Maxirt~iring tile Usable 13aridwidtll of MTI Signal Processors, IEEE Trvrtrs., vol.
 AIIS-13, pp.
48-55.
January, 1977.
 27.
13riglian1, E.
0..
and R.
W.
Morrow: The Fast Fourier Transform, IEEE Specrrum, vol.
4, pp.
63-70,  I>ccctnhcr, 1967.
 2H.
Kahiner.
L.
K..
et al.: Terminology in Digital Signal Processing, IEEE Trans., vol.
AU-20,  pp 222 -337, December, 1972.
 29.
Cooley.
J.
W..
and J.
W.
Tukey: An Algorithm for the Machine Computation of Complex Fourier  Series.
hlatlt.
Conrp..
vol.
19, pp.
297-301, April, 1965.
 30.
Andrews, (i.
A., Jr.: Performance of Cascaded MTI and Coherent Integration Filters in a Clutter  Environment, NRL Report 7533, Naval Research Laboratory, Washington, D.C., Mar.
27, 1973.
 31.
Andrews.
G.
A..
Jr.: Optimizatior~ of Radar Doppler Filters to Maximize Moving Target Detection,  N.IEC'ON '74 Record.
pp.
279-283.
 32.
Andrews.
G.
A..
Jr.: Optimal Radar Doppler Processors, NRL Report 7727, Naval Research Labora-  tory.
Wasliington.
D.C., May 29.
1974.
 33.
Arenberg, D.
L.: .Ultrasonic Solid Delay Lines, J.
Acous.
Soc.
Am., vol.
20,.pp.
1-28, January, 1948.
 34.
Anonymous: Moving Target Radar Using Storage Tubes, Electronics, vol.
34, no.
33, pp.
30-31,  Aug.
18.
1961.
 35.
Lobcnstcin.
t1., and I).
N.
Ludington: A Charge Transfer Device MTI Implementation, IEEE 1975  Irrtc~rtratiorral Rndur C'oi!firetrcr Record, pp.
107-1 10, IEEE Publication 75 CHO 938-1 AES.
 36.
Roberts, J.
H.
G..
R.
Eames, and K.
A.
Roche: Moving-Target-Indicator Recursive Radar Filter using  Bucket-Brigade Circuits, Electrottics Letters, vol.
9, no.
4, pp.
89-90, Feb.
22, 1973.
 37.
Hounden.
J.
E., and M.
J.
Tomlinson: C.C.D.
Chebyshev Filter for Radar MTI Applications, Elec-  trottics Le~t~rs, vol.
10, no.
7, pp.
89-90, Apr.
4th, 1974.
 38.
Barbe.
D.' F., and W.
D.
Baker: Signal Processing Devices Using the Charge-Coupled Concept,  hlicroelectrorrics, vol.
7, no.
2, pp.
36-45, 1975.
 39.
Hsizo.
J.
K.: FFT Doppler Filter Performance Computations, NRL Memorandum Report 2744, Naval  Rrsc~arclr Laboratory, Wasliington, D.C., March, 1974.
 40.
Jensen, A.
S.: The Radechon.
A Barrier Grid Storage Tube, RCA Rev., vol.
16, pp.
197-213, June,  1955.
 41.
McKee.
D.
A,: An FM MTI Cancellation System, MIT Lincoln Lab.
Tech.
Rept.
171, Jan.
8, 1958.
 42.
Meuehe, C.
E.: Digital Signal Processor for Air Traffic Control Radars, IEEE NEREM 74 Record,  Part 4: Radar Systems and Compotrents, pp.
73-82, Oct.
28-31, 1974, IEEE Catalog no.
74 CHO 934-0  NEREM.
 43.
Mirelie.
C.
E.: Advances in Radar Signal Processing, IEEE Electro '76, Boston, Mass, May 11-14,  1976.
 44.
[)rury.
W.
11.: Improved MTI Radar Signal Processor, Report no.
FAA-RD-74-185, MIT Littcolrr  Lahorarory.
Apr.
3, 1975.
Available from National Technical Information Service, Catalog  no.
AD-,4010 478.
 45.
Barton.
D.
K., and W.
W.
Shrader: Interclutter Visibility in MTI Systems, IEEE EASCON '69  Cotrr.cntiorr Record.
pp.
294-297, Oct.
27-29, 1969, IEEE Publication 69 C 31-AES.
 46.
Barton, I).
K.: " Radar System Analysis." Prentice-Hall, Inc., Englewood Cliffs, N.J., 1964.
 MTIANDPULSE DOPPLER RADAR149 17.Brennan, L.E.,andl.S.Reed:Optimum Processing ofUnequally SpacedRadarPulseTrainsfor Cluller Rejection.
IEEETrails..vol.AES-4.pp.474-477, May,1968.
18.Jacomini.
O.J.:Weighting FactorandTransmission TimeOptimization inVideoMTIRadar,JEEE Trails..vol.AES-8,pp.517-527, July.1972.
19.Prinsen, P.J.A.:Elimination ofBlindVelocitie,s ofMTIRadarbyModulating theInterpulse Period, JEEETrails..vol.AES-9,pp.714-724.
September, 1973.
20.Hsiao.J.K..andF.F.Kretschmer, Jr.:DesignofaStaggered-prf Moving TargetIndication Filter, TheRadioalldElectrollic Ellgineer, vol.43,pp.689-693, November.
1973.
21.Owen.P.L.:TheEfIectofRandom PRFStaggering onMTIPerformance,IEEE 1975IflCematiollal RadarConference.
pp.73--78.IEEEPub/.75CHO938-1AES.
22.Zverev.A.
I.:DigitalMTIRadarFilters,IEEETrans.vol.AU-16, pp.422-432, September, 1968.
23.Taylor.
J.W.Jr.amiJ.Mattern: Receivers.
chap.5of"RadarHandbook," M.I.Skolnik (ed.).
McGraw-Hili RookCo..NewYork,1970.sec.5.12.
24.Sheingold.
D.If..andR.A.Ferrero: Understanding AIDandD/AConverters, IEEESpect/'!/l1l.
vol.9.
pp.4756.Septemher.
1972.
25Taylor.
J.W.,Jr.:DigitalMTIRadarSystem.
U.S.PatentNo.3,797.017, Mar.12,1974.
26.flouts.R.C..andD.W.Burlage: DesignProcedure forImproving theUsableBandwidth ofanMTI HadarSignalProcessor.
IEEECan(erellc£' Record1976International Conference 011Acoustics, Speed,.
andS;qna/P/'Occss;nq.
Apr.12-14.1976.Phila.PA.lEEECat.no.76CH1067-8 ASSP.Seealsoby salllcauthors: Maximi"ing theUsableBandwidth ofMTISignalProcessors, IEEETrelliS.,vol.
AES-I3.
pp.48-55.January, 1977.
27.Brigham, E.0..andR.W.Morrow: TheFastFourier Transform, IEEESpectrum, vol.4,pp.63-70, Decemher, 1967.
lX.Rahiner.
L.R..etal.:Terminology inDigital SignalProcessing, IEEETrans., vol.AU-20, pp.322-337.Decemher.
1972.
29.Cooley.
J.W..andJ.W.Tukey: AnAlgorithm fortheMachine Computation ofComplex Fourier Series.Math.Comp..vol.19,pp.297-301, April,1965.
30.Andrews.
G.A.,Jr.:Performance ofCascaded MTIandCoherent Integration FiltersinaClutter Environment.
NRLReport7533,NavalResearch Laboratory, Washington, D.C.,Mar.27,1973.
.31.Andrews.
G.A..Jr.:Optimization orRadarDoppler FilterstoMaximize Moving TargetDetection, NAECVN '74Record.
pp.279-283.
32.Andrews.
G.A..Jr.:Optimal RadarDoppler Processors, NRLReport7727,NavalResearch Labora­ tory.Washington.
D.C.,May29,1974.
33.Arenberg.
D.L.:Ultrasonic SolidDelayLines,J.Acous.Soc.Am.,vol.20,.pp.1-28,January.
1948.
34.Anonymous: Moving TargetRadarUsingStorage Tubes,Electronics, vol.34,no.33,pp.30-31, Aug.18.1961.
.~5.Lohenstein.
H..andD.N.Ludington: AChargeTransfer DeviceMTIImplementation.
IEEE1975 1,!Cenrat;ollal RadarCOII(erellce Record, pp.107-110, IEEEPublication 75CHO938-1AES.
.~6.Roherts.
J.B.G..R.Eames.andK.A.Roche:Moving-Target-lndicator Recursive RadarFilterusing Bucket-Brigade Circuits, ElectrOTlics Lecrers, vol.9,no.4,pp.89-90,Feb.22,1973.
37.Bounden.
J.E..andM.J.Tomlinson: CC.D.Chebyshev FilterforRadarMTIApplications, Elec­ IrollicsLepers.
vol.10.no.7.pp.89-90.Apr.4th,1974.
38.Barbe.D.F.,andW.D.Baker:SignalProcessing Devices UsingtheCharge-Coupled Concept, MicroelectrOllics.
vol.7.no.2,pp.36-45,1975.
39.Hsiao.J.K.:FFTDoppler FilterPerformance Computations, NRLMemorandum Report2744,Naval Research Laboratory.
Washington, D.C.,March.
1974.
40.Jensen.
A.S.:TheRadechon.
ABarrierGridStorage Tube,RCARev.,vol.16.pp.197-213, June, 1955.
41.McKee.
D.A.:AnFMMTICancellation System,MITLincolnLab.Tech.Rept.171,Jan.8,1958.
42.Meuehe, C.E.:DigitalSignalProcessor forAirTrafficControl Radars,IEEENEREM 74Record, Part4:RadarSystemsalldCompollellts, pp.73-82.Oct.28-31,1974,IEEECatalog no.74CHO934-0 NEREM.
43.Muehe.
C.E.:Advances inRadarSignalProcessing, IEEEElectro'76,Boston, Mass,May11-14, 1976.
44.Drury.W.H.:Improved MTlRadarSignalProcessor.
Reportno.FAA-RD-74-185, MITLincoln Lahorarol'}'.
Apr.3.1975.Available fromNational Technical Information Service, Catalog no.AD-AUIO 478.
45.Barton.
D.K.•andW.
W.Shrader: Interclutter Visibility inMTISystems, IEEEEASCON '69 CO/welltion Record.pr.294-297, Oct.27-29,1969,IEEEPublication 69C31-AES.
46.Barton.
D.K.:"Radar System Analysis." Prentice-Hall.
Inc.,Englewood ClilTs,N.J.•1964. 150 iNTRODUCTtON TO RADAR SYSTEMS  47.
Nathanson, F.
E.: "Radar Design Principles," McGraw-Hill Book Co., New York, 1969.
 48.
Goldstein, H.: The Effect of.Clutter Fluctuations on MTI, M1T.Radiurion Lab.
Rept.
70, Dec.
27,  1945.
 49.
Barlow, E.
J.: Doppler Radar, Proc.
IRE, vol.
37, pp.
340-355, April, 1949.
 50.
Shrader, W.
W.: Moving Target Indication Radar, IEEE 74 Record NEREM, Pt 4, pp.
18-26,  Oct.
28-31, 1974, IEEE Catalog no.
74 CHO 934-0 NEREM.
 51.
Grisetti, R.
S., M.
M.
Santa, and G.
M.
Kirkpatrick: Effect of Internal Fluctuations and Scanning on  Clutter Attenuation in MTI Radar, IRE Trans., vol.
ANE-2, pp.
37-41, March, i955.
 52.
Steinberg, B.
D.: Target Clutter, and Noise Spectra, pt VI, chap.
I of "Modern Radar," R.
S.
Berko-  witz (ed.), John Wiley and Sons, New York, 1965.
 53.
Ward, H.
R., and W.
W.
Shrader: MTI Performance Caused by Limiting, EASCON '68 Record,  Supplement to IEEE Trans, vol.
AES-4 pp.
168-174, November, 1968.
 54.
Grasso, G.: Improvement Factor of a Nonlinear MTI in Point Clutter, IEEE Truru., vol.
AES-4.
 pp.
640-644, July, 1968.
 55.
Grasso, G., and P.
F.
Guarguaglini: Clutter Residues of a Coherent MTI Radar Receiver, IEEE  Trans., vol.
AES-5, pp.
195-204, March, 1969.
 56.
Shrader, W.
W.: Radar Technology Applied to Air Traffic Control, IEEE Trutrs., vol.
COM-21,  pp.
591-605, May, 1973.
 57.
Mooney, D.
H., and W.
A.
Skillman: Pulse Doppler Radar, chap.
19 of" Radar Handbook." M.
I.
 Skolnik (ed.), McGraw-Hill Book Co., New York, 1970.
 58.
Staudaher, F.
M.: Airborne MTI, chap.
18 of" Radar Handbook," M.
I.
Skolnik (td.), McGraw-fiill  Book Co., New York, 1970.
 59.
Voles, R.: New Approach to MTI Clutter Locking, Proc.
IEE, vol.
120, pp.
1383-1390, Novzmhrr,  1972.
 60.
See sec.
14.5 of ref.
47.
 61.
Andrews, G.
A.: Airborne Radar Motion Compensation Techniques, Evaluation of TACCAR, NRL  Report 7407, Naval Research Laboratory, Washington, D.C., Apr.
12, 1972.
 62.
Spafford, L.
J.: Optimum Radar Signal Processing in Clutter, I EEE Trans..
vol.
IT-14, pp.
734 -743.
 September, 1968.
 63.
Andrews, G.
A.: Airborne Radar Motion Compensation Techniques, Evaluation of DPCA.
NRL  Report 7426, Naval Research Laboratory, Washington, D.C., July 20, 1972.
 64.
Zeger, A.
E., and L.
R.
Burgess: An Adaptive AMTI Radar Antenna Array, Proc.
IEEE 1974 Null.
 Aerospace and Electronics ConJ, May 13-15, 1974, Dayton, Ohio, pp.
126- 133.
 65.
Johnson, M.
A., and D.
C.
Stoner: ECCM from the Radar Designer's Viewpoint, paper 30-5, lEEE  ELECTRO-76, Boston, Mass., May 11-14, 1976.
Reprinted in Microwave J., vol.
21, pp.
59-63,  March, 1978.
 66.
Anderson, D.
B.: A Microwave Technique to Reduce Platform Motion and Scanning Noise in Air-  borne Moving-Target Radar, IRE WESCON Conv.
Record, vol.
2, pt.
1, pp.
202 -21 1, 1958.
 67.
Brennan, L.
E., J.
D.
Mallett, and I.
S.
Reed: Adaptive Arrays in Airborne MTI Radar.
IEEE Truns..
 vol.
AP-24.
pp.
607-615, September, 197b.
 68.
Volts.
R.: New Techniques for MTI Clutter-1,ocking.
Radur ---Prt*st*nt tind Frrt~~re, i1:t' (I.ontlor~)  Conf.
Publ.
no.
105, pp.
274-279, 1973.
 69.
Kroszczynski, J.: Efficiency of Attenuation of moving Clutter.
Tlre Rudio utrd Elrctrotric Enyr..
vol.
34.
 no.
3, pp.
157-159, September, 1967.
.
 70.
Maguire, W.
W.: Application of Pulsed Doppler Radar to Airborne Radar Systems, Proc.
Nurl.
C'otd:  on Aeronaut.
Electronics (Dayton, Ohio), pp.
291-295, 1958.
 71.
Hsiao, J.
K.: MTI Optimizatiorl in a Multiple-Clutter Environment, NRL Report 7860, Nar!ul  Research Laboratory, Washington, D.C., Mar.
20, 1975.
 72.
Hsiao, J.
K.: A Digital Mean-Clutter-Doppler Compensation System, NRL Mmioratidrtnl Reporl  2772, Naval Research Laboratory, Washington, D.C., April.
1974.
 73.
Hsiao, J.
K.: Analysis of a Dual Frequency Moving Target Indication System, Tlie Radio urrd Elrc-  tronic Engineer, vol.
45, pp.
351-356, July, 1975.
 74.
Andrews, G.
A.: Radar Antenna Pattern Design for Platform Motion Compensation, lEEE Truns..
 vol.
AP-26, pp.
566-571.
July, 1978.
 75.
Hadjifotiou, A.: Round-off Error Analysis in Digital MTI Processors for Radar.
The Radio and  Electronic Engineer, vol.
47, pp.
59-65, JanuaryIFebruary, 1977.
 76.
Tong, P.
S.: Quantization Requirements in Digital MTI, IEEE Trans., vol.
AES-13, pp.
512-521,  September, 1977.
 77.
Cantrell, B.
H.: A Short-Pulse Area MTI, NRL Report 8162, Nauul Rrseurcl~ Laboratory, Washington.
 D.C..
Sept.
22, 1977.
 150INTRODucnON TORADAR SYSTEMS 47.Nathanson, F.E.:"Radar DesignPrinciples," McGraw-Hili BookCo.,NewYork,1969.
48.Goldstein, H.:TheEffectofClutterFluctuations onMTl,MJTRadiacion Lab.Repc.700,Dec.27, 1945.
49.Barlow, E.J.:Doppler Radar,Proc.IRE,vol.37,pp.340-355, April,1949.
50.Shrader, W.W.:Moving Targetlndication Radar,IEEE74RecordNEREM, Pt4,pp.18-26, Oct.28-31,1974,IEEECatalog no.74CHO934-0NEREM.
51.Grisetti, R.S.,M.M.Santa,andG.M.Kirkpatrick: EffectofInternal Fluctuations andScanning on ClutterAttenuation inMTIRadar,IRETrans.,vol.ANE-2,pp.37-41,March,1955.
52.Steinberg, B.D.:TargetClutter,andNoiseSpectra, ptVI,chap.Iof"Modern Radar," R.S.Berko­ witz(ed.~JohnWileyandSons,NewYork,1965.
53.Ward,H.R.,andW.
W.Shrader: MTIPerformance Caused byLimiting, EASCON '68Record, Supplement toJEEETrans,vol.AES-4,pp.168-174, November, 1968.
54.Grasso, G.:Improvement FactorofaNonlinear MTIinPointClutter,IEEETrans.,vol.AES-4, pp.640-644, July,1968.
55.Grasso, G.,andP.F.Guarguaglini: ClutterResidues ofaCoherent MTIRadarReceiver, IEEE Trans.,vol.AES-5,pp.195-204, March,1969.
'.i 56.Shrader, W.W.:RadarTechnology Applied toAirTrafficControl, IEEETrails.,vol.COM-21, pp.591-605.
May,1973.
57.Mooney, D.H.,andW.A.Skillman: PulseDoppler Radar,chap.19of"RadarHandbook," M.( Skolnik (ed.),McGraw-Hili BookCo.,NewYork,1970.
58.Staudaher, F.M.:Airborne MTI,chap.18of"RadarHandbook," M.LSkolnik (ed.),McGraw-Hill BookCo.,NewYork,1970.
59.Voles,R.:NewApproach toMTIClutterLocking.
Proc.IEE.vol.120,pp.1383-1390, Novemher, 1972.
60.Seesec.14.5ofref.47.
61.Andrews, G.A.:Airborne RadarMotionCompensation Techniques, Evaluation ofTACCAR, NRL Report7407,NavalResearch Laboratory, Washington.
D.C.,Apr.12,1972.
62.Spafford, L.J.;Optimum RadarSignalProcessing inClutter,IEEETrans.,vol.1T-14,pp.734-743, September, 1968.
63.Andrews, G.A.:Airborne RadarMotion Compensation Techniques, Evaluation ofDPCA.NRL Report7426,NavalResearch Laboracory, Washington, D.C.,July20,1972.
64.Zeger,A.E.,andL.R.Burgess: AnAdaptive AMTIRadarAntenna Array,Proc.IEEE1974Nue/.
Aerospace andElectronics Conf.,May13-15,1974,Dayton, Ohio,pp.126-133.
65.Johnson, M.A.,andD.C.Stoner:ECCMfromtheRadarDesigner's Viewpoint, paper30-5,IEEE ELECTRO-76, Boston, Mass.,May11-14,1976.Reprinted inMicrowave J.,vol.21,pp.59-63, March,1978.
66.Anderson, D.B.:AMicrowave Technique toReducePlatform MotionandScanning NoiseinAir­ borneMoving-Target Radar,IREWESCON COIIV.Record,vol.2,pt.1,pp.202-211.195M.
67.Brennan, L.E.,J.D.Mallett,andI.S.Reed:Adaptive ArraysinAirborne MTIRadar,IEEETrulIs., vol.AP-24,pp.607-615, September, 1975.
6M.Voles,R.:NewTechniques forMTIC1utler-Locking.
R"dar---Pn'St'IlemIdfuture,IEF(London) Conf.Pub!.no.105,pp.274-279, 1973.
69.Kroszczynski.
J.:Efficiency ofAttenuation ofmovingClutter,TileRadioalldEkccrOllic EIIIJr.,vol.34.
no.3,pp.157-159, September, 1967..
70.Maguire, W.W.:Application ofPulsedDoppler RadartoAirborne RadarSystems, Proc.Nurl.COllf onAeronaut.
Electronics (Dayton, Ohio),pp.291-295, 1958.
71.Hsiao,J.K.:MTIOptimization inaMultiple-Clutter Environment, NRLReport7860,Nal'ul Research Laboratory, Washington, D.C.,Mar.20,1975.
72.Hsiao,1.K.:ADigitalMean-Clutter-Doppler Compensation System,NRLMemorandum Report 2772,NavalResearch Laboratory, Washington.
D.C.,April,1974.
73.Hsiao,J.K.:Analysis ofaDualFrequency Moving TargetIndication System,TheRadioufldElec­ CronicEngineer, vol.45,pp.351-356,July,1975.
74.Andrews, G.A.:RadarAntenna PatternDesignforPlatform MotionCompensation, IEEETrailS., vol.AP-26,pp.566-571, July,1978.
.
75.Hadjifotiou, A.:Round-off ErrorAnalysis inDigitalMTIProcessors forRadar,TheRadioand Electronic Engineer, vol.47,pp.59-65,January/February, 1977.
76.Tong,P.S.:Quantization Requirements inDigitalMTI,IEEETrailS.,vol.AES-13, pp.512-521, September, 1977.
77.Cantrell, B.H.:AShort-Pulse AreaMTI,NRLReport8162,NavalResearcll Laboratory, Washington, D.C.,Sept.22,1977. MTI AND PLI1.SE 1)OPPI.ER RA1)AR 151  7H.
Kroc/c7ynski, J.: The Two-Frequency MTI System, The Radio attd Elrctrot~ic Etrgit~err.
vol.
39.
 p13.
172 176.
Marcll, 1970.
 79.
Kros7c7ynsky.
J.: EJfficiency of thc Two-Frequency MTI System.
Tile Radio arid Elrctrottic Et~yitieer.
 vol.
41.
pp.
77 XO.
F--ehruary.
1971.
 80.
Kabilicr, L.
R..
and t3.
Gold: "Theory and Application of Digital Signal Processing," Prentice-Hall,  Inc., Englewood Cliffs.
N.J..
1975.
 XI.
Thonlas.
H.
W., N.
P.
Lutte, and M.
W.
Jelffs: Design of MTI Filters with Staggered PRF: A  Pole-Zero Approacli, Ptm.
IEE, vol.
121, pp.
1460--1466, December, 1974.
 87.
Ewell.
Ci.
W..
and A.
M.
Bush: Constrained Improvement MTI Radar Processors.
IEEE Tratu.,  vol.
AES-1 I.
pp.
768 780.
September.
1975.
 MTIANDPULSE DOPPLER RADARlSI 7X.KrO~/C7ynsk i.J.:TheTwo-Frequency MTISystem.
TileRadioandElectronic Engineer.
vol.39.
pp.172176.March.
1970.
79.KroslC7ynsky.
1.:Efficiency oftheTwo-Frequency MTISystem.TireRadioalldElectronic Engineer.
vol.41.pp.77XO.Fenruary.
1971.
Xl).RanineI'.
L.R.,andB.Gold:..TheoryandApplication ofDigitalSignalProcessing," Prentice-Hall.
Inc..Englewood Clirfs.N.J..1975.
XI.Thomas.
H.W..N.P.LUlle.andM.W.Jetrrs:DesignofMTIFilterswithStaggered PRF:A Pole-Zero Approach.
Proc.lEE.vol.121.pp.1460--1466.
December.
1974.
X2.Ewell.G.W.andA.M.Bush:Constrained Improvement MTIRadarProcessors.
IEEETrailS.• vol.AI:S-11, pp.76Rno.September.
1975. CHAPTER  FIVE  TRACKING RADAR  5.1 TRACKING WITH RADAR  A tracking-radar system measures the coordinates of a target and provides data which nlay be  used to determine the target path and to predict its future position.
All or only part of the  available radar data-range, elevation angle, azimutll angle, and dopplcr f~.cqi~crlcy sllift  may be used in predicting future position; that is, a radar might track in range, in aoglu.
in  doppler, or with any combination.
Almost any radar can be considcrecl a tracking radar.
 provided its output information is processed properly.
But, in general, it is the nletliod by  which angle tracking is accomplished that distinguishes what is normally considered a tracking  radar from any other radar.
It is also necessary to distinguish bet ween a c:onli,~~~olr.s tr'ic'liir~~g  radar and a track-while-scan (TWS) radar.
The former supplies continuous tracking data on a  particular target, while the track-while-scan supplies sampled data on one or more targets.
In  general, the continuous tracking radar and the TWS radar employ different types of  equipment.
 The antenna beam in the continuous tracking radar is positioned in angle by a servomech-  anism actuated by an error signal.
The various methods for generating the error signal may  be classified as seqttential lobing, conical scan, and simltltnrieolts lohirly or monnp[rlse.
The rangc  and doppler frequency shift can also be continuously tracked, if desired, by a servo-control  loop actuated by an error signal generated in the radar receiver.
The information available  from a tracking radar may be presented on a cathode-ray-tube (CRT) display for action by an  operator, or may be supplied to an automatic computer which determines the target path and  calculates .its probable future course.
 The tracking radar must first find its target before it can track.
Some radars operate in a  search, or acquisition, mode in order to find the target before switclling to a trackirlg mode.
 Although it is possible to use a single radar for both tile search and the tracking fttnctions, such  CHAPTER FIVE TRACKING RADAR 5.1TRACKING WITHRADAR Atracking-radar systemmeasures thecoordinates ofatargetandprovides datawhichmaybe usedtodetermine thetargetpathandtopredictitsfutureposition.
Alloronlypartofthe available radardata-range, elevation angle,azimuth anglc,anddoppkr frequency shift maybeusedinpredicting futureposition; thatis,aradarmighttrackinrange,inangk,in doppler, Ofwithanycombination.
Almostanyradarcanbeconsidered atracking radar provided itsoutputinformation isprocessed properly.
But,ingeneral, itisthemethod by whichangletracking isaccomplished thatdistinguishes whatisnormally considered atracking radarfromanyotherradar.Itisalsonecessary todistinguish between acontillllOlIS crllddtlfj radarandatrack-while-scan (TWS)radar.Theformersupplies continuous tracking dataona particular target,whilethetrack-while-scan supplies sampled dataononeormoretargets.In general, thecontinuous tracking radarandtheTWSradaremploy different typesof equipment.
Theantenna beaminthecontinuous tracking radarispositioned inanglebyaservomech­ anismactuated byanerrorsignal.Thevariousmethods forgenerating theerrorsignalmay beclassified assequential lobing,conicalscan,andsimultaneous lohillgormOtlOpulse.
Therange anddoppler frequency shiftcanalsobecontinuously tracked, ifdesired, byaservo-control loopactuated byanerrorsignalgenerated intheradarreceiver.
Theinformation available fromatracking radarmaybepresented onacathode-ray-tube (CRT)displayforactionbyan operator, ormaybesupplied toanautomatic computer whichdetermines thetargetpathand calculates .itsprobable futurecourse.
Thetracking radarmustfirstfinditstargetbeforeitcantrack.Someradarsoperate ina search,oracquisition, modeinordertofindthetargetbeforeswitching toatracking mode.
Although itispossible touseasingleradarforboththesearchandthctracking functions, such a ~vowdirre irs11;iIly results iri certain operatiorial limitations.
Obviously, when the radar is  uzcd in its trackilig mode, it Iias rio knowledge of otlier poteritial targets.
Also, if the antenna  p;ctrerri is a rlarrow per~cil beam arid if the searcli volume is large, a relatively lorig time rniglit  be rcqirired to find the target.
Therefore many radar tracking systems employ a separate searcli  rnciar to provide tlie inforrnatiori necessary to position the tracker on the target.
A search  radar.
when used for this purpose.
it called ari c~cqtristiott rcldclr.
The acquisitiori radar ciesig-  rwtes targets to the tracking radar by providing tlie coordinates where the targets are to be  fourid.
Tlie tracking radar clc.q~rir.t~s a target by performing a lirtiited search in the area of the  tlcqigiiatcd target coo~tiiriatcq.
 .l'lie scaliriiiig fati-bean1 scarcli radar cat] also provide tracking information to determine  the plitli of ttie target ;itid predict its fittiire position.
Each time the radar beam scans past the  t;~rgct.
it$ coordinates are obtained.
If the change in target coordinates frorn scan to scan is not  tclo large.
it is possible to rccorlstruct tlie track of the target from ttie sampled data.
This [nay  be acconiplislied by providirig tlie PPI-scope operator with a grease pencil to mark tlie target  pips or1 the face of the scope.
A line joining those pips tliat correspond to the same target  prcwidcs ttie target track.
Wlieti tlie traffic is so dense that operators cannot maintain pace  tvith the irifortnatiori available from the radar, the target trajectory data may be processed  autotnatically iri a digital computer.
The availability of small, inexpensive minicomputers has  rnade it practical to obtain target tracks, not just target detections, from a surveillance radar.
 Srrcli processing is tisilally called ADT (automatic detection and track).
When the outputs  frorn Inore ttia~i one radar are automatically combined to provide target tracks, tlie processirig  is called ADIT (automatic detection and integrated track) or IADT (integrated ADT).
 A surveillarice radar that provides target tracks is sonletimes called a track-while-scar1  radar.
This terminology is also applied to radars tliat scan a limited angular sector to provide  tracking informatioti at a high data rate on one or more targets within its field of view.
 Laridirig radars used for GCA (ground control of approach) and some missile control radars  are of this type.
 When the term trcickirrg radar is used in this book, it generally refers to the continuous  tracker, unlcss otherwise specified.
 The alltenria pattern commonly employed with tracking radars is the symmetrical pencil beart1  iri which the, elevation and azimuth beamwidths are approximately equal.
However, a simple  pencil-beam antenna is not suitable for tracking radars unless means are provided for deter-  mining the magnitude and direction of the target's angular position with respect to some  reference direction, usually the alris of the antenna.
The difference between the target position  arid tlic refercrice directioti is the arrgrtlar error.
Tlie tracking radar attempts to position tlie  antenna to make the angular error zero.
When the angular error is zero, the target is located  along the reference direction.
 011~ t~~etliod of obtaitiitig the direction and the magnitude of tlie angular error in one  coordinate is by alternately switching the antenna beam between two positions (Fig.
5.1).
This  is called lobe srvitcl~iriq, seqtterrtiol srvitcltirrg, or sequential lobirtg.
Figure 5.la is a polar rep-  resen~atiorl of the antenna beam (minus the sidelobes) in the two switched positions.
A plot in  rectarigular coordinates is shown in Fig.
5.lh, and the error signal obtained from a target not  on the switching axis (reference direction) is shown in Fig.
5.1~.
The difference in amplitude  between the voltages obtained in the two switched positions is a measure of the angular  displacement of the target from the switching axis.
The sign of the difference determines tlie  TRACKING RADAR153 aproceuure lIsuallyresultsincertainoperational limitations.
Obviously, whentherauaris lIseuinitstracking moue,ithasnoknowleugeofother potential targets.Also,iftheantenna pattem isanarrowpencilbeamanuifthesearchvolumeislarge,arelatively longtimemight hercquireu tofinuthetarget.Therefore manyradartracking systems employaseparate search radartoprovide theinformation necessary toposition thetrackeronthetarget.Asearch radar.whenusedforthispurpose.
itcalleuanacqllistioll radar.Theacquisition radardesig­ lIatestargetstothetracking radarbyproviding thecoordinates wherethetargetsaretobe found.Thetracking radaracquires atargetbyperforming alimitedsearchintheareaofthe designated targetcoordinates.
Thescanning fan-beam searchradarcanalsoprovidetracking information todetermine thepathofthetargetandpredictitsfutureposition.
Eachtimetheradarbeamscanspastthe target.itscoordinates areobtained.Ifthechangeintargetcoordinates fromscantoscanisnot ((10large.itispossible toreconstruct thetrackofthetargetfromthesampled data.Thismay heaccomplished byproviding thePPI-scope operator withagreasepenciltomarkthetarget pipsonthefaceofthescope.Alinejoiningthosepipsthatcorrespond tothesametarget provides thetargettrack.Whenthetrarticissodensethatoperators cannotmaintain pace withtheinformation available fromtheradar,thetargettrajectory datamaybeprocessed automatically inadigitalcomputer.
Theavailability ofsmall,inexpensive minicomputers has madeitpractical toobtaintargettracks,notjusttargetdetections, fromasurveillance radar.
Suchprocessing isusuallycalledADT(automatic detection andtrack).WhentheOlltputs frommorethanoneradarareautomatically combined toprovidetargettracks,theprocessing iscalledADIT(automatic detection andintegrated track)orIADT(integrated ADT).
Asurveillance radarthatprovides targettracksissometimes calledatrack-while-scan radar.Thisterminology isalsoappliedtoradarsthatscanalimitedangularsectortoprovide trackinginformation atahighdatarateononeormoretargetswithinitsfieldofview.
Landing radarsusedforGCA(ground controlofapproach) andsomemissilecontrolradars areofthistype.
Whenthetermtrackillg radarisusedinthisbook,itgenerally referstothecontinuous tracker, unlessotherwise spccified.
5.2SEQUENTIAL LODING Theantenna pattcrncommonly employed withtracking radarsisthesymmetrical pencilbeahl inwhichtheelevation andazimuth beamwidths areapproximately equal.However, asimple pencil-beam antenna isnotsuitable fortracking radarsunlessmeansareprovided fordeter­ miningthemagnitude anddirection ofthetarget'sangular position withrespecttosome rcference direction, usuallythea"isoftheantenna.
Thedifference between thetargetposition andthereference direction istheallglllar error.Thetracking radarattempts toposition the antenna tomaketheangularerrorzero.Whentheangularerroriszero,thetargetislocated alongthereference direction.
Onemethod ofobtaining thedirection andthemagnitude oftheangularerrorinone coordinate isbyalternately switching theantenna beambetween twopositions (Fig.5.1).This iscalledloheswitching, seqllential switching, orsequential lobing.Figure5.laisapolarrep­ resentation oftheantenna beam(minusthesidelobes) inthetwoswitched positions.
Aplotin rcctangular coordinates isshowninFig.5.th,andtheerrorsignalobtained fromatargetnot ontheswitching axis(reference direction) isshowninFig.5.1c.Thedifference inamplitude bctween thevoltages obtained inthetwoswitched positions isameasure oftheangular displacement ofthetargetfromtheswitching axis.Thesignofthedifference determines the Time -+ Angle  (6)  Figure 5.1 Lobe-switching antenna  patterns and error signal (one dirnen-  sion).
(a) Polar representation of  switched antenna patterns; (b) rect-  ( c angular representation; (c)error signal.
 direction the antenna must be moved in order to align the switching axis with the direction of  the target.
When the voltages in the two switched positions are equal, the target is on axis and.
 its position may be determined from the axis direction.
 Two additional switching positions are needed to obtain the angular error in the ortho-  gonal coordinate.
Thus a two-dimensional sequentially lobing radar might consist of a cluster  of four feed horns illuminating a single antenna, arranged so that the right-left, up-down  sectors are covered by successive antenna positions.
Both transmission and reception are  accomplished at each position.
A cluster of five feeds might also be employed, with the central  feed used for transmission while the outer four feeds are used for receiving.
High-power RF  switches are not needed since only the receiving beams, and not the transmitting beam, are  stepped in this five-feed arrangement.
 One of the limitations of a simple unswitched nonscanning pencil-beam antenna is that  the angle accuracy can be no better than the size of the antenna beamwidth.
An important  feature of sequential lobing (as well as the other tracking techniques to be discussed) is that the  target-position accuracy can be far better than that given by the antenna beamwidth.
The  accuracy depends on how well equality of the signals in the switched positions can be  determined.
The fundamental limitation to accuracy is system noise caused either by mechani-  cal or electrical fluctuations.
 Sequential lobing, or lobe switching, was one of the first tracking-radar techniques to be  employed.
Early applioations were in airborne-interception radar, where it provided direc-  tional information for homing on a target, and in ground-based antiaircraft fire-control radars.
 It is not used as often in modern tracking-radar applications as some of the other techniques to  be described.
 154INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS N eo 10:.:: e'~ ~Q f I I It/")....., I I II II II II I / II I , I,,Vl..-.-Q) '"0'oLN-I~01ef-'egl,-10 '';:::1-5,I:;:,-+-11'-~I'j ~ Cl.I(fJICl.
III .....
\ \ \ \ \ \ \ \/-"}I\ (alAngle (b) Figure 5.1Lobe-switching antenna patterns anderrorsignal(onedimen­ sion).(a)Polarrepresentation of switched antenna patterns; (b)rect­ angularrepresentation; (c)errorsignal.~IN eIe o\0 (cITime-t Q) II..- (~I-0II'iiiI ::> -+- 0I<P c.IICl.
I E IIII <1 IIII I I I direction theantenna mustbemovedinordertoaligntheswitching axiswiththedirection of thetarget.Whenthevoltages inthetwoswitched positions areequal,thetargetisonaxisand, itsposition maybedetermined fromtheaxisdirection.
Twoadditional switching positions areneededtoobtaintheangularerrorintheortho­ gonalcoordinate.
Thusatwo-dimensional sequentially lobingradarmightconsistofacluster offourfeedhornsilluminating asingleantenna, arranged sothattheright-left, up-down sectorsarecovered bysuccessive antenna positions.
Bothtransmission andreception are accomplished ateachposition.
Aclusteroffivefeedsmightalsobeemployed, withthecentral feedusedfortransmission whiletheouterfourfeedsareusedforreceiving.
High-power RF switches arenotneededsinceonlythereceiving beams,andnotthetransmitting beam,are stepped inthisfive-feed arrangement.
Oneofthelimitations ofasimpleunswitched nohscanning pencil-beam antenna isthat theangleaccuracy canbenobetterthanthesizeoftheantenna beamwidth.
Animportant featureofsequential tobing(aswellastheothertracking techniques tobediscussed) isthatthe target-position accuracy canbefarbetterthanthatgivenbytheantenna beamwidth.
The accuracy depends onhowwellequality ofthesignalsintheswitched positions canbe determined.
Thefundamental limitation toaccuracy issystemnoisecausedeitherbymechani­ calorelectrical fluctuations.
Sequential lobing,orlobeswitching, wasoneofthefirsttracking-radar techniques tobe employed.
Earlyapplioations wereinairborne-interception radar,whereitprovided direc­ tionalinformation forhomingonatarget,andinground-based antiaircraft fire-control radars.
Itisnotusedasofteninmoderntracking-radar applications assomeoftheothertechniques to bedescribed.;Y 5.3 CONICAL SCAN  A logical extension of the simultaneous lobing technique described in the previous section is to  rotate continuoi~sly an offset ariter~tia bean1 rather than discontinuously step the beam be-  t wceri four discrete positiotis.
'T'liis is kriown as cor~ical sca~rrritry (Fig.
5.2).
The angle betweerl  tlie axis of rotation (wliicli is usually, but not always, the axis of the antenna refiector)and the  ;~uir; of tlic ;i~itcrit~;~ I~ciitri iq c;illctl 111c scl~~ilit anglc.
Cotisidcr 8 targct at positiori A.
Tlie eclrn  signal will he niorlt~latcd at a frequency equal to ttie rotation frequency of the beam.
?'tie  ;tnll>litclde of ttic cclio-sigtial modulation will depend upon the shape of the antenna pattern,  111~' sqilil~t arigle.
atid tlie ariglc between tlie target line ofsight and the rotation axis.
The ptiase  of tlie rnodulatioii depends on the angle between the target and the rotation axis.
The conical-  scan tnodulatiori is extracted from the eclio signal and applied to a servo-control system which  coiitini~ally positions the antenna on the target.
[Note that two servos are required because  tl~c tr;\ckirig prot7lctti is two-ditnctisiorial.
Botli the rectatigular (az-el) and polar tracking  coordinates may be used.] Wtien the antenna is on target, as in B of Fig.
5.2, the line of sight  to tlic target arid tlie rotation axis coincide, and the conical-scan modulation is zero.
 A block diagrar~i of tlie angle-tracking portion of a typical conical-scan tracking radar is  sliowri in Fig.
5.3.
The antenna is mounted so that it can be positioned in both azimuth and  elevation by separate motors, which might be either electric- or hydraulic-driven.
The antenna  bearn is offset by tilting either the feed or the reflector with respect to one another.
 One of the simplest conical-scan antennas is a parabola with an offset rear feed rotated  about the axis of tlie reflector.
If the feed maintains the plane of polarization fixed as it rotates,  it is called a rtlrratittg feed.
A rotatir~g feed causes the polarization to rotate.
The latter type of  feed requires a rotary joint.
The nutating feed requires a flexible joint.
If the antenna is small, it  may be easier to rotate the dish, which is offset, rather than the feed, thus avoiding the problem  of a rotary or flexible RF joint in the feed.
A typical conical-scan rotation speed might be  30 r/s.
The same motor that provides the conical-scan rotation of the antenna beam also drives  a tv.3-phase reference generator with two outputs 90" apart in phase.
These two outputs serve  as a reference to extract the elevation and azimuth errors.
The received echo signal is fed to the  receiver from the antenna via two rotary joints (not shown in the block diagram).
One rotary  joint permits motion in azimuth; the other, in elevation.
 rotation  Figure 5.2 Conical-scan tracking.
 TRACKING RADAR155 5.3CONICAL SCAN ;\logicalextension ofthesimultaneous lobingtechnique described intheprevious sectionisto rotatecontinuously anoffsetantenna beamratherthandiscontinuously stepthebeambe­ tweenfourdiscrete positions.
Thisisknownasconicalscallning (Fig.5.2).Theanglebetween theaxisofrotation (whichisusually, butnotalways,theaxisoftheantenna reflector) andthe axisoftheantenna beallliscalledtilesquintangle.Consider atargetatposition A.Theccho signalwillbemodulated atafrequcncy equaltotherotation frequency ofthebeam.The amplitude oftheccho-signal modulation willdependupontheshapeoftheantenna pattern, thesquintangle.andtheanglebetween thetargetlineofsightandtherotation axis.Thephase ofthcmodulation depends ontheanglebetween thetargetandtherotation axis.Theconical­ scanmodulation iscxtracted fromtheechosignalandappliedtoaservo-control systemwhich continually positions theantenna onthetarget.[Notethattwoservosarerequired because thetracking prohlem istwo-dimcnsional.
Boththerectangular (az-el)andpolartracking coordinates maybeused.]Whentheantenna isontarget,asinBofFig.5.2,thelineofsight tothetargetandtherotation axiscoincide, andtheconical-scan modulation iszero.
Ahlockdiagram oftheanglc-tracking portionofatypicalconical-scan tracking radaris showninFig.5.3.Theantenna ismounted sothatitcanbepositioned inbothazimuth and elevation byseparate motors, whichmightbeeitherelectric-orhydraulic-driven.
Theantenna beamisoffsetbytiltingeitherthefeedorthereflector withrespecttooneanother.
Oneofthesimplest conical-scan antennas isaparabola withanoffsetrearfeedrotated abouttheaxisofthereflector.Ifthefeedmaintains theplaneofpolarization fixedasitrotates, itiscalleda1Itltatillg feed.Arotating feedcausesthepolarization torotate.Thelattertypeof feedrequires arotaryjoint.Thenutating feedrequires aflexiblejoint.Utheantenna issmall,it maybeeasiertorotatethedish,whichisoffset,ratherthanthefeed,thusavoiding theproblem ofarotaryorfiexibleRFjointinthefeed.Atypicalconical-scan rotation speedmightbe 30r/s.Thesamemotorthatprovides theconical-scan rotationoftheantenna beamalsodrives at\\oJ-phase reference generator withtwooutputs90°apartinphase.Thesetwooutputsserve asareference toextracttheelevation andazimuth errors.Thereceived echosignalisfedtothe receiver fromtheantenna viatworotaryjoints(notshownintheblockdiagram).
Onerotary jointpermitsmotioninazimuth; theother,inelevation.
Radar Fi~ure5.2Conical-scan tracking. Tn rntn  o ,,,ry joint  on antenna ,to,.
detector  net.
\ sin 2rfS t  I  LIGIUIIVII UII,,IG  error detector h 3( 1 l Elevation l I I CI,,,~~;~,-,,~~, l Error  signal  servo '"  error detector  Figure 5.3 Block diagram of conical-scan tracking radar.
 The receiver is a conventional superheterodyne except for features peculiar to the conical-  scan tracking radar.
One feature not found in other radar receivers is a means of extracting the  conical-scan modulation, or error signal.
This is accomplished after the second detector it1 the  video portion of the receiver.
The error signal is compared with the elevation and azimuth  reference signals in the angle-error detectors, which are phase-sensitive detect0rs.j ' A pl~ase-  sensitive detector is a nonlinear device in which the input signal (in this case the angle-error  signal) is mixed with the reference signal.
The input and reference signals are of the same  frequency.
The output d-c voltage reverses polarity as the phase of the input signal changes  through 180".
The magnitude of the d-c output from the angle-error detector is proportional to  the error, and the sign (polarity) is an indication of the direction of the error.
The angle-error-  detector outputs are amplified and drive the antenna elevation and azimuth servo motors.
 The angular position of the target may be determined from the elevation and azimuth of  the antenna axis.
The position can be read out by means of standard angle transd~rcers such as  synchros, potentiometers, or analog-to-digital-data converters.
.i  Boxcar generator.
When extracting the modulation imposed on a repetitive train of narrow  pulses, it is usually convenient to stretch the pulses before low-pass filtering.
This is callet!  boxcaring, or satnple and hold.
Here the device is called the boxcar grtterr~ror.8 The boxcar  generator was also mentioned in the discussion of the MTI receiver using range-gated  filters (Sec.
4.4).
ln essence, it clamps or stretches the video pulses of Fig.
5.4~ in time so as to  cover the entire pulse-repetition period (Fig.
5.46).
This is possible only in a range-gated  rcccivcr.
(Tracking radars are normally operated with range gates.) Tlle boxcar gcncri~tor  corlsists of an electric circuit that clamps the potential of a storage element, sucll as a capacitor,  to the video-pulse amplitude each time the pulse is received.
The capacitor maintains the  potential of the pulse during the entire repetition period and is altered only when a new video  pulse appears whose amplitude differs from the previous one.
The boxcar generator eliminates  the pulse repetition frequency and reduces its harmonics.
It also has the practical advantage  that the magnitude of the conical-scan modulation is amplified because pulse stretching puts  more of the available energy at the modulation frequency.
The puhe repetition frequency must  be sufficiently large compared with the conical-scan frequency for proper boxcar filtering.
If  156INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS Torotaryjoint onantenna r-------j Ref.
gen.
sin27Tfst cos27Tfst Elevation servo amplifier Azimuth servo amplifierReceiver wifh---AGe Elevation -angle errordetector Azimuth-angle errordetector--;-Rangegale ~ Error signal '.
Figure5.3Blockdiagram ofconical-scan tracking radar.
Thereceiver isaconventional superheterodyne exceptforfeatures peculiar totheconical­ scantracking radar.Onefeaturenotfoundinotherradarreceivers isameansofextracting the conical-scan modulation, orerrorsignal.Thisisaccomplished aftertheseconddetector inthe videoportionofthereceiver.
Theerrorsignaliscompared withtheelevation andazimuth reference signalsintheangle-error detectors, whicharephase-sensitive detectors.;} 7Aphase­ sensitive detector isanonlinear deviceinwhichtheinputsignal(inthiscasetheangle-error signal)ismixedwiththereference signal.Theinputandreference signalsareofthesame frequency.
Theoutputd-cvoltagereverses polarity asthephaseoftheinputsignalchanges through 180°.Themagnitude ofthedocoutputfromtheangle-error detector isproportional to theerror,andthesign(polarity) isanindication ofthedirection oftheerror.Theangle-error­ detector outputs areamplified anddrivetheantenna elevation andazimuth servomotors.
Theangular position ofthetargetmaybedetermined fromtheelevation andazimuth of theantenna axis.Theposition canbereadoutbymeansofstandard angletransducers suchas synchros, potentiometers, oranalog-to-digital-data converters.
Boxcargenerator.
Whenextracting themodulation imposed onarepetitive trainofnarrow pulses,itisusuallyconvenient tostretchthepulsesbeforelow-pass filtering.
Thisiscalled boxcarillg, orsampleandhold.Herethedeviceiscalledtheboxcargenerator.
IIThebox.car generator wasalsomentioned inthediscussion oftheMTIreceiver usingrange-gated filters(Sec.4.4).Inessence,itclampsorstretches thevideopulsesofFig.5.4aintimesoasto covertheentirepulse-repetition period(Fig.5.4b).Thisispossible onlyinarange-gated receiver.
(Tracking radarsarenormally operated withrangegates.)ThehoxcargenL:fator consistsofanelectriccircuitthatclampsthepotential ofastorageelement.
suchasacapacitor, tothevideo-pulse amplitude eachtimethepulseisreceived.
Thecapacitor maintains the potential ofthepulseduringtheentirerepetition periodandisalteredonlywhenanewvideo pulseappears whoseamplitude differsfromtheprevious one.Theboxcargenerator eliminates thepulserepetition frequency andreducesitsharmonics.
Italsohasthepractical advantage thatthemagnitude oftheconical-scan modulation isamplified because pulsestretching puts moreoftheavailable energyatthemodulation frequency.
Thepulserepetition frequency must besufficiently largecompared withtheconical-scan frequency forproperboxcarfiltering.If not, it may be necessary to provide additional filtering to attenuate undesired cross-  modulation frequency components.
 Auron~atic gain contr01.~- " Tlie echo-signal amplitude at the tracking-radar receiver will  not be constant but will vary with time.
The three major causes of variation in amplitude are  (1) the inverse-fourth-power relationship between the echo signal and range, (2) the conical-  scan moditlatiori (angle-error signal), and (3) amplitude fluctuations in the target cross  sectiot~.
Tlie function of the automatic gain control (AGC) is to maintain the d-c level of the  receiver output constant and to smooth or eliminate as much of the noiselike amplitude  fluctuations as possible without disturbing the extractiondf the desired error signal at the  coriical-scan frequency.
 One of the purposes of AGC in any receiver is to prevent saturation by large signals.
The  scanning niodulatiori and the error signal would be lost if the receiver were to saturate.
In the  cor~icnl-scat] tri~ckirlg radar 2111 ACiC' tlint r~iailitains tlic d-c lcvcl colistatit rcsi~lts in at1 error  signal that is a true itidicatioti of tlie angular pointing error.
The d-c level of the receiver must  bc rnairitaitied cotistant if tlie at~gular error is to be linearly related to the angle-error signal  voltage.
,.
 Ari example of the AGC portion of a tracking-radar receiver is shown in Fig.
5.5.
A  portioti of tlie video-atnplifier output is passed tlirough a low-pass or smoothing filter and fed  back to control the gain of the IF amplifier.
The larger the video output, the larger will be tlie -  .
-  Conical scan modulation  to angle-error detector  amplifier amplifier gate and boxcar 4 cal-scan rnodulation; (h) same pulse  I/$ train after passing Ihrough boxcar  (b) generator.
---- - -  amplifier filter Figure 5.4 (a) Pulse train with coni-  I  Delay voltage V,  Figure 5.5 Hlock diagram of Ihc AC;C portion of a trackit~g-radar receiver.
 .....
'- "-"..­..­ / /'­" (a) -------"----- -------'-----'-- (b)TRACKING RADAR157 Figure5.4(a)Pulsetrainwithconi­ cal-scan modulation; (h)samepulse trainafterpassingthrough boxcar generator.
not,itmaybenecessary toprovide additional filtering toattenuate undesired cross­ modulation frequency components.
Automatic gaincontrol.9- 1 ITheecho-signal amplitude atthetracking-radar receiver will notbeconstant butwillvarywithtime.Thethreemajorcausesofvariation inamplitude are (1)theinverse-fourth-power relationship between theechosignalandrange,(2)theconical­ scanmodulation (angle-error signal), and(3)amplitude fluctuations inthetargetcross section.
Thefunction oftheautomatic gaincontrol(AGC)istomaintain thed-clevelofthe receiver outputconstant andtosmooth oreliminate asmuchofthenoiselike amplitude fiuctuations aspossible without disturbing theextraction -ofthedesirederrorsignalatthe conical-scan frequency.
Oneofthepurposes ofAGCinanyreceiver istopreventsaturation bylargesignals.The scanning modulation andtheerrorsignalwouldhelostifthereceiver weretosaturate.
Inthe conical-scan tracking radaranA(iCthatmaintains thed-clevelconstant resultsinanerror signalthatisatrueindication oftheangular pointing error.Thed-clevelofthereceiver must hemaintained constant iftheangularerroristobelinearly relatedtotheangle~error signal voltage.
~.
Anexample oftheAGeportion ofatracking-radar receiver isshowninFig.5.5.A portionofthevideo-amplifier outputispassedthrough alow-pass orsmoothing filterandfed hacktocontrolthegainoftheIFamplifier.
Thelargerthevideooutput,thelargerwillbethe From mixer ---~-- f2dl~Range gateand boxcarConicalscanmodulation toangle-error detector '----~---- Delayvoltage ~ Fi~urt, ~.~Blockdiagram oftheAGeportionofatracking-radar receiver. feedback signal and the greater will be the gain redi~ction.
The filter in the AGC loop should  pass all frequencies from direct current to just below the conical-scan-modulation frequency.
 The loop gain of the AGC filter measured at the conical-scan frequency should be low so that  the error signal will not be affected by AGC action.
(If the AGC responds to the conical-scan  frequency, the error signal might be lost.) The phase shift of this filter must be small if its phase  characteristic is not to influence the error signal.
A phase change of the error signal is equiva-  lent to a rotation of the reference axes and introduces cross coupling, or "cross talk," between  the elevation and azimuth angle-tracking loops.
Cross talk affects the stability of the tracking  and might result in an unwanted nutating motion of the antenna.
In conventional tracking-  radar applications the phase change introduced by the feedback-loop filter should be less than  loQ, and in some applications it should be as little as 2".1° For this reason, a tilter with a sharp  attenuation characteristic in the vicinity of the conical-scan frequency might not be desirable  because of the relatively large amount of phase shift which it would introduce.
.
 The output of the feedback loop will be zero unless the feedback voltage exceeds a  prespecified minimum value V, .\In the block diagram the feedback voltage and the voltage  are compared in the d-c amplifier.
If the feedback voltage exceeds V,, the AGC is operative,  while if it is less, there is no AGC action.
The voltage V, is called the delay ~jolragr.
The  terminology may be a bit misleading since the delay is not in time but in amplitude.
The  purpose of the delay voltage is to provide a reference for the constant output signal and permit  receiver gain for weak signals.
If the delay voltage were zero, any output which might appear  from the receiver would be due to the failure of the AGC circuit to regulate completely.
 In many applications of AGC the delay voltage is actually zero.
This is called undelayed  AGC.
In such cases the AGC can still perform satisfactorily since the loop gain is usually low  for small signals.
Thus the AGC will not regulate weak signals.
The effect is similar to having a  delay voltage, but the performance will not be as good.
 The required dynamic range of the AGC will depend upon the variation in range over  which targets are tracked and the variations expected in the target cross section.
If the range  variation were 10 to 1, the contribution to the dynamic range would be 40 dB.
The target  cross section might also contribute another 40dB variation.
Another 10 dB ought to be  allowed to account for variations in the other parameters of the radar equation.
Hence the  dynamic range of operation required of the receiver AGC might be of the order of 90 dB, or  perhaps more.
 It is found1' in practice that the maximum gain variation which can be obtained with a  single IF stage is of the order of 40 dB.
Therefore two to three stages of the IF amplifier milst  be gain-controlled to accommodate the total dynamic range.
The middle stages are usually the  ones controlled since the first stage gain should remain high so as not to influence the noise  figure of the mixer stage.
It is also best not to control the last IF stage since the maximum  undistorted output of an amplifying stage is reduced when its gain is reduced by the applica-  tion of a control voltage.
 An alternative AGC filter design would maintain the AGC loop gain up to frequencies  much higher than the conical-scan frequency.
The scan modulation would be effectively sup  pressed in the output of the receiver, and the output would be used to measure range in the  normal manner.
In this case, the error signal can be recovered from the AGC voltage since it  varies at the conical-scan frequency.
The AGC voltage will also contain any amplitude fluctua-  tions that appear with the echo signal.
The error signal may be recovered from the AGC  voltage with a narrow bandpass filter centered at the scan-modulation frequency.
 Squint angle, The angle-error-signal voltage is shown in Fig.
5.6 as a function of Or, the  angle between the axis of rotation and the direction to the target.'' The squint angle 0, is the  158INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS feedback signalandthegreaterwillbethegainreduction.
ThefilterintheAGeloopshould passallfrequencies fromdirectcurrenttojustbelow theconical-scan~modulation frequency.
TheloopgainoftheAGCfiltermeasured attheconical-scan frequency shouldbelowsothat theerrorsignalwillnotbeaffectedbyAGCaction.(IftheAGeresponds totheconical-scan frequency, theerrorsignalmightbelost.)Thephaseshiftofthisfiltermustbesmallifitsphase characteristic isnottoinfluence theerrorsignal.Aphasechangeoftheerrorsignalisequiva­ lenttoarotationofthereference axesandintroduces crosscoupling, or"crosstalk,"between theelevation andazimuth angle-tracking loops.Crosstalkaffectsthestabilityofthetracking andmightresultinanunwanted nutating motionoftheantenna.
[nconventional tracking­ radarapplications thephasechangeintroduced bythefeedback-loop filtershouldbelessthan 10°,andinsomeapplications itshouldbeaslittleas2°.10Forthisreason,afilterwithasharp attenuation characteristic inthevicinityoftheconical-scan frequency mightnotbedesirable becauseoftherelatively largeamountofphaseshiftwhichitwouldintroduce.• Theoutputofthefeedback loopwillbezerounlessthefeedback voltageexceedsa prespecified minimum value~.\Intheblockdiagram thefeedback voltageandthevoltage Yc arecompared inthed-camplifier.Ifthefeedback voltageexceedsVc,theAGCisoperative, whileifitisless,thereisnoAGCaction.Thevoltage 'Vciscalledthedelayvoltage.The terminology maybeabitmisleading sincethedelayisnotintimebutinamplitude.
The purposeofthedelayvoltageistoprovideareference fortheconstant outputsignalandpermit receivergainforweaksignals.Ifthedelayvoltagewerezero,anyoutputwhichmightappear fromthereceiverwouldbeduetothefailureoftheAGCcircuittoregulate completely.
Inmanyapplications ofAGCthedelayvoltageisactually zero.Thisiscalledundelayed AGe.InsuchcasestheAGCcanstillperformsatisfactorily sincetheloopgainisusually(ow forsmallsignals.ThustheAGCwillnotregulateweaksignals.Theeffectissimilartohavinga delayvoltage,buttheperformance willnotbeasgood.
Therequired dynamic rangeoftheAGCwilldependuponthevariation inrangeover whichtargetsaretrackedandthevariations expected inthetargetcrosssection.Iftherange variation were10to1,thecontribution tothedynamic rangewouldbe40dB.Thetarget crosssectionmightalsocontribute another 4O-dBvariation.
Another 10dBoughttobe allowedtoaccount forvariations intheotherparameters oftheradarequation.
Hencethe dynamic rangeofoperation required ofthereceiverAGCmightbeoftheorderof90dB,or perhapsmore.
hisfound 10inpracticethatthemaximum gainvariation whichcanbeobtained witha singleIFstageisoftheorderof40dB.Therefore twotothreestagesoftheIFamplifier must begain-controlled toaccommodate thetotaldynamic range.Themiddlestagesareusuallythe onescontrolled sincethefirststagegainshouldremainhighsoasnottoinfluence thenoise figureofthemixerstage.ItisalsobestriottocontrolthelastIFstagesincethemaximum undistorted outputofanamplifying stageisreducedwhenitsgainisreducedbytheapplica­ tionofacontrolvoltage.
Analternative AGCfilterdesignwouldmaintain theAGCloopgainuptofrequencies muchhigherthantheconical-scan frequency.
Thescanmodulation wouldbeeffectively sup­ pressedintheoutputofthereceiver.
andtheoutputwouldbeusedtomeasure rangeinthe normalmanner.
Inthiscase,theerrorsignalcanberecovered fromtheAGCvoltagesinceit variesattheconical-scan frequency.
TheAGCvoltagewillalsocontainanyamplitude fluctua­ tionsthatappearwiththeechosignal.Theerrorsignalmayberecovered fromtheAGC voltagewithanarrowbandpass filtercentered atthescan-modulation frequency.
Squintangle.Theangle-error-signal voltageisshowninFig.5.6asafunction ofOr.the anglebetween theaxisofrotation andthedirection tothetarget.12ThesquintangleOfisthe Figure 5.6 Plot of the relative angle-  error signal from the conical-scan radar  as a function of target angle (eT/oB)  and squint angle (040,).
0, = half-  power beamwidth.
 angle between the antenna-beam axis and the axis of rotation; and OB is the half-power  beamwidth.
The antenna beam shape is approximated by a gaussian function in the calcula-  tions leading to Fig.
5.6.
The greater the slope of the error signal, the more accurate will be  the tracking of the target.
The maximum slope occurs for a value 8,/OB slightly greater than  0.4.
This corresponds to a point on the antenna pattern (the antenna crossover) about 2 dB  down from the peak.
It is the optimum crossover for maximizing the accuracy of angle  tracking.
The accuracy of range tracking, however, is affected by the loss in signal but not by  the slope at the crossover point.
Therefore, as a compromise between the requirements for  accurate range and angle tracking, a crossover nearer the peak of the beam is usually selected  rather than that indicated from Fig.
5.6.
It has been suggested that the compromise value of  Q,/OB be abbut 0.28, corresponding to a point on the antenna pattern about 1.0 dB below the  peak.'.I  Other considerations.
In both the sequential-lobing and conical-scan techniques, the measure-  ment of the angle error in two orthogonal coordinates (azimuth and elevation) requires that a  minimum of three pulses be processed.
In practice, however, the minimum number of pulses in  sequential lobing is usually four-one per quadrant.
Although a conical scan radar can also be  operated with only four pulses per revolution, it is more usual to have ten or more per  revolution.
This allows the modulation due to the angle error to be more that of a continuous  sine wave.
Thus tile prf is usually at least an order of magnitude greater than the conical-scan  frequency.
The scan frequency also must be at least an order of magnitude greater than the  tracking bandwidth.
 A conical-scan-on-receive-only (COSRO) tracking radar radjates a nonscanning transmit  beam, but receives with a conical scanping beam to extract the angle error.
The analogous  operation with sequential lobing is called lobe-on-receive-only (LORO).
 TRACKING RADAR159 0.22- Figure5.6Plotoftherelativeangle­ errorsignalfromtheconical-scan radar asafunction oftargetangle(Or/Os) andsquintangle(O.,lOs).
Os=half­ powerbeamwidth.{}q Antenna {}e crossover, dB 0.2 0.5 0.4 1.95 0.6 4.36 0.8 7.7 0.10.2 0.3 0.40.50.60.70.80.91.0 Br/Be0.04- 0.02 oL-----L_--L._.J-_..L..._-'----l_--'- __--I.-_-'-----'o0.06-S0.18 VI C11> .~0.16 C11 L ~0.1<1 o' C11 0"o ~0.12- > o .~0.10 VI Ie0.08 Lw0.20 anglebetween theantenna-beam axisandtheaxisofrotation; and88isthehalf-power beamwidth.
Theantenna beamshapeisapproximated byagaussian function inthecalcula­ tionsleadingtoFig.5.6.Thegreatertheslopeoftheerrorsignal,themoreaccurate willbe thetracking ofthetarget.Themaximum slopeoccursforavalueOq/08slightlygreaterthan 0.4.Thiscorresponds toapointontheantenna pattern(theantenna crossover) about2dB downfromthepeak.Itistheoptimum crossover formaximizing theaccuracy ofangle tracking.
Theaccuracy ofrangetracking, however, isaffectedbythelossinsignalbutnotby theslopeatthecrossover point.Therefore, asacompromise between therequirements for accurate rangeandangletracking, acrossover nearerthepeakofthebeamisusuallyselected ratherthanthatindicated fromFig.5.6.Ithasbeen·suggested thatthecompromise valueof 0,/08beabOut0.28,corresponding toapointontheantenna patternabout1.0dBbelowthe peak.1.2 Otherconsiderations.
Inboththesequential-Iobing andconical-scan techniques, themeasure­ mentoftheangleerrorintwoorthogonal coordinates (azimuth andelevation) requiresthata minimum ofthreepulsesbeprocessed.
Inpractice, however, theminimum numberofpulsesin sequential lobingisusuallyfour-one perquadrant.
Although aconicalscanradarcanalsobe operated withonlyfourpulsesperrevolution, itismoreusualtohavetenormoreper revolution.
Thisallowsthemodulation duetotheangleerrortobemorethatofacontinuous sinewave.Thustheprrisusuallyatleastanorderofmagnitude greaterthantheconical-scan frequency.
Thescanfrequency alsomustbeatleastanorderofmagnitude greaterthanthe tracking bandwidth.
Aconical-scan-on-receive-only (COSRO) tracking radar rad~atesanonscanning transmit beam,butreceives withaconicalscanning beamtoextracttheangleerror.Theanalogous operation withsequential lobingiscalledlobe-on-receive-only (LORO). 5.4 MONOPULSE TRACKING RADAR1~2~'3-'8  The conical-scan and sequential-lobing tracking radars require a mininll~nl number of p~~lws  in order to extract the angle-error signal.
In the time interval during which a measurement is  made with eiiher sequential lobing or conical scan, the train of echo pulses must contain no  amplitude-modulation components other than the modulation produced by scanning.
If the  echo pulse-train did contain additional modulation components, caused, for example, by a  fluctuating target cross section, the tracking accuracy might he degraded, especially if the  frequency components of the fluctuations were at or near the conical-scan frequency or the  sequential-lobing rate.
The effect of the fluctuating echo can be sufficiently serious in some  applications to severely limit the accuracy of those tracking radars which require many pulses  to be processed in extracting the error signal.
 Pulse-to-pulse amplitude fluctuations of the echo signal have no effect on trscking accur-  acy if the angular measurement is made on the basis of one pulse rather than many.
There are  several methods by which angle-error information might be obtained with only a single pulse.
 More than one antenna beam is used simultaneously in these methods, in contrast to the  conical-scan or lobe-switching tracker, which utilizes one antenna beam on a time-shared  basis.
The angle of arrival of the echo signal may be determined in a single-pulse system by  measuring the relative phase or the relative amplitude of the echo pulse received in each beam.
 The names simrrltaneous lobing and monopulse are used to describe those tracking techniques  which derive angle-error information on the basis of a single pulse.
 An example of a simultaneous-lobing technique is amplittrde-comparison mot~op~rlse, or  more simply, monopulse.
In this technique the RF signals received from two offset antenna  beams are combined so that both the sum and the difference signals are obtained simulta-  neously.
The sum and difference signals are multiplied in a phase-sensitive detector to obtain  both the magnitude and the direction of the error signal.
All the information necessary to  determine the angular error is obtained on the basis of a single pulse; hence the name trtono-  pulse is quite appropriate.
 Amplitude-comparison monopuke.
The amplitude-comparison monopulse employs two  overlapping antenna patterns (Fig.
5.7a) to obtain the angular error in one coordinate.
The  two overlapping antenna beams may be generated with a single reflector or with a lens  antenna illuminated by two adjacent feeds.
(A cluster of four feeds may be used if both  elevation- and azimuth-error signals are wanted.) The sum of the two antenna patterns of  Fig.
5.7~ is shown in Fig.
5.76, and the difference in Fig.
5.7~.
The sum patterns is used for  transmission, while both the sum pattern and the difference pattern are used on reception.
The  signal received with the difference pattern provides the magnitude of the angle error.
The sum  signal provides the range measurement and is also used as a reference to extract the sign of the  error signal.
Signals received from the sum and the difference patterns are amplified separately  and combined in a phase-sensitive detector to produce the error-signal characteristic shown in  Fig.
5.7d.
 A block diagram of the amplitude-comparison-monopulse tracking radar for a single  angular coordinate is shown in Fig.
5.8.
The two adjacent antenna feeds are connected to the  two arms of a hybrid junction such as a "magic T," a " rat race," or a short-slot coupler.
The  sum and difference signals appear at the two other arms of the hybrid.
On reception,  the outputs of the sum arm and the difference arm are each heterodyned to an intermediate  frequency and amplified as,in any superheterodyne receiver.
The transmitter is connected to  thesum arm.
Range information is also extracted from the sum channel.
A duplexer is included  in the sum arm for the protection of the receiver.
The output of the phase-sensitive detector is  160INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS 5.4MONOPULSETRACKING RADAR1.2.13-18 Theconical-scan andsequential-Iobing tracking radarsrequireaminimum numberofpulses inordertoextracttheangle-error signal.Inthetimeintervalduringwhichameasurement is madewitheithersequential lobingorconicalscan,thetrainofechopulsesmustcontainno amplitude-modulation components otherthanthemodulation produced by"scanning.
Ifthe echopulse-train didcontainadditional modulation components, caused,forexample, bya fluctuating targetcrosssection, thetracking accuracy mightbedegraded, especially ifthe frequency components ofthefluctuations wereatorneartheconical-scan frequency orthe sequential-Iobing rate.Theeffectofthefluctuating echocanbesufficiently seriousinsome applications toseverely limittheaccuracy ofthosetracking radarswhichrequiremanypulses tobeprocessed inextracting theerrorsignal.
Pulse-to-pulse amplitude fluctuations oftheechosignalhavenoeffectontdcking accur­ acyiftheangularmeasurement ismadeonthebasisofonepulseratherth"anmany.Thereare severalmethods bywhichangle-error information mightbeobtained withonlyasinglepulse.
Morethanoneantenna beamisusedsimultaneously inthesemethods, incontrast tothe conical-scan orlobe-switching tracker, whichutilizesoneantenna beamonatime-shared basis.Theangleofarrivaloftheechosignalmaybedetermined inasingle-pulse systemby measuring therelativephaseortherelativeamplitude oftheechopulsereceived ineachbeam.
Thenamessimultaneous lobingandmonopulse areusedtodescribe thosetracking techniques whichderiveangle-error information onthebasisofasinglepulse.
Anexample ofasimultaneous-Iobing technique isamplitude-comparison motlopll/se, or moresimply,monopulse.
Inthistechnique theRFsignalsreceived fromtwooffsetantenna beamsarecombined sothatboththesumandthedifference signalsareobtained simulta­ neously.
Thesumanddifference signalsaremultiplied inaphase-sensitive detector toobtain boththemagnitude andthedirection oftheerrorsignal.Alltheinformation necessary to determine theangularerrorisobtained onthebasisofasinglepulse;hencethenamemmlO­ pulseisquiteappropriate.
Amplitude-comparison monopulse.
Theamplitude-comparison monopulse employs two overlapping antenna patterns (Fig.5.7a)toobtaintheangularerrorinonecoordinate.
The twooverlapping antenna beamsmaybegenerated withasinglereflector orwithalens antenna illuminated bytwoadjacent feeds.(Aclusteroffourfeedsmaybeusedifboth elevation- andazimuth-error signalsarewanted.) Thesumofthetwoantenna patterns of Fig.5.7aisshowninFig.5.7b,andthedifference inFig.5.7c.Thesumpatterns isusedfor transmission, whileboththesumpatternandthedifference patternareusedonreception.
The signalreceived withthedifference patternprovides themagnitude oftheangleerror.Thesum signalprovides therangemeasurement andisalsous~dasareference toextractthesignofthe errorsignal.Signalsreceived fromthesumandthedifference patterns areamplified separately andcombined inaphase-sensitive detectortoproducetheerror-signal characteristic shownin Fig.5.7d.
Ablockdiagram oftheamplitude-comparison-monopulse tracking radarforasingle angularcoordinate isshowninFig.5.8.Thetwoadjacent antenna feedsareconnected tothe twoarmsofahybridjunction suchasa..magicT,"a..ratrace,"orashort-slot coupler.
The sumanddifference signalsappearatthetwootherarmsofthehybrid.Onreception, theoutputsofthesumarmandthedifference armareeachheterodyned toanintermediate frequency andamplified as.inanysuperheterodyne receiver.
Thetransmitter isconnected to thesumarm.Rangeinformation isalsoextracted fromthesumchannel.
Adup)exer isincluded inthesumarmfortheprotection ofthereceiver.
Theoutputofthephase-sensitive detector is Figure 5.7 Monopulse antenna patterns and error signal.
Left-hand diagrams in (a-c) are in polar coor-  dinates; right-hand diagrams are in rectangular coordinates.
(a) Overlapping antenna patterns; (b) sum  pattern; (c) dilierence pattern; (d) product (error) signal.
 an error signal wllose magnitude is proportional to the angu!ar error and whose sign is  proportional to the direction.
 The output of the monopulse radar is used to perform automatic tracking.
The angular-  error signal actuates a servo-control system to position the antenna, and the range output  from the sum charlnel feeds into an automatic-range-tracking unit.
 The sign of the difference signal (and the direction of the angular error) is determined by  comparing the phase of the difference signal with the phase of the sum signal.
If the sum signs1  Transmitter  Sum channel  r I- Range  TR -+-- Mixer - 1 F Amplitude >gnaal  amplifier detector  I  junction eTq,'"rid \ 1 Phase- Angle -  sensitive error  signal  \ Antenno  feeds  Mixer  Difference channel  Figure 5.8 Block diagram of amplitude-comparison monopulse radar (one angular coordinate).
 (a1m (c)TRACKING RADAR161 M (J (d)Angle Figure5.7Monopulse antenna patterns anderrorsignal.Left-hand diagrams in(a-c)areinpolarcoor­ dinates; right-hand diagrams areinrectangular coordinates.
(a)Overlapping antenna patterns;(b)sum pattern;(c)dilTerence pattern;(d)product (error)signal.
anerrorsignalwhosemagnitude isproportional totheangu!ar errorandwhosesignis proportional tothedirection.
Theoutputofthemonopulse radarisusedtoperform automatic tracking.
Theangular­ errorsignalactuatesaservo-control systemtoposition theantenna, andtherangeoutput fromthesumchannel feedsintoanautomatic-range-tracking unit.
Thesignofthedifference signal(andthedirection oftheangularerror)isdetermined by comparing thephaseofthedifference signalwiththephaseofthesumsignal.Ifthesumsignal Transmitter Hybrid junction 6 Difference channelPhase­ sensitlve detectorAngle­ error signalRange signal Figure5.8Blockdiagram ofamplitude-comparison monopulse radar(oneangularcoordinate). in the IF portion of the receiver were A, cos (L),~[, the difference signal woirld be either  A, cos WIFt or -Ad cos WtFC (As > 0, Ad > O), depend~ng on which side of center is the target.
 Since -Ad cos qFt = Ad cos wF(t + n), the sign of the difference signal may be measured by  determining whether the difference signal is in phase with the sum or 180" out of phase.
 Although a phase comparison is a part of the amplitude-comparison-monopulse radar,  the angular-error signal is basically derived by comparing the echo amplitudes from simulta-  neous offset beams.
The phase relationship between the signals in the offset beams is not used.
 The purpose of the phase-sensitive detector is to conveniently furnish the sigtt of the error  signal.
 A block diagram of a monopulse radar with provision for extracting error signals In both  elevation and azimuth is shown in Fig.
5.9.
The cluster of four feeds generates four partially  overlapping antenna beams.
The feeds might be used with a parabolic reflector, Cassegrain  antenna, or a lens.
All four feeds generate the sum pattern.
The difference pattern jn one plane  is formed by taking the sum of two adjacent feeds and subtracting this from the sum of the  other two adjacent feeds.
The difference pattern in the orthogonal plane is obtained by adding  the differences of the orthogonal adjacent pairs.
A total of four hybrid junctions generate the  sum channel, the azimuth difference channel, and the elevation difference channel.
Three  separate mixers and IF amplifiers are shown, one for each channel.
All three mixers operate  from a single local oscillator in order to maintain the phase relationships between the three  channels.
Two phase-sensitive detectors extract the angle-error information, one for azimuth,  the other for elevation.
Range information is extracted from the output of the sum channel  after amplitude detection.
 Since a phase comparison is made between the output of the sum channel and each of the  difference channels, it is important that the phase shifts introduced by each of the channels be  almost identical.
According to Page,13 the phase difference between channels must be main-  tained to within 25" or better for reasonably proper performance.
The gains of the channels  also must not differ by more than specified amounts.
 An alternative approach to using three identical amplifers in the monopulse receiver is to  use but one IF channel which amplifies the sum signal and the two difference signals on a  time-shared basis."-l9 The sum signal is passed through the single IF amplifier followed by  the two difference signals delayed in time by a suitable amount.
Most of the gain and gain  RANGE  TRACKER -- -  t  f  r 7  I: IF PHASE- AZIMUTH ; +- MIXER -C SENSIIIVE AMPLIFIER -  DIFFERENCE DETECTOR  A JUNCTION CHANNEL - - AMPLIFIER Y,,,  ELEVATION -  ANGLE  ERROR  AZIMUTH-  ANGLE  ERROR L  RANGE  Figure 5.9 Block diagram of two-coordinate (azimuth and elevation) amplitude-comparison monopulsc  tracking radar.
 162INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS intheIFportion ofthereceiver were A~cosWIFe,thedifference signalwouldbeeither AdcoswIFeor-AdcoswIFe(A~>0,Ad>0),depending onwhichsideofcenteristhetarget.
Since-AdcosWjFt=AdcosWjF(t+n),thesignofthedifference signalmaybemeasured by determining whether thedifference signalisinphasewiththesumor1800outofphase.
Although aphasecomparison isapartoftheamplitude-comparison-monopulse radar, theangular-error signalisbasically derivedbycomparing theechoamplitudes fromsimulta­ neousoffsetbeams.Thephaserelationship between thesignalsintheoffsetbeamsisnotused.
Thepurpose ofthephase-sensitive detector istoconveniently furnishthesignoftheerror signal.
Ablockdiagram ofamonopulse radarwithprovision forextracting errorsignalsinboth elevation andazimuth isshowninFig.5.9.Theclusteroffourfeedsgenerates fourpartially overlapping antenna beams.Thefeedsmightbeusedwithaparabolic reflector, Cassegrain antenna, oralens.Allfourfeedsgenerate thesumpattern.Thedifference patterninoneplane isformedbytakingthesumoftwoadjacent feedsandsubtracting thisfromthesumoflhe othertwoadjacent feeds.Thedifference patternintheorthogonal planeisobtained byadding thedifferences oftheorthogonal adjacent pairs.Atotaloffourhybridjunctions generate the sumchannel, theazimuth difference channel, andtheelevation difference channel.
Three separate mixersandIFamplifiers areshown,one.foreachchannel.
Allthreemixersoperate fromasinglelocaloscillator inordertomaintain thephaserelationships between thethree channels.
Twophase-sensitive detectors extracttheangle-error information, oneforazimuth, theotherforelevation.
Rangeinformation isextracted fromtheoutputofthesumchannel afteramplitude detection.
Sinceaphasecomparison ismadebetween theoutputofthesumchannelandeachofthe dilTerence channels, itisimportant thatthephaseshiftsintroduced byeachofthechannels be almostidentical.
According toPage,l JthephasedilTerence between channels mustbemain­ tainedtowithin25°orbetterforreasonably properperformance.
Thegainsofthechannels alsomustnotdifferbymorethanspecified amounts.
Analternative approach tousingthreeidentical amplifers inthemonopulsereceiver isto usebutoneIFchannel whichamplifies thesumsignalandthetwodilTerence signalsona time-shared basis.17•19Thesumsignalispassedthrough thesingleIFamplifier followed by thetwodilTerence signalsdelayed intimebyasuitable amount.
Mostofthegainandgain ELEVATION DIFFERENCE CHANNEL AZIMUTH DIFFERENCE CHANNELELEVATION­ ANGLE ERROR Figure5.9Blockdiagram oftwo-coordinate (azimuth andelevation) amplitude-comparison monopulse tracking radar. control take place in the single IF amplifier.
Any variations affect all three signals simulta-  neously.
After amplification, compensating delays are introduced to unscramble the time se-  quence and bring the sum signal and the two difference signals in time coincidence.
Phase  detection occurs as it1 tile conventional monopulse.
Another single-channel system SCAMP  converts the sum and the two difference signals to different IF frequencies and amplifies them  simultaneously in a single, wide-band amplifier.20 The output is hard-limited to provide the  effect of an instantaneous AGC.
The three signals after limiting are separated by narrowband  filters and then converted to the same IF frequency for further processing.
The hard-limiting,  however, causes cross-coupling between the azimuth and the elevation error-signal channels  and can result in significant error." Two-channel monopulse receivers have also been used by  combining the sum and the two difference signals in a manner such that they can be again  resolved into three components after amplification.'.2z  The purpose ill using one- or two-channel monopulse receivers is to ease the problem  associated wit11 rnairitai~ling identical phase and amplitude balance among the three channels  of the conventiotial receiver.
These techniques provide some advantage in this regard but they  car1 result it1 uridesired couplilig between the azimuth and elevation chennels and a loss in  signal-to-tloise ratio.
 The monopulse antenna must generate a sum pattern with high efficiency (maximum  boresight gain), and a differelice pattern with a large value of slope at the crossover of the offset  beams.
Furthermore, the sidelobes of both the sum and the difference patterns must be low.
 The antenna must be capable of the desired bandwidth, and the patterns must have the desired  polarization characteristics.
It is not surprising that the achievement of all these properties  cannot always be fully satisfied simultaneously.
Antenna design is an important part of the  successful realization of a good monopulse radar.
 The uniform aperture illumination maximizes the aperture efficiency and, hence, the  directive gain.
The aperture illumination that maximizes the slope of the difference pattern is  the linear illunlination function with odd symmetry about the center of the apert~re.'~ Not  only do both of these aperture illuminations produce patterns with relatively high sidelobes,  but they cannot be readily generated by the simple four-horn feed.
Independent control of the  sum arid the difference patterns is required in order to obtain simultaneously the optimum  patterns.
 The approximately "ideal" feed-illuminations for a monopulse radar is shown in  Fig.
5.10.
Tliis has been approximated in some precision tracking radars by a five-horn feed  consisting of one horn generating the sum pattern surrounded by four horns generating the  difference patterns.' Other approximations to the ideal designs include a twelve-horn feedz4  atid a feed consisting of four stacked horns in one plane with each horn generating three  waveguide modes in the other plane.z5 Higher-order waveguide modes are used to obtain the  desired sur~i arid differetice patterns from a sitigle horn without the necessity of complex  TRACKING RADAR163 controltakeplaceinthesingleIFamplifier.
Anyvariations affectallthreesignalssimulta­ neously.
Afteramplification, compensating delaysareintroduced tounscramble thetimese­ quenceandbringthesumsignalandthetwodifference signalsintimecoincidence.
Phase detection occursasintheconventional monopulse.
Another single-channel systemSCAMP converts thesumandthetwodifference signalstodifferent IFfrequencies andamplifies them simultaneously inasingle,wide-band amplifier.20Theoutputishard-limited toprovide the effectofaninstantaneous AGe.Thethreesignalsafterlimiting are separated bynarrowband filtersandthenconverted tothesameIFfrequency forfurtherprocessing.
Thehard-limiting, however, causescross-coupling between theazimuth andtheelevati.on error-signal channels andcanresultinsignificant error.21Two-channel monopulse receivers havealsobeenusedby combining thesumandthetwodifference signalsinamanner suchthattheycanbeagain resolved intothreecomponents afteramplification.1.22 Thepurpose inusingone-ortwo-channel monopulse receivers istoeasetheproblem associated withmaintaining identical phaseandamplitude balanceamongthethreechannels oftheconventional receiver.
Thesetechniques providesomeadvantage inthisregardbutthey canresultinundesired coupling between theazimuth andelevation channels andalossin signal-to-noise ratio.
Themonopulse antenna mustgenerate asumpatternwithhighefficiency (maximum boresight gain).andadifference patternwithalargevalueofslopeatthecrossover oftheoffset beams.Furthermore, thesidelobes ofboththesumandthedifference patterns mustbelow.
Theantenna mustbecapableofthedesiredbandwidth, andthepatterns musthavethedesired polarization characteristics.
Itisnotsurprising thattheachievement ofalltheseproperties cannotalwaysbefullysatisfied simultaneously.
Antenna designisanimportant partofthe successful realization ofagoodmonopulse radar.
Theuniform aperture illumination maximizes theaperture efficiency and,hence,the directive gain.Theaperture illumination thatmaximizes theslopeofthedifference patternis thelinearillumination function withoddsymmetry aboutthecenteroftheaperture.23Not onlydobothoftheseaperture illuminations produce patterns withrelatively highsidelobes, buttheycannotbereadilygenerated bythesimplefour-horn feed.Independent controlofthe sumandthedifference patterns isrequired inordertoobtainsimultaneously theoptimum patterns.
Theapproximately "ideal" feed-illuminations foramonopulse radarisshownin Fig.5.10.Thishasbeenapproximated insomeprecision tracking radarsbyafive-horn feed consisting ofonehorngenerating thesumpatternsurrounded byfourhornsgenerating the difference patterns.
IOtherapproximations totheidealdesignsincludeatwelve-horn feed24 andafeedconsisting offourstacked hornsinoneplanewitheachhorngenerating three waveguide modesintheotherplane.2sHigher-order waveguide modesareusedtoobtainthe desiredsumanddifference patterns fromasinglehornwithout thenecessity ofcomplex () FRONT/~ fLEVATlON~ ~ OlfFERENCE SUM'1-~ AZIMUTH~ DIFFERENCEFigure5.10Approximately" ideal"feed-aperture illumi­ nationformonopulsesumanddifference channels.
I 164 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  microwave combining circuitry.'~~~ These are called ni~rltittiodr /eCds.
Tl~c iise of Itlgll~r-or~lcr  waveguide modes in monopulse feeds to generate the required patterns results in feeds that arc:  of high efficiency, compact, simple, low loss, light weight, low aperture blockage, and exczllsnt  boresight stability independent of frequency.
 The greater the signal-to-noise ratio and the steeper the slope of the error signal in the  vicinity of zero angular error, the more accurate is the measi~rement of angle.
The error-signal  slope as a function of the squint angle or beam crossover is shown in Fig.
5.1 1 The maximun~  slope occurs at a beam crossover of about 1.1 dB.
 Automatic gain control (AGC) is required in order to maintain a stable closed-loop servo  system for angle tracking.'s2 The AGC in a monopulse radar IS accompllslled by ernploylng a  voltage proportional to the sum-channel IF output to control the gain of all three rcccivcr  channels.
The AGC results in a constant angle sensitivity independent of target size and range  With AGC the output of the angle-error detector is proportional to the difference srgrlal  normalized (divided) by the sum signal.
The output of the sum channel is constant.
 Hybrid tracking system.
Con~pulse~~ and "scan with compensation "" are the names given to  a hybrid tracking system that is a combination of monopulse and conical scan.
Two squinted  beams, similar to those of a single angle-coordinate amplitude-comparison monopulse, are  scanned (rotated or nutated) in space around the boresight axis.
(In the conical scan tracker,  only one squinted beam is scanned.) In conopulse, the sum and difference signals received in  the two squinted beams are extracted in a manner similar to that of the conventional monopulse  system.
Two-coordinate angle information is obtained by scanning the beams about the bore-  sight axis similar to the extraction of azimuth and elevation angle information in the conical-  scan tracker.
Amplitude fluctuations of the target echo signal do not in principle degrade the  tracking accuracy as in the conical-scan tracker because a difference signal is extracted from  the simultaneous outputs of the two squinted beams.
However, the need to scan the two beams  means that a single pulse angle-estimate is not obtained as in a true monopulse.
 An advantage claimed for this hybrid tracking technique is that, like monopulse, target  amplitude fluctuations do not affect the tracking accuracy.
It is also claimed that the simplicity  of conical scan is retained.
Both claims can be debated.
Although only two receivers are  required instead of the three used in a monopulse tracker, the mechanical rotation of the two  0 1 2 3 4 5 6  Beam crossover, dB Figure 5.1 1 Slope of the angular-error  signal at crossover for a monopulse  and conical-scan tracking radar.
0, -  half-power beamwidt h, 0, = squint  angle.
 164INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS microwave combining circuitry.
1.26Thesearecallednlllitimode feeds.Theuseofhigher-order waveguide modesinmonopulse feedstogenerate therequired patterns resultsinfeedsthatan: ofhighefficiency, compact, simple,lowloss,lightweight,lowaperture blockage, andexcellent boresight stability independent offrequency.
Thegreaterthesignal-to-noise ratioandthesteepertheslopeoftheerrorsignalinthe vicinityofzeroangularerror,themoreaccurate isthemeasurement ofangle.Theerror-signal slopeasafunction ofthesquintangleorbeamcrossover isshowninFig.5.11.Themaximum slopeoccursatabeamcrossover ofabout1.1dB.
Automatic gaincontrol(AGC)isrequired inordertomaintain astableclosed-loop servo systemforangletracking.
1.2TheAGCinamonopulse radarisaccomplished byemploying i:I voltageproportional tothesum-channel IFoutputtocontrol thegainofallthreereceiver channels.
TheAGCresultsinaconstant anglesensitivity independent oftargetsizeandrange.
WithAGCtheoutputoftheangle-error detector isproportional tothedifTtJrence signal normalized (divided) bythesumsignal.Theoutputofthesumchannel isconstant.
Hybridtracking system.
Conopulse86and"scanwithcompensation,,8 7arethenamesgivento ahybridtracking systemthatisacombination ofmonopulse andconicalscan.Twosquinted beams,similartothoseofasingleangle-coordinate amplitude-comparison monopulse, are scanned (rotated ornutated) inspacearoundtheboresight axis.(Intheconicalscantracker, onlyonesquinted beamisscanned.) Inconopulse, thesumanddifference signalsreceived in thetwosquinted beamsareextracted inamannersimilartothatoftheconventional monopulse system.Two-coordinate angleinformation isobtained byscanning thebeamsaboutthebore­ sightaxissimilartotheextraction ofazimuth andelevation angleinformation intheconical­ scantracker.
Amplitude fluctuations ofthetargetechosignaldonotinprinciple degrade the tracking accuracy asintheconical-scan trackerbecause adifference signalisextracted from thesimultaneous o'utputsofthetwosquinted beams.However, theneedtoscanthetwobeams meansthatasinglepulseangle-estimate isnotobtained asinatruemonopulse.
Anadvantage claimed forthishybridtracking technique isthat,likemonopulse, target amplitude fluctuations donotaffectthetracking accuracy.Itisalsoclaimed thatthesimplicity ofconicalscanisretained.
Bothclaimscanbedebated.
Although onlytworeceivers are required insteadofthethreeusedinamonopulse tracker,themechanical rotation ofthetwo (1)g4.0.....
~--o o".§.et'3.0",­ fL L(J,)e> L0 (1)II> '0e2.0 <1JUa.......20 '"x1.0 ~ 234 Beamcrossover, dB5FigureS.1lSlopeoftheangular-error signalatcrossover foramonopulse andconical-scan trackingradar.08= 6halr·power beamwidth.
Oq=squint angle. TRACKING RADAR 165  squinted beams is not an easy task.
Nutation, which preserves the plane ofpolarization, is even  rnorc difficult.
Rotation of tlie hearris causes the plane of polarization to rotate which can  carlqc undcsirahle target :iniplttirdc fliictuatiotis at tlie scan rate.
Altliougli such fluctuations  are theoretically removed by the rtionopulse type of processing, in practice the removal is not  corlij~lctc arid ntlgi~lat cr rot can rcsi~lt.~"itli nloderii solid-state tecllnology, the need for a  tliird receiver in tile conventio~ial tiiotiopi~lse tra,cker might not be as difficult to realize in  IJI;~CIICC ;iq 11ic cor~~l~lcxity of 11tol~c1 ly scii~iriirig a pair of sqt~ititcd hcanls.
Gcncrally it can hc  said t1i:it tllc ar~~~,litirtlc-cor111,ar is011 nio~iopulsc trackirig system is ~isually preferred over tliis  Iiyhrid techriiquc  I'haw-con~parisotr nio~ropt~lse.
Tlie tracking teciiniques disc:i~ssed thus far in this chapter were  i,;~s~tl on it corlljvtr is011 01 tlic III)IIIII'III(ICS of eclio signals received from two or Inore antenna  positionr.
.l'lie sequerltial-lobing arid conical-scan techniques used a single, time-shared  itritcriri:i I~ciit~l.
wliilc tlic tllor~ol,ulsc tccl~riiqt~c ~tscd two or 111orc sinit~lta~icous beatiis.
Tlle  clil'lcrctice in a~nplitudes in tlic several antenna positions was proportional to the angular error.
 l'lic :tnglc of ar rival (in one coordinate) rnay also be determined by comparing the phase  diflerericc hetween the sigtlals frotn two separate antennas.
Unlike the antennas of anlplitude-  conlparison trackers.
those used in pliase-comparison systems are not offset from the axis.
The  individual boresight axes of the antennas are parallel, causing the (far-field) radiation to  illurnitlate the same volume in space.
The ampliti~des of the target echo signals are essentially  tlic srirllc fro111 each antenna hcani, but the phases are different.
 .I'lie ~neasurerrierit of arigle of arrival by comparison of the phase relationships in the  sigrlnls frotri the separated antennas of a radio interferometer has been widely used by the  rnciio astronotners for precise nleasilrernerlts of the positions of radio stars.
The interferometer  as used by the radio astronomer is a passive instrument, the source of energy being radiated  by tile target itself.
A tracking radar which operates with phase information is similar to an  active interferometer and might be called an ilrrerferonteter radar.
It has also been called  sir~rrtltclrreo~ts-pI~c~.~~-co,npnriso~t radar, or phase-co~npariso~t mortopldse.
The latter term is the  one wliich will be used here.
 Iri Fig.
5.1 2 two antennas are shown separated by a distance d.
The distance to the target  is H and is assumed large corllpared with the antenna separation d.
The line of sight to the  Figure 5.12 Wavefront phase relationships in phase-  comparison monopulse radar.
 TRACKING RADAR165 squinted beamsisnotaneasytask.Nutation, whichpreserves theplaneofpolarization, iseven moredifficult.
Rotation oftheheamscauses theplaneofpolarization torotatewhichcan causeundesirahle targetamplitude lluctuatiolls atthescanrate.Although suchrtuctuations aretheoretically removed bythemOl1opulse typeofprocessing, inpractice theremoval isnot complete andangular errorcanresult.R6Withmodern solid-state technology, theneedfora thirdreceiver intheconventional mOl1opulse tra,ckermightnotbeasdifficult-to realizein practice astilecomplexity ofproperly scallning apairofsquinted beams.Generally itcanhe saidthaItheamplitude-comparison 111OIlopulse tracking systemisusuallypreferred overthis hyhridtechnique, Phase-comparison monopulse.
Thetracking techniques discussed thusfarinthischapter were hased 011acomparison ofthe1lI111,1il/ldl'sofechosignalsreceived fromtwoormoreantenna positions.Thesequential-Iobing andconical-scan techniques usedasingle,time-shared alltcllna heam,whilethemOllopulse technique usedtwoormorcsimultancous beams.The differencc inamplitudes intheseveralantenna positions wasproportional totheangularerror.
Theangleofarrival(inonccoordinate) mayalsobedetermined bycomparing thephase difference betwecn thcsignalsfromtwoseparate antennas.
Unliketheantennas ofamplitude­ comparison trackers, thoseusedinphase-comparison systemsarenotoffsetfromtheaxis.The individual boresight axesoftheantennas areparallel, causing the(far-field) radiation to illuminate thesamevolumeinspace.Theamplitudes ofthetargetechosignalsareessentially thesamefromeachantcnna heam,butthephasesaredifferent.
Themeasurement ofangleofarrivalbycomparison ofthephaserelationships inthe signalsfromlheseparated antennas ofaradiointerferometer hasbeenwidelyusedbythe radioastronomers forprecisemeasurements ofthepositions ofradiostars.Theinterferometer asusedbytheradioastronomer isapassiveinstrument, thesource!Jfenergybeingradiated hythetargetitself.Atracking radarwhichoperates withphaseinformation issimilartoan activeinterferometer andmightbecalledanimerferometer radar.Ithasalsobeencalled Sillllllt(/I/(-'0I1S-phase-co11lpar;soll radar,orphase-comparison mOllupll[se.
Thelattertermisthe onewhichwillbeusedhere.
InFig.5.12twoantennas areshownseparated byadistance d.Thedistance tothetarget isRandisassumed largecompared withtheantenna separation d.Thelineofsighttothe Antenna NO.1---'"Target Figure5.12Wavefront phaserelationships inphase­ comparison monopulse radar. 166 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  target makes an angle 0 to the perpendicular bisector of the line joining the two antennas.
The  distance from antenna 1 to the target is  and the distance from antenna 2 to the target is  d Rz = R - - sin 0 2  The phase difference between the echo signals in the two antennas is approximately  271 A4 = - d sin O 1  For small angles where sin O 0, the phase difference is a linear function of the angular error  and may be used to position the antenna via a servo-control loop.
 In the early versions of the phase-comparison monopulse radar, the angular error was  determined by measuring the phase difference between the outputs of receivers connected to  each antenna.
The output from one of the antennas was used for transmission and for provid-  ing the range information.
with such an arrangement it was difficult to obtain the desired  aperture illuminations and to maintain a stable boresight.
A more satisfactory method of  operation is to form the sum and difference patterns in the RF and to process the signals as in a  conventional amplitude-comparison monopulse radar.
 In one embodiment of the phase-comparison principle as applied to missile g~~idance the  phase difference between the signals in two fixed antennas is measured with a servo-controlled  phase shifter located in one of the armsz7 The servo loop adjusts the phase sllifter ilntil 111e  difference in phase between the two channels is a null.
The amount of phase shift which \\as to  be introduced to make a null signal is a measure of the angular error.
 The phase- and amplitude-comparison principles can be combined in a single radar to  produce two-dimensional angle tracking with only two, rather than four, antenna beams.2B  The angle information in one plane (the azimuth) is obtained by two separate antennas placed  side by side as in a phase-comparison monopulse.
One of the beams is tilted slightly upward,  while the other is tilted slightly downward, to achieve the squint needed for amplitude-  comparison monopulse in elevation.
Therefore the horizontal projection of the antenna pat-  terns is that of a phase-comparison system, while the vertical projection is that of an  amplitude-comparison system.
 Both the amplitude-comparison-monopulse and the phase-comparison-monopiilse  trackers employ two antenna beams (for one coordinate tracking).
The measiirements made  by the two systems are not the same; consequently, the characteristics of the antenna beams  will also be different, In the amplitude-comparison monopulse the two beams arc offset, Illat is,  point in slightly different directions.
This type of pattern may be generated by using one  reflector dish with two feed horns side by side (four feed horns for two coordinate data).
Since  the feeds may be placed side by side, they could be as close as one-half wavelcngtl~.
With s~rch  close spacing the phase difference between the signals received in the two feeds is negligibly  small.
Any difference in the amplitudes between the two antenna outputs in the arnplitude-  comparison system is a result of differences in amplitude and not phase.
The phase-  comparison monopulse, on the other hand, measures phase differences only and is not  concerned with amplitude difference.
Therefore the antenna beams are not offset, but are  directed to illuminate a common volume in space.
Separate antennas are needed since it is  166INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS targetmakesanangle0totheperpendicular bisector ofthelinejoiningthetwoantennas.
The distance fromantenna 1tothetargetis R Rd.)I=+Sill(2 andthedistance fromantenna 2tothetargetis R2=R-~sin(1 Thephasedifference between theechosignalsinthetwoantennas isapproximately t:..¢=2,l,.7rdsin()..(5.1) Forsmallangleswheresin0~0,thephasedifference isalinearfunction oftheangularerror andmaybeusedtoposition theantenna viaaservo-control loop.
Intheearlyversions ofthephase-comparison monopulse radar,theangularerrorwas determined bymeasuring thephasedifference between theoutputsofreceivers connected to eachantenna.
Theoutputfromoneoftheantennas wasusedfortransmission andforprovid­ ingtherangeinformation.
Withsuchanarrangement itw.asdifficult toobtainthedesired aperture illuminations andtomaintain astableboresight.
Amoresatisfactory method of operation istoformthesumanddifference patterns intheRFandtoprocessthesignalsasina conventional amplitude-comparison monopulse radar.
Inoneembodiment ofrhephase-comparison principle asappliedtomissileguidance the phasedifference between thesignalsintwofixedantennas ismeasured withaservo-controlled phaseshifterlocatedinoneofthearms.27Theservo[oopadjuststhephaseshifteruntilthe difference inphasebetween thetwochannels isanull.Theamountofphaseshiftwhichhasto beintroduced tomakeanullsignalisameasure oftheangular error.
Thephase-andamplitude-comparison principles canbecombined inasingleradarto produce two-dimensional angletracking withonlytwo,ratherthanfour,antenna beams.28 Theangleinformation inoneplane(theazimuth) isobtained bytwoseparate antennas placed sidebysideasinaphase-comparison monopulse.
Oneofthebeamsistiltedslightlyupward, whiletheotheristiltedslightly downward, toachieve thesquintneededforamplitude­ comparison monopulse inelevation.
Therefore thehorizontal projection oftheantenna pat­ ternsisthatofaphase-comparison system, whilethevertical projection isthatofan amplitude-comparison system.
Boththeamplitude-comparison-monopulse andthephase-comparison-monopulse trackers employtwoantenna beams(foronecoordinate tracking).
Themeasurements made bythetwosystems arenotthesame;consequently, thecharacteristics oftheantenna beams willalsobedifferent.
Intheamplitude-comparison monopulse thetwobeamsarcoffset,thatis, pointinslightly different directions.
Thistypeofpattern maybegenerated byusingone reflector dishwithtwofeedhornssidebyside(fourfeedhornsfortwocoordinate data).Since thefeedsmaybeplacedsidebyside,theycouldbeascloseasonc-half wavelength.
WithSlIch closespacing thephasedifference between thesignalsreceived inthetwofeedsisnegligihly small.Anydifference intheamplitudes between thetwoantenna outputs intheamplitude­ comparison system isaresultofdifferences inamplitude andnotphase.Thephase­ comparison monopu)se, ontheotherhand,measures phasedifferences onlyandisnot concerned withamplitude difference.
Therefore theantenna beamsarenotoffset,butare directed toillumin~te acommon volume inspace.Separate antennas areneededsinceitis difficult to illuniinate a single reflector with more than one feed and produce independeilt  antenna patterns which illuminate the same volume in space.
 Although tracking radars based upon the phase-comparison monopulse principle have  been built and operated, this technique has not been as widely used as some of the other  angle-tracking methods.
The sum signal has higher sidelobes because the separation between  the phase centers of the separate antennas is large.
(These high sidelobes are the result of  qrcltirrq lohcrs.
similar to those produced in phased arrays.) The problem of high sidelobes can  Ilc rctl\~ccd by overl:lppirlg the antentla apcrturcs.
With reflector antennas.
this results ill a loss  of :tr~gle ser~sitivity arid atlte~ltia gain.
 5.5 'I'AH(;E;'I'-UEF1,EC'TION CI IAUAC'I'ERISTICS AND ANGULAR ACCUHACY".~ 1-95  I Ilc angular accuracy of tracking radar will be il~fluetlced by such factors as the nieclla~lical  properties of the radar antenna and pedestal, the method by which the angular position of the  antenria is measured, the quality of the se-, the stability of the electronic circuits, the  noise level of the receiver, the antenna beamwidth, atmospheric fluctuations, and the reflection  characteristics of the target.
These factors can degrade the tracking accuracy by causing the  antenna beam to fluctuate in a random manner about the true target path.
These noiselike  fluctuations are sometimes called trackiltg ltoise, or jitter.
 A simple radar target such as a smooth sphere sot cause degradation of the angular-  tracking accuracy.
The radar cross section of a sphere is independent of the aspect at which it  is viewed; consequently, its echo will not fluctuate with time.
The same is true, in general, ofa  radar beacon if its antenna pattern is omnidirectional.
However, most radar targets are of a  riiore complex nature than the sphere.
Tlle amplitude of the echo signal from a complex target  may vary over wide limits as the aspect changes with respect to the radar.
In addition, the  effective center of radar reflection may also change.
Both of these effects-amplitude fluctua-  tions and wandering of the radar center of reflection-as well as the limitation imposed by  receiver noise can limit the tracking accuracy.
These effects are discussed below.
 Amplitude fluctuations.
A cornplex target such as an aircraft or a ship may be considered as a  nuniber of independent scattering elements.
The echo signal can be represented as the vector  addition of the contributions from the individual scatterers.
If the target aspect changes with  respect to the radar-as might occur because of motion of the target, or turbulence in the case  of aircraft targets-the relative phase and amplitude relationships of the contributions from  the individual scatterers also change.
Consequently, the vector sum, and therefore the ampli-  tude, change with changing target aspect.
 Amplitude fluctuations of the echo signal are important in the design of the lobe-  switching radar and the conical-scan radar but are of little consequence to the monopulse  tracker.
Both the conical-scan tracker and the lobe-switching tracker require a finite time to  obtain a measuremerlt of the angle error.
This time corresponds in the conical-scan tracker to  at least one revolutiorl of the antenna beam.
With lobe switching, the minimum time is that  necessary to obtain echoes at the four successive angular positions.
In either case four pulse-  repetition periods are required to make a measurement; in practice, many more than four are  often used.
If the target cross section were to vary during this observation time, the change  might he erroneoilsly interpreted as an angular-error signal.
The monopulse radar, on the  other ttand.
detern~ines the-angular error on-the-.basis of a single pulse.
Its accuracy will  therefore riot be affected by changes in amplitude with time.
 TRACKING RADAR167 difficult toilluminate asinglerellector withmorethanonefeedandproduce independent antenna patterns whichilluminate thesamevolumeinspace.
Although tracking radarsbaseduponthephase-comparison monopulse principle have heenbuiltandoperated, thistechnique hasnotbeenaswidelyusedassomeoftheother angle-tracking methods.
Thesumsignalhashigher sidelobes because theseparation between thephasecentersoftheseparate antennas islarge.(Thesehighsidelobes aretheresultof gratinglohes.similartothoseproduced inphasedarrays.)Theproblem ofhighsidelobes can hereduced byoverlapping theantenna apertures.
Withreflector antennas, thisresultsinaloss ofanglesensitivity andantenna gain.
5.5TARGET-REFLECTION CHARACTERISTICS ANDANGULAR ACCURACyJo.41.Q5 Theangular accuracy oftracking radarwillbeinfluenced bysuchfactorsasthemechanical properties oftheradarantenna andpedestal, themethodbywhichtheangular position ofthe antenna ismeasured, thequalityofthes~osysteQ'l,thestability oftheelectronic circuits, the noiselevelofthereceiver, theantenna beamwidth, atmospheric fluctuations, andthereflection characteristics ofthetarget.Thesefactorscandegrade thetracking accuracy bycausingthe antenna beamtofluctuate inarandom manner aboutthetruetargetpath.Thesenoiselike fluctuations aresometimes calledtracking noise,orjitter.
Asimpleradartargetsuchasasmoothspherewillnotcausedegradation oftheangular­ tracking accuracy.
Theradarcrosssectionofasphereisindependent oftheaspectatwhichit isviewed:consequently, itsechowillnotfluctuate withtime.Thesameistrue,ingeneral,ofa radarbeaconifitsantenna pattern isomnidirectional.
However, mostradartargetsareofa morecomplex naturethanthesphere.Theamplitude oftheechosignalfromacomplex target mayvaryoverwidelimitsastheaspectchanges with respec~totheradar.Inaddition.
the effective centerofradarrellection mayalsochange.
Bothoftheseeffects-amplitude fluctua­ tionsandwandering oftheradarcenterofreflection-as wellasthelimitation imposed by receiver noisecanlimitthetracking accuracy.
Theseeffectsarediscussed below.
Amplitude fluctuations.
Acomplex targetsuchasanaircraftorashipmaybeconsidered asa number ofindependent scattering elements.
Theechosignalcanberepresented asthevector addition ofthecontributions fromtheindividual scatterers.
Ifthetargetaspectchanges with respecttotheradar-as mightoccurbecauseofmotionofthetarget,orturbulence inthecase ofaircrafttargets-the relative phaseandamplitude relationships ofthecontributions from theindividual scatterers alsochange.
Consequently, thevectorsum,andtherefore theampli­ tude.changewithchanging targetaspect.
Amplitude fluctuations oftheechosignalareimportant inthedesignofthelobe­ switching radarandtheconical-scan radarbutareoflittleconsequence tothemonopulse tracker.
Boththeconical-scan trackerandthelobe-switching trackerrequireafinitetimeto obtainameasurement oftheangleerror.Thistimecorresponds intheconical-scan trackerto atleastonerevolution oftheantenna beam.Withlobeswitching, theminimum timeisthat necessary toobtainechoesatthefoursuccessive angular positions.
Ineithercasefourpulse­ repetition periodsarerequired tomakeameasurement; inpractice, manymorethanfourare oftenused.Hthetargetcrosssectionweretovaryduringthisobservation time,thechange mightbeerroneollsly interpreted asanangular-error signal.Themonopulse radar,onthe otherhand.determines thLang.ulaI.cr+OLon_tbe __ba.sl~ofasinglepulse.Itsaccuracy will therefore notbeaffected bychanges inamplitude withtime. To reduce the effect of amplitude noise on tracking, the conical-scan frequency shoitld be  chosen to correspond to a low value of amplitude noise.
If considerable amplitude tl~ictuation  noise were to appear at the conical-scan or lobe-switching frequencies, it could not be readily  eliminated with filters or AGC.
A typical scan freqliency might be of the order of 30 fir.
 Higher frequencies might also be used since target amplitude noise generally decreases with  increasing frequency.
However, this may not always be true.
Propeller-driven aircraft produce  modulation components at the blade frequency and harmonics thereof and can cause a sub-  stantial increase in the spectral energy density at certain frequencies.
it has been found exper-  imentally that the tracking accuracy of radars operating with pulse repetition frequencies from  1000 to 4000 Hz and a lobing or scan rate one-quarter of tlie prf arc not limited by ccho  amplitude fluct~ations.~~  The percentage modulation of the echo signal due to cross-section aniplitude tluctilatio~is  is independent of range if AGC is used.
Consequently, the angular error as a rault ofampli-  tude fluctuations will also be independent of range.
 Angle  fluctuation^.^^.^^ Changes in the target aspect with respect to thc radar can cailse the  apparent center of radar reflections to wander from one point to another.
(The apparent center  of radar reflection is the direction of the antenna when the error signal is zero.) In general, the  apparent center of reflection might not correspond to the target center.
In fact, it need not he  confined to the physical extent of the target and may be off the target a significant fraction of  the time.
The random wandering of the apparent radar reflecting center gives rise to noisy or  jittered angle tracking.
This form of tracking noise is called angle noise, arlgle scintillatiorls,  angle juctuations, or target glint.
The angular fluctuations produced by small targets at long  range may be of little consequence in most instances.
However, at short range or with rela-  tively large targets (as might be seen by a radar seeker on a homing missile), angular Hilctua-  tions may be the chief factor limiting tracking accuracy.
Angle fluctuations affect all tracking  radars whether conical-scan, sequential-lobing, or monopulse.
 Consider a rather simplified model of a complex radar target consisting of two indepen-  dent isotropic scatterers separated by an angular distance O,>, as measureti from the ratiar.
 Although such a target may be fictitious and used for reasons of mathematical simplicity, it  might approximate a target such as a small fighter aircraft with wing-tip tanks or two aircraft  targets flying in formation and located within the same radar resolution cell.
It is also a close  approximation to the low-angle tracking problem in which the radar sees the target pltis its  image reflected from the surface.
The qualitative effects of target glint may be assessed from  this model.
The relative amplitude of the two scatterers is assumed to be (1, and tlie relative  phase difference is a.
Differences in phase might be due to differences in range or to ret'tccting  properties.
The ratio a is defined as a number less than unity.
The angular error A0 as  measured from the larger of the two targets is3'  A0 -- - a2 + a cos or  OD 1 + a2 + 2a cos or  This is plotted in Fig.
5.13.
The position of the larger of the two scatterers corresponds to  AOlO,, = 0, while the smaller-scatterer position is at AO/OD = + 1.
Positive values of A0 corre-  spond to an apparent radar center which lies between the two scatterers; negative values lie  outside the target.
When the echo signals from both scatterers are in phase (a = O), the error  reduces to a/(a + I), which corresponds to the so-called "center of gravity" of the two scat-  terers (not to be confused with the mechanical center of gravity).
 Angle fluctuations are due to random changes in the relative distance from radar to the  scatterers, that is, varying values of a.
These changes may result from turbulence in the aircraft  (5.2)168INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS Toreducetheeffectofamplitude noiseontracking, theconical-scan frequency shouldbe chosentocorrespond toa-lowva1ueofamplitude noise.Ifconsiderable amplitude fluctuation noiseweretoappearattheconical-scan orlobe-switching frequencies, itcouldnotbereadily eliminated withfiltersorAGe.Atypicalscanfrequency mightbeoftheorderof30Hz.
Higherfrequencies mightalsobeusedsincetargetamplitude noisegenerally decreases with increasing frequency.
However, thismaynotalwaysbetrue.Propeller-driven aircraftproduce modulation components atthebladefrequency andharmonics thereofandcancauseasub­ stantialincrease inthespectral energydensityatcertainfrequencies.
Ithasbeenfoundexper­ imentally thatthetracking accuracy ofradarsoperating withpulserepetition frequencies from 1000to4000Hzandalobingorscanrateone-quarter oftheprfarenotlimitedbyecho amplitude f1uctuations.29 Thepercentage modulation oftheechosignalduetocross-section amplitude lluctuations isindependent ofrangeifAGCisused.Consequently, theangularerrorasarcsultofampli­ tudefluctuations willalsobeindependent ofrange.
Anglefluctuations.29.3oChanges inthetargetaspectwithrespecttothcradarcancalisethc apparent centerofradarreflections towanderfromonepointtoanother.
(Theapparent center ofradarreflection isthedirection oftheantenna whentheerrorsignaliszero.)Ingencral,the apparent centerofreflection mightnotcorrespond tothetargetcenter.Infact,itneednotbe confined tothephysical extentofthetargetandmaybeoffthetargetasignificant fractionof thetime.Therandom wandering oftheapparent radarreflecting centergivesrisetonoisyor jitteredangletracking.
Thisformoftracking noiseiscalledanglenoise,anglescintillations, anglefluctuations, ortargetglint.Theangular fluctuations produced bysmalltargetsatlong rangemaybeoflittleconsequence inmostinstances.
However, atshortrangeorwithrela­ tivelylargetargets(asmightbeseenbyaradarseekeronahomingmissile), angularlluctua­ tionsmaybethechieffactorlimitingtracking accuracy.
Anglefluctuations affectalltracking radarswhether conical-scan, sequential-Iobing, ormonopulse.
Consider arathersimplified modelofacomplex radartargetconsisting oftwoindepen­ dentisotropic scatterers separated byanangular distance 0IJ,asmeasured fromtheradar.
Although suchatargetmaybefictitious andusedforreasonsofmathematical simplicity, it mightapproximate atargetsuchasasmallfighteraircraftwithwing-tip tanksortwoaircraft targetsflyinginformation andlocatedwithinthesameradarresolution cell.Itisalsoaclose approximation tothelow-angle tracking problem inwhichtheradarseesthetargetpillSits imagereflected fromthesurface.Thequalitative effectsoftargetglintmaybeassessed from thismodel.Therelativeamplitude ofthetwoscatterers isassumed tobea,andtherelative phasedifference isCt..Differences inphasemightbeduetodifferences inrangeortorel1ccting properties.
Theratioaisdefined asanumber lessthanunity.Theangular error ~IJas measured fromthelargerofthetwotargetsis3! 110a2+acosCi.
8D=1+a2+2acosCi.
ThisisplottedinFig.5.13.Theposition ofthelargerofthetwoscatterers corresponds to !!.(J/OIJ=0,whilethesmaller-scatterer position isat110/0D=+1.Positive valuesof!!.(Jcorre­ spondtoanapparent radarcenterwhichliesbetween thetwoscatterers; negative valueslie outsidethetarget.Whentheechpsignalsfrombothscatterers areinphase (Ci.=0),theerror reducestoa/(a+1),whichcorresponds totheso-called" centerofgravity" ofthetwoscat­ terers(nottobeconfused withthemechanical centerofgravity).
Anglefluctuations areduetorandom changes intherelativedistance fromradartothe scaUerers, thatis,varyingvaluesofCi..Thesechanges mayresultfromturbulenc.e intheaircraft I;i~t~rc 5.13 Plot of tiq.
(5.2).
Apparerlt radar center A0 of two isotropic scatterers of relative amplitude a  :trlti rclativc pI);~sc sl~if! sr, scparatcd hy an nt~gulitr cxtctlt 0,.
 Iliglit path or from the chariging aspect caused by target motion.
In essence, angle fluctuations  are a distortion of the phase front of the echo signal reflected from a complex target and may be  ttisunli7ed as the apparent tilt of this phase front as it arrives at the tracking system.
 Equation (5.2) indicates that the tracking error A0 due to glint for the two-scatterer target  is directly proportio~ial to the angular extent of the target OD.
This is probably a reasonable  approxirnatiori to tlie behavior of real targets, provided the angular extent of the target is not  too large compared with ttie antenna beamwidth.
Since OD varies inversely with distance for a  fixed target size, tlie tracking error due to glint also varies inversely with distance.
 A slightly more complex model than the two-scatterer target considered above is one  consisting of rnatiy individual scatterers, each of the same cross section, arranged uniformly  along a line of length L perpendicular to the line of sight from the radar.
The resultant cross  scctiori froin sucll a target is assumed to behave according to the Rayleigh probability distribu-  tion.
Tlie probability of the apparent radar center lying outside the angular region of LIR  radians (in one tracking plane) is 0.134, where R is the distance to the target.j2 Thus 13.4 per-  cent of the time the radar will not be directed to a point on the target.
Similar results for a  two-dirne~isiorial riiodcl consisting of equal-cross-section scatterers uniformly spaced over a  circular area indicate that the probability that the apparent radar center lies outside this target  is 0.20.
 Angle fluctuations in a tracking radar are reduced by increasing the time constant of the  AGC system (reducing the band widt h).29.33.34 Ho wever, this reduction in angle fluctuation is  acconipariied by a new cotnponent of noise caused by the amplitude fluctuations associated  witti tlie echo signal; that is, narrowing the AGC bandwidth generates additional noise in the  vicinity of zero frequency, and poorer tracking results.
Amplitude noise modulates the  tracking-error sigrials and produces a new noise component, proportional to true tracking  errors.
tliat is enhanced with a slow AGC.
Under practical tracking conditions it seems that a  wide-bandwid th (short-time constant) AGC should be used to minimize the overall tracking  noise.
However, tlie servo bandwidth stiould be kept to a minimum consistent with tactical  reqr~irenients in order to minimize the noise.
 TRACKING RADAR169 0.5 0.4.
0.2 0 t::.B ~ Bo·--0.2- --04 --0.6 '- -0.8- -1.0 0?O <106080100120140160180 Phasedifference ~ FigureS.UPlotofEq.(5.2).Apparent radarcenterL10oftwoisotropic scatterers ofrelativeamplitude a andIclativcphascshinIJ..scparatcd byanangular extentOv.
flightpathorfromthechanging aspectcausedbytargetmotion.
Inessence, anglefluctuations areadistortion ofthephasefrontoftheechosignalreflected fromacomplex targetandmaybe visualizcd astheapparent tiltofthisphasefrontasitarrivesatthetracking system.
Equation (5.2)indicates thatthetracking error6.0duetoglintforthetwo-scatterer target isdirectly proportional totheangular extentofthetargetOD.Thisisprobably areasonable approximation tothebehavior ofrealtargets,provided theangular extentofthetargetisnot toolargecompared withtheantenna beamwidth.
SinceODvariesinversely withdistance fora fixedtargctsize,thetracking errorduetoglintalsovariesinversely withdistance.
/\.slightlymorecomplex modelthanthetwo-scatterer targetconsidered aboveisone consisting ofmanyindividual scatterers, eachofthesamecrosssection,arranged uniformly alongalineoflengthLperpendicular tothelineofsightfromtheradar.Theresultant cross sectionfromsuchatargetisassumed tobehaveaccording totheRayleigh probability distribu­ tion.Theprohahility oftheapparent radarcenterlyingoutside theangular regionofLIR radians(indnetrackingplane)is0.134,whereRisthedistance tothetarget.
32Thus13.4per­ centofthetimetheradarwillnotbedirected toapointonthetarget.Similar resultsfora two-dimensional modelconsisting ofequal-cross-section scatterers uniformly spacedovera circular areaindicate thattheprobability thattheapparent radarcenterliesoutsidethistarget is0.20.
Anglefluctuations inatracking radararereduced byincreasing thetimeconstant ofthe AGesystem(reducing thebandwidth).29.33.34 However, thisreduction inanglefluctuation is accompanied byanewcomponent ofnoisecausedbytheamplitude fluctuations associated withtheechosignal;thatis,narrowing the/\.Gebandwidth generates additional noiseinthe vicinity ofzerofrequency, andpoorertracking results.
Amplitude noisemodulates the tracking-error signalsandproduces anewnoisecomponent, proportional totruetracking errors,thatisenhanced withaslowAGe.Underpractical tracking conditions itseemsthata wide-bandwidth (short-time constant) AGeshouldbeusedtominimize theoveralltracking noise.However, theservobandwidth shouldbekepttoaminimum consistent withtactical requirements inordertominimize thenoise. 170 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  Receiver and servo noise.
Another limitation on tracking accuracy is the receiver noise power.
 The accuracy of the angle measurement is inversely proportional to the square root of the  signal-to-noise power ratio.' Since the signal-to-noise ratio is proportional to 1/R4 (from the  radar equation), the angular error due to receiver noise is proportional to the square of  the target distance.
 Servo noise is the hunting action of the tracking servomechanism which results from  backlash and compliance in the gears, shafts, and structures of the mount.
The magnitude of  servo noise is essentially independent of the target echo and will therefore be independent of  range.
 Summary of errors.
The contributions of the various factors affecting the tracking error  are summarized in Fig.
5.14.
Angle-fluctuation noise varies inversely with range; receiver  noise varies as the square of the range; and amplitude fluctuations and servo noise are  independent of range.
This is a qualitative plot showing the gross effects of each of the factors.
 Two different resultant curves are shown.
Curve A is the sum of all effects and is representative  of conical-scan and sequential-lobing tracking radars.
Curve B does not include the amplitude  fluctuations and is therefore representative of monopulse radars.
In Fig.
5.1 the amplitude -asJ  fluctuations are assumed to be larger than servo noise.
If not, the improvement of rnonopulse  tracking over conical scan will be negligible.
In general, the tracking accuracy deteriorates at  ry\ both short and long target ranges, with the best tracking occurring at some intermediate range.
 ' -/~re~uene~ agility and glint redu~tion.~~~~~~~' Th e angular error due to glint, which affects all  tracking radars, results from the radar receiving the vector sum of the echoes contributed by  the individual scattering centers of a complex target, and processing it as if it were the return  from a single scattering center.
If the frequency is changed, the relative phases of the individual  ( rnonopulse  Receiver noise  (conical scan)  I 1 1 1 11 1111 I 1 1 11 1111 I 1 1 11 111  1 10 100 1,000  Relative radar range  Figure 5.14 Relative contributions to angle tracking error due to amplitude fluctuations, angle fluctua-  tions, receiver noise, and servo noise as a function of range.
(A) Composite error for a conical-scan or  sequential-lobing radar; (B) composite error for monopulse.
 170INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS Receiver andservonoise.Another limitation ontracking accuracy isthereceivernoise power.
Theaccuracy oftheanglemeasurement isinversely proportional tothe·squarerootofthe signal-to-noise powerratio.2Sincethesignal-to-noise ratioisproportional to1/R4(fromthe radarequation), theangular errorduetoreceiver noiseisproportional tothesquareof thetargetdistance.
Servonoiseisthehunting actionofthetracking servomechanism whichresultsfrom backlash andcompliance inthegears,shafts,andstructures ofthemount.Themagnitude of servonoiseisessentially independent ofthetargetechoandwilltherefore beindependent of range.
Summary oferrors.Thecontributions ofthevarious factorsaffecting thetracking error aresummarized inFig.5.14.Angle-fluctuation noisevariesinversely withrange;receiver noisevariesasthesquareoftherange;andamplitude fluctuations andservonoiseare independent ofrange.Thisisaqualitative plotshowing thegrosseffectsofeachofthefactors.
Twodifferent resultant curvesareshown.CurveAisthesumofalleffectsandisrepresentative ofconical-scan andsequential-Iobing tracking radars.CurveBdoesnotincludetheamplitude fluctuations andistherefore representative ofmonopulse radars.InFig.5.1theamplitude fluctuations areassumed tobelargerthanservonoise.Ifnot,theimprovement ofmonopulse tracking overconicalscanwillbenegligible.
Ingeneral,thetracking accuracy deteriorates at["bothshorlandlonglargetranges,withthebesttracking occurring atsomeintermediate range .·-JFrequenCy agilityandglintreduction.35-40,85Theangularerrorduetoglint,whichaffectsall tracking radars,resultsfromtheradarreceiving thevectorsumoftheechoescontributed by theindividual scattering centersofacomplex target,andprocessing itasifitwerethereturn fromasinglescattering center.Ifthefrequency ischanged, therelativephasesoftheindividual I.­o L..
I.- ~0.1 cxuo L..­l.- E ::30' Co '"E I.- .~0.01-E Clla::/ I IL.Receiver noise (monopulse) '<4.''-- Receiver noise (conicalscanI 10 100 Relativeradarrange1,000 Figure5.14Relative contributions toangletracking errorduetoamplitude fluctuations, anglefluctua­ tions,receivernoise,andservonoiseasafunction ofrange.(A)Composite errorforaconical-scan or sequential-Iobing radar;(8)composite errorformonopulse. scatterers will change and a new resultant is obtained as well as a new angular measurement.
 Measurements are independent if tlie frequency is changed by an amountJ6  where c = velocity of propagation arid D = target depth.
The glint error can be reduced by  averaging the independent measurements obtained with frequency agility.
(The depth D as  seen by the radar might be less than tlie geometrical measurement of target depth if the  extremities of the target result in small backscatter.)  The improvernerlt 1 in the tracking accuracy when the frequency is changed pulse-to-pulse  is approximately3'  where Bfa = the frequency agility bandwidth, D = target depth, c = velocity of propagation,  B, = glint bandwidth, and f, = pulse repetition frequency.
(The approximation holds for large  prf's and for the usual glint bandwidths which are of the order of a few hertz to several tens of  For example.
with a target depth D of 7 m and a frequency-agile bandwidth of  300 MHz.
the glint error is reduced by a factor of 2.6.
According to the above, the improve-  merit in trackin accuracy is proportional to the square root of the frequency agility band-  width.
or 1 - &.
 A different glint model, based on the assumption that the angular motion of a complex  target can be described by a gaussian random yaw motion of zero mean, yields the result that  the reductior~ in angle error due to frequency agility asymptotically approaches a value of 3.1  with increasing agility bandwidth.38 The model also gives the variance of the inherent glint tor  a frequency-agile radar as  var = 0.142~6 (5.5)  where )-, is the lateral radius of gyration of the collection of scatterers comprising the target.
 The value of yo for a " typical" twin-jet aircraft in level flight at near head-on or near tail-on  aspect is saidJ8 to be equal to half the separation of the jet engines.
For a ship at broadside, yo  is approximately 0.15 times the ship length.
 When angle errors due to glint are large, the received signals are small; that is, the  received signal amplitude and the glint error are negatively correlated.
Thus, by transmitting a  number of frequencies and using the angle error corresponding to that frequency with the  largest signal, it is possible to eliminate the large angle errors associated with Those  returns of low amplitude and, hence, of high error, are excluded in this technique.
Instead of  selecting only the largest signal for processing, the indicated position of the target at each  frequency can be weighted according to the amplitude of the return.40 Only a small number of  frequencies is needed to reduce substantially the glint error.
The reduction in rms tracking  error by processing only that signal (frequency) with the largest amplitude is appro~irnately~~  wticrc rr, is the sitigle-ftequeticy glint error and N is tlle number of frequencies.
The tracking  error will not decrease significantly for more than four pulses.
Each of the frequencies must be  separated by at least Af;, as giver1 by Eq.
(5.3).
 Frequency agility, as described here for the reduction of glint, applies to the monopulse  tracking radar.
It also reduces the glint in a conical scan or a sequential-lobing radar, but the  TRACKING RADAR171 scatterers willchangeandanewresultant isobtained aswellasanewangular measurement.
Measurements areindependent ifthefrequency ischanged byanamount36 c flfc=2D(5.3) (5.4)wherec=velocity ofpropagation andD=targetdepth.Theglinterrorcanbereduced by averaging theindependent measurements obtained withfrequency agility.(ThedepthDas seenbytheradarmightbelessthanthegeometrical measurement oftargetdepthifthe extremities ofthetargetresultinsmallbackscatter.) Theimprovement /inthetracking accuracy whenthefrequency ischanged pUlse-to-pulse isapproximately37 /2= 1 ~DBf'!.
2flfc/Bfa+2Bg/fp C whereBfa=thefrequency agilitybandwidth, D=targetdepth,c=velocityofpropagation, BI1=glintbandwidth, andI"=pulserepetition frequency.
(Theapproximation holdsforlarge prf'sandfortheusualglintbandwidths whichareoftheorderofafewhertztoseveraltensof hertz.)36 Forexample.
withatargetdepthDof7mandafrequency-agile bandwidth of 300MHz,theglinterrorisreduced byafactorof2.6.According totheabove,theimprove­ m~ntintrackin~curacy isproportional tothesquarerootofthefrequency agilityband­ WIdth.or/-...JBfa.
Adifferent glintmodel,basedontheassumption thattheangular motionofacomplex targetcanbedescribed byagaussian random yawmotionofzeromean,yieldstheresultthat thereduction inangleerrorduetofrequency agilityasymptotically approaches avalueof3.1 withincreasing agilitybandwidth.38Themodelalsogivesthevariance oftheinherent glintlor afrequency-agile radaras var=0.142y5 (5.5) where )"0isthelateralradiusofgyration ofthecollection ofscatterers comprising thetarget.
ThevalueofYofora"typical" twin-jet aircraftinlevelflightatnearhead-on orneartail-on aspectissaid38tobeequaltohalftheseparation ofthejetengines.
Forashipatbroadside, Yo isapproximately 0.15timestheshiplength.
Whenangleerrorsduetoglintarelarge,thereceived signalsaresmall;thatis,the received signalamplitude andtheglinterrorarenegatively correlated.
Thus,bytransmitting a number offrequencies andusingtheangleerrorcorresponding tothatfrequency withthe largestsignal.itispossible toeliminate thelargeangleerrorsassociated withglint.39,40Those returnsoflowamplitude and,hence,ofhigherror,areexcluded inthistechnique.
Insteadof selecting onlythelargestsignalforprocessing, theindicated position ofthetargetateach frequency canbeweighted according totheamplitude ofthereturn.40Onlyasmallnumberof frequencies isneededtoreducesubstantially theglinterror.Thereduction inrmstracking errorbyprocessing onlythatsignal(frequency) withthelargestamplitude isapproximatel y40 (5.6) where (1,isthesingle-frequency glinterrorandNisthenumberoffrequencies.
Thetracking errorwillnotdecrease significantly formorethanfourpulses.Eachofthefrequencies mustbe separated byatleastM~,asgivenbyEq.(5.3).
Frequency agility,asdescribed hereforthereduction ofglint,appliestothemonopulse trackingradar.Italsoreducestheglintinaconicalscanorasequentiai-Iobing radar,butthe 172 INTRODIJCTION TO KADAK SYSTEMS  changing frequency can result in amplitllde fluctilations wl~iclt can affect the angle tracking  accilracy if the spectrum of the fluctuations at the conical scan or the lobing freqt~zncies is  increased.
Thits, frequency agility might cause an increase in the angle error dile to amplitutie  llitcti~ations in these systems while decreasing the error due to glint.
The overall cffect of  frequency agility in conical scan or sequential lobing systems IS therefore more complicated to  analyze than monopulse systems which are unaffected by amplitude fluctuations.
 It has also been suggested54 that polarization agility can reduce the glint error.
Since the  individual echoes from the various scattering centers that make up a complex target are likely  to be sensitive to the polarization of the incident radar signal, a change in the polarization can  possibly result in an independent measure of the apparent target direction.
By observing the  target with a variable polarization producing independent measurements, the angle error due  to glint is averaged and the effect of the large glint errors is reduced.
Experimental measure-  ments with an X-band, conical-scan, pulse doppler radar tracking an M-48 t8nk at approxi-  mately 500 m range reduced the angular tracking error by about one-half.
In these tests, the  best results were obtained when the plane of polarization was switched in small increments  (5.6 to 22.5") at a rate greater than 500 steps per second, which is more than an order of  magnitude greater than the 40 Hz conical-scan rate.
,  &-angle tracking?' -53190- 94 A radar that tracks a target at a low elevation angle, near the  surface of the earth, can receive two echo signals from the target, Fig.
5.15.
One signal is  rettected directly from the target, and the other arrives via the earth's siirface.
(This is similar to  the description of surface reflections and its effect on the elevation coverage, as in Sec.
12.2.)  The direct and the surface-reflected signals combine at the radar toman angle measure-  ment that differs from the true measurement that would have been made with a single target in  the absence of surface reflections.
The result is an error in the measurement of elevation.
The  surface-reflected signal may be thought of as originating from the image of the target mirrored  by the earth's surface.
Thus, the effect on tracking is similar to the two-target model used to  describe glint, as discussed previously.
The surface-reflected signal is sometimes called a  rtllrltipatll signal.
 An example of the elevation angle error at low angles is shown in Fig.
5.16 for a target at  constant height.43 At close range the target elevation angle is large and the antenna beam does  not illuminate the surface; hence the tracking is smooth.
At intermediate range, where the  elevation angle is from 0.8 to as much as six beamwidths, the surface-reflected signal enters  the radar by means of the antenna near-in sidelobes.
The surface-reflected signal is small so  that the antenna makes small oscillations about some mean position.
At greater ranges (eleva-  tion angles less than about 0.8 beamwidth), where the an'tenna main beam illuminates the  surface, the interference between the direct and the reflected signals can result in large errors in  elevation angle.
The angular excursions can be up (into the air) or down (into the ground).
The  peak errors are severe and can be many times the angular separation between the target and its  Antenna beam ____------- -- - Radar __---- -- -- - ,Direct path ,  _------  --- --- 7 - - - - _ _--_-_ '--%-.3 lmoge  Surface - reflected path  Figure 5.15 Low-angle tracking illustrating the surface-reflected signal path and the target image.
 172INTRODUCTION TORADARSYSTEMS changing frequency canresultinamplitude fluctuations whichcanaffecttheangktracking accuracy ifthespectrum -ofthefluctuations attheconicalscanorthelobingfrequencies is increased.
Thus,frequency agilitymightcauseanincrease intheanglcerrorduetoamplitude lluctuations inthesesystems whiledecreasing theerrorduetoglint.Theoveralleffectof frequency agilityinconicalscanorsequential lobingsystems istherefore morecomplicated to analyzethanmonopulse systems whichareunaffected byamplitude fluctuations.
Ithasalsobeensuggested 54thatpolarization agilitycanreducetheglinterror.Sincethe individual echoesfromthevariousscattering centersthatmakeupacomplex targetarelikely tobesensitive tothepolarization oftheincident radarsignal,achangeinthepolarization can possibly resultinanindependent measure oftheapparent targetdirection.
Byobserving the targetwithavariable polarization producing independent measurements, theangleerrordue toglintisaveraged andtheeffectofthelargeglinterrorsisreduced.
Experimental measure­ mentswithanX-band,conical-scan, pulsedoppler radartracking anM-48 t~katapproxi­ mately500mrangereduced theangular tracking errorbyaboutone-half.
Inthesetests,the bestresultswereobtained whentheplaneofpolarization wasswitched insmallincrements (5.6to22.5°)atarategreaterthan500stepspersecond, whichismorethananorderof magnitude greaterthanthe40Hzconical-scan rate.
~-angle tracking.41-53,90- 94Aradarthattracksatargetatalowelevation angle,nearthe surfaceoftheearth,canreceivetwoechosignalsfromthetarget,Fig.5.15.Onesignalis reflected directlyfromthetarget,andtheotherarrivesviatheearth'ssurface.
(Thisissimilarto thedescription ofsurfacereflections anditseffectontheelevation coverage, asinSec.12.2.) Thedirectandthesurface-reflected signalscombine attheradarto.J'.k1d-an anglemeasure­ mentthatdiffersfromthetruemeasurement thatwouldhavebeenmadewithasingletargetin theabsence ofsurfacereflections.
Theresultisanerrorinthemeasurement ofelevation.
The surface-reflected signalmaybethought ofasoriginating fromtheimageofthetargetmirrored bytheearth'ssurface.Thus,theeffectontracking issimilartothetwo-target modelusedto describe glint,asdiscussed previously.
Thesurface-reflected signalissometimes calleda n111[tipath signal.
Anexample oftheelevation angleerroratlowanglesisshowninFig.5.16foratargetat constant height.43Atcloserangethetargetelevation angleislargeandtheantenna beamdoes notilluminate thesurface; hencethetracking issmooth.
Atintermediate range,wherethe elevation angleisfrom0.8toasmuchassixbeamwidths, thesurface-reflected signalenters theradarbymeansoftheantenna near-insidelobes.
Thesurface-reflected signalissmallso thattheantenna makessmalloscillations aboutsomemeanposition.
Atgreaterranges(eleva­ tionangleslessthanabout0.8beamwidth), wherethean'tenna mainbeamilluminates the surface,theinterference between thedirectandthereflected signalscanresultinlargeerrorsin elevation angle.Theangular excursions canbeup(intotheair)ordown(intotheground).
The peakerrorsaresevereandcanbemanytimestheangularseparation between thetargetandits"'.-..,,,,,,, RadarAntenna beam--------_-._- t1-._.---'.,- ~Directpath'fj~~ ~........::.:::: Target~-----~~----~ -----::~~::~ Image Surface -reflected path Figure5.15Low-angle tracking illustrating thesurface-reflected signalpathandthetargetimage. I " , I .....L ,+--+----t-'--t-"""- I I.--1--__III1 !II, --+---'-I~I---+-+.-1---'.+ --i-'-.----+-- I I--'---Ji =....J...
n I 1, 'E!ts.f'NJjj II5 I I III112.0-'•951I I"00 LJ,It,.,."41"'IjI[]"fC'rT-n IT["",~Itlr"I " ;I"I~'!"III 11" Ii..1.I·.I'.1...11~ -1.8U'I........a: '"....c2.0"'''·C'''''I.' ..·lii/'1" ',," "I;'1'q~:';'..
,_~_I ir-J.
! I~_:..._.~.._...l:.'.I.,,'j'" I-r- ,.
.I I I 1.8 H-...;.,.....H'-l-+- _.':I.....J__......L_.--e---.: .---..----.....-----/-.--.1-l·----i-----1--L.
--j.---L._l- .:....I- 16I! ' -rII .
II,; 1'I,·: .
I I ---,-.t---+----- -f--,.....--'.- J........""" l..............__L_f-__-~-.---- ....:........1-I J I :!.
I :I! !TJ.
.
1.4..,',,: I 'I I i·.:·.··..
, I I II,--r-I--+-1---'----;--; 1.2;' ,.
,: \I I _i..~ , T"" [-------;- I·-T-f---+---r---+--+--i-----l-- 10.:.
I..'; I 1 ~+_I- .....""""_ 08.;:.." MEANELEVATIONERROR! I I,,,; Ir'!!WITHl I I'TTT I I O.':,16 ~~L?~~ ~~~l~~K,~~~·~'~-.~~~~~~~~~~~I~~T~:~~~~I-l~-l~~l-~'-~:-.~I===~~~~.
0.4::.1:.
!.1;--:------~--- ..I; I!---LL.i.-L 0.2 .-l-a: ...:.
ii''c'II"i"'".,.,.I: :::;0'g60'· ..·.,I'651 5_02';;:;~;ljliiHII'A'" ;:;.~1!¥¥-''''l.
~r:\~.¥!rqIUl~-\' ''''·#-I+I~i.'H+-Hf--v-l+-lTl ~-04;i;I·"·,:I:I:" ,.I,,'"UMliJ\1 IIfT~',l, ~I...r ~.,,'';1', !I I ~If!,,!VliIi'W.Ii I"T11 .
_ L.~ 111 ....
II " I I I,fI ! " 1 I:J -0.6 I' I'I Ii'\I! II' .T·II,.
i f-;--~--j-f-.
,Ir--- -.....,......
.....-'- ---1""1,"f-'---:"--,.--Ii---'h -0.8 ' .
!i ,+_IT' -j.: I I : I, r' , t++-+-+-+-+-+-~--j,-+--+---,----+--+-+--+I--+-l- .-------'--'- -_c.,......-,--"--,_......-.
..-;-...., .-----~- -T----..,- '1IIi ~I I I , !j, .
'1.0.
I' II I !' I..
!' I','-11 I.:..' I .
I -,-_.1-----'-__+.
-1--'r-- f--, ---.;...,- ' .
"~f--1 ....cHl"'-'--+-l-i------f---'--+t----j!I., II ' , II, I 1II ' 1 -1.2 I.
_.i..II.If-_~__ q_.1i " __.L~c:....l...__ .II •.,Ii,II.:::" I II~"1""-T,: !;' ~,!I, ! IIII! -1.4 ..'.! I,-.L I--~---i-._i.-l-._.1.
I I'----1' ---._'_+_~......1 -i-1 ITIi: !IrI;r I:: I:! " -1.6..',,'..
,I,! I, --J i 'I',' J!.
11;' FPS'~'6 .-.f---'----'-[' I+---...,...T-;----1---+-1-1--- -~4--i'-'- --....-.--.'-It._ ---~ _.~.-' AZIMUTH tOEGREES) '-.......:32.547' .:''30.684 .
I,30.366';,: 30.281I.
30.263 30244 .
ELEVATIONlDEGREESl __._J3.028tC----i-.I--+-i-+.
2446 \11._...:........; 20~\t :t-l-i'36653----.l.....1.,.--1.449_~ _.~--._- c----.:.'25/'__ _2.0'RANGE(YARDS) ,21727 ,.,Ii .
"26680 '31 684 (! 4183/' I.
I46972, TRACKTIME(MINUTES) --I CMFigure5.16Example ofthemeasured elevation trackingerrorusingaphased-array radarwith2._rbeamwidth.
Aircrafttargetflewoutinrange atanearlyconstant altitude.
Thenumbers alongthezeroerrorline,indicatethetracktimeinminutes.
(FromLinde.46) image.
The tracking has been described as "wild" and can be great enough to cause the radar  to break track.
The effect is most pronounced over a smooth water surface where the reflected  s~gnal is strong.
The effect can be so great that it can become impossible to track targets at low  elevation angles with a conventional tracking radar.
In addition to causing errors in the  elevation-angle tracking, it is also possible for surface-reflected multipath'to introduce errors  in the azimuth-angle tracking; either by "cross-talk" in the radar between the azimuth and  elevation error channels, or by the target-image plane departing from the vertical as when over  sloping land or when the radar is on a rolling and pitching ship.
 The surest method for avoiding tracking error due to multipath reflections,via the surface  of the earth is to use an antenna with such a narrow beamwidth that it doesn't illuminate the  surface.
This requires a large antenna and/or a high frequencyS4' Although such a solution  eliminates the problem, there may be compelling reasons in some applications that m~tigatr:  against the large antenna needed for a narrow beamwidth or against operation at 111gh  frequency.
 Prior knowledge of target behavior sometimes can be used to avoid the serious effects of  low-angle multipath without overly complicating the radar.
Since targets of interest will not go  below the surface of the earth, and are limited in their ability to accelerate upward and  downward, radar data indicative of unreasonable behavior can be recognized and rejected In  some situations, the target might be flying fast enough and the inertia of the antenna may be  great enough to dampen the angle-error excursions caused by the multipath.j7 Another solu-  tion takes advantage of the fact that large errors are limited to a region of low elevation angles  predictable from the antenna pattern and the terrain.
It is thus possible to determine when the  target is in the low-angle region by sensing large elevation-angle errors and locking the  antenna in elevation at some small positive angle while continuing closed-loop azimuth  tracking.43 This is sometimes called ofjlaxis tra~king,~' or of-boresight tracking..'7 The eleva-  tion angle at which the antenna is fixed depends on the terrain and the antenna pattern.
 Typically it might be about 0.7 to 0.8 beamwidth.
With the beam fixed at a positive elevation  angle, the elevation-angle error may then be determined open-loop from the error-signal  voltage or the elevation measurement may simply be assumed~~t~lfway between  the horizon and the antenna boresight.
In the extreme, the peak-io-peak trac ing error would  not exceed 0.7 to 0.8 beamwidth and typically the rms error would be about 0.3 beamwidth.
 These relatively simple methods, combined with heavy smoothing of the error signal, can  allow meaningful, but not necessarily accurate, tracking at low angles.
 The surface-reflected signal travels a longer path than the direct signal so that it may be  possible in some cases to separate the two in time (range).
Tracking on the direct signal avoids  the angle errors introduced by the multipath.
The range-resol~~tion required to separatc thc  direct from the ground-reflected signal is  where ha = radar antenna height, h, = target height, and R = range to the target.
For a radar  height of 30 m, a target height of 100 m and a range of 10 km, the range-resolution must be  0.6 m, corresponding to a pulse width of 4 ns.
This is a much shorter pulse than is commonly  employed in radar.
Although the required range-resolutions for a ground-based radar are  achievable in principle, it is usually not applicable in practice.
 The use of frequency diversity, as described previously for reducing glint, can also reduce  the multipath tracking error.
As seen in Fig.
5.16, the angle errors due to multipath at low  angle are cyclical.
This is a result of the direct and surface-reflected signals reinforcing and  174INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS image.Thetracking hasbeendescribed as"wild"andcanbegreatenoughtocausetheradar tobreaktrack.Theeffectismostpronounced overasmoothwatersurfacewherethereflected signalisstrong.Theeffectcanbesogreatthatitcanbecomeimpossible totrackta'rgetsatlow elevation angleswithaconventional tracking radar.Inaddition tocausing errorsinthe elevation-angle tracking, itisalsopossible forsurface-reflected multipath 'tointroduce errors intheazimuth-angle tracking; eitherby"cross-talk" intheradarbetween theazimuth and elevation errorchannels, orbythetarget-image planedeparting fromtheverticalaswhenover slopinglandorwhentheradarisonarollingandpitching ship.
Thesurestmethodforavoiding tracking errorduetomultipath reflections ,viathesurface oftheearthistouseanantenna withsuchanarrowbeamwidth thatitdoesn'tilluminate the surface.Thisrequires alargeantenna and/orahighfrequency.44 Although suchasolution eliminates theproblem, theremaybecompelling reasons insomeapplications thatmitigate againstthelargeantenna neededforanarrowbeamwidth oragainstoperation athigh frequency.
Priorknowledge oftargetbehavior sometimes canbeusedtoavoidtheseriouseffectsof low-angle multipath withoutoverlycomplicating theradar.Sincetargetsofinterestwillnotgo belowthesurfaceoftheearth,andarelimitedintheirabilitytoaccelerate upward and downward, radardataindicative ofunreasonable behavior canberecognized andrejected.
In somesituations, thetargetmightbeflyingfastenoughandtheinertiaoftheantenna maybe greatenoughtodampen theangle-error excursions causedbythemultipath:~7 Another solu­ tiontakesadvantage ofthefactthatlargeerrorsarelimitedtoaregionoflowelevation angles predictable fromtheantenna patternandtheterrain.Itisthuspossibletodetermine whenthe targetisinthelow-angle regionbysensing largeelevation-angle errorsandlockingthe antenna inelevation atsomesmallpositive anglewhilecontinuing closed-loop azimuth tracking.43Thisissometimes calledoff-axistracking,45 orofJ-boresight trackillg:PTheeleva­ tionangleatwhichtheantenna isfixeddepends ontheterrainandtheantenna pattern.
Typically itmightbeabout0.7to0.8beamwidth.
Withthebeamfixedatapositiv~elevation angle,theelevation-angle errormaythenbedetermined open-loop fromtheerror-signal voltageortheelevation measurement mayS!f!lPJy.beassumed ~beh~~ween thehorizonandtheantenna boresight.
Intheex-trem~,'the'peaK=to=peak trael(ing errorwould notexceed0.7to0.8beamwidth andtypically therQ1serrorwouldbeabout0.3beamwidth.----Theserelatively simplemethods, combined withheavysmoothing oftheerrorsignal,can allowmeaningful, butnotnecessarily accurate, tracking atlowangles.
Thesurface-reflected signaltravelsalongerpaththanthedirectsignalsothatitmaybe possible insomecasestoseparate thetwointime(range).Tracking onthedirectsignalavoids theangleerrorsintroduced bythemultipath.
Therange-resolution required toseparate the directfromtheground-reflected signalis !1R=2hah, R(5.7) whereha=radarantenna height,h,=targetheight,andR=rangetothetarget.Foraradar heightof30m,atargetheightof100mandarangeof10km,therange-resolution mustbe 0.6m,corresponding toapulsewidthof4ns.Thisisamuchshorterpulsethaniscommonly employed inradar.Although therequired range-resolutions foraground-based radarare achievable inprinciple, itisusuallynotapplicaple inpractice.
Theuseoffrequency diversity, asdescribed previously forreducing glint,canalsoreduce themultipath tracking error.AsseeninFig.5.16,theangleerrorsduetomultipath atlow anglearecyclical.
Thisisaresultofthedirectandsurface-reflected signalsreinforcing and canccli~ig each otlier as tlie rclativc pl~asc bctweeri tlie two patlis varies.
A change in frequency  also changes the phase relationship between the two signals.
Thus the angle errors can be  averaged by operating the radar over a wide frequency band or by sweeping the RF frequency  atid dcducilig tlie arigle on tllc basis of tlie correspotldirig behavior of the error It  turns out, however, that the bandwidth required to extract the target elevation angle is esesen-  tially the same required of a short pulse for separating the direct and reflected signals.
Thus,  tlie hatidwidtlis r~ccdccl to elirnitiatc tlic rnultipath error are ilsually quite large for riiost  applications.
 The doppler frequency shift of tlie direct signal differs from that of the surface-reflected  slgnal, but the difference is too small in most cases to be of use in reducing the errors due to  multipath.
Radar fences, properly located, can mask the surface-reflected signal from the  near-in elevation sidelobes, but they are of limited utility when the main beam illuminates the  top edge of the fence and creates diffracted energy.53 Vertical polarization, often used in  trackers, reduces the surface-reflected signal in the vicinity of the Brewster angle, but has no  special advantage at low angles (less than 1.5" over water and 3" over land).45 For a similar  reason, circular polarization lias no inherent advantage in improving multipath below eleva-  tion angles corresponditig to tlie Brewster angle.
 ?'lie hasic reason for poor tracking at low angle results from the fact that the conventional  ttacki~ig radar with a two-liorti feed in elevation (or its equivalent for a conical-scan tracker)  provides unambiguous information for only one target.
At low elevation angles two'' targets"  arc present.
tlie real one and its image.
Thus, the aperture must be provided with more degrees  of freedom that1 are available from a simple two-element feed.
One approach is to utilize  multiple feeds in tlie vertical plane.48- 50 A minimum of three feeds (or elements) is necessary  to resolve two targets, but antennas with from four to nine elements in the vertical dimension  have been considered.
Another approach that depends on additional antenna feeds, or degrees  of freedom, employs a monopulse tracker with a difference pattern containing a second null  wliicli is independently steerable.
This null is maintained in the direction of the image, as  computed by Snell's law for the measured target range.
The use of the classical maximum  likelihood solution for the optimum double-null difference pattern results in relatively large  sidelobes at the horizon and at angles below the image.
By slightly sacrificing the accuracy of  angle tracking (due to less slope sensitivity), lower sidelobes can be achieved.
Such a pattern  whicli sacrifices slope sensitivity for lower sidelobes has been called a tempered double-trull  rii/l>rrttce pattert~.~~  The tempered double-null is more suited to mechanically steered trackers than to phased-  awince it is basically a null balance technique that does not achieve full accuracy  until it goes through a settling process.
A technique that can operate on the basis of a single  pi~lse.
and tilerefore is more applicable to the phased array, has been called the fi.ued-hmru.
 approach; or more descriptively, thea~ism~~~eu/se.48 Two asymmetrical patterns are  generated and squinted above the horizon to minimize response to the surface-reflected signal.
 ?'he two patterns are constrained so that their ratichhas an even-order symmetry about the  horizon.
Knowing the shape of the antenna patterns, the measurement of the ratio of signals in  the two beams allows tlie target elevation angle to be deduced.
A similar techniq~e~'.~' utilizes  sum (E) and difference (A) patterns whose ratio A/X is symmetrical.
Just as in off-axis tracking,  the antenna boresight is locked at some elevation angle.
This results in the lower of the two  peaks of the symmetrical A/C ratio being placed in the direction of the bisector of the target  and image.
Under this condition, the values of A/C in the direction of the target and its image  are equal.
?'he estimate of target elevation is unaffected by the phase and amplitude of the  image.
(The angle of the targetlimage bisector is approximately given by the ratio of the radar  antenna-height-to-target-range.)  TRACKING RADAR17S canceling eachotherastherelative phasebetween thetwopathsvaries.Achangeinfrequency alsochanges thephaserelationship between thetwosignals.Thustheangleerrorscanbe averaged byoperating theradaroverawidefrequency bandorbysweeping theRFfrequency anddeducing theangleonthebasisofthecorresponding behavior oftheerrorsignal.46It turnsout,however, thatthebandwidth required toextractthetargetelevation angleisesesen­ tiallythesamerequired ofashortpulseforseparating thedirectandreflected signals.Thus, thehandwidths needed toeliminate themultipath errorareusuallyquitelargeformost applications.
Thedoppler frequency shiftofthedirectsignaldilTersfromthatofthesurface-reflected signal.butthedifference istoosmallinmostcasestobeofuseinreducing theerrorsdueto multipath.
Radarfences.properly located, canmaskthesurface-reflected signalfromthe near-inelevation sidelobes.
buttheyareoflimitedutilitywhenthemainbeamilluminates the topedgeofthefenceandcreatesdiffracted energy.53 Vertical polarization, oftenusedin trackers, reduces thesurface-reflected signalinthevicinityoftheBrewster angle,buthasno specialadvantage atlowangles(lessthan1.5°overwaterand3°overland).45Forasimilar reason,circular polarization hasnoinherent advantage inimproving multipath beloweleva­ tionanglescorresponding totheBrewster angle.
Thebasicreasonforpoortracking atlowangleresultsfromthefactthattheconventional tracking radarwithatwo-horn feedinelevation (oritsequivalent foraconical-scan tracker) provides unambiguous information foronlyonetarget.Atlowelevation anglestwo"targets" arepresent.
therealoneandits·image.Thus,theaperture mustbeprovided withmoredegrees offreedom thanareavailable fromasimpletwo-element feed.Oneapproach istoutilize multiple feedsinthevertical plane.48'5oAminimum ofthreefeeds(orelements) isnecessary toresolvetwotargets,butantennas withfromfourtonineelements intheverticaldimension havebeenconsidered.
Another approach thatdepends onadditional antenna feeds,ordegrees offreedom, employs amonopulsetrackerwithadifference patterncontaining asecondnull whichisindependently steerable.
Thisnullismaintained inthedirection oftheimage,as computed bySnell'slawforthemeasured targetrange.Theuseoftheclassical maximum likelihood solution fortheoptimum double-null difference pattern resultsinrelatively large sidelobes atthehorizon andatanglesbelowtheimage.Byslightlysacrificing theaccuracy of angletracking (duetolessslopesensitivity), lowersidelobes canbeachieved.
Suchapattern whichsacrifices slopesensitivity forlowersidelobes hasbeencalledatempered double-null durerellce pattern.48 Thetempered double-null ismoresuitedtomechanically steeredtrackers thantoehased­ a~~since itisbasically anullbalance technique thatdoesnotachievefullaccuracy untilitgoesthrough asettling process.
Atechnique thatcanoperateonthebasisofasingle pulse.andtherefore ismoreapplicable tothephasedarray,hasbeen c~lledthe~ approach; ormoredescriptively, the_.as.y.mmeU:U:.-.m.QltQll.Itl~!.48 Twoasymmetrical patterns are generated andsquinted abovethehorizontominimize response tothesurface-reflected signal.
Thetwopatterns areconstrained sothattheirratio-,hasaneven-order symmetry aboutthe horizon.
Knowing theshapeortheantenna patterns, themeasurement oftheratioofsignalsin thetwobeamsallowsthetargetelevation angletobededuced.
Asimilartechnique41.51utilizes sum(I:)anddiITerence (L\)patterns whoseratioAq;:cjssymmetrical.
Justasinoff-axistracking, the<i-iltenna boresight· islockedatsomeelevation angle.Thisresultsinthelowerofthetwo peaksofthesymmetrical L\/r.ratiobeingplacedinthedirection ofthebisectorofthetarget andimage.Underthiscondition, thevaluesofL\/r.inthedirection ofthetargetanditsimage areequal.Theestimate oft~r&etel~vaUQt\ isunaffected bythephaseandamplitude ofthe image.(Theangleofthetarget/image bisector isapproximately givenbytheratiooftheradar antenna-height-to-target-range.) The normal monopulse radar receiver uses only the in-phase (or the out-of-phase) com-  ponent of the difference signal.
When there is a multipath signal present along with the direct  signal, a quadrature component of the difference signal exists.
The in-phase and the quadra-  ture components of the error signal define a complex angle-erro-F-sign&.
In the complex planc,  with the in-phase and quadrature components as the axes, the locus ofthe complex angle with  target elevation as the parameter is a spiral path.
By measuring the complex angle, the target  elevation can be inferred." In using the complex-angle technique, the radar antenna is fixed at  some angle above the horizon and the open-loop measilrement of complex angle is compared  with a predicted set of values for the particular radar installation, antenna elevation-pointing  angle, and terrain properties.
A given in-phase and quadrature measurement does not give a  unique value of elevation angle since the plot of the complex angle shows multiple, overlap-  ping turns of a spiral with increasing target altitude.
The ambiguities can be resolved with  frequency diversity or by continuous tracking over an interval long enough (o recognize the  ambiguous spirals.
In one simulation of the technique it was found that tracking over a  smooth surface can be improved by at least a factor of two, but over rough surfaces the  improvement was marginaL6'  Thus there exist a number of possible techniques for reducing the angle errors found when  tracking a target at low angle.
Some of these require considerable modification to the conven-  tional tracking radar but others require only modification in the processing of the angle-error  signals.
It has been said that these various techniques can avoid the large errors encountered  by conventional trackers when the elevation angle is between 0.25 and 1.0 beamwidth.
The  rms accuracies are between 0.05 and 0.1 beamwidth in these regions.'' The choice of  technique to permit tracking of targets at low altitude with reduced error depends on the  degree of complexity that can be tolerated for the amount of improvement obtained.
 Electro-optical devices such as TV, IR, or lasers can be used in conjunction with radar to  provide tracking at low target altitude when the radar errors are unacceptable.
These deviccs,  however, are of limited range and are not all-weather.
 5.6 TRACKING IN RANGE=*' -  In most tracking-radar applications the target is continuously tracked in range as well as in  angle.
Range tracking might be accomplished by an operator who watches an A-scope or  J-scope presentation and manually positions a handwheel i~ order to maintain a marker over  the desired target pip.
The setting of the handwheel is a measure of the target range and may be  converted to a voltage that is supplied to a data processor.
 As target speeds increase, it is increasingly difficult for an operator to perform at the  necessary levels of efficiency over a sustained period of time, and automatic tracking becomes  a necessity.
Indeed, there are many tracking applications where an operator has no place, as in  a homing missile or in a small space vehicle.
 The technique for automatically tracking in range is based on the split range gate.
Two  range gates are generated as shown in Fig.
5.17.
One is the early gate, and the other is the late  gate.
The echo pulse is shown in Fig.
5.17a, the relative position of the gates at a particular  instant in Fig.
5.17b, and the error signal in Fig.
5.17~.
The portion of the signal energy  contained in the early gate is less than that in the late gate.
If the outputs of the two gates arc  subtracted, an error signal (Fig.
5.17~) will result which may be used to reposition the center of  the gates.55 The magnitude of the error signal is a measure of the difference between the center  of the pulse and the center of the gates.
The sign of the error signal determines the direction in  176INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS Thenormalmonopulse radarreceiver usesonlythein-pbase (ortheout-of-phase) com­ ponentofthedifference signal.Whenthereisamullipath signalpresentalongwiththedirect signal,aquadrature component ofthedifference signalexists.Thein-phase andthequadra­ turecomponents oftheerrorsignaldefineacomplex angke.noJ:-signal.
Inthecomfllex plane.
withthein-phase andquadrature components astheaxes,thelocusofthecomplex anglewith targetelevation astheparameter isaspiralpath.Bymeasuring thecomplex angle,thetarget elevation canbeinferred.52Inusingthecomplex-angle technique, theradarantenna isfixedat someangleabovethehorizonandtheopen-loop measurement ofcomplex angleiscompared withapredicted setofvaluesfortheparticular radarinstallation, antenna elevation-pointing angle,andterrainproperties.
Agivenin-phase andquadrature measurement doesnotgivea uniquevalueofelevation anglesincetheplotofthecomplex angleshowsmultiple, overlap­ pingturnsofaspiralwithincreasing targetaltitude.
Theambiguities canberes_olved with frequency diversity orbycontinuous tracking overanintervallongenoughwrecognize the ambiguous spirals.Inonesimulation ofthetechnique itwasfoundthattracking overa smooth surfacecanbeimproved byatleastafactoroftwo,butoverroughsurfaces the improvement wasmarginal.61 Thusthereexistanumberofpossible techniques forreducing theangleerrorsfoundwhen tracking atargetatlowangle.Someoftheserequireconsiderable modification totheconven­ tionaltracking radarbutothersrequireonlymodification intheprocessing oftheangle-error signals.Ithasbeensaidthatthesevarioustechniques canavoidthelargeerrorsencountered byconventional trackers whentheelevation angleisbetween 0.25and1.0beamwidth.
The rmsaccuracies arebetween 0.05and0.1beamwidth intheseregions:BThechoiceof technique topermittracking oftargetsatlowaltitude withreduced errordepends onthe degreeofcomplexity thatcanbetolerated fortheamount ofimprovement obtained.
Electro-optical devicessuchasTV,IR,orlaserscanbeusedinconjunction withradarto providetracking atlowtargetaltitudewhentheradarerrorsareunacceptable.
Thesedevices, however, areoflimitedrangeandarenotall-weather.
5.6TRACKING INRANGE3,55-58 Inmosttracking-radar applications thetargetiscontinuously trackedinrangeaswellasin angle.Rangetracking mightbeaccomplished byanoperator whowatches anA-scope or J-scopepresentation andmanually positions ahandwheelinordertomaintain amarkerover thedesiredtargetpip.Thesettingofthehandwheel isameasure ofthetargetrangeandmaybe (;onverted toavoltagethatissupplied toadataprocessor.
Astargetspeedsincrease, itisincreasingly difficult foranoperator toperform atthe necessary levelsofefficiency overasustained periodoftime,andautomatic tracking becomes anecessity.
Indeed,therearemanytracking applications whereanoperator hasnoplace,asin ahomingmissileorinasmallspacevehicle.
Thetechnique forautomatically tracking inrangeisbasedonthesplitrangegate.Two rangegatesaregenerated asshowninFig.5.17.Oneistheearlygate,andtheotheristhelate gate.TheechopulseisshowninFig.5.l7a,therelativeposition ofthegatesataparticular instantinFig.5.l7b,andtheerrorsignalinFig.5.17c.Theportionofthesignalenergy contained intheearlygateislessthanthatinthelategate.Iftheoutputsofthetwogatesarc subtracted, anerrorsignal(Fig.5.l7c)willresultwhichmaybeusedtoreposition thecenterof thegates.ssThemagnitude oftheerrorsignalisameasure ofthedifference between thecenter ofthepulseandthecenterofthegates.Thesignoftheerrorsignaldetermines thedirection in Echo! pulse  1  I  (a) I  I  T~me 4  (b) Early Cote yote gate  Time --  (C Figure 5.17 Split-range-gate tr;ickilig.
 ((I) Ecllo pulse; (h) early-late range  [.ole gate Time -+ gates; (c) dilference signal betwee11  sign01 early and late range gates.
 wliicli tlie gates must be repositioned by a feedback-control systetn.
When the error signal is  zcro.
tlie range gates are centered on the pulse.
 The range gating necessary to perform automatic tracking offers several advantages as by-  products.
It isolates one target, excluding targets at other ranges.
This permits the boxcar  generator to be employed.
Also, range gating irnproves the signal-to-noise ratio since it elimin-  ates tlie noise from the other range intervals.
Hence the width of the gate should be sufficiently  narrow to minimize extraneous noise.
On the other hand, it must not be so narrow that an  appreciable fraction of the signal energy is excluded.
A reasonable compromise is to make the  gate width of the order of the pulse width.
 A target of finite length can cause noise in range-tracking circuits in an analogous manner  to angle-fluctuation noise (glint) in the angle-tracking circuits.
Range-tracking noise depends  or1 tlic lerigtli of the target and its shape.
It has been reported29 that the rms value of the range  rioisc is approximately 0.8 of tlie target length when tracking is accomplished with a video  split-range-gate error detector.
 5.7 ACQUISITION  A tracking radar must first find and acquire its target before it can operate as a tracker.
 Therefore it i~.usually necessary for the radar to scan an angular sector in which the presence  of the target is suspected.
Most tracking radars employ a narrow pencil-beam antenna.
 Searching a volume in space for an aircraft target vith a narrow pencil beam would be  somewhat analogous to searching for a fly in a darkened auditorium with a flashlight.
It must  be done with some care if the entire volume is to be covered uniformly and efficiently.
 Exanlplcs of the common types of scantling patterns employed with pencil-beam antennas are  illustrated in Fig.
5.18.
 In the helical scan, the antenna is cor~tinuously rotated in azimuth while it is simulta-  neously raised or lowered in elevation.
It traces a helix in space.
Helical scanning was employed  for the search mode of the SCR-584 fire-control radar, developed during World War Ii for the  airnit~g of antiaircraft-gitn batt~rics.'~ The SCR-584 antenna was .rotated at the rate of  6 rpm and covered a 20" elevation angle in 1 min.
The Palmer scan derives its name from  the farrliliar penmanship exercises of grammar school days.
It consists of a rapid circular scan  (conical scan) about the axis of the antenna, combined with a linear movement of the axis of  rotation.
When the axis of rotation is held stationary.
the Palmer scan reduces to the corrical  TRACKING RADAR177 (al Time-- torIy gateLofe gate Time -~ (r)Earlygate signal L.ategafe signalTime-+Fi~ure5.17Split-range-gate tracking.
(a)Echopulse;(h)early-late range gates;(c)dilTerence signalbetween earlyandlaterangegates.
whichthegatesmustberepositioned byafeedback-control system.Whentheerrorsignalis zero.therangegatesarecentered onthepulse.
Therangegatingnecessary toperformautomatic tracking offersseveraladvantages asby­ products.
Itisolates onetarget.excluding targetsatotherranges.Thispermits theboxcar generator tobeemployed.
Also.rangegatingimproves thesignal-to-noise ratiosinceitelimin­ atesthenoisefromtheotherrangeintervals.
Hencethewidthofthegateshouldbesufficiently narrowtominimize extraneous noise.Ontheotherhand,itmustnotbesonarrowthatan appreciahle fraction ofthesignalenergyisexcluded.
Areasonable compromise istomakethe gatewidthoftheorderofthepulsewidth.
/\targetoffinitelengthcancausenoiseinrange-tracking circuitsinananalogous manner toangle-fluctuation noise(glint)intheangle-tracking circuits.
Range-tracking noisedepends onthelengthofthetargetanditsshare.Ithasbeenreported29thatthermsvalueoftherange noiseisapproximately 0.8ofthetargetlengthwhentracking isaccomplished withavideo split-range-gate errordetector.
5.7ACQUISITION /\tracking radarmustfirstfindandacquire itstargetbeforeitcanoperate asatracker.
Therefore iti9.-.usually necessary fortheradartoscananangular sectorinwhichthepresence ofthetargetissuspected.
Mosttracking radarsemploy anarrow pencil-beam antenna.
Searching avolume inspaceforanaircraft targetwithanarrow pencilbeamwouldbe somewhat analogous tosearching foraflyinadarkened auditorium withaflashlight.
Itmust hedonewithsomecareiftheentirevolume istobecovered uniformly andefficiently.
Examples ofthecommon typesofscanning patterns employed withpencil-beam antennas are illustrated inFig.5.18.
IntheIlelicalscan.theantenna iscontinuously rotatedinazimuth whileitissimulta­ neouslyraisedorlowered inelevation.
Ittracesahelixinspace.Helicalscanning wasemployed forthesearchmodeoftheSCR-584 fire-control radar,developed duringWorldWarIIforthe aimingofantiaircraft-gun batteries.59TheSCR-584 antenna was.rotated attherateof 6rpmandcovered a200elevation anglein1min.ThePalmerscanderivesitsnamefrom thefamiliar penmanship exercises ofgrammar schooldays.Itconsists ofarapidcircularscan (conical scan)abouttheaxisoftheantenna, combined withalinearmovement oftheaxisof rotation.
Whentheaxisofrotation isheldstationary, thePalmerscanreducestotheconical Figure 5.18 Examples of acquisition  search patterns.
(a) Trace of helical  scanning beam; (b) Palmer scan; (c)  spiral scan; (ri) raster, or TV, scan;  (e) nodding scan.
The raster scan is  sometimes called an n-bar scan, where  n is the number of horizontal rows.
 ' *  scan.
Because of this property, the Palmer scan is sometimes used with conical-scan tracking  radars which must operate with a search as well as a track mode since the same mechanisms  used to produce conical scanning can also be used for Palmer scan~ing.~' Some conical-scan  tracking radars increase the squint angle during search in order to reduce the time required to  scan a given volume.
The conical scan of the SCR-584 was operated during the search mode  and was actually a Palmer scan in a helix.
In general, conical scan is performed during the  search mode of most tracking radars.
 The Palmer scan is suited to a search area which is larger in one dimension than another.
 The spiral scan covers an angular search volume with circular symmetry.
Both the spiral scan  and the Palmer scan suffer from the disadvantage that all parts of the scan volume do not  receive the same energy unless the scanning speed is varied during the scan cycle.
As a  consequence, the number of hits returned from a target when searching with a constant  scanning rate depends upon the position of the target within the search area.
 The raster, or TV, scan, unlike the Palmer or the spiral scan, paints the search area in a  i~niforrn manner.
The raster scan is a simple and convenient means for searching a limited  sector, rectangular in shape.
Similar to the raster scan is the nodding scan produced by oscillat-  ing the antenna beam rapidly in elevation and slowly in azimuth.
Although it may be  employed to cover a limited sector-as does the raster scan-nodding scan may also be used  to obtain hemispherical coverage, that is, elevation angle extending to 90' and the azimuth  scan angle to 360".
 The helical scan and the nodding scan can both be used to obtain hemispheric coverage  with a pencil beam.
The nodding scan is also used with height-finding radars.
'The Palmer,  spiral, and raster scans are employed in fire-control tracking radars to assist in the acquisition  of the target when the search sector is of limited extent.
 5.8 OTHER TOPICS  Servo system.
The automatic tracking of the target coordinates in angle, range, and doppler  frequency is usually accomplished with a so-called Type 11 servo It is also  referred to as a zero velocity error system since in theory no steady-state error exists for a  constant velocity input.
A steady-state error exists, however, for a step-acceleration input.
 Thus, the accelerations the system must handle need to be specified in order to select a suitable  Type I1 system.
The tracking bandwidth of the servo system is defined as the frequency.where  its open-lodp filter transfer function is of unity gain.
It represents the transition from closed  loop to open loop operation.
One of the functions of the servo system is to reduce the  178INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS (a) (d)(b) (e) Figure5.18Examples ofacquisition searchpatterns.
(a)Traceofhelical scanning beam;(b)Palmerscan;(c) spiralscan;(d)raster,orTV,scan; (e)nodding scan.Therasterscanis sometimes calledann-barscan,where (e) nisthenumber ofhorizontal rows.
" scan.Becauseofthisproperty, thePalmerscanissometimes usedwithconical-scan tracking radarswhichmustoperatewithasearchaswellasatrackmodesincethesamemechanisms usedtoproduce conicalscanning canalsobeusedforPalmerscanr.ing.60Someconical-scan tracking radarsincrease thesquintangleduringsearchinordertoreducethetimerequired to scanagivenvolume.
Theconicalsca'noftheSCR-584 wasoperated duringthesearchmode andwasactually aPalmerscaninahelix.Ingeneral, conicalscanisperformed duringthe searchmodeofmosttracking radars.
ThePalmerscanissuitedtoasearchareawhichislargerinonedimension thananother.
Thespiralscancoversanangularsearchvolumewithcircularsymmetry.
Boththespiralscan andthePalmerscansuffer from thedisadvantage thatallpartsofthescanvolumedonot receivethesameenergyunlessthescanning speedisvariedduringthescancycle.Asa consequence, thenumber ofhitsreturned fromatargetwhensearching withaconstant scanning ratedepends upontheposition ofthetargetwithinthesearcharea.
Theraster,orTV,scan,unlikethePalmerorthespiralscan,paintsthesearchareaina uniform manner.
Therasterscanisasimpleandconvenient meansforsearching al.imited sector,rectangular inshape.Similartotherasterscanisthenoddingscanproduced byoscillat­ ingtheantenna beamrapidlyinelevation andslowlyinazimuth.
Although itmayhe employed tocoveralimitedsector-as doestherasterscan-nodding scanmayalsobeused toobtainhemispherical coverage, thatis,elevation angleextending to90°andtheazimuth scanangleto360°.
Thehelicalscanandthenodding scancanbothbeusedtoobtainhemispheric coverage withapencilbeam.Thenodding scanisalsousedwithheight-finding radars.ThePalmer, spiral,andrasterscansareemployed infire-control tracking radarstoassistintheacquisition ofthetargetwhenthesearchsectorisoflimitedextent.
5.8OTHER TOPICS Servosystem.Theautomatic tracking ofthetargetcoordinates inangle,range,anddoppler frequency isusuallyaccomplished withaso-called TypeIIservosystem.1.2·3.67.68 Itisalso referred toasazerovelocityerrorsystemsinceintheorynosteady-state errorexistsfora constant velocity input.Asteady-state errorexists,however, forastep-acceleration input.
Thus,theaccelerations thesystemmusthandleneedtobespecified inordertoselectasuitable TypeIIsystem.Thetracking bandwidth oftheservosystemisdefinedasthefrequencY'where itsopen-lo6p filtertransferfunction isofunitygain.Itrepresents thetransition fromclosed looptoopenloopoperation.
Oneofthefunctions ofthe servo systemistoreducethe TRACKING RADAR 179  fluctuations of the input signal by filtering or smoothing.
Therefore, the tracking bandwidth  stlould be narrow to reduce the effects of noise or jitter, reject unwanted spectral components  such as the conical-scan frequency or engine modulation, and to provide a smoothed output of  the measurement.
On the other hand, a wide tracking bandwidth is required to accurately  follow, with minimum lag, rapid changes in the target trajectory or in the vehicle  carrying the radar antenna.
That is, a wide bandwidth is required for following changes in the  target trajectory and a narrow bandwidth for sensitivity.
A compromise must generally be  made between these conflicting requirements.
A target at long range has low angular rates and  a low sigrial-to-noise ratio.
A narrow tracking bandwidth is indicated in such a case to increase  sensitivity and yet follow the target with minimum lag.
At short range, however, the angular  rates are likely to be large so that a wide tracking bandwidth is needed in order to follow the  target properly.
The loss in sensitivity due to the greater bandwidth is offset by the greater  target signal at tlie sliortcr ranges.
The bandwidth should be no wider than necessary in order  to keep the angle errors due to target scintillation, or glint, frorn becoming excessive.
The  tracking bandwidth in some systems might be made variable or even adaptive to conform  i~t~to~ii;itically to tlic target cot~ditiotis.
 Another restriction on the tracking bandwidth is that it should be small compared to the  lowest tiatt~ral resonant frequency of tlie antenna and servo system including the structt~re  foundation, in order to prevent the system from oscillating at the resonant frequency.
The  shaded region in Fig.
5.19 describes the measured bounds of the lowest servo resonant  frequency as a function of antenna size achieved with actual tracking radars.
 Antenna diameter - ft  Figure 5.19 Lowest servo resonant-frequency as a function of antenna diameter for hemispherical scan-  riing paraboloid reflector antennas.
(Based or1 trteastrretnettts compiled by D.
D.
Pidhayny of the Aerospace  Corporot iort.)  TRACKING RADAR179 fluctuations oftheinputsignalbyfilteringorsmoothing.
Therefore, thetracking bandwidth shouldbenarrowtoreducetheeffectsofnoiseorjitter,rejectunwanted spectral components suchastheconical-scan frequency orenginemodulation, andtoprovideasmoothed outputof themeasurement.
Ontheotherhand,awidetracking bandwidth isrequired toaccurately follow, withminimum lag,rapidchanges inthetargettrajectory orinthevehicle carrying theradarantenna.
Thatis,awidebandwidth isrequired forfollowing changes inthe targettrajectory andanarrowbandwidth forsensitivity.
Acompromise mustgenerally be madehetween thesecontlicting requirements.
Atargetatlongrangehaslowangular ratesand alowsignal-to-noise ratio.Anarrowtracking bandwidth isindicated insuchacasetoincrease sensitivity andyetfollowthetargetwithminimum lag.Atshortrange,however, theangular ratesarelikelytobelargesothatawidetracking bandwidth isneededinordertofollowthe targetproperly.
Thelossinsensitivity duetothegreaterbandwidth.is offsetbythegreater targetsignalattheshorterranges.Thebandwidth shouldbenowiderthannecessary inorder tokeeptheangleerrorsduetotargetscintillation, orglint,frombecoming excessive.
The tracking handwidth insomesystems mightbemadevariable orevenadaptive toconform automatically tothetargetconditions.
Another restriction onthetracking bandwidth isthatitshouldbesmallcompared tothe lowestnatural resonant frequency oftheantenna andservosystemincluding thestructure foundation, inordertoprevent thesystemfromoscillating attheresonant frequency.
The shaded regioninFig.5.19describes themeasured bounds ofthelowestservoresonant frequency asafunction ofantenna sizeachieved withactualtracking radars.
N10 I I ;..vc: Q) ::>o Q)...
coc: ~ Q)0::10Estimated ":'/),.
I I II;, 11///II'" I111/// / -<...-11I I I I ........1 I1/-",- 1000 100 100.1L-_---L---l--l-L...L..1....Ll-L--_-l---l--l-L...L..1....Ll-L--_---L----L---'-L...L..1..J...J..J 1·0 Antenna diameter -ft Figure5.19Lowestservoresonant-frequency asafunctionofantennadiameter forhemispherical scan­ ningraraboloid reflectorantennas.
(Based 011measurements compiled byD.D.Pidhayny a/theAerospace Corporatioll.) 180 lNTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  Precision " on-axis " Some of the most precise tracking radars are those asso-  ciated with the instrumentation used at missile-testing ranges.62 One such class of precision  tracking radar has been called on-axis The outpiit of a conventional servo system  lags its input.
The result of the lag is a tracking error.
The on-axis tracker accounts for this lag,  as well as for other factors that can contribute to tracking error, so as to keep the target being  tracked in the center of the beam or on the null axis of the difference pattern.
On-axis tracking,  as compared with trackers with a target lag, improves the accuracy by reducing the coupling  between the azimuth and elevation angle-tracking channels, by minimizing the generation of  cross polarization and by reducing the effects of system nonlinearities.
 The processes that constitute on-axis tracking incliide (I) the use of adaptive tracking  whose output updates a stored prediction of the target trajectory rather than control the  antenna servo directly, (2) the removal by prior calibration of static and dynamic system  biases and errors, and (3) the use of appropriate coordinate systems for filteriqg (smoothing)  the target data.
 The radar's angle-error signals are smoothed and compared to a predicted measurement  based on a target-trajectory model updated by the results of previous measurements.
(Prior  knowledge of the characteristics of the trajectory can be incorporated in the model, as, for  example, when the trajectory is known to be ballistic.) If the difference between the pred~ction  and the measurement is zero, no adjustment is made and the antenna mount is pointed  according to the stored prediction.
If they do not agree, the target trajectory prediction 1s  changed until they do.
Thus, the pointing of the antenna is made open-loop based on the  stored target-trajectory prediction updated by the radar measurements.
The servo loop that  points the antenna is made relatively wideband (high data rate) to permit a fast tracking  response against targets with high angular acceleration.
The process of adjusting the predicted  position based on the measured position is performed with a narrow bandwidth.
This error-  signal bandwidth is adaptive and can be made very narrow to obtain good signal-to-noise  ratio, yet the system will continue to point open-loop based on the stored target-trajectory  prediction and the wide tracking-bandwidth of the antenna-pointing servos.
For convenience  the range, azimuth, and elevation (r, 0, 4) coordinates of the radar output are converted to  rectilinear (x, y, z) target coordinates to perform the data smoothing and comparison with  prediction.
In radar coordinates, the track of a target on a straight-line trajectory is curvilinear  and can generate apparent accelerations.
This does not happen when tracking in rectilinear  coordinates.
The rectilinear coordinates of the updated target prediction are converted back to  radar coordinates to drive the antenna.
 Systematic errors are determined by prior measurement atld arc used to arijust the  encoded antenna position to provide the correct target position.
Systematic errors include  (1) error in the zero reference of the encoders that indicate the orientation of the radar axes,  (2) misalignment of the elevation axis with respect to the azimuth axis (nonorthogonality),  (3) droop or flexing of the antenna and mount caused by gravity, (4) misalignment of the radar  with respect to the elevation axis (skew), (5) noncoincidence of the azimuth plant: of tht: mount  to the local reference plane (mislevel), (6) dynamic lag in the servo system, (7) finite transit  time that resillts in the target being at a different position by the time the echo is received by  the radar, and (8) bending and additional time delay of the propagation path due to atmo-  spheric refraction.
 A boresight telescope mounted on the radar antenna permits calibration of the mechani-  cal axis of the antenna with respect to a star field.
This calibration accounts for bias in  azimuth and elevation, mislevel, skew, droop, and nonorthogonality.
Tracking a visible satel-  lite with the radar permits the position of the RF axis relative to the mechanical (optical) axis  to be determined.
The difference between the position measured by the optics and that  180INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS Precision" on-axis" tracking.62-65Someofthemostprecisetracking radarsarethoseasso­ ciatedwiththeinstrumentation usedatmissile-testing ranges.62Onesuchclassofprecision tracking radarhasbeencalledon-axistracking.OJTheoutputofaconventional servosystem lagsitsinput.Theresultofthelagisatracking error.Theon-axistrackeraccounts forthislag, aswellasforotherfactorsthatcancontribute totracking error,soastokeepthetargetbeing trackedinthecenterofthebeamoronthenullaxisofthedifference pattern.On-axis tracking, ascompared withtrackers withatargetlag,improves theaccuracy byreducing thecoupling between theazimuth andelevation angle-tracking channels, byminimizing thegeneration of crosspolarization andbyreducing theeffectsofsystemnonlinearities.
Theprocesses thatconstitute on-axistracking include(1)theuseofadaptive tracking whoseoutputupdates astoredprediction ofthetargettrajectory ratherthancontrol the antenna servodirectly, (2)theremoval bypriorcalibration ofstaticanddynamic system biasesanderrors,and(3)theuseofappropriate coordinate systems forfilteriqg (smoothing) thetargetdata.
Theradar'sangle-error signalsaresmoothed andcompared toapredicted measurement basedonatarget-trajectory modelupdated by'theresultsofprevious measurements.
(Prior knowledge ofthecharacteristics ofthetrajectory canbeincorporated inthemodel,as,for example, whenthetrajectory isknowntobeballistic.)Ifthedifference between theprediction andthemeasurement iszero,noadjustment ismadeandtheantenna mountispointed according tothestoredprediction.
Iftheydonotagree,thetargettrajectory prediction is changed untiltheydo.Thus,thepointing oftheantenna ismadeopen-loop basedonthe storedtarget-trajectory prediction updated bytheradarmeasurements.
Theservoloopthat pointstheantenna ismaderelatively wideband (highdatarate)topermitafasttracking response againsttargetswithhighangularacceleration.
Theprocessofadjusting thepredicted position basedonthemeasured position isperformed withanarrowbandwidth.
Thiserror­ signalbandwidth isadaptive andcanbemadeverynarrowtoobtaingoodsignal-to-noise ratio,yetthesystemwillcontinue topointopen-loop basedonthestoredtarget-trajectory prediction andthewidetracking-bandwidth oftheantenna-pointing servos.Forconvenience therange,azimuth, andelevation (r,0,4»coordinates oftheradaroutputareconverted to rectilinear (x,y,z)targetcoordinates toperform thedatasmoothing andcomparison with prediction.
Inradarcoordinates, thetrackofatargetonastraight-line trajectory iscurvilinear andcangenerate apparent accelerations.
Thisdoesnothappenwhentracking inrectilinear coordinates.
Therectilinear coordinates oftheupdated targetprediction areconverted backto radarcoordinates todrivetheantenna.
Systematic errorsaredetermined bypriormeasurement andareusedtoadjustthe encoded antenna position toprovidethecorrecttargetposition.
Systematic errorsinclude (1)errorinthezeroreference oftheencoders thatindicate theorientation oftheradaraxes, (2)misalignment oftheelevation axiswithrespecttotheazimuth axis(nonorthogonality), (3)drooporflexingoftheantenna andmountcausedbygravity,(4)misalignment oftheradar withrespecttotheelevation axis(skew'),(5)noncoincidence oftheazimuth planeofthemount tothelocalreference plane(mislevel), (6)dynamic lagintheservosystem,(7)finitetransit timethatresultsinthetargetbeingatadifferent position bythetimetheechoisreceived hy theradar,and(8)bending andadditional timedelayofthepropagation pathduetoatmo­ sphericrefraction.
Aboresight telescope mounted ontheradarantenna permitscalibration ofthemechani­ calaxisoftheantenna withrespecttoastarfield.Thiscalibration accounts forbiasin azimuth andelevation, mislevel, skew,droop,andnonorthogonality.
Tracking avisiblesatel­ litewiththeradarpermitstheposition oftheRFaxis relativetothemechanical (optical) axis tobedetermined.
Thedifference between theposition measured hytheopticsandthat IRACKING RADAR 181  nlcasurcd by tlic radar is ol,tai~lcd after correctio~i is made for tl~c dini're~ice ill atmosplic~.ic  refractior~ for optical arid KF propagation.
This type of dynarnic calibratiorl requires ttie radar  to f7e I;irgc CI~OLI~II to track satellilcs.
 l'tlcrc is riotliirlg u~~iqrrc aborit any of the irldividual processes that enter into on-axis  trackirlg.
Tltcy can each hc applied i~idividually, if desired, to any tracking radar to improve  tile accrrracy of track.
 High-range-resolution rnonopul~e.~~ It has been noted previously in this chapter that the  presence of rnultiple scatterers witliir~ the range-resolution cell of the radar results in scintilla-  tion, or glir~t, wllicli car] ir~trodiice a significant error.
The use of a radar with liigli rangc-  ' corresponding zero L, angle error voltage range video  ongle video  ____j.
 time  Figure 5.20 Rangc and angle video obtained with the NRL High Range Resolution Monopulse (HRRM)  radar The target is a Super Constellation aircraft in flight.
Note that the angle video indicates to what side  of the radar beam axis are located the individual scatterers which are resolved in range.
The radar  olwratrd at ,i' harid will1 a 7-ft-diarnetcr arltenna arid a pulse width of 3  nanosecond^.^^  TRACKING RADARlSI mcasured bythcradarisohlaincd artcrcorrcction ismadcforthcJincrcncc inatmosphcric refraction foropticalandRFpropagatiDn.
Thistypeofdynamic calibration requires the radar tobclargccnoughtotracksatcllitcs.
Thercisnothing uniqucaboutanyoftheindividual processes thatenterintoon-axis tracking.
Theycancachbeapplicdindividually.
ifdesired.toanytracking radartoimprove theaccuracy oftrack.
High-range-resolution monopulse.66Ithasbeennotedpreviously inthischapter thatthe prescnce oflTlultiple scatterers withintherange-resolution celloftheradarresultsinscintilla­ tion,orglint.whichcallintroduce asignificant error.Theuseofaradarwithhighrange- radarlocation approx.radar corresponding zero angleerrorvoltagerangevideo anglevideoQ) "t:7 ttWV-2 superconste110tion timeI I I I I I I I I I I I \ -1- / / /L_ Figure5.20Rangeandanglevideooblained withtheNRLHighRangeResolution Monopulse (HRRM) radar.ThetargetisaSuperConstellation aircraninflight.Notethattheanglevideoindicates towhatside oftheradarbeamaxisarelocatedtheindividual scatterers whichareresolved inrange.Theradar opcrated atXhandwitha7-n-diameter antenna andapulsewidthof3nanoseconds.66 resolution isolates the individual scattering centers and therefore eliminates the glint problem.
 With aircraft targets an effective pulse width of several nanoseconds (less ttiarl a riletcr range-  resollttion) can resolve the individual scatterers.
Once the scatterers are resolved in rangc, an  angle measurement can be obtained on each one by use of monopulse.
This provides a  three-dimensional "image" of the target since the azimuth and elevation of each scatterer is  given along with the range.
Figure 5.20 is an example of the type of radar image that might be  obtained with an aircraft.
This technique not only improved significantly the tracking accur-  acy as compared with a longer pulse conventional tracker, but its unique measurement  properties provide additional capabilities.
For example, it can be used as a means of target  classification or recognition, as a precision vector miss-distance indicator for uninstritmentsd  targets, as a counter (ECCM) to repeater jammers, as an aid in low-angle tracking, and as a  means for discriminating unwanted clutter or chaff from the desired target.
.
 Tracking in doppler.
Tracking radars that are based on CW, pulse-doppler, or MTI principle5  can also track the doppler frequency shift generated by a moving target.
This may be accom-  plished with a frequency discriminator and a tunable oscillator to maintain the received signal  in the center of a narrow-band filter.
It is also possible to use a phase-lock loop, or phase-  sensitive discriminator whose output drives a voltage-controlled oscillatar to hold its phase in  step with the input signaL2 Tracking the doppler frequency shift with the equivalent of a  narrow-band filter just wide enough to encompass the frequency spectrum of the received  signal allows an improvement in the signal-to-noise ratio as compared with wideband proczs-  sing.
It can also provide resolution of the desired moving target from stationary clutter.
The  doppler tracking filter is sometimes called a speed gate.
 5.9 COMPARISON OF TRACKERS1  Of the four continuous-tracking-radar techniques that have been discussed (sequential lobing,  conical scan, amplitude-comparison monopulse, and phase-comparison monopulse), con~cal  scan and amplitude-comparison monopulse have seen more application than the other two.
 The phase-comparison monopulse has not been too popular because of the relative awkward-  ness of its antenna (four separate antennas mounted to point their individual beams in the same  direction), and because the sidelobe leveliiinight be higher than desired.
Although sequential  lobing is similar to conical scan, the'littei*ispreferred in most applications, since it suffers less  loss and the antenna and feed ~yst'kmk~are usually less complex.
In this section, only the  conical-scan radar and the amp~itiid~~omparison monopulse will be compared.
(The latter  will be referred to simply as mon'opulse,)  When the target is being tracked, the signal-to-noise ratio available from the monopulse  radar is greater than that of a %oniciil:scan radar, all other things being equal, since the  I* ,#J' monopulse radar views the target at'the'pak of its sum pattern while the conical-scan radar  views the target at an angle off thi"peak of the antenna beam.
The difference in signal-to-no~se  ratio might be from 2 to 4 dB.
For the same size aperture, the beamwidth of a conical-scan  radar will be slightly greater than that of the monopulse because its feed is offset from the  foc11s.
 The tracking accuracy of a monopulse radar is superior to that of the conical-scan radar  because of the absence of target amplitude-fluctuations and because of its greater s~gnal-to-  noise ratio.
It is the preferred technique for precision tracking.
However, both monopttlse and  conical-scan radars are degraded equally by the wandering of the apparent position of the  target (glint).
 182INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS resolution isolatestheindividual scattering centersandtherefore eliminates theglintproblem.
Withaircrafttargetsaneffective pulsewidthofseveralnanoseconds (kssthanameterrange­ resolution) canresolvetheindividual scatterers.
Oncethescatlcrers an:n:solved inrange,an anglemeasurement canbeobtained oneachonebyuseofmonopulse.
Thisprovides a three-dimensional" image"ofthetargetsincetheazimuth andelevation ofeachscallerer is givenalongwiththerange.Figure5.20isanexample ofthetypeofradarimagethatmightbe obtained withanaircraft.
Thistechnique notonlyimproved significantly thetracking accur­ acyascompared withalongerpulseconventional tracker, butitsuniquemeasurement properties provideadditional capabilities.
Forexample, itcanbeusedasameansoftarget classification orrecognition, asaprecision vectormiss-distance indicator foruninstrument,ed targets,asacounter(ECCM) torepeater jammers, asanaidinlow-angle tracking, andasa meansfordiscriminating unwanted clutterorchafffromthedesiredtarget.
'.Tracking indoppler.
Tracking radarsthatarebasedonCW,pulse-doppler, orMTIprinciples canalsotrackthedoppler frequency shiftgenerated byamovingtarget.Thismaybeaccom­ plishedwithafrequency discriminator andatunableoscillator tomaintain thereceivedsignal inthecenterofanarrow-band filter.Itisalsopossible touseaphase-lock loop,orphase-.J sensitive discriminator whoseoutputdrivesavoltage-controlled oscillator toholditsphasein stepwiththeinputsignal.
2Tracking thedoppler frequency shiftwiththeequivalent ofa narrow-band filterjustwideenoughtoencompass thefrequency spectrum ofthereceived signalallowsanimprovement inthesignal-to-noise ratioascompared withwidebandproces- sing.Itcanalsoprovideresolution ofthedesiredmovingtargetfromstationary c!uller.The doppler tracking filterissometimes calledaspeed gate.
5.9COMPARISON OFTRACKERS' Ofthefourcontinuous-tracking-radar techniques thathavebeendiscussed (sequentiallobing, conicalscan,amplitude-comparison monopulse, andphase-comparison monopulse), conical scanandamplitude-comparison monopulse haveseenmoreapplication thantheothertwo.
Thephase-comparison monopulse hasnotbeentoopopular becauseoftherelativeawkward­ nessofitsantenna(fourseparate an'tennas m'ounted topointtheirindividual beamsinthesame direction), andbecausethesidelobC"levelS)night behigherthandesired.
Although sequential lobingissimilartoconicalscan,' the'l~tier:'is'preferred inmostapplications, sinceitsuffersless lossandtheantenna andfeed'systems~re .usuallylesscomplex.
Inthissection, onlythe conical-scan radarandtheamplitude~c<imparison monopulse willbecompared.
(Thelatter willbereferred tosimplyasmoriopulsc;) Whenthetargetisbeing tracked,the:signal-to-noi~e ratioavailable fromthemonopulse radarisgreaterthanthatofa;corlical;scan' radar,allotherthingsbeingequal,sincethe monopulse radarviewsthetarier~'fth~"peak ofitssumpatternwhiletheconical-scan radar viewsthetargetatanangleoffthe"peak oftheantenna beam.Thedifference insignal-to-noise ratiomightbefrom2to4dB.Forthesame'size aperture, thebeamwidth ofaconical-scan radarwillbeslightlygreaterthanthatofthemonopulse because itsfeedisoffsetfromthe focus.
Thetracking accuracy ofamonopulse radarissuperior tothatoftheconical-scan radar becauseoftheabsenceoftargetamplitude-fluctuations andbecauseofitsgreatersignal-to­ noiseratio.Itisthepreferred technique forprecision tracking.
However, bothmonopulse and conical-scan radarsaredegraded equallybythewandering oftheapparent position ofthe target(glint). TRACKING RADAR 183  The monopulse radar is the rnore complex of the two.
Three separate receivers are  necessary to derive the error signal in two orthogonal angular coordinates.
Only one receiver  is needed in the conical-scan radar.
(There are certain monopulse implementations that can  use either one or two rcccivcrs, but at some sacrifice in performance.) Since the monopulse  radar conlpares the amplitudes of signals received in three separate channels, it is important  that the gain and phase shift through these channels be identical.
The RF circuitry that  generates the surn and diKerence signals in a monopulse radar has been steadily improved, and  can be realized without excessive physical bulk.
A popular forni of antenna for monopulse is  tllc Casseg~aill.
 With the IIIOIIOI~~IISL' tr;~cker it is possible to obtain a measure of the angular error in two  coorditlatcs 011 tllc tlnsis of a single pulse.
A n~initnurn of four pulses are usually necessary with  the co~lical-scan radar.
fIowever, a continuous-tracking radar seldom makes a measurement  or1 il si~iglc pl~lsc.
(f'lii~sctl-array radars and sorne surveillarlce radars, however, [night use the  rnorlopulse prirlciplc to extract an ar~gle ~neasurement on the basis of a single pulse.) I11  practice.
the two radars utilize essentially the same number of pulses to obtain an error signal  if the servo tracking bandwidths and pulse repetition frequencies are the same.
The monopulse  radar first makes its angle measurement and then integrates a number of pulses to obtain  the required signal-to-noise ratio and to smooth the error.
The conical-scan radar, on the  other hand, integrates a number of pulses first and then extracts the angle measurement.
 Because a rnonopulse radar is not degraded by amplitude fluctuations, it is less suscep-  tible to l~ostile electronic countermeasures than is conical scan.
 111 brief, the mot~opulse radar is the better tracking technique; but in many applications  where the ultimate in performance is not needed, the conical-scan radar is used because it is  less costly and less complex.
 5.10 I'RACKING WlTti SURVEILLANCE RADAR  The track of a target can be determined with a surveillancg radar from the coordinates of the  target as rncasured from scan to scan.
The quality of such a track will depend on the time  between observations, the location accuracy of each observation, and the number of extra-  neous targets that [night be present in the vicinity of the tracked target.
A surveillance radar that  develops tracks on targets it has detected is sometimes called a track-while-scan (TWS) radar.
 One method of obtaining tracks with a surveillance radar is to have an operator manually  mark with grgase pencil on the face of the cathode-ray tube the location of the target on each  scan.
The simplicity of such a procedure is offset by the poor accuracy of the track.
The  accuracy of track can be improved by using a computer to determine the trajectory from  inputs supplied by an operator.
A human operator, however, cannot update target tracks at a  rate greater than about once per two seconds.69 Thus, a single operator cannot handle more  than about six target tracks when the radar has a twelve-second scan rate (5 rpm antenna  rotation rate).
Furthermore an operator's effectiveness in detecting new targets decreases  rapidly after about a half hour of operation.
The radar operator's traffic handling limitation  and the effects of fatigue can be mitigated by automating the target detection and tracking  process with data processing called atrtomaric detection and tracking (ADT).
The availability of  digital data processing technology has made ADT economically feasible.
An ADT system  pcrforms the futlctions of target detection, track initiation, track association, track update,  track smoothing (filtering) and track termination.
 The atrrontatic detector part of the ADT quantizes the range into intervals equal to the  range resolution.
At each range interval the detector integrates 11 pulses, where n is the number  TRACKING RADAR183 Themonopulseradaristhemorecomplex ofthetwo.Threeseparate receivers are necessary toderivetheerrorsignalintwoorthogonal angularcoordinates.
Onlyonereceiver isneededintheconical-scan radar.(Therearecertainmonopulse implementations thatcan useeitheroneortworeceivers.
butatsomesacrifice inperformance.) Sincethemonopulse radarcompares theamplitudes ofsignalsreceived inthreeseparate channels, itisimportant thatthegainandphaseshiftthrough thesechannels beidentical.
TheRFcircuitry that generates thesumanddifference signalsinamonopulse radarhasbeensteadilyimproved, and canberealized withoutexcessive physical bulk.Apopular formofantenna formonopulse is theCassegrain.
Withthe1l10nopulse trackeritispossible toobtainameasure oftheangularerrorintwo coordinates onthehasisofasinglepulse.1\minimum offourpulsesareusuallynecessary with theconical-scan radar.However, acontinuous-tracking radarseldommakesameasurement onasinglepulse.(Phased-array radarsandsomesurveillance radars,however, mightuscthe monopulse principle toextractananglemeasurement onthebasisofasinglepulse.)In practice.
thetworadarsutilizeessentially thesamenumberofpulsestoobtainanerrorsignal iftheservotracking bandwidths andpulserepetition frequencies arethesame.Themonopulse radarfirstmakesitsanglemeasurement andthenintegrates anumberofpulsestoobtain therequired signal-to-noise ratioandtosmooth theerror.Theconical-scan radar,onthe otherhand,integrates anumberofpulsesfirstandthenextracts theanglemeasurement.
Because amonopulse radarisnotdegraded byamplitude fluctuations, itislesssuscep­ tibletohostileelectronic countermeasures thanisconicalscan.
Inbrief.themonopulse radaristhebettertracking technique; butinmanyapplications wheretheultimate inperformance isnotneeded,theconical-scan radarisusedbecause itis lesscostlyandlesscomplex.
5.10TRACKING WITHSURVEILLANCE RADAR Thetrackofatargetcanbedetermined withasurveillan~ radarfromthecoordinates ofthe targetasmeasured fromscantoscan.Thequalityofsuchatrackwilldependonthetime between observations, thelocation accuracy ofeachobservation, andthenumber ofextra­ neoustargetsthatmighthepresentinthevicinityofthetrackedtarget.Asurveillance radarthat develops tracksontargetsithasdetected issometimes calledatrack-while-scan (TWS)radar.
Onemethodofobtaining trackswithasurveillance radaristohaveanoperator manually markwith gr~asepencilonthefaceofthecathode-ray tubethelocation ofthetargetoneach scan.Thesimplicity ofsuchaprocedure isoffsetbythepooraccuracy ofthetrack.The accuracy oftrackcanbeimproved byusingacomputer todetermine thetrajectory from inputssupplied byanoperator.
Ahumanoperator, however, cannotupdatetargettracksata rategreaterthanaboutoncepertwoseconds.69Thus,asingleoperator cannothandlemore thanaboutsixtargettrackswhentheradarhasatwelve-second scanrate(5rpmantenna rotation rate).Furthermore anoperator's effectiveness indetecting newtargetsdecreases rapidlyafteraboutahalfhourofoperation.
Theradaroperator's traffichandling limitation andtheeffectsoffatiguecanbemitigated byautomating thetargetdetection andtracking processwithdataprocessing calledautomatic detection andtracking (ADT).Theavailability of digitaldataprocessing technology hasmadeADTeconomically feasible.
AnADTsystem performs thefunctions oftargetdetection, trackinitiation, trackassociation, trackupdate, tracksmoothing (filtering) andtracktermination.
Thea/ltomatic detector partoftheADTquantizes therangeintointervals equaltothe rangeresolution.
I\teachrangeintervalthedetector integrates npulses,wherenisthenumber 184 lNTHODUCTlON TO RADAR SYSTEMS  of pulses expected to be returned from a target as tile at~tcnna scatis past.
The integrated pulscs  are compared with a threshold to indicate the presence or absence of a target.
An example 1s  the commonly used moving window detector which examines continuously the last r15amples -  within each quantized range interval and announces the presence of a target if m out of 11 of  these samples cross a preset threshold.
(This and other automatic detectors are described in  hec.
10.7 and in Ref.
70.) By locating the center of the n pulses, an estimate of the target's  angular direction can be obtained.
This is called beam splittihg.
 If there is but one target present within the radar's coverage, then detections on two scans  are all that is needed to establish a target track and to estimate its velocity.
However, there are  usually other targets as well as clutter echoes present, so that three or more detections are  needed to reliably establish a track without the generation of false or spurious tracks.
 Although a computer can be programmed to recognize and reject false tracks, too many false  tracks can overload the computer and result in poor information.
It is for this same reason of  avoiding computer overload that the radar used with &pT should be designed to exclude  unwanted signals, as from clutter and interference.
A good ADT system therefore reqirires a  radar with a good-MTI and a good CEAE-(constant false alarm rate) receiver.
A clutter map,  generated by the radar, is sometimes used to reduce the load on thc tracking compiltcr by  blanking clutter areas and removing detections associated with large point clutter sources not  rejected by the MTI.
Slowly moving echoes that are not of interest can also be rcmoveti by the  clutter map.
The availability of some distinctive target characteristic, such as its altitude, m~gtlt  also prove of help when performing track association.'' Thus, the quality of the ADT will  depend significantly on the ability of the radar to reject unwanted signals.
 When a new detection is received, an attempt is made to associate it with existing  tracks.96 This is aided by establishing for each track a small search region, or gate, within  which a new detection IS predicted based on the estimate of the target speed and direction.
It is  desired to make the gate as small as possible so as to avoid having more than one echo fall  within it when the traffic density is high or when two tracks are close to one another.
However,  a large gate area is required if the tracker is to follow target turns or maneuvers.
More than  one size gate might therefore be used to overcome this dilemma.
The size of the small gate  would be determined by the accuracy of the track.
When a target does not appear in the small  gate, a larger gate would be used whose search area is determined by the maximum accelera-  tion expected of the target during turns.
 On the basis of the past detections the track-while-scan radar must make a smoothed  estimate of a target's present position and velocity, as well as a predicted position and velocity.
 One method for computing this information is the so-called a-fl tracker (also called the g-h  trackera4), which computes the present smoothed target position 2, and velocity by the  following equations72  Smoothed position: in = x,, + a(x, - x,,) (5.8)  - - B Smoothed velocity: in = in - 1 + _r (x, - xpn)  where x,, = predicted position of the target at the nth scan, x, = measured position at the nth  scan, a = position smoothing parameter, j? = velocity smoothing parameter, and T, = time  between observations.
The predicted position at the n + 1st scan is in + %, T,.
(When accelera-  tion is important a third equation can be added to describe an a-8-y tracker, where  y = acceleration smoothing ~arameter.)'~ For a = 8 = 0, the tracker uses no current informa-  tion, only the smoothed data of prior observations.
If a = /? = l, no smoothing is included at all.
 The classical a-8 filter is designed to minimize the mean square error in the smoothed (filtered)  184INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS ofpulsesexpected tobereturned fromatargetastheantenna scanspast.Theintegrated pulses arecompared withathreshold toiJidicatethe presence orabsenceofatargetAnexample is thecommonly usedmovingwindowdetector whichexamines continuously theJi!~iJ}~mples withineachquantized rangeintervalandannounces thepresence ofatargetifmoutofrJof thesesamples crossapresetthreshoid.
(Thisandotherautomatic detectors aredescribed in Sec.10.7andinRef.70.)Bylocating thecenterofthenpllls_es,anestimate ofthetarget's angulardirection canbeobtained.
Thisiscalledbeantsp/ittiJW.
Ifthereisbutonetargetpresentwithintheradar'scoverage, thendetections ontwoscans areallthatisneededtoestablish atargettrackandtoestimate itsvelocity.
However, thereare usuallyothertargetsaswellasclutterechoespresent,sothatthreeormoredetections are neededtoreliably establish atrackwithout thegeneration offalseorspurious tracks.
Although acomputer canbeprogrammed torecognize andrejectfalsetracks,toomanyfalse trackscanoverload thecomputer andresultinpoorinformation.
Itisforthis·6ame reasonof avoiding computer overload thattheradarusedwithAI}Tshouldhedesigned toexclude unwanted signals,as fromclutterandinterference.
AgoodADTsystemtherefore requires a radarwithagood,MTLand ..agoQdCEAJ!_.(.ronstant falsealarmrate)receiver.
Acluttermap, generated bytheradar,issometimes usedtoreducetheloadonthetracking computer by blanking clutterareasandremoving detections associated withlargepointcluttersourcesnot rejectedbytheMTI.Slowlymovingechoesthatarenotofinterestcanalsoberemoved bythe cluttermap.Theavailability ofsomedistinctive targetcharacteristic, suchasitsaltitude, might alsoproveofhelpwhenperforming trackassociation.71Thus,thequalityoftheADTwill dependsignificantly ontheabilityoftheradartorejectunwanted signals.
Whenanewdetection isreceived, anattempt ismadetoassociate itwithexisting tracks.96Thisisaidedbyestablishing foreachtrackasmallsearchregion,orgate,within whichanewdetection ISpredicted basedontheestimate ofthetargetspeedanddirection.
Itis desiredtomakethegateassmallaspossible soastoavoidhavingmorethanoneechofall withinitwhenthetrafficdensityishighorwhentwotracksareclosetooneanother.
However, alargegateareaisrequired ifthetrackeristofollowtargetturnsormaneuvers.
Morethan onesizegatemighttherefore beusedtoovercome thisdilemma.
Thesizeofthesmallgate wouldbedetermined bytheaccuracy ofthetrack.Whenatargetdoesnotappearinthesmall gate,alargergatewouldbeusedwhosesearchareaisdetermined bythemaximum accelera­ tionexpected ofthetargetduringturns.
Onthebasisofthepastdetections thetrack-while-scan radarmustmakeasmoothed estimate ofatarget'spresentpositionandvelocity, aswellasapredicted position andvelocity.
Onemethodforcomputing thisinformation istheso-called ex-fJtracker(alsocalledtheg-II tracker84),whichcomputes thepresentsmoothed targetposition\xnandvelocityIbytht: following equations 72 ' Smoothed position:xn=xpn+ex(xn-xpn) Smoothed velocity:xn=xn-1+~(xn-xpn)(5.8) (5.9) wherexpn=predicted positionofthetargetatthenthscan,Xn=measured positionatthenth scan,ex=position smoothing parameter, fJ=velocity smoothing parameter, andTs=time between observations.
Thepredicted position atthen+1stscanisxn+xnTs.(Whenaccelera­ tionisimportant athirdequation can be addedtodescribe anex.-fJ-ytracker, where y=acceleration smoothing parameter.)73 Forex.=fJ=0,thetrackerusesnocurrentinforma­ tion,onlythesmoothed dataofpriorobservations.
Ifex=fJ=I,nosmoothing isincluded atall.
Theclassical ex.-fJfilterisdesigned tominimize themeansquareerrorinthesmoothed (filtered) position and velocity, assumitlg small velocity changes between observations, or data samples.
 Benedict7' suggests that to minimize the output noise variance at steady state and the tran-  sient response to a maneuvering target as modeled by a ramp function, the a-B coefficients are  related by P = a2/(2 - a).
Tlie particular choice of a within the range of zero to one depends  upon the system application, in particular the tracking bandwidth.
A compromise usually  niilst be made between good sniootliing of the random measurement errors (requiring narrow  haridwidtll) arid rapid response to marieuverir~g targets (requiring wide bandwidth).
Another  criterion for selecting the a-fl coefficients is based on the best linear track fitted to the radar  data in a least squares sense.
This gives the values of a and fl asT4  where rl is the number of the scan or target observation (n > 2).
 I'lie standard @-/I tracker tloes not handle the maneuvering target.
However, an adaptive  sc-/I tracker is one wllicll varies the two smootliitig parameters to achieve a variable bandwidth  so as to follow maneuvers.
The value of a can be set by observing the measurement error  un - urn.
At tile start of tracking the bandwidth is made wide and then it narrows down if the  target rnoves in a straight-line trajectory.
As the target maneuvers or turns, the bandwidth is  wideried to keep the tracking error small.
 The Kalrnan filter78 is similar to the classical a-p tracker except that it inherently pro-  vides for the dynamical or maneuvering target.
In the Kalman filter a model for the measure-  ment error has to be assumed, as well as a model of the target trajectory and the disturbance or  uncertainty of the traje~tory.~~ Such disturbances in the trajectory might be due to neglect of  higher-order derivatives in the model of the dynamics, random motions due to atmospheric  turbulence, and deliberate target maneuvers.
The Kalman filter can, in principle, utilize a wide  variety of models for measurement noise and trajectory disturbance; however, it is often  assumed that these are described by white noise with zero mean.75 A maneuvering target does  not always fit such an ideal model, since it is quite likely to produce correlated observations.
 The proper inclusion of realistic dynamical models increases the complexity of the calcula-  tions.
Also, it is difficult to describe a priori the precise nature of the trajectory disturbances.
 Some form of adaptation to maneuvers is required.76 The Kalman filter is sophisticated and  accurate, but is more costly to implement than the several other methods commonly used for  the smoothing and prediction of tracking data.77 Its chief advantage over the classical a-/?  tracker is its intlerent ability to take account of maneuver statistics.
If, however, the Kalman  filter were restricted to modeling the target trajectory as a straight line and if the measurement  noise and the trajectory disturbance noise were modeled as white, gaussian noise with zero  mean, the Kalman filter equations reduce to the a-/? filter equations with the parameters a and /I computed sequentially by the Kalman filter procedure.
 Tlie classical a-/l tracking filter is relatively easy to implement.
To handle the maneuver-  ing target, some means may be included to detect maneuvers and change the values of a and fl  accordingly.
In some radar systems, the data rate might also be increased during target  maneuvers.
As the means for choosing a and /? become more sophisticated, the optimal a-fl  tracker becomes equivalent to a Kalman filter even for a target trajectory model with error.
In  this sense, the optimal a-/3 tracking filter is one in which the values of a and /? require  knowledge of the statistics of the measurement errors and the prediction errors, and in which a  and /3 are determined in a recursive manner in that they depend on previous estimates of the  mean square error in the smoothed position and vel~city.'~  (The above discussion has been in terms of a sampled-data system tracking targets  detected by a surveillance radar.
The concept of the a-/? tracker or the Kalman filter also can  TRACKING RADAR185 position andvelocity, assuming smallvelocitychanges between observations, ordatasamples.
Benedict72suggests thattominimize theoutputnoisevariance atsteadystateandthetran­ sientresponse toamaneuvering targetasmodeled byarampfunction, theex-pcoefficients are relatedbyf1=ex2/(2-ex).Theparticular choiceofexwithintherangeofzerotoonedepends uponthesystemapplication, inparticular thetracking bandwidth.
Acompromise usually mustbemadebetween goodsmoothing oftherandommeasurement errors(requiring narrow handwidth) andrapidresponse tomaneuvering targets(requiring widebandwidth).
Another criterion forselecting theex-fJcoefficients isbasedonthebestlineartrackfittedtotheradar datainaleastsquaressense.Thisgivesthevaluesofexand/3as74 2(2n-I)ex=--_._-- 11(11+I)6 /3=n(1I+1) whereIIisthenumber ofthescanortargetobservation (11>2).
Thestandard rx-f1trackerdocsnothandlethemaneuvering target.However, anadaptive 'Y.-f1trackerisonewhichvariesthetwosmoothing parameters toachieveavariable bandwidth soastofollowmancuvers.
Thcvalueofexcanbesetbyobserving themeasurement error .'("-.'(,,".Atthestartoftracking thebandwidth ismadewideandthenitnarrowsdownifthe targetmovesinastraight-line trajectory.
Asthetargetmaneuvers orturns,thebandwidth is widened tokeepthetracking errorsmall.
TheKalman fiIter78issimilartotheclassical ex-/3trackerexceptthatitinherently pro­ videsforthedynamical ormaneuvering target.IntheKalman fitteramodelforthemeasure­ menterror hastobeassumed, aswellasamodelofthetarget trajectory andthedisturbance or uncertainty ofthetrajectory.81 Suchdisturbances inthetrajectory mightbeduetoneglectof higher-order derivatives inthemodelofthedynamics, random motions duetoatmospheric turbulence, anddeliberate targetmaneuvers.
TheKalman filtercan,inprinciple, utilizeawide varietyofmodelsformeasurement noiseandtrajectory disturbance; however, itisoften assumed thatthesearedescribed bywhitenoisewithzeromean.7SAmaneuvering targetdoes notalwaysfitsuchanidealmodel,sinceitisquitelikelytoproduce correlated observations.
Theproperinclusion ofrealistic dynamical modelsincreases thecomplexity ofthecalcula­ tions.Also,itisdifficulttodescribe aprioritheprecisenatureofthetrajectory disturbances.
Someformofadaptation tomaneuvers isrequired.76TheKalman filterissophisticated and accurate, butismorecostlytoimplement thantheseveralothermethods commonly usedfor thesmoothing andprediction oftracking data.77Itschiefadvantage overtheclassical ex-fi trackerisitsinherent abilitytotakeaccountofmaneuver statistics.
If,however, theKalman",filterwererestrictedtomodeling thetargettrajectory asastraightlineandifthemeasurement noiseandthetrajectory disturbance noiseweremodeled aswhite,gaussian noisewithzero mean,theKalman filterequations reducetotheex-pfilterequations withtheparameters exand {1computed sequentially bytheKalman filterprocedure.
Theclassical ex-f3tracking filterisrelatively easytoimplement.
Tohandlethemaneuver­ ingtarget,somemeansmaybeincluded todetectmaneuvers andchangethevaluesofexandP accordingly.
Insomeradarsystems, the·dataratemightalsobeincreased duringtarget maneuvers.
Asthemeansforchoosing exandPbecomemoresophisticated, theoptimal ex-p trackerbecomes equivalent toaKalman filterevenforatargettrajectory modelwitherror.In thissense,theoptimal ex-Ptracking filterisoneinwhichthevaluesofexandPrequire knowledge ofthestatistics ofthemeasurement errorsandtheprediction errors,andinwhich ex andparedetermined inarecursive mannerinthattheydependonprevious estimates ofthe meansquareerrorinthesmoothed position andvelocity.79 (Theabovediscussion hasbeenintermsofasampled-data systemtracking targets detected byasurveiJIance radar.Theconceptoftheex-ptrackerortheKalman filteralsocan be applied to a continuous, single-target tracking radar when the error signal is processed  digitally rather than analog.
Indeed, the equations describing the a-/I tracker are equivalent to  the type II servo system widely used to model the continuous tracker.)  If, for some reason, the track-while-scan radar does not receive target information on a  particular scan, the smoothing and prediction operation can be continued by properly  accounting for the missed data." However, when data to update a track is missing for a  sufficient number of consecutive scans, the track is terminated.
Although the criterion for  terminating a track depends on the application, one example suggests that when three target  reports are used to establish a track, five consecutive misses is a suitable criterion for  terminati~n.~~  One of the corollary advantages of ADT is that it effccts a bandw~tltll retliiction 111 ttlc  output of a radar so as to allow the radar data to be tra11sm1ttt.d to another location via  narrowband phone lines rather than wideband microwave links.
This makes it,more conve-  nient to operate the radar at a remote site, and permits the outputs from many radars to be  communicated economically to a central control point.
 It should be noted that the adaptive thresholding of the automatic detector can cause a  worsening of the range-resolution.-By ana10~~-to the angukr_esolu&~n possibhn the angle  coordinateE8 it wo d seem a priori that tw_otargets might be resolved in range-if their  separation is abou<.l b - f the pulse width.
However, it hai been shown8' thatGith ailtomatic .- detection the probabil~ty of resmg targets in range does not rise above 0.9 until they are  separated by 2.5 pulse widths.
To achieve this resolution a log-video receiver should be used  and the threshold should be proportional to the smaller of the two means calculated from a  number of reference cells on either side of the test cell.
It also assumes that the shape of the  return pulse is not known.
If it is, it should be possible with the proper processing to resoivc  targets within a pulse width.'  When more than one radar, covering approximately the same volume in space, are  located within the vicinity of each other, it is sometimes desirable to combine their outputs to  form a single track file rather than form separate tra~ks.~~,~'-~' Such an automatic detection  and integrated tracking system (ADIT) has the advantage of a greater data rate than any single  radar operating independently.
The development of a single track file by use of the total  available data from all radars reduces the likelihood of a loss of target detections as might be  caused by antenna lobing, fading, interference, and clutter since integrated processing pernlits  the favorable weighting of the better data and lesser weighting of the poorer data.
 REFERENCES  1.
Dunn, 3.
H., D.
D.
Howard, and K.
B.
Pendleton: Tracking Radar, chap.
2 1 of "Radar Handbook,"  M.
I.
Skolnik (ed.), McGraw-Hill Book Co., Inc., New York, 1970.
 2.
Rarton.
D.
K.
"Radar Systems Analysis," Prenticc-Ilall, inc., Ncw Jcrscy, 1964.
 3.
James, H.
M., N.
B.
Nichols, and R.
S.
Phillips: "Theory of Servomechanisms," MIT Radiation  Laboratory Series, vol.
25, McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York, 1947.
 4.
Schafer, C.
R.: Phase-selective Detectors, Electronics, vol.
27, no.
2, pp.
188-190, February, 1954.
 5.
Greenwood, I.
A., Jr., J.
V.
Holdam, Jr., and D.
Macrae, Jr.
(eds.): "Electronic instruments," MIT  Radiation Laboratory Series, vol.
21, pp.
383-386, McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York, 1948.
 6.
Palma-Vittorelli, M.
M., M.
U.
Palma, and D.
Palumbo: The Behavior of Phase-sensitive Detectors,  Nuouo cimento, vol.
6, pp.
1211-1220, Nov.
1.1957.
 7.
Krishnan, S.: Diode Phase Detectors, Electronic and Radio Engr., vol.
36, pp.
45 -50, February, 1959.
 8.
Lawson, J.
L., and G.
E.
Uhlenbeck (eds.): "Threshold Signals," MIT Hadialion Laboratory Series,  vol.
24, McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York, 1950.
 9.
Oliver, B.
M.: Automatic Volume Control as a Feedback Problem, Proc.
IRE, vol.
36, pp.
466 473,  April, 1948.
 186INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS beappliedtoacontinuous, single-target tracking radarwhentheerrorsignalisprocessl:d digitally ratherthananalog.Indeed,theequations describing thea-ptrackerareequivalent to thetypeIIservosystemwidelyusedtomodelthecontinuous tracker.) If,forsomereason,thetrack-while-scan radardoesnotreceivetargetinformation ona particular scan,thesmoothing andprediction operation canbecontinued byproperly accounting forthemisseddata.8oHowever, whendatatoupdateatrack.ismissingfora sufficient numberofconsecutive scans,thetrackisterminated.
Although thecriterion for terminating atrackdepends ontheapplication, oneexample suggests thatwhenthreetarget reportsareusedtoestablish atrack,fiveconsecutive missesisasuitable criterion for termination.B2 Oneofthecorollary advantages ofADTisthatitefkctsaoandwidth reduction inthe.: outputofaradarsoastoallowtheradardatatobetransmitted toanother location via narrowband phonelinesratherthanwideband microwave links.Thismakesit.moreconve­ nienttooperatetheradarataremotesite,andpermitstheoutputsfrommanyradarstobe communicated economically toacentralcontrorpoint.
Itshouldbenotedthattheadaptive thresholding oftheautomatic detector cancausea worsening oftherange-resolution._B.yanalQ~~o theangu1aL[~~Ql~ti~n theangle coordinateB8itwo~seemapriorithattW-Q_tl!rgets mightberesolved inrangeifthdr separation isabou~»fthe pulsewidth.However, ithas-been shown89tha(;ith automatic ;:::r-"_•.•..".•...__ _ detection theprobability ofresolvmg targetsinrangedoesnotriseabove0.9untiltheyare separated by2.5pulsewidths.Toachievethisresolution alog-video receivershouldbeused andthethreshold shouldbeproportional tothesmallerofthetwomeanscalculated froma numberofreference cellsoneithersideofthetestcell.Italsoassumes thattheshapeofthe returnpulseisnotknown.Ifitis,itshouldbepossible withtheproperprocessing toresolve targetswithinapulsewidth: Whenmorethanoneradar,covering approximately thesamevolume inspace,are locatedwithinthevicinityofeachother,itissometimes desirable tocombine theiroutputsto formasingletrackfileratherthanformseparate tracks.83•97-S>:lSuchanautomatic detection andintegrated tracking system(ADIT)hastheadvantage ofagreaterdataratethananysingle radaroperating independently.
Thedevelopment ofasingletrackfilebyuseofthetotal available datafromallradarsreducesthelikelihood ofalossoftargetdetections asmightbe causedbyantenna lobing,fading,interference, andcluttersinceintegrated processing pe.:rmils thefavorable weighting ofthebetterdataandlesserweighting ofthepoorerdata.
REFERENCES 1.Dunn,J.H.,D.D.Howard, andK.B.Pendleton: Tracking Radar,chap.21of"RadarHandbook," M.I.Skolnik(ed.),McGraw-Hill BookCo.,Inc.,NewYork,1970.
2.Barton.
D.K...RadarSystems Analysis," Prentice-Hall, Inc.,NewJersey,1964.
3.James,H.M.,N.B.Nichols, andR.S.Phillips: ..TheoryofServomechanisms," MITRadiation Laboratory Series,vol.25,McGraw-Hili BookCompany, NewYork,1947.
4.Schafer,C.R.:Phase-selective Detectors, Electronics, vol.27,no.2,pp.188-190, February, 1954.
5.Greenwood, I.A.,Jr.,J.V.Holdam, Jr.,andD.Macrae,Jr.(eds.):..Electronic Instruments," MIT Radiation Laboratory Series,vol.21,pp.383-386, McGraw-Hili BookCompany, NewYork,1948.
6.Palma-Vittorelli, M.M.,M.U.Palma,andD.Palumbo: TheBehavior ofPhase-sensitive Detectors, Nuovocimento,vol.6,pp.1211-1220, Nov.1.1957.
7.Krishnan, S.:DiodePhaseDetectors, Electronic andRadioEngr.,vol.36,pp.45-50,February, 1959.
8.Lawson, J.L.,andG.E.Uhlenbeck (eds.):..Threshold Signals," MITRadiation Laboratory Series, vol.24,McGraw-Hill BookCompany, NewYork,1950.
9.Oliver,B.M.:Automatic VolumeControlasaFeedback Problem, Proc.IRE,vol.36,pr.466473, April,1948. TRACKING RADAR 187  10.
Field.
J.
C.
G.: Tlic Design of Automatic-gain-control Systems for Auto-tracking Radar Receivers,  Proc.
IEE, pt.
C, vol.
105, pp.
93-108, March, 1958.
 ll.
Locke, A.
S.: "G\ridance." pp.
402--408, D.
Van Nostrand Company, Inc., Princeton, N.J., 1955.
 12.
I>amon~c, J.
R., arid I).
J.
Stoddard: An Analysis of Conical Scan Antennas for Tracking, IRE Natl.
 Cotrtl.
Record, vol.
4, pt.
I, pp.
39-47, 1956.
 13.
Page, R.
M.: Munopt~lsc Radar, IRE Natl.
Conv.
Record, vol.
3, pt.
8, pp.
132- 134, 1955.
 14.
[>\inn, J.
11..
and D.
I>.
Howard: Precision Tracking with Monopulse Radar, Electrorrics, vol.
33, no.
 17.
pp.
5 1-56, Apr.
22.
1960.
 15.
Ihrton.
I).
K., ~ntl S.
M.
Sl~crman: Pulse Radar for Trajectory Instrumcnt.ntion, paper prcscritcd nt  Sixtli National Fliglit Test instrumentation Symposium, Instrument Society of America, San Diego,  Calif..
May 3, 1960.
 16.
Cohen, W., and C.
M.
Steinmetz: Amplitude and Phase-sensing Monopulse System Parameters, pts I  and 11, Aficrowar!~ 3..
vol.
2, pp.
27-33, October, 1959, and pp.
33-38, November, 1959; also discussion  hy F.
J.
(iardiner, vol.
3, pp.
18, 20, January, 1960.
 17.
Rhodes, U.
R.: "Introduction to Monopulse," McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York, 1959.
 18.
Rarton, D.
K.: " Radars, vol.
1.
Monopulse Radar," Artech House, Inc., Dedham, Mass., 1974 (a  collectior~ of 26 rcprints from tlie literature of monopulse radar).
 19.
Ilowney, 1:.
J., R.
14.
liardin, and J.
Munishian: A Time Duplexed Monopulse Receiver, Cot$ Proc.
on  Alilitnry Elactrotrics Cotrri.
(IRE), 1958, p.
405.
 20.
Rubin, W.
L., and S.
K.
Kamen: SCAMP-A New Ratio Computing Technique with Application to  Monopulse, Microwave J., vol.
7, pp.
83-90, December, 1964.
 2 1.
Ahel, J.
E., S.
F.
George, and 0.
D.
Sledge: The Possibility of Cross Modulation in the SCAMP Signal  Processor, Proc.
IEEE, vol.
53, pp.
317-318, March, 1965  22.
Noblit, R.
S.: Reliability without Redundancy from a Radar ~ono~ulse Receiver, Microwaves, vol.
6,  pp.
56 60.
December, 1967.
 23.
Kirkpatrick.
C;.
M.: Final El~gitieering Report on Angular Accuracy Improvement, General Electric  C'o.
Report otr Corrtract D.A.
36-039-sc-194, Aug.
l., 1952.
(Reprinted in ref.
18.)  24.
Ricardi.
L.
J., and L.
Niro: Design of a Twelve-horn Monopulse Feed, IRE Conv.
Rec., 1, pp.
49-56,  1961.
(Reprinted in ref.
18.)  25.
Hannan, P.
W., and P.
A.
Loth: A Monopulse Antenna Having Independent Optimization of the Sum  and UifTerence Modes, IRE Conv.
Rec., 1, pp.
56-60, 1961.
(Reprinted in ref.
18.)  26.
Howard, D.
D.: Single Aperture Monopulse Radar Multi-Mode Antenna Feed and Homing Device,  Proc.
1964 Inrertrational Conv.
Military Electronics, Sept.
14-16, pp.
259-263.
 27.
Sommer.
H.
W.: An Improved Simultaneous Phase Comparisa Guidance Radar, IRE Trans., vol.
 ANE-3, pp.
67-70, June, 1956.
 28.
Hausz, W., and R.
A.
Zachary: Phase-Amplitude Monopulse System, IRE Trans., vol.
MIL-6, pp.
 140- 146, April 1972.
(Reprinted in ref.
18.)  29.
Dunn, J.
H., D.
D.
Howard, and A.
M.
King: Phenomena of Scintillation Noise in Radar  Tracking Systems.
Proc.
IRE, vol.
47, pp.
855-863, May, 1959.
 30.
Dunn, J.
H., and D.
D.
Howard: Target Noise, chap.
28 of" Radar Handbook," M.
I.
Skolnik (ed.).
 McGraw-Hill Book Co., New York, 1970.
 3 1.
Locke, A.6.: "Guidance," D.
Van Nostrand Company, Inc., Princeton, N.J., 1955, pp.
440-442.
 32.
Delano, R.
H.: A Theory of Target Glint or Angular Scintillation in Radar Tracking, Proc.
I RE, vol.
 41, pp.
1778- 1784, December, 1953.
,  33.
Delano, R.
H., and I.
Pfeffer: The Effect of AGC on Radar Tracking Noise, Proc.
IRE, vol.
44, pp.
 801-810, June, 1956.
 34.
Dunn.
J.
H., and D.
D.
Howard: The Effects of Automatic Gain Control Performance on the Tracking  Accuracy of Monopulse Radar Systems, Proc.
IRE, vol.
47, pp.
430-435, March, 1959.
 35.
Gustafson, B.
G., and B.
0.
As: System Properties of Jumping Frequency Radar, Philips Telecom.
Rev.,  vol.
25, no.
I, pp.
70-65, July, 1964.
 76.
Lind.
G.: Reduction of Radar Tracking Errors with Frequency Agility, IEEE Trans., vol.
AES-4, pp.
 4 10 - 4 16, May, 1968.
 37.
Lind, Ci.: A Simple Approximate Formula for Glint Improvement with Frequency Agility, IEEE Trans.,  vol.
AES-8, pp.
854-855, November, 1972.
 38.
Nicholls, L.
A.: Reduction of Radar Glint for Complex Targets by Use of Frequency Agility, IEEE  Tmtu., vol.
AES-I I, pp.
647 649, July, 1975.
(See also comment on p.
325 of ref.
85.)  39.
Sims.
R.
J., and E.
R.
Graf: The Reduction of Radar Glint by Diversity Techniques, IEEE Trans., vol.
 AP-19, pp.
462-468, July, 1971.
 40.
Loomis, J.
M., and E.
R.
Graf: Frequency-Agility Processing to Reduce Radar Glint Pointing Error,  IEE E Trans., vol.
AES- 10, pp.
8 1 1-820, November, 1974.
 TRACKING RADAR187 to.Field.1.C.G.:TheDesignofAutomatic-gain-control Systems forAuto-tracking RadarReceivers, Proc.IEE,pI.C,vol.'OS,pp.93-108.
March, 1958.
II.Locke.A.S.:"Guidance." pp.402··40R, D.VanNostrand Company, Inc.,Princeton, N.J.,1955.
12.Damonlc.
J.A,andD.J.Stoddard: AnAnalysis ofConical ScanAntennas forTracking, IRENatl.
COlll'.Record.
vol.4.pI.I,pr.39-47,1956.
IJ.Page.R.M.:Monopulse Radar.IRENatl.ConI'.Record,vol.3.pt.8,pp.132-134, 1955.
14.Dunn,J.H..andD.D.Howard: Precision Tracking withMonopulse Radar,Electronics, vol.33,no.
17.pp.51-56.Apr.22.1960.
15.Barton.
D.K..andS.M.Sherman: PulseRadarforTrajectory Instrumentation.
paperpresented at SixthNational FlightTestinstrumentation Symposium.
Instrument SocietyofAmerica.
SanDiego.
Calif..May3.1960.
16.Cohen,W.,andC.M.Steinmetz: Amplitude andPhase-sensing Monopulse SystemParameters, ptsI andII.Microwave J..vol.2.pp.27-33,October, 1959,andpp.33-38,November, 1959;alsodiscussion hyF.J.Gardiner.
vol.3.pp.IR,20,January, 1960.
17.Rhodes, D.R.:"Introduction toMonopulse," McGraw-Hili BookCompany, NewYork,1959.
tR.Barton,D.K.:"Radars.
vol.I,Monopulse Radar." ArtechHouse,Inc.,Dedham, Mass.,1974(a collection of26reprints fromtheliterature ofmonopulse radar).
19.Downey, E.J.,R.H.Hardin.andJ.Munishian: ATimeDuplexed Monopulse Receiver.
Con!Proc.on MilitaryElectronics COlII'.(IRE),1958.p.405.
20.Rubin.W.L..andS.K.Kamen:SCAMP-A NewRatioComputing Technique withApplication to Monopulse, Microwave J.,vol.7,pp.83-90.December, 1964.
21.Abel,J.E.,S.F.George, andO.D.Sledge:ThePossibility ofCrossModulation intheSCAMP Signal Processor, Proc.IEEE,vol.53,pp.317-318, March,1965 22.Nonlit.
R.S.:Reliability without Redundancy fromaRadarMonopulse Receiver, Microwaves.
vol.6.
pp5660.Decemher.
1967.
D.Kirkpatrick.
(i.M.:FinalEngineering ReportonAngular Accuracy Improvement, GeneralElectric Co.ReportallCOlltract D.A.36-039-sc-194.
Aug.I.,1952.(Reprinted inref.18.) 24.Ricardi.L.1.,andL.Niro:DesignofaTwelve-horn Monopulse Feed,IREConI'.Rec.•I.pp.49-56, 1961.(Reprinted inref.18.) 25.Hannan, P.W.,andP.A.Loth:AMonopulse Antenna HavingIndependent Optimization oftheSum andDilTerence Modes,IREConI'.Rec.•1.pp.56-60,1961.(Reprinted inref.18.) 26.Howard.
D.D.:SingleAperture Monopulse RadarMulti-Mode Antenna FeedandHoming Device, PrOf1964International ConI'.MilitaryElectronics.
Sept.14-16.pp.259-263.
27.Sommer.
H.W.:AnImproved Simultaneous PhaseComparisOl1 Guidance Radar.IRETrans.•vol.
ANE-3, pp.67-70,June,1956.
2R.Haus7.,W.•andR.A.Zachary: Phase-Amplitude Monopulse System,IRETrans.,vol.MIL-6, pp.
140-146.
April1972.(Reprinted inref.18.) 29.Dunn.J.H.•D.D.Howard, andA.M.King:Phenomena ofScintillation NoiseinRadar Tracking Systems.
Proc.IRE,vol.47.pp.855-863.
May.1959.
30.Dunn,J.H.,andD.D.Howard: TargetNoise.chap.28of"RadarHandbook," M.I.Skolnik (ed.), McGraw-Hili BookCo.,NewYork,1970.
31.Locke.A.oS.:"Guidance," D.VanNostrand Company.
Inc.•Princeton.
N.J.•1955,pp.440-442.
32.Delano.
R.H.:ATheoryofTargetGlintorAngular Scintillation inRadarTracking.
Proc.IRE.vol.
4I.pp.1778-1784, December.
1953.
33.Delano, R.H.•andI.PfelTer:TheEffectofAGConRadarTracking Noise.Proc.IRE,vol.44.pp.
801-810.
June,1956.
34.Dunn,J.H.,andD.D.Howard: TheElTectsofAutomatic GainControl Performance ontheTracking Accuracy ofMonopulse RadarSystems.
Proc.IRE,vol.47.pp.430-435.
March,1959.
j5.Gustafson.
B.G.,andB.O.As:SystemProperties ofJumping Frequency Radar,PhilipsTelecom.
Rev.• vol.25,no.I,pp.70-65,July,1964.
~6.Lind,G.:Reduction ofRadarTracking ErrorswithFrequency Agility,IEEETrans.•vol.AES-4,pp.
410416, May.1968.
37.Lind,G.:ASimpleApproximate Formula forGlintImprovement withFrequency Agility.IEEETrans.• vol.AES-R.pp.854-855.
November.
1972.
38.Nicholls, L.A.:Reduction ofRadarGlintforComplex Targets byUseofFrequency Agility,IEEE TrailS.,vol.AES-Il,pp.647649.
July.1975.(Seealsocomment onp.325ofref.85.) 39.Sims.R.J.•andE.R.Graf:TheReduction ofRadarGlintbyDiversity Techniques.
IEEETrans.•vol.
AP-19.pp.462-468.
July,1971.
40.Loomis.
1.M.•andE.R.Graf:Frequency-Agility Processing toReduceRadarGlintPointing Error.
IEEETrans.,vol.AES-IO,pp.811-820, November, 1974. 31.
Barton, D.
K., and H.
R.
Ward: " Handbook of Radar Measureme~it," Prcntice-llall, inc..
E~iglcwoixl  Cliffs, N.J., 1969.
 42.
Barton, D.
K.: "Radars, vol.
4, Radar Resolution and Multipath Effects," Artech Iloilse, inc.,  l)ctlllum, Muss, 1975.
(collcctioa of 38 rcpricits.)  43.
Howard, D.
D., J.
Nessmith, and S.
M.
Sherman: Monopulse Tracking Errors Due to Mi1ltipatl.r.
 1 EEE EASCON '71 Record, pp.
175-182.
 44.
Kittredge, F., E.
Ornstein, and M.
C.
Licitra, Millimeter Radar for Low-Angle Tracking.
IEEE  EASCON '74 Record, pp.
72-75, IEEE Publication 74 CHO 883-1 AES.
 45.
Barton, D.
K.: Low-Angle Radar Tracking, Proc.
IEEE, vol.
62, pp.
687-704, June, 1974.
 46.
Linde, G.
J.: Improved Low-Elevation-Angle Tracking with Use of Frequency Agility, Nauul Research  Laboratory ~e~t.
7378, Washington, D.C., Mar.
17, 1972.
 47.
Dax, P.
R.: Keep Track of that Low-Flying Attack, Microwuues, vol.
15, pp.
36-42.47-53, April, 1976.
 48.
White, W.
D.: Low-Angle Radar Tracking in the Presence of Multipath, lEEE T/.iins., vol.
AES-10, pp.
 835-852, November, 1974.
 49.
Peebles, P.
Z., Jr.: Multipath Angle Error Reduction Using Multiple-Target Methods, IEEE Trurls.,  vol.
A ES-7, pp.
1 123-1 130, November, 197 1.
.j  50.
Howard, J.
E.: A Low Angle Tracking System for Fire Control Radars, IEEE 1975 It~rer~~i~tionul  Radar Cor!ferrnce, pp.
412-417.
 51.
Dax, P.
R.: Accurate Tracking of Low Elevation Targets Over the Sea with a Monopulsc Radar,  IEEE Conf.
Publ.
no.
105, "Radar-Present and Future," Oct.
23-25, 1973, pp.
160-165.
 52.
Sherman, S.
M.: Complex Indicated Angles Applied to Unresolved Radar Targets and Multipath.
 IEEE Trans.
vol.
AES-7, pp.
160-170, January, 1971.
 53.
Albersheim, W.
J.: Elevation Tracking Through Clutter Fences, Stipplrrnrtir ro IEEE Tru~ls., vol.
 AES-3.
pp.
366-373, NOV.
1967.
 54.
Hatcher, J.
L., and C.
Cash: Polarization Agility for Radar   lint Reduction, IEEE Region 3 Corlrcrl-  rion, Huntsville, Alabama, Nov.
19-21, 1969.
 55.
Locke, A.
S.: "Guidance," pp.
408-413, D.
Van Nostrand Company, Inc., Princeton, N.J., 1955.
 56.
Cross, D.
C., and J.
E.
Evans: Target-Generated Range Errors, Naunl Research Lahortrrory hlt~ttlor~irr-  dlim Report 2719, January, 1974.
 57.
Cross, D.
C.: Low Jitter High Performance Electronic Range Tracker, IEEE 1975 It~tt~rr~ntior~ill H~iilur  Co~lfrrence, pp.
408-41 1, IEEE Publication 75 CHO 938-1 AES.
 58.
Galati, G.: Range-tracking in Tracking Radars: Analysis and Evaluation of the Accuracy, Rit:isru  Technica Selenia (Rome, Italy), vol.
2, no.
2, pp.
29-41, 1975.
 59.
The SCR-584 Radar, Electronics, pt.
1, vol.
18, pp.
104-109, November, 1945; pt.
2, vol.
18, pp.
 104-109, December, 1945; pt.
3, vol.
19, pp.
110-117, February, 1946.
 60.
Cady, W.
M., M.
B.
Karelitz, and L.
A.
Turner (eds.): "Radar Scanners and Radomes," MIT Radia-  tion Laboratory Series, vol.
26, p.
66, McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York, 1948.
 61.
Symonds, M.
D., and J.
M.
Smith: Multi-Frequency Complex-Angle Tracking of Low-Level Targets,  Radar-Present and Future, pp.
166-171; Oct.
23-25, 1973, IEE Conference Publication No.
105.
 62.
Nessmith, J.
T.: Range Instrumentation Radars, IEEE ELECTRO '76, Boston, Mass., May 11 -14,  1976.
 63.
Schelonka, E.
P.
: Adaptive Control Techniques for On-Axis Radars, IEEE 1975 Internarionul R~dur  Conference, Arlington, Va., April 21-23, 1975, pp.
396-401, IEEE Publication 75 CHO 938-1 AES.
 64.
Clark, B.
L., and J.
A.
Gaston: On-Axis Pointing and the Maneuvering Target, NAECON '75 Rrcord.
 pp.
163-170.
 65.
Pollock, E.
J.: In Loop Integration Control (ILIC), Technical Memorandtim 118, Feb.
1, 1976, Air  Force Special Weapons Center, Kirtland Air Force Base, New Mexico.
 66.
Howard, D.
D.: High Range-Resolution Monopulse Tracking Radar and Applications, EASCON '74  Record, pp.
86-91, IEEE Publication 74 CHO 883-1 AES.
 67.
Provejsil, D.
J., R.
S.
Raven, and P.
Waterman: "Airborne Radar," D.
Van Nostrand Co., Inc.,  Princeton, N.J., 1961.
 68.
Hoare, E., and G.
Hine: Servomechanisms, chap.
11 of "Mechanical Engineering in Radar and  Communications," C.
J.
Richards (ed.), Van Nostrand Reinhold Co., New York, 1969.
 69.
Plowman, J.
C.: Automatic Radar Data Extraction by Storage Tube and Delay Line Techniques, J.
 Brit.
IRE, vol.
27, pp.
317-328, October, 1963.
 70.
Caspers, J.
W.: Automatic Detection Theory, chap.
15 of" Radar Handbook," M.
I.
Skolnik (ed.),  McGraw-Hill Book Co., Inc., New ~ork, 1970.
 71.
Oakley, B.
W.: Tracking in an Air Traffic Control Environment, chap.
30 of" Radar Techniques for  Detection, Tracking and Navigation," W.
T.
Blackband (ed.), Gordon and Breach, New York, 1966.
 72.
Benedict, T.
R., and G.
W.
Bordner: Synthesis of an Optimal Set of Radar Track-While-Scan Smooth-  ing Equations, IRE Trans., vol.
AC-7, pp.
27-32, July, 1962.
 188INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS 41.Barton,D.K.,andH.R.Ward:" Handbook ofRadarMeasurement," Prentil:e-llall, Inl:.,Englewood ClilTs,N.J.,1969.
42.Barton, D.K.:"Radars, vol.4,RadarResolution andMultipath Effects," Artel:hHouse,Inc., Dedhum, Muss,1975.(collection of3!lreprints.) 43.Howard, D.D.,J.Nessmith, andS.M.Sherman: Monopulse Tracking ErrorsDuetoMultipath, IEEEEASCON '71Record,pp.175-182.
44.Kittredge, F.,E.Ornstein, andM.C.Licitra, Millimeter RadarforLow-Angle Tracking, IEE£ EASCON '74Record,pp.72-75,IEEEPublication 74CHO883-1AES.
45.Barton,D.K.:Low-Angle RadarTracking, Proc.IEEE,vol.62,pp.687-704, June,1974.
46.Linde,G.J.:Improved Low-Elevation-Angle Tracking withUseofFrequency Agility,NavalResearch Laboratory Rept.7378,Washington, D.C.,Mar.17,1972.
47.Dax,P.R.:KeepTrackofthatLow-Flying Attack,MicrowalJes, vol.15,pp.36-42,4753, April,1976.
48.White,W.D.:Low-Angle RadarTracking inthePresence ofMultipath, IEEETraIlS.,vol.AES-lO,pp.
835-852, November, 1974.
49.Peebles, P.Z.,Jr.:Multipath AngleErrorReduction UsingMultipk-Target Methods, IEEETrailS, vol.AES-7,pp.1123-1130, November, 1971.
.• 50.Howard, J.E.:ALowAngleTracking SystemforFireControl Radars,IEEE1975Illlenl£ltiullal RadarCOI,{erence, pp.412-417.
51.Dax,P.R.:Accurate Tracking ofLowElevation TargetsOvertheSeawithaMonopulse Radar, IEEEColif.PubI.no.105,"Radar-Present andFuture," Oct.23-25,1973,pp.160-165.
52.Sherman, S.M.:Complex Indicated AnglesApplied toUnresolved RadarTargetsandMultipath, IEEETrans.vol.AES-7,pp.160-170.
January, 1971.
53.Albersheim, W.J.:Elevation Tracking Through ClutterFences.SlIpplemellC toIEEETnms.,vol.
AES-3,pp.366-373, Nov.1967.
54.Hatcher, J.L.,andC.Cash:Polarization AgilityforRadarGlintReduction, IEEERegioll3CUIII'I.'I1­ tion,Huntsville, Alabama, Nov.19-21,1969.
55.Locke,A.S.:"Guidance," pp.408-413, D.VanNostrand Company, Inc.,Princeton, N.J.,1955.
56.Cross,D.c.,and1.E.Evans:Target-Generated RangeErrors,NavalResearch Laboratory Mt.'lIlonlll­ dllmReport2719,January, 1974.
57.Cross,D.c.:LowJitterHighPerformance Electronic RangeTracker, IEEE197511lCt.'rllatiullal Rwlur Conference, pp.408-411, IEEEPublication 75CHO938-1AES.
58.Galati,G.:Range-tracking inTracking Radars: Analysis andEvaluation oftheAccuracy, Ril:isca Technica Selenia(Rome,Italy),vol.2,no.2,pp.29-41,1975.
59.TheSCR-584 Radar,Electronics, pt.I,vol.18,pp.104-109, November, 1945;pI.2,vol.IX,pp.
104-109, December, 1945;pt.3,vol.19,pp.110-117, February, 1946.
60.Cady.W.M.,M.B.Karelitz, andL.A.Turner(eds.):"RadarScanners andRadomes," MITRadia­ tionLaboratory Series,vol.26,p.66,McGraw-Hili BookCompany, NewYork,1948.
61.Symonds, M.D.,andJ.M.Smith:Multi-Frequency Complex-Angle Tracking ofLow-Level Targets, Radar-Present andFuture,pp.166-171; Oct.23-25,1973,lEEConference Publication No.105.
62.Nessmith, J.T:RangeInstrumentation Radars,IEEEELECTRO '76,Boston.
Mass.,May11·14, 1976.
63.Schelonka, E.P.:Adaptive ControlTechniques forOn-Axis Radars,IEEE1975Internatiollal Radar Conference, Arlington, Va.,April21-23,1975,pp.396-401, IEEEPublication 75CHO93!HAES.
64.Clark,B.L.,andJ.A.Gaston: On-Axis Pointing andtheManeuvering Target,NAECON '75Rl.'Cl)rd, pp.163-170.
65.Pollock, E.J.:InLoopIntegration Control (ILIC),Technical Memorandum 118,Feb.I,1976,Air ForceSpecialWeapons Center,Kirtland AirForceBase,NewMexico.
66.Howard, D.D.:HighRange-Resolution Monopulse Tracking RadarandApplications, EASCON '74 Record.pp.86-91,IEEEPublication 74CHO883-1AES.
67.Provejsil, D.J.,R.S.Raven,andP.Waterman: "Airborne Radar," D.VanNostrand Co.,Inc..
Princeton.
N.J.,1961.
68.Hoare,E.,andG.Hine:Servomechanisms, chap.11of"Mechanical Engineering inRadarand Communications," C.J.Richards (ed.),VanNostrand Reinhold Co.,NewYork,1969.
69.Plowman, J.c.:Automatic RadarDataExtraction byStorageTubeandDelayLineTechniques, J.
Brit.IRE,vol.27,pp.317-328, October, 1963.
70.Caspers, J.W.:Automatic Detection Theory, chap.15of"RadarHandbook," M.I.Skolnik (cd.), McGraw-Hili BookCo.,Inc.,NewYork,1970.
71.Oakley, B.W.:Tracking inanAirTrafficControl Environment, chap.30of"RadarTechniques for Detection, Tracking andNavigation," W.T.Blackband (ed.),Gordon andBreach,NewYork,1966.
72.Benedict, T.R.,andG.W.Bordner: Synthesis ofanOptimal SetofRadarTrack-While-Scan Smooth­ ingEquations, IRETrans.,vol.AC-7,pp.2,7-32,July,1962. 73.
Sinipson.
I{.
R.: Pcrft~rriiance Measures arid Optimization Condition for a Third-Order Sampled-  Ihta Tsnckcr.
/EKE Trtrrr.r..
vol.
AC-8.
pp.
182 183, April.
1963.
 74 Qtriglcy.
A.
L.
C.: 7'racking arid Associated.
Problems, Itrtc~rtrlrtiotrcrl Cot!/:- otr Rtrdar----Prrset~t otrd  1~rrrrtr.c~.
Oct.
23 25, 1973.
1-oridori.
pp.
352 359, IEEE Corifcrericc Publication no.
105.
 75.
Hanipton, R.
L.
T., and J.
R.
Cookc: Unsupervised Tracking of Maneuvering Vehicles, IEEE Trans.,  vol.
AES-9.
pp.
197 207.
hlarcll.
1973.
 76.
I'horp.
J.
S.: Optiriial I'rackirig of Maneuvering Targets, IEEE Trans., vol.
AES-9, pp.
512-519, July,  1973.
 77.
Sirigcr.
K.
A,.
;~ritl K.
W.
Ilclirikc: Rcal-.l'iriic Iracking Filter Evaluatio~i arid Selcctio~i for Tactical  Applic;~tior\s.
1l:I:E 7'r.(rrrs..
vol.
AES-7.
pp.
lot) 110, Jan.
1971.
 7X.
K;rlrr~;irl, R I!: A Ncw Approncl~ lo I .irie;~r 1-ilteritig ant1 Predictiori I'rohler~is, 7'rtrtrs.
ASIIfE.
.I.
t?tr.cic  I;IIOI~.
vot,, X?.
1111 34 45, b1:rrcIi.
1000.
 79.
Sclloolcr.
(' C'.: 0l~tiri1:il 7-11 1:iltcrs for Systcrns with Modeling Iriaccuracics, IEEE Tt~rtu..
vol.
 AI!S- I I.
111).
1 !(H) 1 106.
Novcr~ihcr.
1975.
 SO K;ir,y\tc.k.
A J.: ~l'r;irtsii.t~t Hc.;l,o~~sc of 7'rncki1\g I:iltcrs with Ka~ldoriily Intel-ruptcd Data.
IEEE  11.trrr.c.
vol /\l.'S-6.
1'1).
313 323.
M;ty, 1970.
 XI.
Morg;~r~.
I).
K.: A Target 'l'rajcctory Noise Model for Kalman Trackers.
IEEE Tratrs., vol.
AES-12, pp.
 405 408.
Mav.
1976.
 82.
L.cili-lispcriscii.
I,.: f:val~rnliori of l'rack-While-Scan Cornputer Logics, chap.
29 of " Radar  ~l'cclirliqucs Tor 1)ctcctiori.
-l'ri~ckirig, and Navigation." W.
T.
Blackband (ed.):Gordon arid !jreacti,  New York.
1966.
 83.
('nritrcll.
1).
f1..
(;.
V.
Trunk.
J.
[I.
Wilsori.
and J.
J.
Alter: Atitomatic Detection and integrated  Trackiiig.
IEEE 1975 It~tt~rt~c~rim~aI Rluiar Co~!/brc*ncr, pp.
39 1 -395.
Arlington, Va., Apr.
21 --23, 1975.
 11!1!f! Publication 75 CHO 938-1 AES.
 84.
Ilhagavan.
13.
K..
arid R.
J.
Polgc: Performarice of the y-11 Filter for Tracking Maneuvering Targets,  I EEI: 7'rirrts..
vol.
AI'S-10.
pp.
864 866, Novctnher, 1974.
 85.
Ilnrtori.
I).
K.: " Rntlars.
vol.
6.
Frcqirericy Agility and Diversity." Artech House.
Inc..
Dedharn.
Mass..
 1977.
 X6 Sakarnolo.
Il..
i111d P.
1.
Pccljlcs.
Jr.: Conopi~lsc Radar.
IEEE Troru.
vol.
AES-14, pp.
199-208,  January.
1978.
 87.
Rakut.
P.
A..
and I.
S.
Hol'shakov: "Questions of the Statistical Theory of Radar, vol.
11." chaps 10 arid  11.
Sovctskoyc Radio.
Moscow, 1963.
Translation available from NTIS, AD 645775.
June 28, 1966.
 xx.
Skolnik.
M.
I.:-Ccun~nc!n! VII tI~~.c.A~~gu~.~r.I.I,R~_s_so!~~!ioQn~C.~, Pmc.
IEEE, vol.
63, pp.
1354.
1355.
 Scptcmbcr, 1975.
 89.
Trunk.
G.
V.: Range Resolution of Targets Using Automatif Detectors, Naoal Research Laboratorjf  R(*pr.
81 78.
Nov.
28, 1977, Wastiirigton, 1l.C.
Also.
IEEE Trons., vol.
AES-14, pp.
750-755.
September,  I97X.
 90.
lloward.
I).
I)., S.
M.
Slierman.
I).
N.
Thomson, and J.
J.
Campbell: Experimental Results of the  t'omplcx lntlic;~tcd Aiiglc 'I'ccliniqt~c for Mitltipath Correction, IEEE 7'rntu., vol.
AES-10, pix  779 787.
November.
1974.
 91.
White, W.
D.: Double Null Technique for Low Angle Tracking, Microwave J., vol.
19, pp.
35-38, 60,  [kcember.
1976.
 92.
Harton; 11.
K.: Low Angle Tracking, Microwave J., vol.
19, pp.
19-24, December, 1976.
 93.
Howard, D.
D.: Investigation and Application of Radar Techniques for Low-Altitude Target Track-  ing.
IEE ltrtrrt~atiotral Radar Corrjeret~ce, RADAR-77, London, Eng., Oct.
25-28, 1977, IEE Confer-  ence Publication No.
105, pp.
313-317, IEEE (New York) Publication No.
77 CH 1271-6 AES.
 94.
Mrstik.
A.
V..
and P.
(i.
Smith: M~iltipatli Limitations on Low-Angle Radar Tracking, I EEE Tmtu..
 vol.
AES-14, pp.
85-102.
January, 1978.
 95.
Howard, I).
D.: Predicting Target-Caused Errors in Radar Measurements, Electronic Warfare Defense  Elecrrotric.s, vol.
10.
pp.
88 -95.
February.
1978.
See also same title and author in IEEE EASCON '76  Record, pp.
30-A to 30-H.
 96.
Trunk.
C;.
V..
and J.
D.
Wilson: Track Initiation in a Dense Detection Environment, Naval Researcl~  Lahorntory (Washington, D.C.) Rept 8238.
July 28.
1978.
 97.
Flad.
E.
H.: Tracking of Formation Flying Aircraft.
I~rternational Conference RADAR-77, Oct.
25-28,  1977.
pp.
160-163.
SEE (London) Conference Publication No.
155.
 98.
Ko~siakoli.
A,.
arid J.
R.
Airstiri: Atrtoni:ltcd Radar Data Processing System.
U.S.
Patent 4,005,415.
 Jari.
25.
1977.
 99.
C'asner.
P.
Ci..
and R.
J.
Prcngarnan: integration and Automation of Multiple Co-located Radars,  Itrrc~rnl~tiottol Cor?/i.ri~trcc~ R/11),1 R-77.
Oct.
25 -28, 1977, pp.
145-149.
IEE (London) Conference Publi-  c;~tioti rlo.
155.
 TRACKING RADAR189 73.Simpson.
II.R.:Performance Measures andOptimization Condition foraThird-Order Sampled­ DataTracker.
IEEETrails..vol.AC-X.pp.IX2IRJ.April.1963.
74.Quigley.
A.L.c.:Tracking andAssociated Problems.
Internatiollal Colit:OilRadar-···Pr/:'sellt alld FJ/t/l/'t'.Oct.2325.19D.London.
pp.352359.IEEEConference Publication no.105.
75.Hampton.
R.L.T..andJ.R.Cooke: Unsupervised Tracking ofManeuvering Vehicles, IEEETrailS., vol.AES-9.pp197207.March.
1971 76.Thorp.J.S.:Optimal Tracking ofManeuvering Targets, IEEETrans.,vol.AES-9,pp.512-519, July, 1973 77Singer.R1\..andK.WBehnke: RealcTillle Tracking FilterEvaluation andSelection forTactical Applications.
IEEET'·lIllS..vol.AF5-7.pp.100110,Jan.1971.
7R.Kallllan.
RF.'ANewApproach toI.inearFiltering andPrediction Problems.
TrailS.ASME.'/.Basic 1-.,1//11/.vo).X2.pp.l44\March.1960.
79.Schooler.
Cc.:Optimal 'X-/IFiltersforSystems withModeling Inaccuracies.
IEEETrailS..vol.
AES-II.
[1(1.130!)I~06.Novemher.
1975.
xoKanyuck.
/\1.:TI<lIlsil'nl Response ofTracking FilterswithRandomly Interrupted Data.IEEE III/liS.vol/\1:S-6.pp.313323.May.1970.
XI.Morgan.
()R.:ATargetTrajectory NoiseModelforKalman Trackers.
IEEETrailS..vol.AES-12.
pp.
40540X.May.1976.
X2.Leth-Fspensen.
L.:Evaluation ofTrack-While-Scan Computer Logics.
chap.29of"Radar Techniques forDetection.
Tracking.
andNavigation." W.T.Blackband (cd.).Gordon and!Jreach.
NewYork.1966.
X3.Cantrell.
B.n..Ci.V.Trunk.J.D.Wilson.
andJ.
J.Alter:Automatic Detection andIntegrated Tracking.
IEEE1975IIltCrlllItivlla[ RadarCOII!i.'/'{'lIce.
pp.391-395.
Arlington.
Va.,Apr.21--23.1975.
IFFEPublication 75CHO93X-1AES.
X4.Bhagavan.
B.K,andR.J.Polge:Performance oftheg-hFilterforTracking Maneuvering Targets.
[EEETrl/lls..vol.AFS-IO.
pp.R64R66,November.
1974.
X5.Barton.
D.K:"Radars.
vol.6.Frequency AgilityandDiversity." ArtechHouse.Inc..Dedham.
Mass..
1977.
X6Sakamoto.
II..andP.Z.Peebles, Jr.:Conopulse Radar.IEEETrailS.vol.AES-14.
pp.199-208.
January.
1978.
X7.Bakul.P.A..andI.S.Bol'shakov: ..Questions oftheStatistical TheoryofRadar,vol.II,"chaps10and 11.Sovctskoye Radio.Moscow.
1963.Translation available fromNTIS,AD645775.
June28,1966.
xxSkolnik.M.I.:-CQtl1JJ1~!!L~~_li!£_{\llg!lJ;l.LB~~_~!.l)ti.9_n_Q.LR.a.d.ar, Proc.IEEE,vol.63,pp.1354·1355.
September.
1975.
89.Trunk,G.V.:RangeResolution ofTargets Using Automati~ Detectors, NavalResearch Laboratory Rl'rt.X17X.Nov.2X.1977,Washington.
D.C.Also.IEEETral/s.•vol.AES-14,pp.750-755,September.
1978.
90.Howard.
D.n.,SM.Sherman.
D.N.Thomson.
andJ.
J.Campbell: Experimental Resultsofthe Complex Indicated AngleTechnique forMultipath Correction.
JEEETrailS., vol.A£:S-IO.
pp.
7797R7.Novemhcr.
1974.
91.White.W.D.:Double NullTechnique forLowAngleTracking, Microwave J.,vol.19,pp.35-38.60.
December.
1976.
92.BartomD.K.:LowAngleTracking.
Microwave J.,vol.19.pp.19-24,December, 1976.
93.Howard.
D.D.:Investigation andApplication ofRadarTechniques forLow-Altitude TargetTrack­ ing.lEEII/terl/atiol/al RadarCDllferel/ce.
RADAR-77, London, Eng.,Oct.25-28,1977,lEEConfer­ encePublication No.lOS,pp.313-317.
IEEE(NewYork)Publicalion No.77CH1271-6AES.
94.Mrstik.A.V..andP.o.Smith:Multipath Limitations onLow-Angle RadarTracking, IEEETrans..
vol.AES-14.
pp.
85-I02.January, 1978.
95.Howard.
D.D.:Predicting Target-Caused ErrorsinRadarMeasurements, Electronic WarfareDefense Elecrrortio.
vol.10.pp.RR-95.February.
1978.SeealsosametitleandauthorinIEEEEASCON '76 Record, pp.30-Ato30-H.
96.Trunk.G.V..andJ.D.Wilson: TrackInitiation inaDenseDetection Environment, NavalResearch Lanoratory (Washington.
D.C.)Rept8238,July28.1978.
97.Flad.E.H.:Tracking ofFormation FlyingAircraft.
Illternational COl!ference RADAR-77, Oct.25-28, 1977.pr.160-163, lEE(London) Conference Publication No.155.
98.Kossiakolf.
1\..andJ.R.Austin: Automated RadarDataProcessing System.
U.S.Patent4,005,415.
Jan.25.1977.
99.Casner.
P.G.,andR.J.Prcngaman: Integration andAutomation ofMultiple Co-located Radars, Jllfernat;OIIllI (OIlfl'Tl'lIC!' RADAR-n.
Oct.25-28.1977, pp.145-149, lEE(London) Conference Publi­ cationno.155. CHAPTER  SIX  RADAR TRANSMITTERS  6.1 INTRODUCTION  The radar system designer has a choice of several different transmitter types, each with its own  distinctive characteristics.
The first successful radars developed prior to World War I1  employed the conventional grid-controlled (triode or tetrode) vacuum tube adapted for opera-  tion at VHF, a relatively high frequency at that time.
The magnetron oscillator, which  triggered the development of microwave radar in World War 11, has been one of the most  widely used of radar transmitters, especially for nlobile systems.
The klystron amplifier, in-  troduced to radar in the 1950s, offered the system designer higher power at microwaves than  available from the magnetron.
,Being an amplifier, the klystron permitted the use of more  sophisticated waveforms than the conventional rectangular pulse train.
The klystron was  followed by the traveling-wave tube, a close cousin with similar properties to the klystron  except for its wider bandwidth.
The 1960s saw the availability of the crossed-field amplifier, a  tube related to the magnetron, There are several variations of crossed-field amplifiers, each  with its special properties; but they are all characterized by wide bandwidth, modest gain, and  a compactness more like that of the magnetron than the klystron or the traveling-wave tube.
 Solid-state devices such as the transistor and the bulkcffect and avalanche diodes can  also be employed as radar transmitters.
They have some interesting properties as compared to  the microwave vacuum tube, but the individual devices are inherently of low power.
 There is no one universal transmitter best suited for all radar applications.
Each power-  generating device has its own particular advantages and limitations that require the radar  system designer to examine carefully all the available choices when configuring a new radar  design.
 The transmitter must be of adequate power to obtain the desired radar range, but it must  also satisfy other requirements imposed by the system application.
The special demands of  MTI (moving target indication), pulse doppler, CW radar, phased-array radar, EMC  CHAPTER SIX RADAR TRANSMITTERS ., 6.1INTRODUCTION Theradarsystemdesigner hasachoiceofseveraldifferent transmitter types,eachwithitsown distinctive characteristics.
Thefirstsuccessful radarsdeveloped priortoWorldWarII employed theconventional grid-controlled (triodeortetrode)vacuumtubeadaptedforopera­ tionatVHF,arelatively highfrequency atthattime.Themagnetron oscillator, which triggered thedevelopment ofmicrowave radarinWorldWarII,hasbeenoneofthemost widelyusedofradartransmitters, especially formobilesystems.
Theklystron amplifier, in­ troduced toradarinthe19505,offeredthesystemdesigner higherpoweratmicrowaves than available fromthemagnetron.
Beinganamplifier, theklystron permitted theuseofmore sophisticated waveforms thantheconventional rectangular pulsetrain.Theklystron was followed bythetraveling-wave tube,aclosecousinwithsimilarproperties totheklystron exceptforitswiderbandwidth.
The19605sawtheavailability ofthecrossed-field amplifier, a tuberelatedtothemagnetron, Thereareseveralvariations ofcrossed-field amplifiers, each withitsspecialproperties; buttheyareallcharacterized bywidebandwidth, modestgain,and acompactness morelikethatofthemagnetron thantheklystronorthetraveling-wave tube.
Solid-state devicessuchasthetransistor andthebulk-effect andavalanche diodescan alsobeemployed asradartransmitters.
Theyhavesomeinteresting properties ascompared to themicrowave vacuumtube,buttheindividual devicesareinherently oflowpower.
Thereisnooneuniversal transmitter bestsuitedforallradarapplications.
Eachpower­ generating devicehasitsownparticular advantages andlimitations thatrequiretheradar systemdesigner toexamine carefully alltheavailable choiceswhenconfiguring anewradar design.
.
Thetransmitter must beofadequate powertoobtainthedesiredradarrange,butitmust alsosatisfyotherrequirements imposed bythesystemapplication.
Thespecialdemands of MTI(moving targetindication), pulsedoppler, CWradar,phased-array radar,EMC 190 (electromagnetic corn pat ibility), and ECCM (electronic counter-countermeasures) all  influence the type of transmitter selected and its method of operation.
The choice of transmit-  ter also depends on whether the radar operates from fixed land sites, mobile land vehicles,  sliips, aircraft, or spacecraft.
Other considerations include the size and weight, high-voltage  and X-ray protection.
modulation requirements, and the method ofcooling.
A transmitter is a  niajor part of a radar system; hence, its size, cost, reliability, and maintainability can  significantly affect the size, cost, reliability, ar~d maintainability of the radar system of which it  is a part.
Not only does the transmitter represent a significant fraction of the initial cost of a  radar systetn, but it cat1 often take a large share of the operating costs because of the prime  power and the rieeds of maintenance.
The classical radar range equation (Chap.
2) shows that  the transmitter power depends on the fourth power of the radar range.
To double the range of  a radar, the power has to be increased 16-fold.
Buying radar range with transmitter power  alone can therefore be costly.
 'l'llus tlierc alc Illany diverse rcquiren~et~ts and systelri constraints that enter illto tlie  selectior~ arid design of a transmitter.
This chapter briefly reviews the various types of transmit-  tcr tu hcs atld their ct~aractcristics.
More complete descriptions will be fourid it1 the Rtrtiur  Ilar~dhook.
'  For the most part, this chapter discusses tlie tubes used in radar transmitters and not tlie  transmitters tllemselves.
A transmitter is far more than the tube alone.
It includes the exciter  and driver amplifiers if a power amplifier, the power supply for generating the necessary  voltages and currents needed by the tube, the modulator, cooling for the tube, heat exchanger  for the cooling system if liquid, protection devices (crowbar) for arc discharges, safety inter-  locks.
monitoring devices, isolators, and X-ray shielding.
 The efficiency quoted for most tubes is the RF conversion eficiency, defined as the RF  power output available from the tube to the d-c power input of the electron stream.
This is the  efficiency of interest to the tube designer.
The system engineer, however, is more concerned  with the overall transmitter efficiency, which is the ratio of the RF power available from the  transmitter to the total power needed to operate the transmitter.
If, for example, the RF  efficiency of a microwave tube were 40 to 50 percent, the transmitter efficiency might be 20 to  25 percent.
(The actual number, of course, varies considerably with tube type and application.)  There are two basic radar-transmitter configurations.
One is the self-excited oscillator,  exemplified by the magnetron.
The other is the power amplifier, which utilizes a low power,  stable oscillator whose output is raised to the required power level by one or more amplifiei  stages.
The klystron, traveling-wave tube, and the crossed-field amplifier are examples of  microwave power-amplifier tubes.
The choice between the power oscillator and the power  amplifier is governed mainly by the particular radar application.
Transmitters that employ the  magnetron power-oscillator are usually smaller in physical size than transmitters that employ  the power amplifier.
The various amplifier transmitters, however, are generally capable of  higher power than the magnetron oscillator.
Amplifiers are of greater inherent stability, which  is of importance for MTI and other doppler radars, and they can generate more conveniently  than can power oscillators the modulated waveforms needed for pulse-compression radar.
 Power oscillators, therefore, are likely to be found in applications where small size and  portability are important and when the stability and high power of the.amplifier transmitter  are not required.
 The magnetron power oscillator has probably seen more application in radar than any  other tube.
It is the only power oscillator widely used in radar.
The classical magnetron is of  low cost, convenient size and weight, and high efficiency, and has an operating voltage low  enough not to generate dangerous X-rays.
The coaxial magnetron improves on the classical  magnetron by providing greater reliability, longer life, and better stability.
 RADAR TRANSMITTERS 191 (electromagnetic compatibility), andECCM (electronic counter-countermeasures) all influence thetypeoftransmitter selectedanditsmethodofoperation.
Thechoiceoftransmit­ teralsodepends onwhether theradaroperates fromfixedlandsites,mobilelandvehicles, ships,aircraft,orspacecraft.
Otherconsiderations includethesizeandweight,high-voltage andX-rayprotection, modulation requirements, andthemethodofcooling.Atransmitter isa majorpartofaradarsystem; hence,itssize,cost,reliability, andmaintainability can significantly affectthesize,cost,reliability, andmaintainability oftheradarsystemofwhichit isapart.Notonlydoesthetransmitter represent asignificant fractionoftheinitialcostofa radarsystem,butitcanoftentakealargeshareoftheoperating costsbecauseoftheprime powerandtheneedsofmaintenance.
Theclassical radarrangeequation (Chap.2)showsthat thetransmitter powerdepends onthefourthpoweroftheradarrange.Todoubletherangeof aradar,thepowerhastobeincreased 16-fold.Buyingradarrangewithtransmitter power alonecantherefore hecostly.
Thusthercarcmanydiverscrequirements andsystemconstraints thatenterintothe selection anddesignofatransmitter.
Thischapterbrieflyreviewsthevarioustypesoftransmit­ tcrlubcsandtheircharacteristics.
Morecomplete descriptions willbefoundintheRadar Ha"dhook.1 Forthemostpart,thischapterdiscusses thetubesusedinradartransmitters andnotthe transmitters themselves, Atransmitter isfarmorethanthetubealone.Itincludes theexciter anddriveramplifiers ifapoweramplifier, thepowersupplyforgenerating thenecessary voltages andcurrents neededbythetube,themodulator, coolingforthetube,heatexchanger forthecoolingsystemifliquid,protection devices(crowbar) forarcdischarges, safetyinter­ locks,monitoring devices,isolators, andX-rayshielding.
Theefficiency quotedformosttubesistheRFconversion efficiency, definedastheRF poweroutputavailable fromthetubetothed-cpowerinputoftheelectronstream.Thisisthe efficiency ofinteresttothetubedesigner.
Thesystemengineer, however, ismoreconcerned withtheoveralltransmitter efficiency, whichistheratiooftheRFpoweravailable fromthe transmitter tothetotalpowerneededtooperatethetransmitter.
If,forexample, theRF efficiency ofamicrowave tubewere40to50percent,thetransmitter efficiency mightbe20to 25percent.(Theactualnumber,ofcourse,variesconsiderably withtubetypeandapplication.) Therearetwobasicradar-transmitter configurations.
Oneistheself-excited oscillator, exemplified bythemagnetron.
Theotheristhepoweramplifier, whichutilizesalowpower, stableoscillator whoseoutputisraisedtotherequired powerlevelbyoneormoreamplifie; stages.The ~Iystron, traveling-wave tube,andthecrossed-field amplifier areexamples of microwave power-amplifier tubes.Thechoicebetween thepoweroscillator andthepower amplifier isgoverned mainlybytheparticular radarapplication.
Transmitters thatemploythe magnetron power-oscillator areusuallysmallerinphysical sizethantransmitters thatemploy thepoweramplifier.
Thevariousamplifier transmitters, however, aregenerally capableof higherpowerthanthemagnetron oscillator.
Amplifiers areofgreaterinherent stability, which isofimportance forMTIandotherdopplerradars,andtheycangenerate moreconveniently thancanpoweroscillators themodulated waveforms neededforpulse-compression radar.
Poweroscillators, therefore, arelikelytobefoundinapplications wheresmallsizeand portability areimportant andwhenthestability andhighpowerofthe'amplifier transmitter arenotrequired.
Themagnetron poweroscillator hasprobably seenmoreapplication inradarthanany othertube.Itistheonlypoweroscillator widely ~sedinradar.Theclassical magnetron isof lowcost,convenient sizeandweight,andhighefficiency, andhasanoperating voltagelow enoughnottogenerate dangerous X-rays.Thecoaxialmagnetron improves ontheclassical magnetron byproviding greaterreliability, longerlife,andbetterstability. 192 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  The klystron amplifier provides the radar system designer wit 11 high power, Iiigh gain,  good efficiency, and stability for MTI and pulse-compression applications.
It is probably the  preferred tube for most high-power radar applications if its high operating voltage and large  size can be tolerated.
The traveling-wave tube is similar to the klystron.
It differs from  the klystron in having wider bandwidth, but at the expense of less gain.
The crossed-field  amplifier is of the same general family as the magnetron and shares some of its properties,  especially small size and weight, high efficiency, and an operating voltage more convenient  tlian that of the klystron and the traveling-wave tube.
Like the traveling-wave tube, it enjoys a  wide bandwidth; but it is of relatively low gain and therefore reqirires more than one stage in  the amplifier chain.
The magnetron and the crossed-field amplifier are devices wllich utilirz the  properties of electron streams in crossed electric and magnetic fields.
The klystron and the  traveling wave tube are of a different family known as linear beam tubes.
i  Radars at VHF and UHF have often employed grid-controlled t riode.and tet rode t lrbes.
 These have usually been, in the past, competitive in cost to other power generation means at  these frequencies.
Solid-state devices, such as transistors and microwave diodc generators.
 have also been considered for radar operation.
Their properties differ significantly from  microwave tubes and require major changes in system design pl~ilosopliy wlien they are used.
 .
.
 6.2 THE MAGNETRON OSCILLATOR  More than any other single device, the high-power magnetron oscillator invented in  19392 made possible the successful development of microwave radar during World War 11.
 The magnetron is a crossed-field device in that the electric field is perpendicular to a static  magnetic field.
Although the name magrletrorl has been applied in the past to several different  electron  device^,^ it was the application of cavity resonators to the magnetron structure that  permitted a workable microwave oscillator of high power and high efficiency.
 Conventional magnetron.
The basic structure of the classical form of the magnetron is shown  in Fig.
6.1.' The anode (I) is a large block of copper into which are cut holes (2) and slots (3).
 The holes and slots function as the resonant circuits and serve a purpose similar to that of the  lumped-constant LC resonant circuits used at lower frequencies.
The holes correspond,  roughly, to the inductance L, and the slots correspond to the capacity C.
In ttie desired mode  of operation (the so-called n mode) the individual C's and L's are in parallel, and the frequency  of the magnetron is approximately that of an individual resonator.
The cathode (4) is a fat  cylinder of oxide-coated material.
The cathode must be rugged to withstand the lleating and  disintegration caused by the back-bombardment of electrons.
Back-bombardment increases  the cathode temperature during operation and causes secondary electrons to be emitted.
For  this reason the heater power may be reduced or even turned off once the oscillations have  started.
The relatively fat cathode, required for theoretical reasons, can dissipate more heat  than can a thin cathode.
 In the interaction space (5) the electrons interact with the d-c electric field and the  magnetic field in such a manner that the electrons give up their energy to the RF field.
The  magnetic field, which is perpendicular to the plane of the figure, passes throtrgh the interaction  space parallel to the cathode and perpendicular to the d-c electric field.
The crossed electric  and magnetic fields cause the electrons to be completely bunched almost as soon as they are  emitted from the cathode.
After becoming btrnclied, the electrons move along in a travcling-  wave field.
This traveling-wave field moves at almost the same speed as the electrons, causing  RF power to be delivered to the wave.
The RF power is extracted by placing a coupling  192INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS Theklystron amplifier provides theradarsystemdesigner withhighpower,highgain, goodefficiency, andstability forMTIandpulse-compression applications.
Ilisprobably the preferred tubeformosthigh-power radarapplications ifitshighoperating voltageandlarge sizecanbetolerated.
Thetraveling-wave tubeissimilartotheklystron.
Itdiffersfrom theklystron inhavingwiderbandwidth, butattheexpense oflessgain.Thecrossed-field amplifier isofthesamegeneral familyasthemagnetron andsharessomeofitsproperties, especially smallsizeandweight,highefficiency, andanoperating voltagemoreconvenient thanthatoftheklystron andthetraveling-wave tube.Likethetraveling-wave tube,ilenjoysa widebandwidth; butitisofrelatively lowgainandtherefore requires morethanonestagein theamplifier chain.Themagnetron andthecrossed-field amplifier aredeviceswhichutiliLethe properties ofelectron streams incrossed electricandmagnetic fields.Theklystron andthe traveling wavetubeareofadifferent familyknownaslinearbeamtubes.
••RadarsatVHFandUHFhaveoftenemployed grid-controlled triode.and tetrodetubes.
Thesehaveusuallybeen,inthepast,competitive incosttootherpowergeneration meansat thesefrequencies.
Solid-state devices, suchastransistors andmicrowave diodegenerators, havealsobeenconsidered forradaroperation.
Theirproperties differsignificantly from .../ microwave tubesandrequiremajorchanges insystemdesignphilosophy whentheyareused.
6.2THEMAGNETRON OSCILLATOR Morethananyothersingledevice, thehigh-power magnetron oscillator invented in 19392madepossible thesuccessful development ofmicrowave radarduringWorldWarII.
Themagnetron isacrossed-field deviceinthattheelectricfieldisperpendicular toastatic magnetic field.Although thenamemagnetroll hasbeenapplied inthepast10severaldifferent electron devices,) itwastheapplication ofcavityresonators tothemagnetron structure that permitted aworkable microwave oscillator ofhighpowerandhighefficiency.
Conventional magnetron.
Thebasicstructure oftheclassical formofIhemagnetron isshown inFig.6.1.4Theanode(1)isalargeblockofcopperintowhicharecutholes(2)andslots(3).
Theholesandslotsfunction astheresonant circuitsandserveapurpose similartothatofthe lumped-constant LCresonant circuits usedatlowerfrequencies.
Theholescorrespond, <.1 roughly, totheinductance L,andtheslotscorrespond tothecapacity C.Inthedesiredmode ofoperation (theso-called 1tmode)theindividual C'sandL'sareinparallel, andthefrequency ofthemagnetron isapproximately thatofanindividual resonator.
Thecathode (4)isafat cylinder ofoxide-coated material.
Thecathode mustberuggedtowithstand theheatingand disintegration causedbytheback-bombardment ofelectrons.
Back-bombardment increases thecathode temperature duringoperation andcausessecondary electrons tobeemilled.
For thisreasontheheaterpowermaybereduced oreventurnedoffoncetheoscillations have started.Therelatively fatcathode, required fortheoretical reasons, candissipate moreheat thancanathincathode.
Intheinteraction space(5)theelectrons interact withthed-celectric fieldandthe magnetic fieldinsuchamannerthattheelectrons giveuptheirenergytotheRFfield.The magnetic field,whichisperpendicular totheplaneofthefigure,passesthrough theinteraction spaceparalleltothecathode andperpendicular tothed-celectricfield.Thecrossed electric andmagnetic fieldscausetheelectrons tobecompletely bunched almostassoonastheyare emitted fromthecathode.
Afterbecoming bunched, theelectrons movealonginatravcling­ wavefield.Thistraveling-wave fieldmovesatalmostthesamespeedastheelectrons, causing RFpowertobedelivered tothewave.TheRFpowerisextracted byplacingacoupling 'I' @ Figure 6.1 Cross-sectional sketch of the classical  cavity magnetron illustrating component parts.
 looi~ (6) ill one of tile cavities or by coupling one cavity directly to a waveguide.
Not sliowt~ in  Fig.
6.1 are end-sliielh disks located at each end ofthe cathode for the purpose of confining the  electrons to tile interaction space.
 The str.cJps (7) are metal rings connected to alternate segments of the anode block.
They  in~lxove the stability and efficiency of the tube.
The preferred mode of magnetron operation  corresponds to an RF field configuration in which the RF phase alternates 180" between  adjacent cavities.
This is called the n trrodr.
The presence of N cavities in the magnetron results  in N/2 possible rnodes of operation.
Each of these N/2 modes corresponds to a different RF  field co~lfiguration riladc up of a standing wave of charge.
All the modes except the n mode are  degcl~crate; tliat is.
tliey can oscillate at two different frequencies corresponding to a rotation  of tile standing-wave pattern, where the positions of the nodes and antinodes are interchanged.
 el'lirls tliere arc N - 1 possible frequencies in wl~ich the magnetron can oscillate.
The presence  of liiorc than one possible mode of operation means that the magnetron can oscillate in any  o~lc of tlicsd frequencies and can do so in an unpredictable manner.
This is the essence of the  stability problem.
Tlie mag~ietron must be designed with but one mode dominant.
The n mode  is usilally preferred since it can be more readily separated from the others.
The straps provide  stability since they connect all those segments of the anode which have the same potential in  the n mode and thus permit tlie tube more readily to operate in this preferred mode.
 Instead of tlie liole ariri slot resollators of Fig.
6.1, vanes may be used, as in Fig.
6.2n.
Slots  Ilave also bee11 eniployed.
When large and small slots are alternated, as in the rising-sun  niagrictron structure of Fig.
6.2h.
stable oscillation can occur in the ~t.
mode without the need  for straps.
Since tlielc are no straps, the rising-sun geometry is more suitable for the shorter  waveletlgt hs than are coriveti tiorial resonators.
 ('oauial magnetron.
A significant irnprovetnent in power, efficiency, stability, and life over the  conventional nlag~ietrori is obtained wlieri the straps are removed and the n mode is coritrolled  by coupling alternate resonators to a cavity surrounding the anode.
This is known as a coa.uial  ~rtn~g~tc~trotr since the stabilizing cavity surrounds the conventional resonators.
as sketched in  RADAR TRANSMITTERS 193 ®Figure6.1Cross-sectional sketchoftheclassical cavitymagnetron illustrating component parts.
loop(6)inoneofthecavitiesorbycoupling onecavitydirectlytoawaveguide.
Notshownin Fig.6.1areend-shield diskslocatedateachendofthecathode forthepurpose ofconfining the electrons totheinteraction space.
Thestrafls(7)aremetalringsconnected toalternate segments oftheanodeblock.They improve thestability andefficiency ofthetube.Thepreferred modeofmagnetron operation corresponds toanRFfieldconfiguration inwhichtheRFphasealternates 1800between adjacent cavities.
Thisiscalledtherrmode.Thepresence ofNcavitiesinthemagnetron results inN/2possible modesofoperation.
EachoftheseN/2modescorresponds toadifferent RF fieldconfiguration madeupofastanding waveofcharge.Allthemodesexcepttherrmodeare degenerate: thatis,theycanoscillate attwodifferent frequencies corresponding toarotation ofthestanding-wave pattern, wherethepositions ofthenodesandantinodes areinterchanged.
ThusthereareN-1possible frequencies inwhichthemagnetron canoscillate.
Thepresence ofmorethanonepossible modeofoperation meansthatthemagnetron canoscillate inany oneofthese'frequencies andcandosoinanunpredictable manner.
Thisistheessenceofthe stahility problem.
Themagnetron mustbedesigned withbutonemodedominant.
Therrmode isusuallypreferred sinceitcanbemorereadilyseparated fromtheothers.Thestrapsprovide stahility sincetheyconnect allthosesegments oftheanodewhichhavethesamepotential in therrmodeandthuspermitthetubemorereadilytooperate inthispreferred mode.
Insteadoftheholeandslotresonators ofFig.6.1,vanesmaybeused,asinFig.6.2a.Slots havealsobeenemployed.
Whenlargeandsmallslotsarealternated, asintherising-sun magnetron structure ofFig.6.211,stableoscillation canoccurintherrmodewithout theneed forstraps,Sincetherearenostraps,therising-sun geometry ismoresuitable fortheshorter wavelengths thanareconventional resonators.
Coaxial ma~ne'ron.
;\significant improvement inpower,efficiency, stability, andlireoverthe conventional magnetron isobtained whenthestrapsareremoved andthe7lmodeiscontrolled bycoupling alternate resonators toacavitysurrounding theanode.Thisisknownasacoaxial 11IOO"ctroll sincethestabilizing cavitysurrounds theconventional resonators.
assketched in Figure 6.2 Magnetron resonators.
 (a) Vane type; (b) rising sun, with  (b) alternate slot lengths  Fig.
6.3.
The output power is coupled from the stabilizing coaxial cavity.
The cavity operates  in the TEoll mode with the electric field lines closed on themselves and concentric with the  circular cavity.
The RF current at every point on the circumference of the cavity has the same  phase, so that the alternate slots which couple to the stabilizing cavity are of the same phase as ,*.
 required for II mode operation.
The elimination of the straps allows the resonators to be  designed for optimum efficiency rather than as a compromise between efficiency and mode  control.
 The power handling capability of a magnetron depends on its size.
Increasing the size of a  magnetron, however, requires increasing the number of resonators.
The greater the number of  resonators the more difficult the problem of mode separation.
Since the mode separation in a  coaxial magnetron is controlled in the TEoll stabilizing cavity rather than in the resonator  area, the coaxial magnetron can operate stably with a large number of cavities.
This allows a  larger anode and cathode structure than with the conventional magnetron, and thererore  a coaxial magnetron can operate at higher power levels.
The larger structures permit more  conservative design, with the result that coaxial magnetrons exhibit longer life and better  Output J woveguide  output  Figure 6.3 Cross-sectional sketch  the coaxial cavity magnetron.
 194INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS (a) (b)Figure 6.2Magnetron resonators.
(a)Vanetype;(b)risingsun,with alternate slotlengths.
Fig.6.3.Theoutputpoweriscoupledfromthestabilizing coaxialcavity.Thecavityoperates intheTEollmodewiththeelectricfieldlinesclosedonthemselves andconcentric withthe circularcavity.TheRFcurrentateverypointonthecircumference ofthecavityhasthesame phase,sothatthealternate slotswhichcoupletothestabilizing cavityareofthesamephaseas required for1tmodeoperation.
Theelimination ofthestrapsallowstheresonators tobe designed foroptimum efficiency ratherthanasacompromise between efficiency andmode control.
Thepowerhandling capability ofamagnetron depends onitssize.Increasing thesizeofa magnetron, however, requires increasing thenumberofresonators.
Thegreaterthenumberof resonators themoredifficulttheproblem ofmodeseparation.
Sincethemodeseparation ina coaxialmagnetron iscontrolled intheTEollstabilizing cavityratherthanintheresonator area,thecoaxialmagnetron canoperatestablywithalargenumberofcavities.
Thisallowsa largeranodeandcathode structure thanwiththeconventional magnetron, andtherefore acoaxialmagnetron canoperateathigherpowerlevels.Thelargerstructures permitmore conservative design,withtheresultthatcoaxialmagnetrons exhibitlongerlifeandbetter .Output waveguide Coaxial cavity Electric Field--.~_ lines (TEallmodel Figure6.3Cross-sectional sketchof thecoaxialcavitymagnetron. RADAR TRANSMITTERS 1%  Figure 6.4 Photograph of the SFD-341 rile-  chanically tuned C-band coaxial magnetron  for shipboard and ground-based radars.
This  tube delivers a peak power of250 kW with rt  0.00 1 duty cycle over the frequency range fro111  5.45 to 5.825 GHz.
The efficiency is 40 to 45  percent.
(Cotrrfesy Vnrinrt Associnres, Ilrc.,  Beverly, MA.
)  reliability than conventional magnetrons.
It has been said that the operating life of coaxial  tuhcs can be betweeti 5000 arid 10,000 hours, a five- to twenty-fold improvement compared to  corlventiorlal rnagnetr~ns.~~ Since most of the RF energy is stored in the TEol cavity rather  than in tlie resonator region, reliable broadband tuning of the magnetron may be accom-  plislied by a noncontacting plunger in the cavity.
Both the pushingfigure (change in frequency  with a change in anode current) and the pulling figure (change in frequency with a change in  phase of the load) ale much less in the coaxial magnetron than in the conventional  configuration.
 The external appearance of the coaxial magnetron, Fig.
6.4, is similar to that of the  corlventional magnetron, and the electron and RF operations that take place in the interaction  space are the same for both types of magnetrons.
The differences between the two are in the  more effective mode control of the coaxial cavity as compared to that offered by conventional  strapping.
 In the i~toerted coa-xial nragnetrolt the cathode surrounds the anode.
The stabilizing TEol  cavity is in the center of the magnetron with a vane-type resonator system arranged on the  outside.
The cathode is built as a ring surrounding the anode.
Power is coupled from the end of  the central stabilizing cavity by a circular waveguide.
The geometry of the inverted coaxial  magnetron makes it suitable for operation at the higher frequencies.
Figure 6.5 is an example.
 Performance chart and Rieke diagram.
Four parameters determine the operation of the  magnetron.
These are (1) the magnetic field, (2) the anode current, (3) load conductance, and  Figure 6.5 Photograph of the SFD-319 K,-  band fixed frequency inverted coaxial magnet-  ron.
This tube delivers a peak power of 100 k W  with a 0.005 duty cycle at a frequency between  34,512 and 35.208 GHz.
The efficiency is  about 25 percent.
(Courtesy Varian Associ-  ates, Inc., Beverly, MA.)  RADAR TRANSMITTERS 195 Figure6.4Photograph oftheSFD-341 me­ chanically tunedC-bandcoaxialmagnetron forshipboard andground-based radars.This tubedelivers apeakpowerof250kWwitha 0.00Idutycycleoverthefrequency rangefrom 5.45to5.825GHz.Theefficiency is40to45 percent.(Courles)' Varia/lAssociates.
l/lc., Bever/y.MA.) reliability thanconventional magnetrons.
Ithasbeensaidthattheoperating lifeofcoaxial tuhescanbehetween 5000and10,000hours,afive-totwenty-fold improvement compared to conventional magnetrons.44SincemostoftheRFenergyisstoredintheTEo!!cavityrather thanintheresonator region,reliablebroadband tuningofth~magnetron maybeaccom­ plishedbyanoncontacting plungerinthecavity.Boththepushingfigure(changeinfrequency withachangeinanodecurrent) andthepullingfigure(change infrequency withachangein phaseofth~load)aremuchlessinthecoaxial magnetron thanintheconventional configuration.
Theexternal appearance ofthecoaxialmagnetron, Fig.6.4,issimilartothatofthe conventional magnetron, andtheelectronandRFoperations thattakeplaceintheinteraction spacearethesameforbothtypesofmagnetrons.
Thedifferences between thetwoareinthe moreeffective modecontrolofthecoaxialcavityascompared tothatofferedbyconventional strapping.
Intheinverted coaxialmagnetron thecathodesurrounds theanode.Thestabilizing TEo!! cavityisinthecenterofthemagnetron withavane-type resonator systemarranged onthe outside.Thecathode isbuiltasaringsurrounding theanode.Poweriscoupledfromtheendof thecentralstabilizing cavitybyacircular waveguide.
Thegeometry oftheinverted coaxial magnetron makesitsuitable foroperation atthehigherfrequencies.
Figure6.5isanexample.
Performance chartandRiekediagram.
Fourparameters determine theoperation ofthe magnetron.
l'heseare(1)themagnetic field,(2)theanodecurrent, (3)loadconductance, and Figure6.5Photograph oftheSFD-319 KG­ bandfixedfrequency invertedcoaxialmagnet­ ron.Thistubedeliversapeakpowerof100kW witha0.005dutycycleatafrequency between 34,512and35.208GHz.Theefficiency is about25percent.(Courtesy Varia"Associ- ates,Inc.,Beverly,MA.) 1% INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  (4) load susceptance.
The first two parameters are related to the input side of the tube, while  the last two are related to the output side.
In most magnetrons the magnetic field is fixed by the  tube designer and may not be a variable the radar designer has under his control.
The  observed quantities are usually the output power, the wavelength, and the anode voltage.
 The problem of presenting the variation of the three quantities-power, wavelength, voltage-  as a function of the four parameters mentioned above is greatly simplified since the input and  output parameters operate nearly independently of each other.
Thus it is possible to study the  effect of the magnetic field and the anode current at some value of load st!sceptance and  conductance chosen for convenience.
The results will not be greatly dependent upon the  particular values of susceptance and conductance chosen.
Similarly, the variation of the ob-  served quantities can be studied as a function of the load presented to the magnetron, with the  input parameters-magnetic field and current-likewise chosen for convenience.
The plot of  the observed magnetron quantities as a function of the input circuit parameters;for some fixed  load, is called the perjbrmance chart.
The plot of the observed quantities as a function of the  load conductance and susceptance, for a fixed magnetic field and anode current, is called a  Rirke diagram, or a load diagram.
..
An example of the coaxial magnetron performance characteristics is shown in Fig.
6.6~  The power output, anode voltage, and efficiency are plotted as a function of the magnetron input  power for a fixed frequency and with the magnetron waveguide-load matched.
The peak  voltage is seen to vary only slightly with a change in input power, but the power output varies  almost linearly.
Figure 6.6h plots the power output and voltage as the tube is tuned througtt itb  frequency range, when the current is held constant and the waveguide load is matclled.
The  variation in magnetron efficiency is similar to that of the variation with power.
 The change in the oscillator frequency produced by a change in the anode current for a  fixed load is called the pushingfigure.
A plot of frequency vs.
current, as in Fig.
6.6~~ is called  the pushing cl~aracteristic and the slope of the curve is the pushing figure.
The lower the valilc  of the pushing figure, the better the frequency stability.
The coaxial magnetron has a lower  pushing figure than a conventional magnetron because of the stabilizing effect (high Q) of it's  relatively large coaxial TEo cavity.
Pushing effects are more serious with longer pulses since  their spectra are narrow.
A given change in frequency with a narrow-spectrum pulse will be  noticed more than with a wide spectrum pulse.
 The effect of the load on the magnetron characteristics is shown by the Rieke diagram,  whose coordinates are the load conductance and susceptance (or resistance and reactance).
 Plotted on the Rieke diagram are contours of constant power and constant frequency.
Thus  the Rieke diagram gives the power output and the frequency of oscillation for any specified load  condition.
Although a cartesian set of load coordinates could be used, it is usually more  convenient to plot the power and frequency on a set of load coordinates known as the Smith  chart.
The Smith chart is a form of circle diagram widely used as an aid in transmission-line  calculations.
A point on the Smith chart may be expressed in conductance-susceptance co-  ordinates or by a set of polar coordinates in which the voltage-standing-wave ratio (VSWR)  is plotted as the radius, and the phase of the VSWR is plotted as the angular coordinate.
 The latter is the more usual of the two possible coordinate systems since it is easier for the  microwave engineer to measure the VSWR and the position of the voltage-standing-wave  minimum (or phase) than it is to measure the conductance and susceptance directly.
The  radial coordinate can also be specified by the reflection coefficient r of the load since the  VSWR p and reflection coefficient are related by the equation Irl = (p - l)/(p + 1).
The  center of the Smith chart (Rieke diagram) corresponds to unity VSWR, or zero reflection  coeficient.
The circumference of the chart corresponds to infinite VSWR, or unity reflection  coefficient.
Thus the region of low standing-wave ratio is toward the center of the chart.
 196INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS (4)loadsusceptance.
Thefirsttwoparameters arerelatedtotheinputsideofthetube,whik thelasttwoarerelatedtotheoutputside.Inmostmagnetrons themagnetic fieldisfixedbythe tubedesigner andmaynotbeavariable theradardesigner hasunderhiscontrol.
The observed quantities areusuallytheoutputpower,thewavelength, andtheanodevoltage.
Theproblem ofpresenting thevariation ofthethreequantities-power, wavelength, voltage­ asafunction ofthefourparameters mentioned aboveisgreatlysimplified sincetheinputand outputparameters operatenearlyindependently ofeachother.Thusitispossible tostudythe effectofthemagnetic fieldandtheanodecurrentatsomevalueofloadsusceptance and conductance chosenforconvenience.
Theresultswillnotbegreatlydependent uponthe particular valuesofsusceptance andconductance chosen.Similarly, thevariation oftheob­ servedquantities canbestudiedasafunction oftheloadpresented tothemagnetron, withthe inputparameters-magnetic fieldandcurrent-likewise chosenforconvenience.
Theplotof theobserved magnetron quantities asafunction oftheinputcircuitparameters,·[or somefixed load,iscalledtheperformance chart.Theplotoftheobserved quantities asafunction ofthe loadconductance andsusceptance, forafixedmagnetic fieldandanodecurrent, iscalleda Riekediagram, oraloaddiagram.
Anexample ofthecoaxialmagnetron performance characteristics isshowninFig.6.6a.
Thepoweroutput,anodevoltage,andefficiency areplottedasafunction ofthemagnetron input powerforafixedfrequency andwiththemagnetron waveguide-load matched.
Thepeak voltageisseentovaryonlyslightlywithachangeininputpower,butthepoweroutputvaries almostlinearly.
Figure6.6hplotsthepoweroutputandvoltageasthetuoeistunedthrough its frequency range,whenthecurrentisheldconstant andthewaveguide loadismatched.
The variation inmagnetron efficiency issimilartothatofthevariation withpower.
Thechangeintheoscillator frequency produced byachangeintheanodecurrentfora fixedloadiscalledthepushingfigure.Aplotoffrequency vs.current, asinFig.6.6c,iscalled thepushingcharacteristic andtheslopeofthecurveisthepushing figure.Thelowerthevalue ofthepushing figure,thebetterthefrequency stability.
Thecoaxialmagnetron hasalower pushing figurethanaconventional magnetron becauseofthestabilizing effect(highQ)ofit's relatively largecoaxialTEo11cavity.Pushing effectsaremoreseriouswithlongerpulsessince theirspectraarenarrow.
Agivenchangeinfrequency withanarrow-spectrum pulsewillbe noticedmorethanwithawidespectrum pulse.
Theeffectoftheloadonthemagnetron characteristics isshownbytheRiekediagram, whosecoordinates aretheloadconductance andsusceptance (orresistance andreactance).
PlottedontheRiekediagram arecontours ofconstant powerandconstant frequency.
Thus theRiekediagram givesthepoweroutputandthefrequency ofoscillation foranyspecified load condition.
Although acartesian setofloadcoordinates couldbeused,itisusuallymore convenient toplotthepowerandfrequency onasetofloadcoordinates knownastheSmith chart.TheSmithchartisaformofcirclediagram widelyusedasanaidintransmission-line calculations, ApointontheSmithchartmaybeexpressed inconductance-susceptance co­ ordinates orbyasetofpolarcoordinates inwhichthevoltage-standing-wave ratio(VSWR) isplottedastheradius,andthephaseoftheVSWRisplottedastheangular coordinate.
Thelatteristhemoreusualofthetwopossible coordinate systems sinceitiseasierforthe microwave engineer tomeasure theVSWRandtheposition ofthevoltage-standing-wave minimum (orphase)thanitistomeasure theconductance andsusceptance directly.
The radialcoordinate canalsobespecified bythereflection coefficientroftheloadsincethe VSWRpandreflection coefficient arerelatedbytheequationIrI=(p-1)j(p+1).The centeroftheSmithchart(Riekediagram) corresponds tounityVSWR,orzeroreflection coefficient.
Thecircumference ofthechartcorresponds toinfiniteVSWR,orunityreflection coefficient.
Thustheregionoflowstanding-wave ratioistowardthecenterofthechart. Average power input (Walls)  Frequency (Gkiz) aJ 0  t" (b) 9  Peak current (A)  Figure 6.6 Performance characteristics of the coaxial magnetron.
(a) Variation of power output,  efficiency, and peak voltage of the SFD-341 as a function of the input average power for a fixed frequency  (5.65 GHz); pulse width = 2.15 p, duty cycle = 0.0009.
(6) Variation of peak power output and peak  voltage of the SFD-341 with frequency for a fixed current (23.9 A); pulse width = 1.8 p, and duty  cycle = 0.0009.
(c) Variation of frequency with current for the SFD-377A X-band coaxial magnetron at a  frequency of 9.373 GHz, with 0.001 duty cycle, and 1.0 ps pulse width (Courtesy Varian Associates, Inc.,  Beverly, MA.)  RADAR TRANSMITIERS 197 30600.-----r------.--------,r---------,----~ Peakvoltage Efficienc (a)-50 800----------- ------------10---·---I--=----F-----;7'o<C----j40 ;:e !:....
>- ----------1----::::7~-t_---__j30 g <V U ~ ---+---------120 W 400 600 .Average powerinput(Wafts)20025500-- 5100 o~ ~20c400------ ~'SE- O) a300 Q:; ~a100200 -'"a <Vn ------------29 ------------r----f- -------- ----f------ 28 -------------f---t---t--f--- r- oL..--------'-_-l----l_---'-_L..--------'-_-'------"-_-'-----' 245455 56 5_75_8 5_9 Frequency (GHzl N I ::'!:+1 - ---------------------------- 0'c ...
c:.
~0·····•...•./V.
1-1~-;------ -r---t--"."""<::::I----+-lI- -------------+--(c) - 2'-------'-_--'-----'_--'-_-'------"-_-'-_L..-----'--_o2 4 6 8 101214 16 1820 Peakcurrent(A) Figure6.6Performance characteristics ofthecoaxial magnetron.
(a)Variation ofpoweroutput, efficiency.
andpeakvoltageoftheSFD-341 asafunction oftheinputaveragepowerforafixedfrequency (5.65GHz);pulsewidth=2.15JJS,dutycycle=0.0009.(b)Variation ofpeakpoweroutputandpeak voltageoftheSFD-341 withfrequency forafixedcurrent(23.9A);pulsewidth=1.8JJS,andduty cycle=0.0009.(c)Variation offrequency withcurrentfortheSFD-377A X-bandcoaxialmagnetron ata frequency of9.373GHz,with0.001dutycycle,and1.0JlSpulsewidth(Courtesy VarianAssociates, InC., Bet'erly,MA.) 198 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  The standing-wave pattern along a transmission line repeats itself every half wavelength;  therefore, 360" in the diagram is taken as a half wavelength.
The reference axls in the Rieke  diagram usually corresponds to the output terminals of the magnetron or the output flange of  the waveguide.
The angle in a clockwise direction from this reference axis is proportional to  the distance (in wavelengths) of the standing-wave-pattern minimum from the reference point.
 An advantage of the Smith chart for plotting the effects of the load on the magnetron parameters  is that the shapes of the curves are practically independent of the position of the reference  point used for measuring the phase of the VSWR.
 An example of a Rieke diagram for a coaxial magnetron is shown in Fig.
6 7.
It 1s  obtained by varying the magnitude and phase of the VSWR of the RF load, with the frequency  and the peak current held constant.
The region of highest power on the Rieke diagram is callcrd  the sink and represents the greatest coupling to the magnetron and the highest efticiency.
 Operation in the region of the sink, however, is not always desirable since itahas poor fre-  quency stability.
Poor pulse shape and mode changes might result.
The low-power region,  where the magnetron is lightly loaded, is called the atltisitlk or opposite-si~lk region.
The  build-up of oscillations in a lightly loaded magnetron is more ideal; however, the magnetron In  this region may perform poorly by showing signs of instability which take the form of arcing  and an increase in the number of missing pulses.
Poor performance is a result of the higher RF  voltages when operating in the antisink region, making RF discharges more likely.
 In a radar with a rotating antenna, the phase and/or magnitude of the VSWR might vary  because the antenna will experience a different load impedance depending on the environment  it views.
The Rieke diagram shows that a change in the VSWR which moves the operating  point of the magnetron into either the sink or antisink regions can cause the magnetron to  operate poorly.
Ferrite isolators are sometimes used to avoid subjecting the magnetron to high  VSWR.
A 10-dB isolator, for example, lowers a VSWR of 1.5 to a value of 1.14.
With a  sufficiently low VSWR, the magnetron operation will not occur in either the sink or the  antisink region, no matter what the phase angle of the load.
 I Reference point is .
 waveguide flange Figure 6.7 Rieke, or load, diagram for the  SFD-341 coaxial magnetron.
Duty cycle =  0.0009, peak current = 24 A.
pulse width =  2.25 ps, frequency = 5.65 (illz.
(C'orrrlcsy  Varian Associates, l,tc., Beverly, M.4.)  198INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS Thestanding-wave patternalongatransmission linerepeatsitselfeveryhalfwavelength; therefore, 360°inthediagram istakenasa.half wavelength.
Thereference axisintheRieke diagram usuallycorresponds totheoutputterminals ofthemagnetron ortheoutputflangeof thewaveguide.
Theangleinaclockwise direction fromthisreference axisisproportional to thedistance (inwavelengths) ofthestanding-wave-pattern minimum fromthereference point.
Anadvantage oftheSmithchartforplottingtheeffectsoftheloadonthemagnetron parameters isthattheshapesofthecurvesarepractically independent oftheposition oftherderence pointusedformeasuring thephaseoftheVSWR.
Anexample ofaRiekediagram foracoaxialmagnetron isshowninFig.6.7.Ilis obtained byvaryingthemagnitude andphaseoftheVSWRoftheRFload,withthefrequency andthepeakcurrentheldconstant.
TheregionofhighestpowerontheRiekediagram iscalled thesinkandrepresents thegreatest coupling tothemagnetron andthehighestefticiency.
Operation intheregionofthesink,however, isnotalwaysdesirable sinceitJlaspoorfre­ quencystability.
Poorpulseshapeandmodechanges mightresult.Thelow-power region, wherethemagnetron islightlyloaded, iscalledtheantisink oropposite-sillk region.The build-up ofoscillations inalightlyloadedmagnetron ismoreideal;however, themagnetron in thisregionmayperform poorlybyshowing signsofinstability whichtaketheformofarcing andanincrease inthenumberofmissingpulses.Poorperformance isaresultofthehigherRF voltages whenoperating intheantisink region,makingRFdischarges morelikely.
Inaradarwitharotating antenna, thephaseand/ormagnitude oftheVSWRmightvary because theantenna willexperience adifferent loadimpedance depending ontheenvironment itviews.TheRiekediagram showsthatachangeintheVSWRwhichmovestheoperating pointofthemagnetron intoeitherthesinkorantisinkregionscancausethemagnetron to operatepoorly.Ferriteisolators aresometimes usedtoavoidsubjecting themagnetron tohigh VSWR.
AIO-dBisolator,for example, lowersaVSWRof1.5toavalueof1.14.Witha sufficiently lowVSWR, themagnetron operation willnotoccurineitherthesinkorthe antisink region,nomatterwhatthephaseangleoftheload.
0- PoSition ofsink·" Reference pointis.
waveguide flangeFigure6.7Rieke,orload,diagram forthe SFD-341 coaxialmagnetron.
Dutycycle= 0.0009,peakcurrent=24A,pulsewidth= 2.25ps,frequency =5.65Gliz.(Courtesy VarianAssociates, Inc.,BelJerly, MA.) A rneasurc of tlic cfTcct of tlie load or1 the rnagrietron frequency is the pttllirtg ,figrrre,  defined as the diffcrerlce betwee~l the rt~aximum and minimum frequencies when the phase  angle of the load varies tliroi~gh 360' and tlie magnitude of the VSWR is fixed at 1.5 (or a  rcflcctioti cocrficicrit of 0.20).
.I'Ilc pttllitig figure is readily obtained from an inspection of tlie  Rieke diagraln.
For the ~nagnetroti whose Rieke diagram is shown in Fig.
6.7, the pulling  figure is approxiuiatcly 4 M 111.
Tllc l>i~llirlg figures of coaxial magnetrons are lower by a factor  of 3 to 5 than tliose of convcritio~ial nlagrietroiis.
 Tuning.
Tlie frequeticy of a cotiventiorial magnetron can be changed by mechanically inserting  a ti~tiitlg C~CIIIC~~~.
S~ICII as a roc!, into the iloles of the hole-and-slot resonators to change the  iridirctance of tlic resonant circuit.
A titrier that consists of a series of rods inserted into each  cavity resoriator so as to alter the inductance is called a crown-of-thorns tuner, or a sprocket  trrlltlr..
l'lic anloutit of niccliitriical motion of the tuning element need not be large (perhaps a  fraction of an inch at L band) to tune the frequency over a 5 to 10 percent frequency range.
A  frequency cliange in a converitional magnetron can also be obtained with a change in capacity.
 Otie example is the cookie cutter, which consists of a metal ring inserted between the two rings  of a double-ring-strapped magnetron, thereby increasing the strap capacitance.
Because of the  mechanical and voltage-breakdown problems associated with this tuner, it is more suited for  use at the longer wavelengths.
Either the cookie cutter or the crown-of-thorns mechanisms can  achieve a 10 percent frequency change.
The two can be used in combination to cover a larger  tuning range than is possible with either one alone.
 A limited tuning range, of the order of 1 percent, can be obtained by a screw inserted in  the side of one of the resonator holes.
This type of adjustment is useful when the normal scatter  of frequencies expected of untuned magnetrons requires the frequency to be fixed to a specified  value.
 In frequency-agile radar systems, the magnetron frequency might be changed pulse-to-  pulse in such a manner that the entire tuning range is covered.
Such radars might be employed  for ECCM, improving tlie detection of targets with fluctuating cross section and reducing the  effects of glint (Sec.
5.5).
With a high tuning rate, the pulse-to-pulse frequency can be made to  appear pseudorandom, especially if the pulse repetition frequency or the tuning rate is varied  rapidly.
Many of the advantages of frequency agility can be obtained if the radar frequency  shifts pulse-to-pulse the minimum amount required to decorrelate successive echoes.
The  minimum frequency shift is equal to the reciprocal of the pulse width.
Slow tuning rates can be  used, but the pulse-to-pulse frequency might not appear random.
 One ofrthe first techniques for achieving frequency-agile magnetrons was known as spin-  trtrrirrg.
or rotary ttcrring.
In this device a rotating slotted disk is suspended above the anode  resonators.
Rotation of this disk alternately provides inductive or capacitive loading of the  resonators to raise arid lower the frequency.' The rotating disk is mounted on bearings inside  tlie vacuum and coupled to a rotating mechanism outside the vacuum.
The Amperex X-band  DX-285 spin-tuned magnetron covers a 500-MHz band in an approximately sinusoidal  mariner at rates up to 1OOO times per second, equivalent to frequency tuning rates of the order  of I MHz per microsecond.
 A coaxial rnagrlctron may be tuned by mechanically positioning in the coaxial cavity a  noncontacting washer-shaped metal ring, or tuning piston, as illustrated in Fig.
6.8.
The  tllriirig piston can be positio~ied meclianically from outside the vacuum by means of a vacuum  bellows.
This tuning mechanism may be adapted to provide narrowband frequency agility at a  rapid tuning rate for frequency-agile radar.
The RF frequency of the Varian SFD-354A  X-band coaxial magnetron can be varied sinusoidally over a 60-MHz range at a rate of 70  times per second by this method.
 RADAR TRANSMITTERS 199 1\measure oftheeffectoftheloadonthemagnctron frequency istheplIlIi"gfigure.
defined asthedifference between themaximum andminimum frequencies whenthephase angleoftheloadvariesthrough .1600andthemagnitude oftheVSWRisfixedat1.5(ora rdlcction coefficicnt of0.20).Thepullingfigurcisreadilyobtained fromaninspection ofthe Riekediagram.
Forthemagnctron whoseRiekediagram isshowninFig.6.7,thepulling figureisapproximately 4 MIll.Thepullingfiguresofcoaxialmagnctrons arelowerbyafactor of.1to5thanthoseofconventional magnetrons.
Tuning.Thefrequcncy ofaconventional magnetron canbechanged bymechanically inserting atuningclement, suchasarod.intotheholesofthehole-and-slot resonators tochangethe inductancc ofthercsonant circuit.
1\tllncrthatconsistsofaseriesofrodsinserted intoeach cavityresonator soastoaltcrtheinductance iscalledacrown-ol-thorns tuner,orasprocket tllllcr.Theamount ofmechanical motionofthetuningelement neednotbelarge(perhaps a fraction ofaninchatLband)totunethefrequency overa 5to10percentfrequency range.A frcqucncy changeinaconvcntional magnetron canalsobeobtained withachangeincapacity.
Oncexample isthecookieclltler,whichconsistsofametalringinsertedbetween thetworings ofadouble-ring-strapped magnetron, therebyincreasing thestrapcapacitance.
Becauseofthe mechanical andvoltage-breakdown problems associated withthistuner,itismoresuitedfor useatthelongerwavelengths.
Eitherthecookiecutterorthecrown-of-thorns mechanisms can achicvea10percentfrequency change.Thetwocanbeusedincombination tocoveralarger tuningrangethanispossible witheitheronealone.
Alimitedtuningrange,oftheorderof1percent, canbeobtained byascrewinserted in thesideofoneoftheresonator holes.Thistypeofadjustment isusefulwhenthenormalscatter offrequencies expected ofuntuned magnetrons requires thefrequency tobefixedtoaspecified value.
Infrequency-agile radarsystems, themagnetron frequency mightbechanged pulse-to­ pulseinsuchamannerthattheentiretuningrangeiscovered.
Suchradarsmightbeemployed forECCM,improving thedetection oftargetswithfluctuating crosssectionandreducing the effectsofglint(Sec.5.5).Withahightuningrate,thepulse-to-pulse frequency canbemadeto appearpseudorandom, especially ifthepulserepetition frequency orthetuningrateisvaried rapidly.
Manyoftheadvantages offrequency agilitycanbeobtained iftheradarfrequency shiftspulse-to-pulse theminimum amount required todecorrelate successive echoes.The minimum frequency shiftisequaltothereciprocal ofthepulsewidth.Slowtuningratescanbe used,butthepulse-to-pulse frequency mightnotappearrandom.
Oneof·thefirsttechniques forachieving frequency-agile magnetrons wasknownasspin­ tWlillg,orrotarytIming.Inthisdevicearotating slotteddiskissuspended abovetheanode resonators.
Rotation ofthisdiskalternately provides inductive orcapacitive loadingofthe resonators toraiseandlowerthefrequency.
ITherotating diskismounted onbearings inside thevacuum andcoupled toarotating mechanism outsidethevacuum.
TheAmperex X-band DX-285 spin-tuned magnetron coversa500-MHz bandinanapproximately sinusoidal manneratratesupto1000timespersecond,equivalent tofrequency tuningratesoftheorder ofIMHzpermicrosecond.
!\.coaxialmagnetron maybetunedbymechanically positioning inthecoaxialcavitya noncontacting washer-shaped metalring,ortuningpiston,asillustrated inFig.6.8.The tuningpistoncanbepositioned mechanically fromoutsidethevacuum bymeansoravacuum bellows.
Thistuningmechanism maybeadapted toprovidenarrowband frequency agilityata rapidtuningrateforfrequency-agile radar.TheRFfrequency oftheVarianSFD-354A X-bandcoaxialmagnetron canbevariedsinusoidally overa60-MHz rangeatarateof70 timespersecondbythismethod. 200 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  Mognetlc f~eld l~nes  Coupl~ng slot  Covlty mode  at tenuotor  I TEoll mode  Inner circuit  ottenuotor  Cathode  Tuning piston mode Figure 6.8 Schematic view oCa coax~al magnetron showi~lg  the tuning piston mechanically actuated by a vacuum I  bellows.
 The rapid tuning over a narrowband for purposes of providing frequency agility is  sometimes called dither tuning.39 In addition to being capable of rapid tuning over a narrow-  band, these tubes also can be tuned to a frequency over a broadband in the normal manner  using a geared drive.
The tuning mechanism may be controlled by a servo motor so as to select  electrically any specific frequency within the operating band either manually or on an automa-  tic, programmed basis.
With servo-motor control, the tube can he tuned from one freqt~cncy lo  another in under 0.1 second.
 Dither-tuning of a coaxial magnetron may also be obtained by a mechanical tuning  element called a ring tuner.'v6 This consists of a narrow ring installed in an annular groove cut  into the outer wall of the cavity.
The ring projects slightly into the cavity.
The ring is split, with  the split diametrically opposite the output cavity.
The ring is also cut to accommodate the  output coupling slot.
Near the output, on both sides of the output coupling, the ring is firmly ,  ,,,b attached to the cavity wall, but is unattached otherwise.
By deforming the ring inward from  mechanical motion applied to the free-hanging ends of the ring, the tuning of the cavi:y is  changed.
The Raytheon QKH 1763 X-band coaxial magnetron tunes in this manner over a  100-MHz range at rates up to 200 Hz.
Electronic tuning is also p~ssible.~'  6.3 KLYSTRON AMPLIFIER .
 The klystron amplifier is an example of a linear beam tube, or 0-type tube.
The characteristic  feature of a linear beam tube is that the electrons emitted from the cathode are formed into a  long cylindrical beam which receives the full potential energy of the electric field before tllt:  beam enters the RF interaction region.
Transit-time effects, which limit the operation of  conventional grid-controlled tubes at the higher frequencies, are used to good advantage in the  klystron.
As the electron beam of the klystron passes the input resonant cavity, the velocity of  the electrons is modulated by the input signal.
This velocity modulation of the beam electrons  is then converted to density modu1ation:A resonant cavity at the output extracts the RF  power from the density-modulated beam and delivers the power to a useful load.
 200INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS Figure6.8Schematic vieworacoaxialmagnetron showing thetuningpistonmechanically actuated byavacuum bellows...RF output waveguide• \Outputvacuum window Vacuumbellows Innercircuitmode allenuator Cathode TuningpistonMagnetic fieldlines Coupling slol Vaneresonator Cavitymode attenuator TEollmode Electricfield lines TEallstabilizing ~~kr:F="'i'l cavily Therapidtuningoveranarrowband forpurposes ofproviding frequency agilityis sometimes calleddithertuning.39Inaddition tobeingcapableofrapidtuningoveranarrow­ band,thesetubesalsocanbetunedtoafrequency overabroadband inthenormalmanner usingageareddrive.Thetuningmechanism maybecontrolled byaservomotorsoastoselect electrically anyspecificfrequency withintheoperating bandeithermanual.ly oronanautoma­ tic,programmed basis.Withservo-motor control,thetubecanhetunedfromonefrequency 10 another inunder0.1second.
Dither-tuning ofacoaxialmagnetron mayalsobeobtained byamechanical tuning elementcalledaringtuner.5,6Thisconsistsofanarrowringinstalled inanannulargroovecut intotheouterwallofthecavity.Theringprojectsslightlyintothecavity.Theringissplit,with thesplitdiametrically opposite theoutputcavity.Theringisalsocuttoaccommodate the outputcoupling slot.Neartheoutput,onbothsidesoftheoutputcoupling, theringisfirmly attached tothecavitywall,butisunattached otherwise.
Bydeforming theringinwardfrom mechanical motionappliedtothefree-hanging endsofthering,thetuningofthecavi:yis changed.
TheRaytheon QKH1763X-bandcoaxialmagnetron tunesinthismannerovera lOO-MHz rangeatratesupto200Hz.Electronic tuningisalsopossible.49 6.3KLYSTRON AMPLIFIER Theklystron amplifier isanexample ofalinearbeamtube,orO-typetube.Thecharacteristic featureofalinearbeamtubeisthattheelectrons emittedfromthecathode areformedintoa longcylindrical beamwhichreceives thefullpotential energyoftheelectricfieldbeforethe beamenterstheRFinteraction region.Transit-time effects,whichlimittheoperation of conventional grid-controlled tubesatthehigherfrequencies, areusedtogoodadvantage inthe klystron.
Astheelectron beamoftheklystron passestheinputresonant cavity,thevelocityof theelectrons ismodulated bytheinputsignal.Thisvelocitymodulation ofthebeamelectrons isthenconverted todensitymodulation.- Aresonant cavityattheoutputextracts theRF powerfromthedensity-modulated beamanddeliversthepowertoausefulload. RADAR TRANSMITTERS 201  The klystroti lias proven to be quite important for radar application.
It is capable of high  average and peak power.
high gain, good efficiency, stable operation, low interpulse noise, and  it can operate with tlie modulated wavefornis required of sophisticated pulse-compression  systems.
 I)escription.
A sketch of tlic ~~ritlcipal parts of the klystron is shown in Fig.
6.9.
At the  left-hand portion of the figure is tile cathode, which emits a stream of electrons that is focused  into a narrow cyli~idrical bean1 by the electror~ gun.
Tlie electron gun consists of the cathode.
 ~nodirl;ititig arioclc or coritrol grid.
and tlie anode.
Tlie electrorl emission density from tlie  catliode is gclierally less than reqtrired for the electrotl beam, so a large-area cathode surface is  11set1 illid tlle criiitted clcctrolis are cslrsed to converge to a narrow beam of high electron  dcrlsity.
'1'11~ riioclirlnti~tg :triode, or.
otlicr I,car~t co~ltrol clcctrodc, is oftcli i~icludcd :is jxtrl ol'  tlic electrorl-guri strirctirre to provide a means for pulsing the electron beam on and off.
The  K f; c;tvitics, wliicli co~-r.csl,or~tl to tile LC rcsoriarit ci~.cuits oflowcr-frequerlcy amplifiers.
are at  a~iode poteritial.
I~lcctror~s are not interitionally collected by the anode as in other tubes;  instead, the electrons are removed by the collector electrode (shown on the right-hand side of  tlie diagram) after the beam Iias given up its RF energy to the output cavity.
 The illput signal is applied across the irlteractiori gap of the first cavity.
Low-power tubes  rnigltt contain a grid structure at the gap to provide coupling to the beam.
In high-power  tubes.
liowever, tlie gap does not usually contain a grid because a grid cannot accommodate  high power.
(Tlie absence of a grid does not seriously impair the coupling between the gap and  tlie bearn.) Those electrons which arrive at the gap when the input signal voltage is at a  nlaxirr~unl (peak of the sine wave) experience a voltage greater than those electrons which  arrive at tlie gap when tlie input signal is at a minimum (trough of the sine wave).
The process  whereby a time variation in velocity is impressed upon the beam of electrons is called velocity  ~tlod~~l~l~io~l.
 Irl tile dr~ii sp(lc3c, those electrons which were speeded up during the peak of one cycle  cittcli irp with tliose slowed down during tile previous cycle.
The result is that the electrons of  tlie velocity-modulated beam become " bunched," or density modulated, after traveling  tlirougli the drift space.
If the interaction gap of the output cavity is placed at the point of  rnaxirliirrn birricliing.
power can be extracted from the density-modulated beam.
Most higll-  power klystroris for radar application liave one or more cavities between the input and output  R F spoce A F  in Out  El~ctron 1  +I- RF secl~on - I  gun * ~-+-Collec101  I I  i,-igarc 6.9 1)iagranirnatic repruser~tation of the principal parts of a three-cavity klystron.
 RADAR TRANSMITTERS 201 Theklystron hasproventobequiteimportant forradarapplication.
Itiscapableofhigh average andpeakpower,highgain,goodefficiency, stableoperation, lowinterpulse noise,and itcanoperate withthemodulated waveforms required ofsophisticated pulse-compression systems.
Description, 1\sketchoftheprincipal partsoftheklystron isshowninFig.6.9.Atthe left-hand portionofthefigureisthecathode, whichemitsastreamofelectrons thatisfocused intoanarrowcylindricaIheamhytheelectroll gUll.Theelectron gunconsists ofthecathode, modulating anodeorcontrol grid,andtheanode.Theelectron emission density fromthe calhadeisgcnerally lessthanrequired fortheelectron beam,soalarge-area cathode surfaceis lIsedandIheemitted eleclrons arecausedtoconverge toanarrow beamofhighelectron (knsily.
Tilemodulating anode,orotherheamcontrolekctrode, isoftenincluded aspart01" theelectron-gun structure toprovide ameansforpulsingtheelectron beamonandoff.The RFcavities, whichcorrespond totheLCresonant circuitsoflower-frcquency amplifiers, arcat anodepotential.
Electrons arcnotintentionally collected bytheanodeasinothertubes; instead, theelectrons areremoved bythecollector electrode (shownontheright-hand sideof thediagram) afterthebeamhasgivenupitsRFenergytotheoutputcavity.
Theinputsignalisapplied acrosstheillteractioll gapofthefirstcavity.Low-power tubes mightcontain agridstructure atthegaptoprovide coupling tothebeam.Inhigh-power tuhes,however, thegapdoesnotusuallycontain agridbecause agridcannotaccommodate highpower.(Theabsenceofagriddoesnotseriously impairthecoupling between thegapand thebeam.)Thoseelectrons whicharriveatthegapwhentheinputsignalvoltage isata maximum (peakofthesinewave)experience avoltagegreaterthanthoseelectrons which arriveatthegapwhentheinputsignalisataminimum (troughofthesinewave).Theprocess whereby atimevariation invelocity isimpressed uponthebeamofelectrons iscalledvelocity modl/lat iOIl.
Inthedriftspace,thoseelectrons whichwerespeeded upduringthepeakofonecycle catchupwiththosesloweddownduringtheprevious cycle.Theresultisthattheelectrons of thevelocity-modulated beambecome "bunched," ordensity modulated, aftertraveling through thedriftspace.Iftheinteraction gapoftheoutputcavityisplacedatthepointof maximum hunching, powercanbeextracted fromthedensity-modulated beam.Mosthigh­ powerklystrons forradarapplication haveoneormorecavities between theinputandoutput ~.RFcavities~ ~~~a; Interactian gaps Electron beam,[lr===i-:Y Cothod'-}1\1__n~ ~llector\ Ileater~0'..=--=----------=.---=---=--=----- --~- -----=-----------:::::) MOd"OtioViAO~ \IrI oood'""< ~r \V ~I Drift space Electron gunRF RF out .
I..RFsection--_.··_-----.,-+---Colleclor I Fi~lJr('6.9Diagrammatic rcprescntation oftheprincipal partsofathree-cavity klystron. 202 1NTRODUCTlON TO RADAR SYSTEMS  cavities to provide additional bunching, and hence, higtier gain.
The gain of a klystron can be  typically 15 to 20 dB per stage when synchronously tuned, so that a four-cavity (three-stage)  klystron can provide over 50 dB of gain.
 After the bunched electron beam delivers its RF power to the otrtput cavity, the electrons  are removed by the collector electrode which is at, or sligt~tly below, the potential of the  interaction structure.
From 50 to 80 percent of the d-c input power might be converted to heat  in typical linear-beam tubes, and.
most of this heat appears at the collector.
Therefore the  majority of the cooling required in the klystron is at the collector.
Power is extracted from  the output cavity and delivered to the load by a coupling loop (as shown in Fig.
6.9) for  low-power tubes, or by waveguide in high-power tubes.
A waveguide ceramic window is  necessary to maintain the vacuum in the tube and yet couple power out efficiently.
Wavegiride  arcing or thermal stresses are common causes of window failures.
High-power tubes  sometimes employ an arc detector looking directly at the output window that allows either the  drive power to be removed or the beam to be shut off within a few tens of microseconds after  the presence of an' arc is detected.
 In order to counteract the mutual repulsion of the electrons which constilute thc electron  beam, an axial magnetic field (not shown in Fig.
6.9) is generally employed.
The rnagnetic ficld  focuses, or confines, the electrons to a relatively long, thin beam, and prevents the beam from  dispersing.
The beam focusing can be provided by a uniform magnetic field generated by a  long solenoid which has iron shielding around the outside diameter.
Cooling might have to be  provided for the electromagnets.
  he weight of the magnetic focusing system is a major  portion of the total weight of a klystron.
This weight can restrict the utility of klystrons for  airborne and portable applications.
 Klystrons can sometimes be focused with lightweight permanent magnets.'*9errnanent  magnets require no power input or cooling, and the various protective circuits needed with  solenoids are eliminated.
A significant reduction in weight can be obtained in some tubes by  replacing the solenoid with a periodic-permanent-magnetic (PPM) focusing system which con-  sists of a series of magnetic lenses.
PPM focusing is not suited to large average-power tubes.
At  A' band, the maximum average power is probably under a kilowatt.' In some klystrons the  electron beam may be confined by electrostatic fields designed into the tube structure so that  external magnets are not req~ired.~'  In a high-power klystron, from 2 to 5 percent of the beam power might normally be  intercepted by the interaction structure, or body of the tube.
If the beam were not properly  confined in a high-power klystron, the stray electrons that impinge upon the metal structi:re of  the tube would cause it to overheat and possibly be destroyed.
Since loss of the focusing  magnetic field could cause the tube to fail, protective circuitry is normally employed to remove  the beam voltage in the event of improper focusing or the complete loss of focusing.
The  collector of most high-power klystrons is insulated from the body (RF interaction circuit) of  the tube so as to allow separate metering and overload protection for the body current and tJlc  collector current.
 Pulse modulation.
The klystron amplifier may be pulsed by turning on and off the beam  accelerating voltage, similar to plate modulation of a triode or magnetron.
The modulator in  this case must be capable of handling the full power of the beam.
When the tube is modirlated  by pulsing the RF input signal, the beam current must be turned on and off; otherwise beam  power will be dissipated to no useful purpose in the collector in the interval between RF  pulses, and the efficiency of the tube will be low.
A common method for pulsing the beam of a  klystron is with an electrode in the electron gun that controls the klystron-beam current.
This  202INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS cavitiestoprovideadditional bunching, andhence,highergain.Thegainofaklystron canbe typically 15to20dBperstagewhensynchronously tuned,sothatafour-cavity (three-stage) klystron canprovideover50dBofgain.
Afterthebunched electron beamdelivers itsRFpowertotheoutputcavity,theelectrons areremoved bythecollector electrode whichisat,orslightlybelow,thepotential ofthe interaction structure.
From50to80percentofthed-cinputpowermightbeconverted toheat intypicallinear-beam tubes,andmostofthisheatappears atthecollector.
Therefore the majority ofthecoolingrequired intheklystron isatthecollector.
Powerisextracted from theoutputcavityanddelivered totheloadbyacoupling loop(asshowninFig.6.9)for low-power tubes,orbywaveguide inhigh-power tubes.Awaveguide ceramic window is necessary tomaintain thevacuum inthetubeandyetcouplepoweroutefficiently.
Waveguide arcingorthermal stresses arecommon causesofwindow failures.
High-power tubes sometimes employanarcdetector lookingdirectlyattheoutputwindow thatallowseitherthe drivepowertoberemoved orthebeamtobeshutoffwithinafewtensofmicroseconds after thepresence ofan.'arcisdetected.
Inordertocounteract themutualrepulsion oftheelectrons whichconstitute theelectron beam,anaxialmagnetic field(notshowninFig.6.9)isgenerally employed.
Themagnetic field focuses,orconfines, theelectrons toarelatively long,thinbeam,andprevents thebeamfrom dispersing.
Thebeamfocusing canbeprovided byauniform magnetic fieldgenerated bya longsolenoid whichhasironshielding aroundtheoutsidediameter.
Cooling mighthavetobe provided fortheelectromagnets.
Theweightofthemagnetic focusing systemisamajor portionofthetotalweightofaklystron.
Thisweightcanrestricttheutilityofklystrons for airborne andportable applications.
Klystrons cansometimes befocusedwithlightweight permanent magnets.l.8Permanent magnets requirenopowerinputorcooling, andthevariousprotective circuitsneededwith solenoids areeliminated.
Asignificant reduction inweightcanbeobtained insometubesby replacing thesolenoid withaperiodic-perm anent-magnetic (PPM)focusing systemwhichcon­ sistsofaseriesofmagnetic lenses.PPMfocusing isnotsuitedtolargeaverage-power tubes.At Xband,themaximum average powerisprobably underakilowatt.8Insomeklystrons the electron beammaybeconfined byelectrostatic fieldsdesigned intothetubestructure sothat external magnets arenotrequired.40 Inahigh-power klystron, from2to5percentofthebeampowermightnormally be intercepted bytheinteraction structure, orbodyofthetube.Ifthebeamwerenotproperly confined inahigh-power klystron, thestrayelectrons thatimpinge uponthemetalstrucll:re of thetubewouldcauseittooverheat andpossibly bedestroyed.
Sincelossofthefocusing magnetic fieldcouldcausethetubetofail,protective circuitry isnormally employed toremove thebeamvoltageintheeventofimproper focusing orthecomplete lossoffocusing.
The collector ofmosthigh-power klystrons isinsulated fromthebody(RFinteraction circuit)of thetubesoastoallowseparate metering andoverload protection forthebodycurrentandthe collector current.
Pulsemodulation.
Theklystron amplifier maybepulsedbyturningonandoffthebeam accelerating voltage,similartoplatemoduiation ofatriodeormagnetron.
Themodulator in thiscasemustbecapableofhandling thefullpowerofthebeam.Whenthetubeismodulated bypulsingtheRFinputsignal,thebeamcurrentmustbeturnedonandoff;otherwise beam powerwillbedissipated tonousefulpurpose inthecollector intheinterval between RF pulses,andtheefficiency ofthetubewillbelow.Acommon methodforpulsingthebeamofa klystron iswithanelectrode intheelectron gunthatcontrols theklystron-beam current.This is tlic rr~otirtlnrirrq rrrrotic.
.l'lic ativa~it:~gc of the ti~odulating anode is that it reqi~ires little control  power to rnodulate the beam.
'I'lw power necessary is that required to charge and discharge the  capacitance of the klyst roll guri and its associated circuitry, and this is independent of the pulse  lerlgtli The cutoff characteristics of the modulating anode permit only a few electrons to  e4capc Troll\ the clcctrori gu11 during tile interpulse period when tlie beam is turned off.
This  is i~~iportar~t in radar applicatio~l since the receiver sensitivity will be degraded if suficient  electrons are preserit during the interpulse period to cause the stray electron-current noise to  cvcccrl I cccivcr ~lclisc.
 'I'lie Iiigli-power klystron rnay also be pulsed with a grid it1 the electron gun so designed  tliat tlle grid does not intercept the  electron^.^^' Such nonintercepting gridded guns can switch  tile hearn witti low-power modulators.
This technique actually uses two closely spaced and  aligned grids.
One is near the cathode and is at cathode potential.
(In the so-called Unig~-id,~~  this grid is pllysically placed on the cathode but is properly passivated to prevent emission.)  *l'lie second grid is the control grid for the beam current.
It is at a positive potential arid is  locarcd ill tlie stladow of tile first grid.
For this reason the first grid is also known as the sltodo,c!  q~.rd 'I'tic pilrposc of the shadow grid is to suppress electron emission from those portions of  tlie catl~ode wliicli otlicrwise would be intercepted by the second, or control, grid.
The cathode  surface utider- each opening of the first grid is dimpled.
Each ditnple is aligned with the  openings of tlie grid so tliat bearnlets are formed within each grid opening.
The beam intercep-  tion on tile coritrol grid of practical nonintercepting gridded guns might be less than a few  lli~ridredtlis of one percent of beam current.' The shadow grid can also be used in the  traveling-wave tube.
 Bandwidth.
The frequency of a klystron is determined by the resonant cavities.
When all the  cavities are tuned to tlie same frequency, the gain of the tube is high, but the bandwidth is  narrow, perhaps a fraction of one percent.
This is known as synchronous tuning.
Although  maximum gain is obtained with all cavities tuned to the same frequency, klystrons are often  operated with the next to the last cavity (the penultimate cavity) tuned outside the passband  on tlie high-frequency side.
The gain is reduced by about 10 dB in so doing, but the improved  electron bunching results in greater efficiency and in 15 to 25 percent more output power.7  Broadbanding of a multicavity klystron may be accomplished in a manner somewhat analo-  gous to the methods used for broadbanding multistage IF amplifiers, that is, by tuning the  individual cavities to different frequencies.
This is known as stagger tuning.
Stagger tuning of a  klystron is not strictly analogous to stagger tuning a conventional IF amplifier because inter-  actions amopg cavities can cause the tuning of one cavity to affect the tuning of the others.
The  S band VA-87, a four-cavity klystron amplifier, has a synchronously tuned half-power band-  width of 20 MHz and a gain of 61 dB.
When tuned for maximum power the bandwidth is  irlcreased to 27 M1I7.
arid the gain reduced to 57.6 dB.9 By stagger tuning the various cavities  the half-power bandwidth can be increased to 77 MHz (about 2.8 percent bandwidth), but  with a corlcurrerit decrease in gain to 44 dB.
In practice, stagger tuning enables the bandwidth  of the multicavity klystron amplifier to be increased from a synchronously tuned bandwidth of  4 to percent to values of more than 5 percent.
Multicavity klystrons can be designed with  bandwidths as large as 10 to 12 percent or greater.7.10.41*50  Tuning.
Altllough conventional kiystrorls are of narrow bandwidth, they may be tuned over a  wide frequency range.' A simple tuning mechanism is a flexible wall in the resonant cavity.
The  tutlirig range is about 2 or 3 percent, and the tuner life is limited.
Tuning ranges of 10 to 20  percent are possible with a movable capacitive element (paddle) in the cavity.
Tuner life is no  RADAR TRANSMITTERS 203 isthe17!Odll{(/(;llq l1IJOde.Theadvantage ofthemodulating anodeisthatitrequires littlecontrol powertomodulate thebeam.Thepowernecessary isthatrequired tochargeanddischarge the capacitance oftheklystron gunanditsassociated circuitry, andthisisindependent ofthepulse length.Thecutoffcharacteristics ofthemodulating anodepermitonlyafewelectrons to escapefromtheelectron gunduringtheinterpulse periodwhenthebeamisturnedoff.This isimportant inradarapplication sincethereceiver sensitivity willbedegraded ifsufficient electrons arepresentduringtheinterpulse periodtocausethestrayelectron-current noiseto exceedreceiver noise.
Thehigh-power klystron mayalsobepulsedwithagridintheelectron gunsodesigned thatthegriddoesnotintercept theelectrons.7.8Suchnonintercepting griddedgunscanswitch theneamwithlow-power modulators.
Thistechnique actually usestwocloselyspacedand alignedgrids.Oneisncarthecathode andisatcathode potential.
(Intheso-called Unigrid,42 thisgridisphysically placedonthecathode butisproperly passivated topreventemission.) Thesecondgridisthecontrol gridforthebeamcurrent.Itisatapositive potential andis locatedintheshadowofthefirstgrid.Forthisreasonthefirstgridisalsoknownastheshadow qrid.Thepurpose oftheshadow gridistosuppress electron emission fromthoseportions of thecathode whichotherwise wouldbeintercepted bythesecond,orcontrol, grid.Thecathode surface undereachopening ofthefirstgridisdimpled.
Eachdimpleisaligned withthe openings ofthegridsothatbeamlets areformedwithineachgridopening.
Thebeamintercep­ tiononthecontrol gridofpractical nonintercepting gridded gunsmightbelessthanafew hundredths ofonepercent ofbeamcurrent.8Theshadow gridcanalsobe used inthe traveling-wave tube.
Bandwidth.
Thefrequency ofaklystron isdetermined bytheresonant cavities.
Whenallthe cavities aretunedtothesamefrequency, thegainofthetubeishigh,butthebandwidth is narrow, perhaps afraction ofonepercent.
Thisisknownassynchronous tuning.Although maximum gainisobtained withallcavitiestunedtothesamefrequency, klystrons areoften operated withthenexttothelastcavity(thepenultimate cavity)tunedoutsidethepassband onthehigh-frequency side.Thegainisreduced byabout10dBinsodoing,buttheimproved electron bunching resultsingreaterefficiency andin15to25percentmoreoutputpower,7 Broadbanding ofamulticavity klystron maybeaccomplished inamannersomewhat analo­ goustothemethods usedforbroadbanding multistage IFamplifiers, thatis,bytuningthe individual cavitiestodifferent frequencies.
Thisisknownasstaggertuning.Staggertuningofa klystron isnotstrictlyanalogous tostaggertuningaconventional IFamplifier because inter­ actionsamoQ,gcavitiescancausethetuningofonecavitytoaffectthetuningoftheothers.The SbandVA-87,afour-cavity klystron amplifier, hasasynchronously tunedhalf-power band­ widthof20MHzandagainof61dB.Whentunedformaximum powerthebandwidth is increased to27Mill.andthegainreduced to57.6dB.9Bystaggertuningthevariouscavities thehalf-power bandwidth canbeincreased to77MHz(about2.8percentbandwidth), but withaconcurrent decrease ingainto44dB'.Inpractice, staggertuningenablesthebandwidth ofthemulticavity klystron amplifier tobeincreased fromasynchronously tunedbandwidth of !toIpercenttovaluesofmorethan5percent.
Multicavity klystrons canbedesigned with bandwidths aslargeas10to12percentorgreater.7,10,41,50 Tuning.
Although conventional klystrons areofnarrowbandwidth, theymaybetunedovera widefrequency range.7Asimpletuningmechanism isaflexiblewallintheresonant cavity.The tuningrangeisabout2or3percent, andthetunerlifeislimited.Tuningrangesof10to20 percentarepossible withamovable capacitive element (paddle) inthecavity.Tunerlifeisno 204 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  problem, but the tuner increases the cavity capacitance and thus decreases the cavity im-  pedance so that there is reduced bandwidth at the low-frequency end of the tuning range  Tuning ranges of 10 to 15 percent can be obtained without a compromise in impedance by  using a sliding-contact movable cavity wall, but at the expense of increased mechanical  complexity.
 To simplify the tuning of a klystron it is desirable to have a "gang tuner " by which all the  cavities are controlled by a single knob when changing frequency.
Gang tuning is complicated,  however, since the resonant cavities do not generally have the same tuning rates.
The channel  tlrrlir~g mechanism avoids the problem of the frequency tracking of the resonant cavities by  preti~ning the cavities (generally at the factory); and the tuning informaticn is stored mechan-  ically within the tuner mechanism.
Thus when a particular frequency channel is desired, the  tuner mechanism provides the correct tuner position for each cavity to achieve the desired  klystron frequency response.
The klystron differs from other tubes in that the t\igher the peak  power, the greater can be its  Other properties.
The RF conversion efficiency of klystron amplifiers as used for radar might  range from 35 to 50 percent.
The less the bandwidth of the klystron, the greater can he its  effi~iency.~~ However, by use of harmonic bunching of the electron beam, high-power CW  klystrons of wide bandwidth have demonstrated efficiencies as high as 70 to 75 percent."  The advantage of the klystron over other microwave tubes in producing high power is due  to its geometry.
The regions of beam formation, RF interaction, and beam collection are  separate and independent in the klystron.
Each region can be designed to best perform its own  particular function independently of the others.
For example, the cathode is outside the RF  field and need not be restricted to sizes small compared with a wavelength.
Large cathode area  and large interelectrode spacings may be used to keep the emission current densities and  voltage gradients to reasonable values.
The only function of the collector electrode in the  klystron is to dissipate heat.
It can be ofa shape and size most suited for satisfying the average  or peak power requirements without regard for conducting RF currents, since none arc  prescnt.
 The design flexibility available with the klystron is not present in other tube types con-  sidered in this chapter, except for the traveling-wave titbe.
In most other tubes the filnctions of  electron emission, RF interaction, and collection of electrons usually occur in the same region.
 The design of such tubes must therefore be a compromise between good RF performance and  good heat dissipation.
Unfortunately, these requirements cannot always be satisfied simulta-  neously.
Good RF performance usually requires the tube electrodes to be small compared with  a wavelength, while good heat dissipation requires large structures.
 The high-power capability of the klystron, like anything else, is not unlimited.
One of the  major factors which has restricted the power available from klystrons has been the problem of  obtaining RF windows capable ofcoupling the output power from the vacitum envelope to the  load.
Other factors limiting large powers are the difficulty of operating with high voltages, of  dissipating hcat in the collector, and of obtaining sufficient cathode emissio~l citrrcnt.
 Examples.
Klystrons have seen wide application in radar.
Several examples of radar pulse  klystrons will be briefly mentioned.
The VA-87E, shown in Fig.
6.10, is a 6-cavity, S-band  klystron tunable over the range from 2.7 to 2.9 GHz.
It was designed to meet the requirements  for the ASR-8 Airport Surveillance Radar.
It has a peak power of 0.5 to 2.0 MW and an  average power of 0.5 to 3.5 k W.
The gain is nominally 50 dB and its efficiency is greater than 45  percent.
Its 1-dB bandwidth is 39 MHz, but it is inherently capable of greater values.
A peak  204INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS problem, butthetunerincreases thecavitycapacitance andthusdecreases thecavityim­ pedance sothatthereisreduced bandwidth atthelow-frequency endofthetuningrange.
Tuningrangesof10to15percentcanbeobtained without acompromise inimpedance by usingasliding-contact movable cavitywall,butattheexpense ofincreased mechanical complexity.
Tosimplify thetuningofaklystron itisdesirable tohavea"gangtuner"bywhichallthe cavitiesarecontrolled byasingleknobwhen changing frequency.
Gangtuningiscomplicated, however, sincetheresonant cavitiesdonotgenerally havethesametuningrates.Thechannel tllningmechanism avoidstheproblem ofthefrequency tracking oftheresonant cavities by pretuning thecavities(generally atthefactory); andthetuninginformation isstoredmechan­ icallywithinthetunermechanism.
Thuswhenaparticular frequency channel isdesired, the tunermechanism provides thecorrecttunerposition foreachcavitytoachievethedesired klystron frequency response.
Theklystron differsfromothertubesinthatthehigherthepeak power,thegreatercanbeitsbandwidth.48•50 Otherproperties.
TheRFconversion efficiency ofklystron amplifiers asusedforradarmight, rangefrom35to50percent.
Thelessthebandwidth oftheklystron, thegreatercanbeits '" efficiency.43 However, byuseofharmonic bunching oftheelectron beam,high-power CW klystrons ofwidebandwidth havedemonstrated efficiencies ashighas70to75percent.ll Theadvantage oftheklystron over othermicrowave tubesinproducing highpowerisdue toitsgeometry.
Theregionsofbeamformation, RFinteraction, andbeamcollection are separate andindependent intheklystron.
Eachregioncanbedesigned tobestperform itsown particular function independently oftheothers.Forexample, thecathode isoutsidetheRF fieldandneednotberestricted tosizessmallcompared withawavelength.
Largecathode area andlargeinterelectrode spacings maybeusedtokeeptheemission currentdensities and voltagegradients toreasonable values.Theonlyfunction ofthecollector electrode inthe klystron istodissipate heat.Itcanbeofashapeandsizemostsuitedforsatisfying theaverage orpeakpowerrequirements without regardforconducting RFcurrents, sincenonearc present.
Thedesignflexibility available withtheklystron isnotpresentinothertubetypescon­ sideredinthischapter, exceptforthetraveling-wave tube.Tnmostothertubesthefunctions of electron emission, RFinteraction, andcollection ofelectrons usuallyoccurinthesameregion.
Thedesignofsuchtubesmusttherefore beacompromise between goodRFperformance and goodheatdissipation.
Unfortunately, theserequirements cannotalwaysbesatisfied simulta­ neously.GoodRFperformance usuallyrequires thetubeelectrodes tobesmallcompared with awavelength, whilegoodheatdissipation requires largestructures.
Thehigh-power capability oftheklystron, likeanything else,isnotunlimited.
Oneofthe majorfactorswhichhasrestricted thepoweravailable fromklystrons hasbeentheproblem of obtaining RFwindows capableofcoupling theoutputpowerfromthevacuumenvelope tothe load.Otherfactorslimiting largepowersarethedifficulty ofoperating withhighvoltages, of dissipating heatinthecollector, andofobtaining sufficient cathode emission current.
Examples.
Klystrons haveseenwideapplication inradar.Severalexamples ofradarpulse klystrons willbebrieflymentioned.
TheVA-87E, showninFig.6.10,isa6-cavity, S-band klystron tunableovertherangefrom2.7to2.9GHz.Itwasdesigned tomeettherequirements fortheASR-8Airport Surveillance Radar.Ithasapeakpowerof0.5to2.0MWandan averagepowerof0.5to3.5kW.Thegainisnominally 50dBanditsefficiency isgreaterthan45 percent.
ItsI-dBbandwidth is39MHz,butitisinherently capableofgreatervalues.Apeak L  Figure 6.10 Pilotograph of the VA-87E 6-cavity S-band klystron mounted on a dolly.
(Courtesy Varian  .Issociates.
IIIC., Palo Alto, CA.)  beam voltage of 65 kV is required and its peak beam current is 34 amperes.
The pulse duration  can he from 0.5 to 6.0 ps.
 The VA-812C is a wideband UHF klystron with a 12 percent bandwidth.
It is capable of  8 M W of peak power and 30 kW of average power, with a pulse width of 6 p.
Its efficiency is  40 percent and gain is 30 dB.
A peak beam voltage of 145 kV is required.
The VA-812C formed  the basis for the design of the VA-842, a tube used in the Ballistic Missile Early Warning  System (BMEWS), with a demonstrated life in excess of 50,000 hours.
The VA-812E, which  was also derived from the same family as the VA-812C, has a peak power of 20 MW with an  itlstatltancous 1-dl3 baridwidtll of 25 MHz and a 40 dB gain.
Its average power rating is  300 kW at a duty of 0.015 and a 40 ps pulse width.
 RADAR TRANSMITfERS 205 (',,.'-....,..;')'" ..,.
..
'.\;;<:'/,t,<';? ,.
Figure6.10Photograph oftheV!\-87E6-cavity S-bandklystron mounted onadolly.(Courtesy Varian Associates, fllc,.PaloAlto,CA.) beamvoltageof65kVisrequired anditspeakbeamcurrentis34amperes.
Thepulseduration canbefrom0.5to6.0tIS.
TheVA-812C isawideband UHFklystron witha12percentbandwidth.
Itiscapableof RMWofpeakpowerand30kWofaveragepower,withapulsewidthof6JJ.S.Itsefficiency is 40percentandgainis30dB.Apeakbeamvoltageof145kVisrequired.
TheVA-812C formed thehasisforthedesignoftheVA-842, atubeusedintheBallistic MissileEarlyWarning System(BMEWS), withademonstrated lifeinexcessof50,000hours.TheVA-812E, which wasalsoderivedfromthesamefamilyastheVA-812C, hasapeakpowerof20MWwithan instantaneous I-dBbandwidth of25MHzanda40dBgain.Itsaverage powerratingis 300kWatadutyof0.015anda40JLSpulsewidth. 6.4 TRAVELING-WAVE-TUBE 'AMPLIFIER  The traveling wave tube (TWT) is another example of a linear-bcanl, or 0-type, tuhc.
It dlffcrs  from the klystron amplifier by the continuous interaction of the electron beam and the RF  field over the entire length of the propagating structure of the traveling-wavc tubc rathcr tllarl  the interaction occurring at the gaps of a relatively few resonant cavities.
The chief character-  istic of the TWT of interest to the radar system engineer is its relatively wide bandwidth.
A  wide bandwidth is necessary in applications where good range-resolution is required or where  it is desired to avoid deliberate jamming or mutual interference with nearby radars.
Altho~rgh  low power TWTs are capable of octave bandwidths, bandwidths of the order of 10 to 20  percent are more typical at the power levels required for long-range radar applications.
The  gain, efficiency, and power levels of TWTs are like those of the klystron; but, in general, their  values are usually slightly less than can be obtained with a klystron of comparable design.
 A diagrammatic representation of a traveling-wave tube is shown in Fig.
6.1 1.
The elec-  tron optics is similar to the klystron.
Both employ the principle of velocity modulation to  density-modulate the electron beam current.
Electrons emitted by the cathode of the traveling-  wave tube are focused into a beam and pass through the RF interaction circuit known as the  slow-wave structure, or periodic delay line.
An axial magnetic field is provided to maintain the  electron-beam focus, just as in the klystron.
A shadow grid to pulse-modulate the beam can  also be included.
After delivering their d-c energy to the RF field, the electrons are removed by  the collector electrode.
The RF signal to be amplified enters via the input coilpler and propa-  gates along the slow-wave structure.
A helix is depicted as the slow-wave structure in Fig.
6.1 I,  but TWTs for radar usually use a structure better suited for high power.
The velocity of  propagation of electromagnetic energy is slowed down by the periodic structure so that it is  nearly equal to the velocity of the electron beam.
It is for this reason that helix and sim~lar  microwave circuits are called slow-wave structures or delay lines.
The synchronism between  the electromagnetic wave propagating along the slow-wave structure and the d-c electron  beam results in a cumulative interaction which transfers energy from the d-c electron beam to  the RF wave, causing the RF wave to be amplified.
 The simple helix was used as the slow-wave structure in the early TWTs and is still  preferred in traveling-wave tubes at power levels up to a few kilowatts.
It is capable of wider  bandwidth than other slow-wave structures, but its power limitations do not make it suitable  for most high-power radar applications.
A modification of the helix known as the ring-bar  circuit has been used in TWTs to achieve higher power and efficiencies between 35 and 50  percent."*12 The Raytheon QKW-1671A, which utilizes a ring-bar circuit, has a peak power  of 160 kW, a duty cycle of 0.036,"p'ulse width of 70 ps, gain of 45 dB, and a 200 MHz band-  width at L band.
This tube is suitable for air-search radar.
Similar TWTs have been used in  phased-array radar.
The Air Force Cobra Dane phased-array radar, for examplc, irscs 96  Gun  Cothode, ,{anode  Electron '  beam Attenuation Collector -',  RF .
' R F  input -:..
.: output  Figure 6.1 1 Diagrammatic representation of the traveling-wave tube.
 206INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS 6.4TRAVELING-WA VE-TUBE AMPLIFIER Thetraveling wavetube(TWT)isanotherexample ofalinear-beam, orO-type,tllhe.Itdifkrs fromtheklystron amplifier bythecontinuous interaction oftheelectron beamandtheRF fieldovertheentirelengthofthepropagating structure ofthetraveling-wave tuhcratherthan theinteraction occurring atthegapsofarelatively fewresonant cavities.
Thechiefcharacter­ isticoftheTWTofinteresttotheradarsystemengineer isitsrelatively widebandwidth.
A widebandwidth isnecessary inapplications wheregoOdrange-resolution isrequired orwhere itisdesiredtoavoiddeliberate jamming ormutualinterference withnearbyradars.Although lowpowerTWTsarecapable ofoctavebandwidths, bandwidths oftheorderof10to20 percentaremoretypicalatthepowerlevelsrequired forlong-range radarapplications.
The gain,efficiency, andpowerlevelsofTWTsarelikethoseoftheklystron; but,ingeneral, their valuesareusuallyslightlylessthancanbeobtained withaklystron ofcomparable design.
Adiagrammatic representation ofatraveling-wave tubeisshowninFig.6.11.Theelec­ tronopticsissimilartotheklystron.
Bothemploytheprinciple ofvelocity modulation to density-modulate theelectron beamcurrent.
Electrons emittedbythecathodeofthetraveling­ wavetubearefocusedintoabeamandpassthrough theRFinteraction circuitknownasthe slow-wave structure, orperiodic delayline.Anaxial magnetic fieldisprovided tomaintain the electron-beam focus,justasintheklystron.
Ashadow gridtopulse-modulate theheamcan alsobeincluded.
Afterdelivering theird-cenergytotheRFfield,theelectrons areremoved by thecollector electrode.
TheRFsignaltobeamplified entersviatheinputcouplerandpropa­ gatesalongtheslow-wave structure.
Ahelixisdepicted astheslow-wave structure inFig.6.11, butTWTsforradarusuallyuseastructure bettersuitedforhighpower.Thevelocity of propagation ofelectromagnetic energyissloweddownbytheperiodic structure sothatitis nearlyequaltothevelocityoftheelectron beam.Itisforthisreasonthathelixandsimilar microwave circuitsarecalledslow-wave structures ordelaylines.Thesynchronism between theelectromagnetic wavepropagating alongtheslow-wave structure andthedocelectron beamresultsinacumulative interaction wpichtransfers energyfromthed-celectron beamto theRFwave,causingtheRFwavetobeamplified.
Thesimplehelixwasusedastheslow-wave structure intheearlyTWTsandisstill preferred intraveling-wave tubesatpowerlevelsuptoafewkilowatts.
Itiscapableofwider bandwidth thanotherslow-wave structures, butitspowerlimitations donotmakeitsuitable formosthigh-power radarapplications.
Amodification ofthehelixknownasthering-bar circuithasbeenusedinTWTstoachievehigherpowerandefficiencies between 35aild50 percent.11.12TheRaytheon QKW-1671A, whichutilizesaring-bar circuit,hasapeakpower of160kW,adutycycleof0.036,"puisewidth of70~s,gainof45dB,anda200MHzband­ widthatLband.Thistubeissuitable forair-search radar.SimilarTWTshavebeenusedin phased-array radar.TheAirForceCobraDanephased-array radar,forexample, uses96 /Gun Attenuation Cathode LOde ~ cOllector\ Heale'~rr-----l~~--~ Electron.J It(interaction region) II beam tRF .
RF input.
.:'..' output Figure6.11Diagrammatic representation orthetraveling-wave tube. RADAR TRANSMITTERS 207  QKW-1723 TWTs, each with a peak power of 175 kW and at1 average power of 10.5 kW  operating over the frequency band of from 1175 to 1375 MHz.
Since this radar is designed to  nlonitor ballistic-missile reentry vet~icles, its pulse width is as great as 2000 ps.
 The ring-loop slow-wave circuit wtiich consists of equally spaced rings and connecting  bars, is also related to the helix and the ring-bar.
It is claimed14 to be preferred for tubes in the  power range from 1 to 20 k W, as for lightweight airborne radar or as drivers for high-power  tubes.
The ring-loop circuit is not bothered by the backward-wave oscillations of the ordinary  helix or the "rabbit ear" oscillations which can appear in coupled-cavity circuits.
 The I~elix tlas heen operated at high average power by passing cooling fluid through a  lielix constructed of copper tubing.43 The bandwidth of this type of fluid-cooled helix TWT  can be alrnost an octave, arid it is capable of several tens of kilowatts average power at L band  with ;\ duty cycle suitable for radar applications.
 A pol>ulnr for111 of slow-wave structure for liigli-power TWTs is the coupled-cat-it)*  circuit '.' it is not derived froni the lielix as are the ring-bar or ring-loop circuits.
Tlie  iridividiial unit cells of the coupled-cavity circuit resemble the ordinary klystron resonant  c;ivities Therc is tio direct couplirig between the cavities of a klystron; but in the traveling-  wave tuhe, coupling is provided by a long slot in the wall of each cavity.
The coupled-cavity  circuit is quite conipatible witti ttie use of lightweight PPM focusing, a desired feature in some  airborne applicatio~is.
 Altliougti the TWT and the klystron are similar in many respects, one of the major  dinerences between ttie two is that feedback along the slow-wave structure is possible in the  TWT, but the back coupling of RF energy in the klystron is negligible.
Ifsufficient energy were  fed back to the input, the TWT would produce undesired oscillations.
Feedback energy might  arise in the TWT from the reflection of a portion of the forward wave at the output coupler.
 The feedback must be eliminated if the traveling-wave amplifier is to function satisfactorily.
 Energy traveling in the backward direction may be reduced to an insignificant level in most  tubes by the itisertiotl of attenuation in the slow-wave structure.
The attenuation may be  distributed, or it may be lumped; but it is usually found within the middle third of the tube.
 Loss introduced to attenuate the backward wave also reduces the power of the forward wave,  wtiich results in a loss of efficiency.
This loss in the forward wave can be avoided by the use of  discoritiniiitics called set-ers, which are short internal terminations designed to dissipate the  reverse-directed power without seriously affecting ttie forward power.13 The number ofsevers  depends on tlie gain of the tube; one sever is used for each 15 to 20 dB of gain.
In addition to  reflection-type oscillations, backward-wave oscillations can occur.
These frequently occur  outside tlie passbarid so that they can he reduced by loss that is frequency selective.13  in principle, the traveling-wave tube should be capable of as large a power output as the  klystron.
The cathode, RF interaction region, and the collector are all separate and each can  be designed to perform tlieir required functions independently of the others.
In practice,  however.
it is found that there are limitations to high power.
The necessity for attenuation or  severs in the structure, as mentioned above, tends to make the traveling-wave tube less efficient  than the klystron.
The slow-wave structure can also provide a limit to TWT capability.
It  seems that those slow-wave structures best suited for broad bandwidth (like the helix) have  poor power capability and poor heat dissipation.
A sacrifice in bandwidth must be made if  high-power is required of a TWT.
If the bandwidth is too small, however, there is little  advantage to be gained with a traveling-wave tube as compared with multicavity klystrons.
 A klystron can be operated over a fairly wide range of beam voltage without a large  change in the gain characteristics.
However, high-power traveling-wave tubes tend to oscillate  at reduced beam voltage.
Therefore the tolerance on the TWT beam voltage must be tighter  witli increasing batidwidtti.' The protection requirements for traveling-wave tubes aresimilar  RADAR TRANSMITTERS 207 QKW-I723 TWTs,eachwithapeakpowerof175kWandanaverage powerofto.5kW operating overthefrequency bandoffrom1175,toI375 MHz.Sincethisradarisdesigned to monitor ballistic-missile reentryvehicles, itspulsewidthisasgreatas2000Jls.
Thering-loop slow-wave circuitwhichconsists ofequallyspacedringsandconnecting bars,isalsorelatedtothehelixandthering-bar.Itisclaimed 14tobepreferred fortubesinthe powerrangefromIto20kW,asforlightweight airborne radarorasdriversforhigh-power tubes.Thering-loop circuitisnotbothered bythebackward-wave oscillations oftheordinary helixorthe"rabbitear"oscillations whichcanappearincoupled-cavity circuits.
Thehelixhasbeenoperated athighaverage powerbypassingcooling fluidthrough a helixconstructed ofcoppertubing.43Thebandwidth ofthistypeoffluid-cooled helixTWT canoealmostanoctave,anditiscapableofseveraltensofkilowatts averagepoweratLband withadutycyclesuitahle forradarapplications.
Apopular formofslow-wave structure forhigh-power TWTsisthecoupled-cm'ity circuit.
7.1IItisnotderived fromthehelixasarethering-bar orring-loop circuits.
The individual unitcellsofthecoupled-cavity circuitresemble theordinary klystron resonant cavities.
Thereisnodirectcoupling between thecavitiesofaklystron; butinthetraveling­ wavetuhe,coupling isprovided byalongslotinthewallofeachcavity.Thecoupled-cavity circuitisquitecompatible withtheuseoflightweight PPMfocusing, adesiredfeatureinsome airborne applications.
Although theTWTandtheklystron aresimilarinmanyrespects, oneofthemajor differences between thetwoisthatfeedback alongtheslow-wave structure ispossible inthe TWT.butthebackcoupling ofRFenergyintheklystron isnegligible.
Ifsufficient energywere fedbacktotheinput,theTWTwouldproduce undesired oscillations.
Feedback energymight ariseintheTWTfromthereflection ofaportionoftheforward waveattheoutputcoupler.
Thefeedback mustbeeliminated ifthetraveling-wave amplifier istofunction satisfactorily.
Energytraveling inthebackward direction maybereduced toaninsignificant levelinmost tubesbytheinsertion ofattenuation intheslow-wave structure.
Theattenuation maybe distributed, oritmaybelumped; butitisusuallyfoundwithinthemiddlethirdofthetube.
Lossintroduced toattenuate thebackward wavealsoreducesthepoweroftheforward wave.
whichresultsinalossofefficiency.
Thislossintheforward wavecanbeavoided bytheuseof discontinuities calledsel'ers.whichareshortinternal terminations designed todissipate the reverse-directed powerwithout seriously affecting theforward power.13Thenumberofsevers depends onthegainofthetube;oneseverisusedforeach15to20dBofgain.Inaddition to reflection-type oscillations, backward-wave oscillations canoccur.Thesefrequently occur outside thepClssband sothattheycanbereduced bylossthatisfrequency selective.
I3 Inprinciple, thetraveling-wave tubeshouldbecapable ofaslargeapoweroutputasthe klystron.
Thecathode, RFinteraction region,andthecollector areallseparate andeachcan hedesigned toperform theirrequired functions independently oftheothers.Inpractice, however.
itisfoundthattherearelimitations tohighpower.Thenecessity forattenuation or seversinthestructure, asmentioned above,tendstomakethetraveling-wave tubelessefficient thantheklystron.
Theslow-wave structure canalsoprovide alimittoTWTcapability.
It seemsthatthoseslow-wave structures bestsuitedforbroadbandwidth (likethehelix)have poorpowercapability andpoorheatdissipation.
Asacrifice inbandwidth mustbemadeif high-power isrequired ofaTWT.Ifthebandwidth istoosmall,however, thereislittle advantage tobegainedwithatraveling-wave tubeascompared withmulticavity klystrons.
Aklystron canbeoperated overafairlywiderangeofbeamvoltagewithout alarge changeinthegaincharacteristics.
However, high-power traveling-wave tubestendtooscillate atreduced beamvoltage.
Therefore thetolerance ontheTWTbeamvoltagemustbetighter withincreasing bandwidth.
7Theprotection requirements fortraveling-wave tubesaresimilar 208 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  to those of the klystron, but they are generally more difficult than for the klystron.
In some  traveling-wave tubes with coupled-cavity circuits, oscillations appear for an instant during the  turn-on and turn-off portions of the pulse.' They are called rabbit-ear oscillations because of  their characteristic appearance when the RF envelope of the pulse waveform is displayed  visually on a CRT.
These can be undesirable in some military applications since they might  provide a distinctive feature for recognizing a particular radar.
 An example of a traveling-wave tube designed for radar applications is the S-band Varian  VA-125A.
It is a broadband, liquid-cooled TWT which uses a clover leaf coupled-cavity  slow-wave structure.
It is capable of 3 MW of peak power over a 300 MHz bandwidth, with ti  0.002 duty cycle, a 2-ps pulse width, and a gain of 33 dB.
This tiibe is similar in many respects  to the VA-87 klystron amplifier.
It was originally designed to be used interchangeably with thc  VA-87 klystron, except that the VA-125 TWT has a broader bandwidth and requires a larger  input power because of its lower gain.
 3  In addition to being used as the power tube for high-power radar systems, thc traveling-  wave tube has also been employed, at lower power levels, as the driver for high-power tube>  (such as the crossed-field amplifier), and in phased array radars which use many tubes to  achieve the desired high-power levels.
 6.5 HYBRID LINEAR-BEAM AMPLIFIER  By combining the advantages of the klystron and the traveling-wave tube into a sitlgle dcvice it  is possible to obtain a high-power amplifier with a bandwidth, efficiency, and gain flatnesb  better than can be obtained with either the usual klystron or TWT.' One such device is thc  Varian Twystron (a trade nam~), which is a hybrid consisting of a millticavity klystron inpt~t  section coupled to an extended interaction traveling-wave output section.
The limitation to the  bandwidth ofa klystron is generally the output cavity.
It cannot be made broadband without a  decrease in efficiency.
The slow-wave circuits of traveling-wave tubes have a broader hand-  width than klystron resonant cavities; and when used for the output of a klystron, as in thc  Twystron, a broad bandwidth can be achieved with the peak and average power capabilities of  a klystron.
 The C-band Varian VA-146 Twystron family of tubes provides peak power outputs from i 200 kW to 9 MW with bandwidths greater than 10 percent.
The VA- 146N produces a 2.5 M W  peak power with a 20 ps pulse at a 0.004 duty cycle over a I-) dB bandwidth of 500 MHz at C'  hand.
The gain is 31 dB and ttie efficiency at midband is 40 percent.
 6.6 CROSSED-FIELD AMPLIFIERS  The crossed-field amplifier (CFA), like the magnetron oscillator, is characterized by magnetic  and electric fields that are perpendicular to each other.
Such tubes are of high efficiency (40 to  60 percent), relatively low voltage (compared with a linear-beam tube), and of light weight and  small size so as to make them of interest for mobile applications.
CFAs are capable of broad  bandwidth (10 to 20 percent) with high peak power, but the gain is usually modest.
They have  good phase stability, and a number of CFAs can be operated in parallel for greater power.
 CFAs can be used as a power booster following a magnetron oscillator, as ttie higtt-power  stage in master-oscillator power-amplifier (MOPA) transmitters with other CFAs or a TWT  as the driver stage, or as the individual transmitters of a high-power phased-array radar.
 208INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS tothoseoftheklystron, buttheyaregenerally moredifficult thanfortheklystron.
In50111(; traveling-wave tubeswithcoupled-cavity circuits; oscillations appearforaninstanlduring th(; turn-onandturn-offportions ofthepulse.1Theyarecalledrabbit-ear oscillations becauseof theircharacteristic appearance whentheRFenvelope ofthepulsewaveform isdisplayed visually onaCRT.Thesecanbeundesirable insomemilitary applications sincetheymight provideadistinctive featureforrecognizing aparticular radar.
Anexample ofatraveling-wave tubedesigned forradarapplications istheS-bandVarian VA-125A.
Itisabroadband, liquid-cooled TWTwhichusesacloverleafcoupled-cavity slow-wave structure.Itiscapableof3MWofpeakpowerovera300MHzbandwidth, witha 0.002dutycycle,a2-pspulsewidth,andagainof33dB.Thistubeissimilarinmanyrespects totheVA-87klystron amplifier.Itwasoriginally designed tobeusedinterchangeably withIhe VA-87klystron, exceptthattheVA-125TWThasabroader bandwidth andrequires alarger inputpowerbecauseofitslowergain.
.~ Inaddition tobeingusedasthepowertubeforhigh-power radarsystems, thetravding­ wavetubehasalso been employed, atlowerpowerlevels,asthedriverforhigh-power lubes (suchasthecrossed-field amplifier), andinphasedarrayradarswhichusemanylubesto achievethedesiredhigh-power levels.
6.5HYBRID LINEAR-BEAM AMPLIFIER Bycombining theadvantages orthe'klystron andthetraveling-wave tubeintoasingledeviceit ispossible toobtainahigh-'power amplifier withabandwidth, efficiency, andgainflatness betterthancanbeobtained witheithertheusualklystron orTWT.7Onesuchdeviceisthe VarianTwystron (atrade nam~),whichisahybridconsisting ofamulticavity klystron input sectioncoupledtoanextend~d interaction traveling-wave outputsection.Thelimitation tothe bandwidth ofaklystron isgenerally theoutputcavity.Itcannotbemadebroadband withoula decrease inefficiency.
Theslow-wave circuitsoftraveling-wave tubeshaveabroader band­ widththanklystron resonant cavitIes; andwhenusedfortheoutputofaklystron, asinthe Twystron, abroadbandwidth canbeachieved withthepeakandaveragepowercapabilities of aklystron.
TheC-bandVarianVA-146Twystron familyoftubesprovides peakpoweroutputsfrom 200kWto9MWwithbandwidths greaterthan10percent.TheVA-146N produces a2.5MW peakpowerwitha20pspulseata0:004dutycycleoveraitdBbandwidth of500MHzatC band.Thegainis31dBandtheefficiency atmidband is40percent.
6.6CROSSED-FIELD AMPLIFIERS Thecrossed-field amplifier (CFA),likethemagnetron oscillator, ischaracterized bymagnetic andelectricfieldsthatareperpendicular toeachother.Suchtubesareofhighefficiency (40to 60percent), relatively lowvoltage(compared withalinear-beam tube),andoflightweightand smallsizesoastomakethemofinterestformobileapplications.
CFAsarecapableofbroad bandwidth (10to20percent) withhighpeakpower,butthegainisusuallymodest.Theyhave goodphasestability, andanumberofCFAscanbeoperated inparallelforgreaterpower.
CFAscanbeusedasapowerboosterfollowing amagnetron oscillator, asthehigh-power stageinmaster-oscillator power-amplifier (MOPA) transmitters withotherCFAsoraTWT asthedriverstage,orastheindividual transmitters ofahigh-power phased-array radar. KAOAK .I'KANSMI.II'EKS 209  'I'llc crossed-field arliplificr is based 011 tllc sarlie i>riticiplc of clcctro~iic i~ltcractiori as tlic  magnetron.
Thus, its characterist-ics resemble tliose of the magnetron,-and many CFAs are  cveli similar in physical appearance to a magnetron.
The CFA also resembles the traveling-  wave tube because tlie electronic iriteractiori in both is wit11 a traveling-wave.
 I'llere are several different types of crossed-field aniplifiers.
Tltey all employ a slow-wave  circuit, cathode, and input and output ports.
A schematic of a CFA is as shown in Fig.
6.12.
it  rcscr~ihlcs tlic rnilgllctl.o~l oscilliitor cxccl~t tliat there are two exterrlal couplings (an input arid  output).
ISlectrons origi~intc fro~ii tlic cyli~idrical catliode whicli is coaxial to tlie KF slow-wave  circuit that acts as tlie anode.
Tlle cathode in a crossed-field tube is also known as the sole.
 (Tlie terrri  sol^.
wllicli nicails yr.orrrlti /~lirte, comes frorn the Frencll, wllo did much of tlie early  ivork on crossed-field devices.) In some crossed-field devices the sole does not emit electrons,  arid a separate crnittilig catliode is used.
The two words sole arid c-atl~ode are sometimes ilsed  intercllangeably.
Tlie slow-wave structure is designed,so that an RF signal propagates at a  vclocity near tl1at of tlle electron bealn.
Tliis permits an exchange of energy frorn the electrori  I~L~~IIII IO ~IIC Ii 1' Iicld to ~>I.OCIIICC i~r~i~~Iific;~tio~t.
A d-c electric fielcl is applied t~ctwccii tl~c :triode  (slow-wave structure) and the cathode.
A magnetic field is perpendicular to the plane of the  Ilapcr.
?-lie electrolls emitted frorri tlle catliode.
under the action of the crossed electric alid  rliag~lctic fields.
fo1.111 illto rotating electrori (space-charge) bu~icties, or spokes.
These bunclles  drift alorig tlie slow-wave circuit it1 phase with the RF signal and transfer energy to the KF  lvavc to provide aniplificatio~i.
Instead of the collector electrode found in the klystroti and the  TWT.
the spent electroils terminate in the crossed-field amplifier on the slow-wave anode  struct ilrc.
 T11e CFA depicted in Fig.
6.12 is called r.eerltr.arlt, in that the electrons that are not  collected after energy is extracted at the output port are permitted to reenter the RF interac-  tion area at the input.
This improves the efficiency of the tube.
The reenteringelectrons, however,  miglit contain niodulation which will be amplified in the next pass through the circuit.
To  circumvent this the tube of Fig.
6.12 has a drift space to demodulate the electron stream so as to  remove this RF feedback.
Some crossed-field tubes, such as the Amblitron and the forward-wave  rnagnetron, do not have the drift space and employ the feedback provided by the reentering  electrons.
If the drift space in Fig.
6.12 is replaced by a collector electrode which terminates the  electrorl stream, the CFA is called nonreentrant.
 Tlle traveling-wave interaction of tlie electron beam and the RF signal may be with either  a forward traveling-wave (as in the TWT) or with a backward traveling-wave.
The type of  interaction is determined by tlie slow-wave circuit employed.
A forward-wave interaction  takcs place when the pliase velocity and the group velocity of the propagating signal along tlie  slokv-kvave circuit are in the same direction.
(The group velocity is the velocity with which  eriergy is propagated aloiig the slow-wave circuit, and the phase velocity is the velocity of the  RF signal on the slow-wave circuit as it appears to the electrons.
To achieve RF  impedance element  Energy  source  /  Charging path ' L~ircharge path Figure 6.12 Simple representation of a  crossed-field amplifier.
(From Cla~~l-  pittV6 Electronic Progress, Raytheitt.)  RADAR TRANSMITTERS 209 Thecrossed-lick! amplifier isbased 011tilesameprinciple ofelectronic interaction astile magnetron.
Thus,itscharacleristicsresemble 1110seof themagnetron, andmanyCFAsare cvensimilarinphysical appearance toamagnetron.
TheCFAalsoresembles thetraveling­ wavetubebecause theelectronic interaction inbothiswithatraveling-wave.
Thereareseveraldifferent typesofcrossed-field amplifiers.
Theyallemploy aslow-wave circuit.cathode, andinputandoutputports.Aschematic ofaCFAisasshowninFig.6.12.It resemoles themagnetron oscillator exceptthattherearctwoexternal couplings (aninputand output).
Electrons originate fromthecylindrical cathode whichiscoaxialtotheRFslow-wave circuitthatactsastheanode.Thecathode inacrossed-field tubeisalsoknownasthe.'loll!.
(Thetermsole.whichmeanswound{'Iatl!.comesfromtheFrench.
whodidmuchoftheearly workoncrossed-field devices.) [nsomecrossed-field devicesthesoledoesnotemitelectrons.
andaseparate emitting cathode isused.Thetwowordssaleandcathodearesometimes used interchangeably.
Theslow-wave structure isdesignedsothatanRFsignalpropagates ata velocity ncarthatoftheelectron beam.Thispermitsanexchange ofenergyfromtheelectron heam(0(heRFficldtoproduce amplification.;\ d-celectricfieldisappliedbetween theanode (slow-wave structure) andthecathode.
t\magnetic fieldisperpendicular totheplaneofthe paper.Theelectrons emitted fromthecathode.
undertheactionofthecrossed electricand magnetic fields.formintorotating electron (space-charge) bunches, orspokes.Thesebunches driftalongtheslow-wave circuitinphasewiththeRFsignalandtransfer energytotheRF wavetoprovide amplification.
Insteadofthecollector electrode foundintheklystron andthe T\VT.thespentelectrons terminate inthecrossed-field amplifier ontheslow-wave anode structl!reo TheCFt\.depicted inFig.6.12iscalledreelltrallt, inthattheelectrons thatarenot collected afterenergyisextracted attheoutputportarepermitted toreentertheRFinterac­ tionareaattheinput.Thisimproves theefficiency ofthetube.Thereentering electrons, however, mightcontain modulation whichwillbeamplified inthenextpassthrough thecircuit.To circumvent thisthetubeofFig.6.12hasadriftspacetodemodulate theelectron streamsoasto removethisRFfeedback.
Somecrossed-field tubes,suchastheAml--Iitron andtheforward-wave magnetron, donothavethedriftspaceandemploy thefeedback provided bythereentering electrons.IfthedriftspaceinFig.6.12isreplaced byacollector electrode whichterminates the electron stream,theCFAiscalledl1ol1ree1ltrant.
Thetraveling-wave interaction oftheelectron beamandtheRFsignalmaybewitheither aforward traveling-wave (asintheTWT)orwithabackward traveling-wave.
Thetypeof interaction isdetermined bytheslow-wave circuitemployed.
Aforward-wave interaction takesplacewhenthephasevelocity andthegroupvelocityofthepropagating signalalongthe slow-wave circuitarcinthesamedirection.
(Thegroupvelocity isthevelocity withwhich energy ispropagated alongtheslow-wave circuit,andthephasevelocity isthevelocity ofthe RFsignalontheslow-wave circuit asitappears totheelectrons.
Toachieve RF Figure6.12Simpierepresentation ofa crossed-field amplifier.
(FromClam­ "itt,6Electronic Progress, RaytIJein.)"'-DiSCharge path9Energy -~ storage>- ceelement----=-=~--~--:::'I ( , II ,,It'-- SwitchI I Load ~•I~ ,I I I I,I\ I 0+----\=---<---- .Jf---0+---(---.- t 1Chargin impedan Energy sourcelibr / CtlOrging path/ 210 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  amplification, the phase velocity must be near the velocity of the electron stream.) A htrckward-  wave interaction takes place when the phase velocity is in the direction opposite that of the  group velocity.
The forward-wave CFA can operate over a broad range of frequency with a  constant anode voltage, with only a small variation in the output power.
On the other hand,  the power output of a backward-wave CFA, with a constant anode voltage, varies with  frequency.
For a typical backward-wave CFA, the power output can vary 100 percent for a 10  percent change in frequency." It is possible, however, with conventional modulator  techniques, to operate the backward-wave CFA over a wide band with little change in output  power.
The type of modulators normally used with cathode-pulsed CFAs can readily compen-  sate for the power variation with frequency of a backward-wave CFA and hold the variation of  output power within acceptable levels.
This is a result of the nature of the dispersion character-  istics of such tubes.
For example, with a particular X-band Varian backward-wave CFA,16 a  constant-voltage modulator produces a variation in output power from 505 k W at 9.0 GHz to  240 kW at 9.5 GHz, a change of 3.2 dB.
A constant-current modulator with the same tube  results in a power variation of only 0.3 dB over the same frequency range.
Since most practical  modulators are neither constant-current nor constant-voltage devices, actual performance is  somewhere in between.
A modulator with an internal impedance of 150 ohms will result in  both current and voltage variations as a function of frequency when used with the above CFA,  but the power output varies only 1 dB.
Thus it does not matter significantly to the modulator  designer whether the CFA is of the backward-wave or the forward-wave type as long as  cathode pulsing is used with either a line-type modulator or a constant-current hard-tube  modulator.
 Electron emission in high-power crossed-field amplifiers can take place by cold-cathode  emission without a thermally heated cathode.
Some of the electrons emitted from the cathode  are not collected by the anode but return to the cathode by the action of the RF field and the  crossed electric and magnetic fields.
When these electrons strike the cathode they produce  secondary electrons that sustain the electron emission process.
Cold-cathode emission requires  the presence of both the RF drive signal applied to the tube as well as the d-c voltage between  cathode and anode.
The buildup of the current by means of this secondary emission process is  very rapid (within nanoseconds).
There is little pulse-to-pulse time jitter in the starting process.
 Although the name cold-cathode emission is used to describe the action by which electrons are  produced in the CFA, the cathode might not actually be "cold." The bombardment of the  cathode surface by returning electrons can raise the cathode temperature high enough to  require liquid cooling to prevent its destruction.
 The CFA can be pulse-modulated by turning on and off the high voltage between the  anode (at ground potential) and the cathode (at a large negative potential).
This is called  cathode pulsing.
The RF drive is usually applied to the CFA before the high voltage is applied  since an RF signal is needed to start the emission process in a secondary-emission cathode.
If  high voltage is applied without RF drive, the amplifier appears as an open circuit to the  modulator, causing the modulator voltage to double.
The higher voltage could lead to arcing.
 The d-c high-voltage can be applied before the RF signal if the design is such that voltage  breakdown or arcing does not occur.
This leads to the possibility of modulating the tube  without the need for a high-power modulator as required with cathode pulsing.
Such opera-  tion is possible with the forward-wave CFA using a cold secondary-emission cathode.
The d-c  operating voltage is applied continuously between cathode and anode.
The tube remains  inactive until the application of the RF input pulse starts the emission process, causing  amplification to take place.
At the end of the RF drive-pulse the electrons remaining in the  tube must be cleared from the interaction area to avoid feedback which generates oscillations  or noise.
In reentrant CFAs, the electron stream can be collected after the removal of the RF  210INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS amplification, thephasevelocitymustbenearthevelocityoftheelectronstream.) Abackward­ waveinteraction takesplacewhenthephasevelocity isinthedirection opposite thatofthe groupvelocity.
Theforward-wave CFAcanoperateoverahroadrangeoffrequency witha constant anodevoltage, withonlyasmallvariation intheoutputpower.Ontheotherhand, thepoweroutputofabackward-wave CFA,withaconstant anodevoltage, varieswith frequency.
Foratypicalbackward-wave CFA,thepoweroutputcanvary100percentfora10 percent change infrequency.1s Itispossible, however, withconventional modulator techniques, tooperatethebackward-wave CFAoverawidebandwithlittlechangeinoutput power.Thetypeofmodulators normally usedwithcathode-pulsed CFAscanreadilycompen­ sateforthepowervariation withfrequency ofabackward-wave CFAandholdthevariation of outputpowerwithinacceptable levels.Thisisaresultofthenatureofthedispersion character­ isticsofsuchtubes.Forexample, withaparticular X-bandVarianbackward-wave CFA,16a constant-voltage modulator produces avariation inoutputpowerfrom505kWat9.0GHzto 240kWat9.5GHz,achangeof3.2dB.Aconstant-current modulator withthesametube resultsinapowervariation ofonly0.3dBoverthesamefrequency range.Sincemostpractical modulators areneitherconstant-current norconstant-voltage devices,actualperformance is somewhere inbetween.
Amodulator withaninternal impedance oft50ohmswillresultin bothcurrentandvoltagevariations asafunction offrequency whenusedwiththeaboveCFA, butthepoweroutputvariesonly1dB.Thusitdoesnotmattersignificantly tothemodulator designer whether theCFAisofthebackward-wave ortheforward-wave typeaslongas cathode pulsingisusedwitheitheraline-type modulator oraconstant-current hard-tube modulator.
Electron emission inhigh-power crossed-field amplifiers cantakeplacebycold-cathode emission withoutathermally heatedcathode.
Someoftheelectrons emittedfromthecathode arenotcollected bytheanodebutreturntothecathode bytheactionoftheRFfieldandthe crossedelectricandmagnetic fields.Whentheseelectrons strikethecathode theyproduce secondary electrons thatsustaintheelectronemission process.Cold-cathode emission requires thepresence ofboththeRFdrivesignalappliedtothetubeaswellasthed-cvoltagehetween cathodeandanode.Thebuildupofthecurrentbymeansofthissecondary emission processis veryrapid(withinnanoseconds).
Thereislittlepulse-to-pulse timejitterinthestartingprocess.
Allhough thenamecold-cathode emission isusedtodescribe theactionhywhichelectrons arc produced intheCFA,thecathode mightnotactually be"cold."Thebombardment ofthe cathode surfacebyreturning electrons canraisethecathode temperature highenoughto requireliquidcoolingtopreventitsdestruction.
TheCFAcanbepulse-modulated byturningonandofTthehighvoltagebetween the anode(atgroundpotential) andthecathode (atalargenegative potential).
Thisiscalled cathode pulsing.TheRFdriveisusuallyappliedtotheCFAbeforethehighvoltageisapplied sinceanRFsignalisneededtostarttheemission processinasecondary-emission cathode.If highvoltage isappliedwithout RFdrive,theamplifier appears asanopencircuittothe modulator, causingthemodulator voltagetodouble.Thehighervoltagecouldleadtoarcing.
Thed-chigh-voltage canbeappliedbeforetheRFsignalifthedesignissuchthatvoltage breakdown orarcingdoesnotoccur,.Thisleadstothepossibility ofmodulating thetube withouttheneedforahigh-power modulator asrequired withcathode pulsing.Suchopera­ tionispossiblewiththeforward-wave CFAusingacoldsecondary-emission cathode.
Thed-c operating voltage isapplied continuously between cathode andanode.Thetuberemains inactive untiltheapplication oftheRFinputpulsestartstheemission process, causing amplification totakeplace.AttheendoftheRFdrive-pulse theelectrons remaining inthe tubemustbeclearedfromtheinteraction areatoavoidfeedback whichgenerates oscillations ornoise.Inreentrant CFAs,theelectron streamcanbecollected aftertheremovaloftheRF RADAR TRANSMITTERS 21 1  drive-pulse by mounting at1 electrode in tlie cathode, but insulated from it, in the region of the  drift space between the RF input and output ports.
This is known as a cutofl or control,  e[octt.odc.
A positive potential is applied to this cutoff electrode at the termination of the pulse  to collect, or q11e11cl1, the retnaitiing electron current.
The positive potential need be applied for  only a short time; hence tlie energy reqilirenierits are low.
This method of modulation in which  tlie d-c anode-cathode voltage is applied contirluously and the tube is turned on by the start of  tl~c 1I.F tirive-prllse atid turrled olT at tllc ctlci of the pulse by tllc aid of a cut-OK electrode to  I crilovc t lie elect r 011s.
Iias bee11 called ti-(.
operrrtiort.
It is applicable to forward-wave CFAs, but  it is llot usually used wit11 backward-wave CFAs since the variation of output power wit11  frcqi~cncy at a constant d-c voltage that is characteristic of backward-wave tubes would limit  tljc harldwidtl~ to but a few percent.
 It is also possible to turn ttie CFA on and off with the RF drive-pulse, without the need for  a positive pulse applied to the cutoff electrode at the end of the drive pulse.
The cutoff  clcctrodc call be designed to operate with an appropriate constant positive-bias that allows  stlfficietit reentrance of the electrons when the RF drive is on but be unable to maintain the  electron stream with ttie RF drive off.I7 This is called RF keyirtg, or self-keying.
In principle, it  is the simplest way to modulate the CFA.
 Although RF keying and d-c operation are simpler pulse-modulating methods than cath-  ode pulsing, they have not been as widely used in the past as has the cathode pulser.
Usually  there have been factors other than modulator size that determine the method of modulation  best used in practice."  llnlike tubes that employ thermonic cathode emission for their supply of electrons, a tube  with a cold secondary-electron cathode does not experience a droop, or decay, of the pulse  amplitude wit11 tirne.
In addition to the insensitivity of electron emission with pulse duration,  there is also an insensitivity to duty cycle if the cathode is cooled sufficiently so that the  secondary emission properties of the cathode do not change with temperature." Thus high and  low duty-cycles can be employed interchangeably if the cathode temperature is maintained cool  enougtl, usually below about 400 or 500°C.
 The noise and spurious signals generated by a CFA can be quite low when the tube is  locked in and controlled by an RF drive signal." Measurements of noise made with the  voltages applied but with the tube inactive because of no RF drive-signal, indicate the noise to  approach what would be expected from its thermal level.
Intrapulse noise is generally much  higher.
Spurious signals can also arise during the flat part of the pulse.
The greater the RF  drive the less will be the in-band noise.
Thus the lower the gain the less will be the noise.
 Pedestals can a'ppear at the leading and trailing edges of the pulse, somewhat like the " rabbit  ears" found in traveling-wave tubes.
They can be caused by the feedthrough of the RF  drive-pulse when it is wider than the d-c modulator pulse, or they can be due to spurious  oscillations, called band-edge oscillations, that occur just outside the normal tube-  bandwidth.16.'  The insertion loss of a CFA is low and might be less than 0.5 dB.
The RF drive will thus  appear at the output of the tube with little attenuation.
In a low-gain amplifier the input power  which appears at the output can be a sizable fraction of the total.
The conversion efficiency of  s CFA is defined as  RF power output - RF drive power Efficiency = d-c power input (6.1  This is a conservative definition since the RF drive power is not lost but appears as part of the  output.
 RADAR TRANSMITTERS 211 drive-pulse bymounting anelectrode inthecathode, butinsulated fromit,intheregionofthe drirtspacebetween theRFinputandoutputports.ThisisknownasacutojJ, orcOfltrol, electrode.
Apositive potential isappliedtothiscutoffelectrode atthetermination ofthepulse tocollect,orqllellclr,theremaining electron current.
Thepositive potential needbeappliedfor onlyashorttime;hencetheenergyrequirements arelow.Thismethodofmodulation inwhich thed-canode-cathode voltage isappliedcontinuously andthetubeisturnedonbythestartof theRf7drive-pulse andturnedofTattileendoftilepulsebytheaidofacut-offelectrode to relllovetileclcctrons,hasheencalledd-c0l'erati01l.
Itisapplicable toforward-wave Cf7As,but itisnotusuallyuscdwithbackward-wave CFAssincethevariation ofoutputpowerwitII frcqucncy ataconstant d-cvoltagethatischaracteristic ofbackward-wave tubeswouldlimit thebandwidth tobutafewpercent.
Itisalsopossible toturntheCFAonandoffwiththeRFdrive-pulse, without theneedfor apositive pulseapplied tothecutoffelectrode attheendofthedrivepulse.Thecutoff electrode callbedesigned tooperate withanappropriate constant positive-bias thatallows sufficient reentrance oftheelectrons whentheRFdriveisonbutbeunabletomaintain the electron streamwiththeRFdriveoff.l?ThisiscalledRFkeying,orself-keying.
Inprinciple, it isthesimplest waytomodulate theCFA.
Although RFkeyingandd-coperation aresimplerpulse-modulating methods thancath­ odepulsing, theyhavenotbeenaswidelyusedinthepastashasthecathode pulser.Usually therehavebeenfactorsotherthanmodulator sizethatdetermine themethodofmodulation bestusedinpractice.15 Unliketubesthatemploythermonic cathode emission fortheirsupplyofelectrons, atube withacoldsecondary-electron cathode doesnotexperience adroop,ordecay,ofthepulse amplitude withtime.Inaddition totheinsensitivity ofelectron emission withpulseduration, thereisalsoaninsensitivity todutycycleifthecathode iscooledsufficiently sothatthe secondary emission properties ofthecathodedonotchangewithtemperature.17Thushighand lowduty-cycles canbeemployed interchangeably ifthecathode temperature ismaintained cool enough, usuallybelowabout400or500°C.
Thenoiseandspurious signalsgenerated byaCFAcanbequitelowwhenthetubeis lockedinandcontrolled byanRFdrivesignal.1?Measurements ofnoisemadewiththe voltages appliedbutwiththetubeinactive becauseofnoRFdrive-signal, indicate thenoiseto approach whatwouldbeexpected fromitsthermal level.Intrapulse noiseisgenerally much higher.Spurious signalscanalsoariseduringtheflatpartofthepulse.ThegreatertheRF drivethelesswillbethein-band noise.Thusthelowerthegainthelesswillbethenoise.
Pedestals cana'ppearattheleadingandtrailingedgesofthepulse,somewhat likethe"rabbit ears"foundintraveling-wave tubes.Theycanbecausedbythefeedthrough oftheRF drive-pulse whenitiswiderthanthed-cmodulator pulse,ortheycanbeduetospurious oscillations, calledband-edge oscillations, thatoccurjustoutside thenormal tube­ bandwidth.16•17 Theinsertion lossofaCFAislowandmightbelessthan0.5dB.TheRFdrivewillthus appearattheoutputofthetubewithlittleattenuation.
Inalow-gain amplifier theinputpower whichappearsattheoutputcanbeasizablefraction ofthetotal.Theconversion efficiency of aCFAisdefinedas Effi.
RFpoweroutput-RFdrivepowerlclency= .d-cpowermput(6.1) Thisisaconservative definition sincetheRFdrivepowerisnotlostbutappears aspartofthe output. 212 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  The low insertion loss of a CFA can be of advantage in systems that require marc tt1a11  one radiating power level.
By omitting tile-application of d-c voltage to the final stagc, the  lower level RF drive-power can be fed through the final stagc with little attcni~atiorl.
l'lirs  allows two power levels, depending on whether the final CFA stage has d-c voltage applied or  not.
The low insertion loss also means that an RF signal traveling in the reverse direction from  output to input suffers little attenuation.
A high-power circulator or other isolation device may  be required between the CFA and its driver to prevent the power reflected from the oi~tpiit of  the CFA building up into oscillations or interfering with the driver stage.
 The gain of conventional pulsed crossed-field amplifiers is typically between 10 and  17 dB.
By designing the cold cathode as a slow-wave circuit and introducing the RF drive at  the cathode emitting surface itself, it has been possible to achieve about 30 dB of gain in a  high-power pulse CFA with power, bandwidth, and efficiency commensurate with conven-  tional designs.43 The RF output is taken from the anode slow-wave circuit.
Thk type of devrce  has been called a cathode-driven CFA6 or a high-gait] CFrl.I9  The type of crossed-field amplifier principally considered in this section can be described  as a distributed emission, or emitting sole, amplifier with a reentrant, circular format ~rt~li~ing  a forward-wave interaction without feedback.
(The electron stream is debunched to rcnlove  the modulation before reentering the interaction space.) There are other types of CFAs.
 however.
The Amplitron, one of the first successf~~l CFAs, is similar to the above except ~t  employs a backward-wave interaction with feedback.
The circi~lar reentrant CFA can bc  designed with or without feedback and with either forward- or backward-wave interact~on  The nonreentrant tube can have either a linear or a circular format, with choice of forward- or  backward-wave interaction.
CFAs can also be built with an injected electron beam and a  nonemitting sole, but these have not found much application in radar.
 The crossed-field amplifier is capable of peak powers comparable to those of linear-beam  tubes, and average powers only slightly less than those achieved with linear-beam tubes.16  Efficiencies greater than 50 percent are common.
The bandwidths are similar to those obtained  with the traveling-wave tube.
Forward-wave CFAs generally have bandwidths from 10 to 25  percent; backward-wave CFAs, less than 10 percent.
The gains are low or modest, but the  potential exists for higher gains, especially if trade-offs with other properties are permitted.
 Reasonably long life has been demonstrated with CFAs.
Operation for greater than 10,000  hours is not unusual in some tubes." The good phase stability and short electrical length of  CFAs make it possible to operate tubes in parallel to achieve greater power than available  from a single tube, as well as provide redundancy in the event of a single tube failure.
The CFA  behaves as a saturated amplifier rather than as a linear amplifier.
The characteristic of a  saturated amplifier is that, above a certain level, the RF oiltput is independent of the RF inpiit.
 A saturated amplifier is compatible with frequency and phase-modulated pulse compression  waveforms.
 When tised in an amplifier chain, the CFA is generally found in only [lie one or two  highest-power stages.
it is often preceded by a medium-power traveling-wave tube.
This  combination takes advantage of the best qualities of both tube types.
The TWT provities high  gain, and the CFA allows high power to be obtained with high efficiency, good plrase stability,  and low voltage.20  The characteristics of a CFA are illustrated by the Varian SFD-257, a forward-wave tube  used in the final high-power amplifier stage of the transmitter chain in the AN/MPS-36  C-band range-instrumentation tracking radar.'"he SFD-257 operates over the frcqi~ency  range 5.4 to 5.7 GHz with a peak power of 1 MW, 0.001 duty cycle, and an efficiency of over 50  percent.
The tube is d-c operated in that the RF pulse turns the tube on and a control electrode  turns it off.
In this radar application the pulse widths are 0.25,0.5, or 1.0 jts, but the tube can  , deliver a pulse as wide as 5 ps.
A coded group, or burst, of five 0.25 11s pulses is also utilized.
It  212INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS Thelowinsertion lossofaCFAcanbeofadvantage insystems thatrequiremorethan oneradiating powerlevel.-Byomitting the-application ofd~cvoltagetothefinalstage.the lowerlevelRFdrive-power canbefedthrough thefinalstagt:withlittle.:atlt:nualioll.
This allowstwopowerlevels,depending onwhether thefinalCFAstagehasd-cvoltageappliedor not.Thelowinsertion lossalsomeansthatanRFsignaltraveling inthereversedirection from outputtoinputsufferslittleattenuation.
Ahigh-power circulator orotherisolation devicemay berequired between theCFAanditsdrivertopreventthepowerreflected fromtheoutputof theCFAbuilding upintooscillations orinterfering withthedriverstage.
Thegainofconventional pulsedcrossed-field amplifiers istypically between 10and 17dB.Bydesigning thecoldcathode asaslow-wave circuitandintroducing theRFdriveat thecathode emitting surfaceitself,ithasbeenpossible toachieveabout30dBofgainina high-power pulseCFAwithpower,bandwidth, andefficiency commensurate withconven­ tionaldesigns.43TheRFoutputistakenfromtheanodeslow-wave circuit.Thk:;typeofdevice hasbeencalledacathode-driven CFA6orahigh-gain CFA.19 Thetypeofcrossed-field amplifier principally considered inthissectioncanbedescribed asadistributed emission, oremitting sole,amplifier withareentrant, circular formatutilizing aforward-wave interaction without feedback.
(Theelectron streamisdebunched toremove themodulation beforereentering theinteraction space.)ThereareothertypesofCFAs, however.
TheAmplitron, oneofthefirstsuccessful CFAs,issimilartotheaboveexceptit employs abackward-wave interaction withfeedback.
Thecircular reentrant CFAcanbe designed withorwithout feedback andwitheitherforward- orbackward-wave intaaction.
Thenonreentrant tubecanhaveeitheralinearoracircular format,withchoiceofforward- or backward-wave interaction.
CFAscanalsobebuiltwithaninjected electron beamanda nonemitting sole,butthesehavenotfoundmuchapplication inradar.
Thecrossed-field amplifier iscapableofpeakpowerscomparable tothoseoflinear-beam tubes,andaverage powersonlyslightlylessthanthoseachieved withlinear-beam tubes.
II> Efficiencies greaterthan50percentarecommon.
Thebandwidths aresimilartothoseobtained withthetraveling-wave tube.Forward-wave CFAsgenerally havebandwidths from10to25 percent; backward-wave CFAs,lessthan10percent.
Thegainsarelowormodest, butthe potential existsforhighergains,especially iftrade-offs withotherproperties arepermitted.
Reasonably longlifehasbeendemonstrated withCFAs.Operation forgreaterthan10,000 hoursisnotunusual insometubes.l?Thegoodphasestability andshortelectrical lengthof CFAsmakeitpossible tooperate tubesinparalleltoachievegreaterpowerthanavailable fromasingletube,aswellasprovideredundancy intheeventofasingletubefailure.TheCFA behaves asasaturated amplifier ratherthanasalinearamplifier.
Thecharacteristic ofa saturated amplifier isthat,aboveacertainlevel,the RFoptputisindependent oftheRFinput.
Asaturated amplifier iscompatible withfrequency andphase-modulated pulsecompression waveforms.
Whenusedinanamplifier chain,theCFAisgenerally foundillonlytheoneortwo highest-power stages.Itisoftenpreceded byamedium-power traveling-wave tube.This combination takesadvantage ofthebestqualities ofbothtubetypes.TheTWTprovides high gain,andtheCFAallowshighpowertobeobtained withhighefficiency, goodphasestability, andlowvoltage.20 Thecharacteristics ofaCFAareillustrated bytheVarianSFD-257, aforward-wave tube usedinthefinalhigh-power amplifier stageofthetransmitter chainintheAN/MPS-36 C-band range-instrumentation tracking radar.lsTheSFD-257 operates overthefrequency range5.4to5.7GHzwithapeakpowerof1MW,0.001dutycycle,andanefficiency ofover50 percent.Thetubeisd-coperated inthattheRFpulseturnsthetubeonandacontrolelectrode turnsitofT.Inthisradarapplication thepulsewidthsare0.25,0.5,or1.0JiS,butthetubecan deliverapulseaswideas5J-lS.Acodedgroup,orburst,offive0.25JiSpulsesisalsoutilized.It KADAK TRANSMITI.EHS 213  require5 50 kW ofdrive power arid operates with 30 kV anode voltage and 70 A of peak anode  currerit Liquid cooling is employed for both ttie anode and cathode.
Approximately one  gallon of water per minute with a pressure drop of 9 psi is required.
The tube is housed in a  magnetically shielded package that stands approximately 2 ft high with a diameter of 1 ft and  weiglis 210 Ih.
A Vac-Ion vacuum purnp is included within tlie magnetically shielded package  to inonitor the vacuum and to provide continuous pumping action during operation.
In the  AN/MPS-36 transmitter chain tlie SFD-257 is preceded by an SFD-244 cathode-pulsed CFA  witli I1 dl3 gain, wliicli is driver1 by a 904T1 catliode-pulsed TWT with 49 dB gain.
TIie drive  power to tlie TWT is 50 rnW.
 ~l'lie early radars dcveloi,cd duririg tlie 1930s used conventional grid-controlled vacuum tubes  si~icc rl~crc cxistctl rio otlic~.
sourcc of largc Kf; powcr.
-1'liis li~iiitcd tlic dcvcloprilcrlt of tlic  early radars to tlie VffF arid the lower UHF bands.
These tubes were triodes or tetrodes  dcsigticd to 11iiriinii7e tlie transit-time effects and other problems of operating at VHF arid  UHF." Tlie poteritial applied to the control grid of the tube acts as a gate, or valve, to control  the number of electrons traveling from the cathode to the anode, or plate.
The variation of  potential applied to the grid is imparted to the current traveling to the anode.
The process by  which tlie electron stream is modulated in a grid-controlled tube to produce amplification is  called cfc~rlsity ~~tocfrtlatiorr.
 When the discovery of the cavity magnetron led to the successful development of micro-  wave radar early in World War 11, interest in lower frequency radars waned.
However, improve-  ments in high-power, grid-controlled tubes continued to be made due to the needs of  LJHF-TV, tropospheric-scatter communications, arid particle accelerators as well as radar.
At  VHF arid UHF, grid-controlled power tubes have been widely used in high-power radar  systems.
They are capable of operation at frequencies as high as 1000 to 2000 MHz, but they  do not seem to be competitive to the linear-beam and crossed-field microwave tubes at radar  frequencies much above 450 MHz.
At low-power levels, gridded tubes must compete with the  solid-state transistor.
 l'he grid-corttrolled tube is characterized as being capable of high power, broadband, low  or 113oderate gain, good efficiency, atid inherent long life.
Unlike other microwave tubes, the  grid-controlled tube can operate, if desired, with a linear rather than a saturated gain charac-  teristic.
In atidition to being used in high-power amplifier chains, the grid-controlled tube has  also seen service in large phased-array radars that operate in the lower radar-frequency bands.
 An exarnple of a grid-controlled tube that could be suitable for high-power radar applica-  tion at UHF is tlie Coaxitr~n.~~ It has wider bandwidth and better performance than conven-  tiorla1 UHF grid-control tubes because it integrates the complete RF input and output circuits  arid the electrical interactiorl system within the vacuum envelope.
The RCA A15193, for  exarnple.
operates frorn 406 to 450 MHz witti 1.5 MW peak power, a duty cycle of 0.0039, 47  percerit plate efficiency, arid 13 dB gain.
It requires a plate voltage of 17.5 kV, plate current of  183 A.
1.57 V filament voltage and 890 A filament current.
The tube is 76 cm long, 42 cm in  diameter and weiglis 63.5 kg.
 Low-power grid-control tubes have been used in phased array radars at UHF and have  proven to be an economical arid reliable source of power.
In the AN/FPS-85 satellite-  surveillance radar built by Beridix Corporation for the U.S.
Air Force, the transmit array con-  tains 5 184 identical modules using the Eimac 4CPX250K ceramic tetr~de.~~ Each module has  a peak power of 10 k W and is 7 by 9 by 3 1 inches with a weight ofnearly 50 Ib.
The array operates  with a 10 Mllz haridwidth centered at 442 MHz.
 RADAR TRANSMln'ERS 213 requires 50kWofdrivepoweramioperates with30kVanodevoltageand70Aofpeakanode currcnt.
Liquidcooling iscmployed forboththeanodeandcathode, Approximately one gallonofwaterperminutewithapressure dropof9psiisrequired.
Thetubeishousedina magnctically shielded package thatstandsapproximately 2fthighwithadiameter of1ftand weighs210lb.i\Vac-Ion vacuum pumpisincluded withinthemagnetically shielded package tomonitor thevacuum andtoprovide continuous pumping actionduringoperation.
Inthe i\N/MPS-36transmitter chaintheSFD-257 ispreceded byanSFD-244 cathode-pulsed CFA withIIdBgain.whichisdrivenbya9041'1cathode-pulsed TWTwith49dBgain.Thedrive powertotheT.WTis50mW, 6.7C;IUD-CONTIH)LLED TUnES Theearlyradarsdeveloped duringthe1930susedconventional grid-controlled vacuum tubes sillcethereexisted 110othersourceoflargeRFpowcr.Thislimitcdthedcvelopment ofIhe earlyradarstotheVHFandthelowerUHFbands.Thesetubesweretriodesortetrodes designcd 10minimize thetransit-time effectsandotherproblems ofoperating atVHFand UHF.11Thepotential appliedtothecontrolgridofthetubeactsasagate,orvalve,tocontrol thenumber ofelectrons traveling fromthecathode totheanode,orplate.Thevariation of potential appliedtothegridisimparted tothecurrenttraveling totheanode.Theprocess by whichtheelectron streamismodulated inagrid-controlled tubetoproduce amplification is calleddellsitymodulatioll.
Whenthediscovery ofthecavitymagnetron ledtothesuccessful development ofmicro­ waveradarearlyinWorldWarII,interestinlowerfrequency radarswaned.However, improve­ mentsinhigh-power, grid-controlled tubescontinued tobemadeduetotheneedsof UHF-TV, tropospheric-scatter communications, andparticleaccelerators aswellasradar.At VHFandUHF,grid-controlled powertubeshavebeenwidelyusedinhigh-power radar systems.
Theyarecapable ofoperation atfrequencies ashighas1000to2000MHz,butthey donotseemtobecompetitive tothelinear-beam andcrossed-field microwave tubesatradar frequencies muchabove450MHz.Atlow-power levels,gridded tubesmustcompete withthe solid-state transistor.
Thegrid-controlled tubeischaracterized asbeingcapableofhighpower,broadband, low ormoderate gain,goodefficiency, andinherent longlife.Unlikeothermicrowave tubes,the grid-controlled tubecanoperate, ifdesired, withalinearratherthanasaturated gaincharac­ teristic, Inatldition tobeingusedinhigh-power amplifier chains,thegrid-controlled tubehas alsoseenserviceinlargephased-array radarsthatoperate inthelowerradar-frequency bands.
Anexamplc ofagrid-controlled tubethatcouldbesuitable forhigh-power radarapplica­ tionatUHFistheCoaxitron.22Ithaswiderbandwidth andbetterperformance thanconven­ tionalUHFgrid-control tubesbecause itintegrates thecomplete RFinputandoutputcircuits andtheelectrical interaction systemwithinthevacuum envelope.
TheRCAA15193, for example, operates from406to450MHzwith1.5MWpeakpower,adutycycleof0.0039,47 percent plateefficiency, and13dBgain.Itrequires aplatevoltageof17.5kV,platecurrentof 183A,1.57Vfilament voltageand890Afilament current.
Thetubeis76cmlong,42cmin diameter andweighs63.5kg.
Low-power grid-control tubeshavebeen used inphasedarrayradarsatUHFandhave provcn tobeaneconomical andreliable sourceofpower.IntheAN/FPS-85 satellite­ surveillance radarbuiltbyBendixCorporation fortheU.S.AirForce,thetransmit arraycon­ tains5184identical modules usingtheEimac4CPX250K ceramic tetrode.23Eachmodulehas apeakpoweror10kWandis7by9by31incheswithaweightornearly 50lb.Thearrayoperates witha10MHzhandwidth centered at442MHz. 21 4 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  6.8 MODULATORS  The function of the modulator is to turn the transmitting tube on and off to generate the  desired waveform.
When the transmitted waveform is a pulse, the modulator is sometimes  called a pulser.
Each RF power tube has its own peculiar characteristics which determine the  particular type of modulator to be used.
The magnetron modulator, for instance, must be  designed to handle the full pulse power.
On the other hand, the full power ofthe klystron and  the traveling-wave tube can be switched by a modulator handling only a small fraction of the  total beam power, if the tubes are designed with a modulating anode or a shadow grid.
The  crossed-field amplifier (CFA) is often cathode-pulsed, requiring a full-power modulator.
Some  CFAs are d-c operated, which means they can be turned on by the start of the RF pulse and  turned off by a short, low-energy pulse applied to a cutoff electrode.
Some CFAs can be turned  on and off by the start and stop of the RF pulse, thus requiring no modi~lator at,itll.
Triode and  tetrode grid-controlled tubes may be modulated by applying a low-power pulse to the grid.
 Plate modulation is also used when the radar application cannot tolerate the interpulse noise  that results from those few electrons that escape the cutoff action of the grid.
 The basic elements of one type of radar modulator are shown in Fig.
6.13.
Energy from an  external source is accumulated in the energy-storage element at a slow rate during the inter-  pulse period.
The charging impedence limits the rate at which energy can be delivered to the  storage element.
At the proper time, the switch is closed and the stored energy is quickly  discharged through the load, or RF tube, to form the pulse.
During the discharge part of the  cycle, the charging impedance prevents energy from the storage element from being dissipated  in the source.
 Line-type modulator.
A delay line, or pulse-forming network (PFN), is sometimes used as the  storage element since it can produce a rectangular pulse and can be operated by a gas-tube  switch.
This combination ofdelay-line storage element and gas-tube switch is called a line-type  modulator.
It has seen wide application in radar because of its simplicity, compact size, and its  ability to tolerate abnormal load conditions such as caused by magnetron A  diagram of a line-type pulse modulator is shown in Fig.
6.14.
The charging impedance is  shown as an inductance.
The pulse-forming network is usually a lumped-constant delay line.
It  might consist of an air-core inductance with taps along its length to which are attached  n ,f capacitance to ground.
A transformer is used to match the impedance of the delay line to that  of the load.
A perfect match is not always possible because of the nonlinear impedance  characteristic of microwave tubes.
 The switch shown in Fig.
6.14 is a hydrogen thyratron, but it can also be a mercury  ignitron, spark gap, silicon-controlled rectifier (SCR), or a saturable reactor.
A gas tube such  Charging  impedance storoge element  Energy  some - -  Figure 6.13 Basic elements of one type  Charging path' \ Discharge path of radar pulse modulator.
 214INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS 6.8MODULATORS Thefunction ofthemodulator istoturnthetransmitting tubeonandofftogenerate the desiredwaveform.
Whenthetransmitted waveform isapulse,themodulator issometimes calledapulser.EachRFpowertubehasitsownpeculiar characteristics whichdetermine the particular typeofmodulator tobeused.Themagnetron modulator, forinstance, mustbe designed tohandlethefullpulsepower.Ontheotherhand,thefullpoweroftheklystron and thetraveling-wave tubecanbeswitched byamodulator handling onlyasmallfractionofthe totalbeampower,ifthetubesaredesigned withamodulating anodeorashadowgrid.The crossed-field amplifier (CFA)isoftencathode-pulsed, requiring afull-power modulator.
Some CFAsared-coperated, whichmeanstheycanbeturnedonbythestartoftheRFpulseand turnedoffbyashort,low-energy pulseappliedtoacutoffelectrode.
SomeCFAscanbeturned onandoffbythestartandstopoftheRFpulse,thusrequiring nomodulator at.all.Triodeand tetrodegrid-controlled tubesmaybemodulated byapplying alow-power pulsetothegrid.
Platemodulation isalsousedwhentheradarapplication cannottoleratetheinterpulse noise thatresultsfromthosefewelectrons thatescapethecutoff action ofthegrid.
Thebasicelements ofonetypeofradarmodulator areshowninFig.6.13.Energyfroman external sourceisaccumulated intheenergy-storage elementataslowrateduringtheinter­ pulseperiod.Thecharging impedence limitstherateatwhichenergycanbedelivered tothe storageelement.
Atthepropertime,theswitchisclosedandthestoredenergyisquickly discharged through theload,orRFtube,toformthepulse.Duringthedischarge partofthe cycle,thecharging impedance prevents energyfromthestorageelementfrombeingdissipated inthesource.
Line-type modulator.
Adelayline,orpulse-forming network (PFN),issometimes usedasthe storageelement sinceitcanproduce arectangular pulseandcanbeoperated byagas-tube switch.Thiscombination ofdelay-line storageelementandgas-tube switchiscalledaline-type modulator.
Ithasseenwideapplication inradarbecause('fitssimplicity, compact size,andits abilitytotolerateabnormal loadconditions suchascausedbymagnetron sparking.
U4.25A diagram ofaline-type pulsemodulator isshowninFig.6.14.Thecharging impedance is shownasaninductance.
Thepulse-forming network isusuallyalumped-constant delayline.It mightconsistofanair-core inductance withtapsalongitslengthtowhichareattached capacitance toground.Atransformer isusedtomatchtheimpedance ofthedelaylinetothat oftheload.Aperfectmatchisnotalwayspossible because ofthenonlinear impedance characteristic ofmicrowave tubes.
TheswitchshowninFig.6.14isahydrogen thyratron, butitcanalsobeamercury ignitron, sparkgap,silicon-controlled rectifier(SCR),orasaturable reactor.Agastubesuch Fieure6.13Basicelements ofonetype ofradarpulsemodulator.
Discharge path Charging pathChargingEnergy -impedancestorage t-- element f------- ------1 Energy- (-----iI-load soun:e-I Switch,trtr-- I L~__JI'--T-----__..J j \. Energy  sourse Chorglng Chorq~nq  rmpedance dode  1 , Pulse  transformer  Damping  network  Figure 6.14 Diagram of a line-type modrrlator.
 as a thyratron or ignitron is capable of handling high power and presents a low impedance  wllerl conducting.
However, a gas tube cannot be turned off once it has been turned on unless  the plate current is reduced to a small value.
The switch initiates the start of the modulator  pulse by discharging the pulse-forming network, and the shape and duration of the pulse are  determined by the passive circuit elements of the pulse-forming network.
Since the trailing  edge of the pulse depends on how the pulse-forming network discharges into the nonlinear  load, the trailing cdge is usually not sharp ahd it may be difficult to achieve the desired pulse  shape.
 The charging inductance LC,, and the capacitance C of the pulse-forming network form a  resonant circuit, whose frequency of oscillation approaches fo = (2n)- '(LC,, C)- 'I2.
(The  inductance of the pulse-forming network and the load are assumed small.) With a d-c energy  source the pulse repetition frequency f, will be twice the resonant frequency if the thyratron is  switched at the peak of maximum voltage.
This method of operation, ignoring the effect of the  charging diode, is called d-c resonant charging.
A disadvantage of d-c resonant charging is that  the pulse repetition frequency is fixed once the values of the charging inductance and the  pulse-forming-network delay-line capacitance are fixed.
However, the charging, or hold-off,  diode inserted in series with the charging inductance permits the modulator to be operated at  any pulse repetition frequency less than that determined by the resonant frequencyfo.
The  function of the diode is to hold the maximum voltage and keep the delay line from discharging  until the thyratron is triggered.26 Although the series diode is a convenient method for varying  the prf, it is ,.
more difficult to change the pulse width since high-voltage switches in the  pulse-forming network are required.
 The bypass diode and the inductance LB connected in parallel with the thyratron serve to  dissipate any charge remaining in the capacitance due to tube mismatch.
If this charge were  allowed to remain, the peak voltage on the network would increase with each cycle and build  up to a high value with the possibility of exceeding the permissible operating voltage of the  thyratron.
The mismatch of the pulse-forming network to the nonlinear impedance of the tube  might also cause a spike to appear at the leading edge of the pulse.
The despiking circuit helps  minimize this effect.
The damping network reduces the trailing edge of the pulse and prevents  post-pulse oscillations which could introduce noise or false targets.
 Hsrd-tube rn~dulator.~ The hard-tube modulator is essentially a high-power video pulse  amplifier.
It derives its name from the fact that the switching is accomplished with " hard-  vacuum" tubes rather than gas tubes.
Semiconductor devices such as the SCR (silicon-  controlled rectifiers) can also be used in this application.' Therefore, the name active-switch  modulator is sometimes used to reflect the fact that the function of a hard-tube modulator can  RADAR TRANSMITTERS 215 Pulse transformer U?""" Damping networkDespiking cicui!L8 Hydragl!n lhyralronCharging Charging Impedance dtOde ..pulse-formingnetwork JrHlll~._-"--.~"ITf1 LCH Bypass diodeEnergy Trigger Insourse --~ Figure6.14Diagram ofaline-type modulator.
asathyratron orignitron iscapableofhandling highpowerandpresents alowimpedance whcnconducting.
However, agastubecannotbeturnedofTonceithasbeenturnedonunless theplatecurrentisreducedtoasmallvalue.Theswitchinitiates thestartofthemodulator pulsebydischarging thepulse-forming network, andtheshapeandduration ofthepulseare determined bythepassivecircuitelements ofthepulse-forming network.
Sincethetrailing edgeofthepulsedepends onhowthepulse-forming network discharges intothenonlinear load,thctrailingedgeisusuallynotsharpahditmaybedifficulttoachievethedesiredpulse shape.
Thecharging inductance Lchandthecapacitance Cofthepulse-forming network forma resonant circuit,whosefrequency ofoscillation approaches fo=(271tl(Lchct1/2.(The inductance ofthepulse-forming network andtheloadareassumed small.)Withad-cenergy sourcethepulserepetition frequency fpwillbetwicetheresonant frequency ifthethyratron is switched atthepeakofmaximum voltage.Thismethodofoperation, ignoring theefTectofthe charging diode,iscalledd-cresonantcharging.
Adisadvantage ofd-cresonant charging isthat thepulserepetition frequency isfixedoncethevaluesofthecharging inductance andthe pulse-forming-network delay-line capacitance arefixed.Rowever, thecharging, orhold-ofT, diodeinsertedinserieswiththecharging inductance permitsthemodulator tobeoperated at anypulserepetition frequency lessthanthatdetermined bytheresonant frequency fo.The function ofthediodeistoholdthemaximum voltageandkeepthedelaylinefromdischarging untilthethyratron istriggered.26Although theseriesdiodeisaconvenient methodforvarying theprf,itismoredifficult tochangethepulsewidthsincehigh-voltage switches inthe ..
pulse-forming network arerequired.
Thebypassdiodeandtheinductance L8connected inparallelwiththethyratron serveto dissipate anychargeremaining inthecapacitance duetotubemismatch.Ifthischargewere allowedtoremain,thepeakvoltageonthenetwork wouldincrease witheachcycleandbuild uptoahighvaluewiththepossibility ofexceeding thepermissible operating voltageofthe thyratron.
Themismatch ofthepulse-forming network tothenonlinear impedance ofthetube mightalsocauseaspiketoappearattheleadingedgeofthepulse.Thedespiking circuithelps minimize thisefTect.Thedamping network reducesthetrailingedgeofthepulseandprevents post-pulse oscillations whichcouldintrQduce noiseorfalsetargets.
Hard-tube modulator.lThehard-tube modulator isessentially ahigh-power videopulse amplifier.
Itderivesitsnamefromthefactthattheswitching isaccomplished with"hard­ vacuum" tubesratherthangastubes.Semiconductor devicessuchastheSCR(silicon­ controlled rectifiers) canalsobeusedinthisapplication.1Therefore, thenameactive-switch modulator issometimes usedtorenectthefactthatthefunction ofahard-tube modulator can 216 INTKODUCTlON TO KADAR SYSTEMS  be obtained without vacuum tubes.
Active-switch pulse modulators can be ~-utio pi~lst~rs that  control the fiill power of the RF tube, mod-anode p~rlsers that are req~iired to switch at t hc ft~ll  bean] voltage of the RF ti~bc but with little current, or grlrl /~~il~c,r~ tllirt ol>ciatc at a Lr ~rilallc~  voltage than that of the RF beam.
 The chief functional difference between a hard-tube modi~lator and a I~ne-typc modulator  is that the switching device in the hard-tube modulator controls both the beginning and the  end of the pulse.
In the line-type modulator, the switch controls only the beg~nning of the  pulse.
The energy-storage element is a capacitor.
To prevent droop in the piilse sltape due to  the exponential nature of a capacitor discharge, only a small fract~on of the stored energy 1s  extracted for the pulse delivered to the tube.
In high-power transmitters w~th long pulses the  capacitor must be very large.
It is usually a collection of capacitors known as a ctrl)czclror bntlh  The hard-tube modulator permits more flexibility and precision than the line-type modu-  lator.
It is readily capable of operating at various pulse widths and various pulse rcpetltion  frequencies, and it can generate closely spaced pulses.
The hard-tube modulator, however, IS  generally of greater complexity and weight than a line-type modulator.
 Tube pr~tection.'.~~ Power tubes can develop internal flash arcs with little warning even  though they are of good design.
When a flash arc occurs in an unprotected tube, the capacitor-  bank discharges large currents through the arc and the tube can be damaged.
One met hod for  ' protecting the tube is to direct the arc-discharge currents with a device called an elrcrro~~~c  crowbar.
It places a virtual short circuit across the capacitor bank to transfer the stored energy  by means of a switch which is not damaged by the momentary short-circuit conditions.
The  name is derived from the analogous action of placing a heavy conductor, like a crowbar,  directly across the capacitor bank.
Hydrogen thyratrons, ignitrons, and spark-gaps have been  used as switches.
The sudden surge of current due to a fault in a protected power tube is sensed  and the crowbar switching is actuated within a few microseconds.
The current surge also  causes the circuit breaker to open and deenergize the primary source of power.
Crowbars are  usually required for high-power, hard-tube modulators because of the large amounts of stored  energy.
They are also used with d-c operated crossed-field amplifiers and modranode pulsed  linear-beam tubes which are connected,directly across a capacitor bank.
The line-type modu-  lator does not usually require a crowbar since it stores less energy than the hard-tube modula-  tor and it is designed to discharge safely all the stored energy each time it is triggered.
 6.9 SOLID-STATE TRANSMITTERS '  There have been two general classes of solid-state devices considered as potential sourczs of  microwave power for radar applications.
One is the transistor amplifier and the ottler is the  single-port microwave diode that can operate as either an oscillator or as a negative-resistance  amplifier.
The silicon bipolar transistor has, in the past, been of interest at the lower rnicro-  wave frequencies (L band or below), and the diodes have been of interest at the higher micro-  wave frequencies.
Gallium arsenide field-effect transistors (GaAs FET) have alsq been  considered at the higher microwave frequencies.
Both the transistor and the diode microwave  generators are characterized by low power, as compared with the power capabilities of the  microwave tubes discussed previously in this chapter.
The low power, as well as otllcr cliarac-  teristics, make the application of solid-state devices to radar systems quite different from  high-power microwave tubes.
The almost total replacement of receiver-type vacuum tubes by  solid-state devices in electronic systems has offered encouragement for replacing the power  vacuum tube with an all solid-state iransmitter to obtain the advantages offered by that  _'a ,,I I .
 216INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS beobtained withoutvacuumtubes.Active-switch pulsemodulators canbecathodeplIlsersthat controlthefullpoweroftheRFtube,mod-anode plllsersthatarerequired toswitchatthefull heamvoltageoftheRFtuhebutwithlittlecurrent,orgridfllI/sasthatoperateatafarsmalkr voltagethanthatoftheRFbeam.
Thechieffunctional difference between ahard-tube modulator andaline-type modulator isthattheswitching deviceinthehard-tube modulator controls boththebeginning andthe endofthepulse.Intheline-type modulator, theswitchcontrols onlythebeginning ofthe pulse.Theenergy-storage element isacapacitor.
Topreventdroopinthepulseshapedueto theexponential natureofacapacitor discharge, onlyasmallfractionofthestoredenergyis extracted forthepulsedelivered tothetube.Inhigh-power transmitters withlongpulsesthe capacitor mustbeverylarge.Itisusuallyacollection ofcapacitors knownasacapacitor bank.
Thehard-tube modulator permitsmoreflexibility andprecision thantheline-type modu­ lator.Itisreadilycapable ofoperating atvariouspulsewidthsandvarious p~lserepetition frequencies, anditcangenerate closelyspacedpulses.Thehard-tube modulator, however, is generally ofgreatercomplexity andweightthan'aline-type modulator.
Tubeprotection.1.27Powertubescandevelop internal flasharcswithlittlewarning even thoughtheyareofgooddesign.Whenaflasharcoccursinanunprotected tube,thecapacitor­ bankdischarges largecurrents through thearcandthetubecanbedamaged.
Onemethodfor .protecting thetubeistodirectthearc-discharge currents withadevicecalledanelectronic crowhar.Itplacesavirtualshortcircuitacrossthecapacitor banktotransferthestoredenergy bymeansofaswitchwhichisnotdamaged bythemomentary short-circuit conditions.
The name.isderived fromtheanalogous actionofplacingaheavyconductor, likeacrowbar, directlyacrossthecapacitor bank.Hydrogen thyratrons, ignitrons, andspark-gaps havebeen usedasswitches.
Thesuddensurgeofcurrentduetoafaultinaprotected powertubeissensed andthecrowbar switching isactuated withinafewmicroseconds.
Thecurrentsurgealso causesthecircuitbreakertoopenanddeenergize theprimary sourceofpower.Crowbars are usuallyrequired forhigh-power, hard-tube modulators becauseofthelargeamounts ofstored energy.Theyarealsousedwithd-coperated crossed-field amplifiers andmod~anode pulsed linear-beam tubeswhichareconnected, directlyacrossacapacitor bank.Theline-type modu­ latordoesnotusuallyrequireacrowbar sinceitstoreslessenergythanthehard-tube modula­ toranditisdesigned todischarge safelyallthestoredenergyeachtimeitistriggered.
6.9SOLID-STATE TRANSMITTERS Therehavebeentwogeneralclassesofsolid-state devicesconsidered as.potential sourcesof microwave powerforradarapplications.
Oneisthetransistor amplifier andtheotheristhe single-port microwave diodethatcano'perateaseitheranoscillator orasanegative-resistance amplifier.
Thesiliconbipolartransistor has,inthepast,beenofinterestatthelowermicro­ wavefrequencies (LbandorbClow)~andthediodeshavebeenofinterestatthehighermicro­ wavefrequencies.
Gallium arsenide field-effect transistors (GaAsFET)haveals,?been considered atthehighermicrowave frequencies.
Boththetransistor andthediodemicrowave generators arecharacterized bylowpower,ascompared withthepowercapahilities ofthe microwave tubesdiscussed previously inthischapter.
Thelowpower,aswellasothercharac­ teristics, maketheapplication ofsolid-staie devicestoradarsystems quitedifferent from high-power microwave tubes.Thealmosttotalreplacement ofreceiver-type vacuum tuhesby solid-state devicesin~lectronic systems hasofferedencouragement forreplacing thepower vacuum tubewith'anallsolid-state transmitter toobtaintheadvantages offeredbythat ~, I RADAR TRANSMITTERS 217  technology.
Although there liave been significant advances in microwave solid-state devices  and altliougli they possess properties that differ from other microwave sources, the degree of  application of these devices to radar syste~ns has been limited.
 h.licrowave transist~r.~~~~.~~ At L band tlie CW power that can be obtained from a single  microwave transistor might be several tens of watts.
Unlike vacuum tubes, the peak power that  c;irl hc ;icliicvcd wit 11 Itarrow pillse widtlis is only about twice the CW power.28 This res~rlts in  tlic tnicrowave trntisistor t~citig operated with relatively long pulse-widths and high duty  cyclcs.
For air-s~~r.vcill;iricc radar applic;itio~l.
pulse widtlis rniglit be many tetis of  r~lic~~oscculicls or niorc.
I>ilty cycles of the ordcr of 0.1 arc not ilnusual, whicli is sig~iificaritly  greater tli;iri tlie duty cycles typical of riiicrowave tubes.
The high duty cycles present special  constrairits or1 ~llc raclar systetli dcsigller so that solid-state transtnitters are not inter-  cliangeable with tube trans~ltitters.
A difierent system design philosophy usually must be  cmployed with solid state.
 To increase the power output, transistors may be operated in parallel.
From 2 to 8 devices  arc ilsually cornhitied into a sitigle power rtrodrtl~.
Too large a number cannot be profitably  par-allcled because of losscs tliat occitr on combining.
The gain of a transistor is only of tlic  order of 10 dB, so tliat several stages of amplification are necessary to achieve a reasonable  total gain.
An L-band module using eight transistors (four paralleled in the final stage, two  paralleled irl tlie penultimate stage, and two series driver stages) might have a peak power  greater than 200 W, 0.1 duty cycle, 200 MHz bandwidth, a gain of 30 dB, and an efficiency  better than 30 per~ent.~' (Wlien examining the claims of power from solid-state devices, it  stiould be kept in mind that the greater the junction temperature the less the life of the device.
 Since long life is a featured characteristic of such power sources, they should be operaied  conscrvat ively.)  The power output of a microwave transistor theoretically decreases inversely as the  square of the frequency, or 6 dB per octave.29 For this reason the silicon bipolar transistor is  ilnattractive for radar application at S band or above, especially when appreciable power is  desired.
Varactor frequency multipliers, however, generally' have attenuation less than their  frequency-mitltiplication ratio so that a transistor at some lower frequency followed by a  varactor multiplier has sometimes been employed to obtain power at the higher microwave  frequencies.
In one experimental design,30 X-band power was obtained by an S-band transistor  followed by a four-times multiplier to obtain 1 watt of peak power at X band with a 0.05 duty  cycle.
 "5  Bulk-effect and avalanche diodes.
The Gunn and LSA bulk-eflect diodes and the Trapatt and  Impatt a~wlnr~che diodes can be operated as oscillators or single-port negative-resistance  ar~i~lifiers.~~.~~ They liave been considered for use at the higher microwave frequencies where  the transistor amplifier has reduced capability, but they can also operate at L band or below.
 Unfortunately, the peak and average powers of such devices are low, as is the efficiency and the  gain.
An S-band Trapatt amplifier, for example, might have a peak power of 150 W, 1 ps pulse  width, 100 Hz pulse repetition frequency, 20 percent efficiency, 9 dB gain, and a 1 dB band-  width of 6.25 ~ercent.~~.~~ LSA diodes may be capable of somewhat greater peak power, but  their average power and efficiency are low.
The performance of these diode microwave sources  worsens with increasing frequency.
 Electron-bombarded semiconductor device.*' The EBS, or electron-bombarded semiconduc-  tor.
is a hybrid device that combines semiconductor and vacuum-tube technology.
It contains  a licated cathode that generates an electrori beam which strikes a semiconductor diode at high  RADAR TRANSMITTERS 217 technology.
Although therehavebeensignificant advances inmicrowave solid-state devices andalthough theypossesspropertles thatdifferfromothermicrowave sources, thedegreeof application ofthesedevicestoradarsystems hasbeenlimited.
Microwave transistor.28.35.46AtLbandtheCWpowerthatcanbeobtained fromasingle microwave transistor mightbeseveraltensofwatts.Unlikevacuum tubes,thepeakpowerthat callheachicved withIlarrowpulsewidthsisonlyahouttwiccthcCWpower.
28Thisrcsultsin thcmicrowave transistor bcingopcrated withrclatively longpulse-widths andhighduty cycles.
Forair-surveillance radarapplication, pulsewidths mightbemanytcnsof microseconds ormure.Dutycyclesoftileorderuf0.1arcnotunusual, whichissignificantly greaterthanthcJutycyclestypicalofmicrowave tubes.Thehighdutycyclespresentspecial constraints onlhcradarsystcmdcsigncr sothatsolid-state transmitters arenotinter­ c1Jangeable withtubetransmitters.
Adifferent systemdesignphilosophy usually mustbe employed withsolidstate.
Toincrease thepoweroutput,transistors maybeoperated inparallel.
From2to8devices arcusuallycombined intoasinglepowermodule.Toolargeanumbercannotbeprofitably paralleled because oflossesthatoccuroncombining.
Thegainofatransistor isonlyofthe orderof10dB,sothatseveralstagesofamplification arenecessary toachieve areasonable totalgain.AnL-bandmodule usingeighttransistors (fourparalleled inthefinalstage,two paralleled inthepenultimate stage,andtwoseriesdriverstages)mighthaveapeakpower greaterthan200W,0.1dutycycle,200MHzbandwidth, againof30dB,andanefficiency betterthan30percent.3!(Whenexamining theclaimsofpowerfromsolid-state devices, it shouldbekeptinmindthatthegreaterthejunction temperature thelessthelifeofthedevice.
Sincelonglifeisafeatured characteristic ofsuchpowersources, theyshouldbeoperated conservat ively.) Thepoweroutputofamicrowave transistor theoretically decreases inversely asthe squareofthefrequency, or6dBperoctave.29Forthisreasonthesiliconbipolartransistor is unattractive forradarapplication atSbandorabove,especially whenappreciable poweris desired.
Varactor frequency multipliers, however, generally" haveattenuation lessthantheir frequency-multiplication ratiosothatatransistor atsomelowerfrequency followed bya varactor multiplier hassometimes beenemployed toobtainpoweratthehighermicrowave frequencies.
Inoneexperimentaldesign,30 X-band powerwasobtained byanS-bandtransistor followed byafour-times multiplier toobtain1wattofpeakpoweratXbandwitha0.05duty cycle.
Bulk-effect andavalanche diodes.TheGunnandLSAbulk-effect diodesandtheTrapatt and ImpattQt'Q1Qllche diodescanbeoperated asoscillators orsingle-port negative-resistance amplifiers.29.45Theyhavebeenconsidered foruseatthehighermicrowave frequencies where thetransistor amplifier hasreduced capability, buttheycanalsooperateatLbandorbelow.
Unfortunately, thepeakandaverage powersofsuchdevicesarelow,asistheefficiency andthe gain.AnS-bandTrapatt amplifier, forexample.
mighthaveapeakpowerof150W,1J..lSpulse width,100Hzpulserepetition frequency, 20percentefficiency, 9dBgain,anda 1dBband­ widthof6.25percent.36.37LSAdiodesmaybecapableofsomewhat greaterpeakpower,but theiraverage powerandefficiency arelow.Theperformance ofthesediodemicrowave sources worsens withincreasing frequency.
Electron-bombarded semiconductor device.47TheEBS,oreiectron-bombarded semiconduc­ tor,isahybriddevicethatcombines semiconductor andvacuum-tube technology.
Itcontains aheatedcathode thatgenerates anelectron beamwhichstrikesasemiconductor diodeathigh energy (typically 10 to 15 keV).
On striking the diode, wliicti is reverse biased well helow tile  avalanche threshold, each impacting electron gives rise to thousands of additional carrier pairs  to provide a current amplification of 2000 or more.
A control grid is inserted between the  cathode and the diode to density-modulate the electron beam.
(The basic geometry is similar  to that of the classic triode vacuum tube, but with a semiconductor diode as the plate.)  The EBS can also be deflection-modulated by varying the position of the beam relative to two  or more separated semiconductor targets whose outputs are combined.
The EBS is claimed to  be broadband and to have high gain (25 to 35 dB), high efficiency (50 percent), and long life.
At  1 GHz, an EBS amplifier might be capable of a peak power of 2 to 3 kW, and an average  power of about 200 W.
The EBS has decreasing capability at the higher frequencies.
A limita-  tion of the EBS, not found with other semiconductor devices, is that it requires a power supply  of 10 to 15 kV as well as a cathode heater supply.
 Methods for employing solid-state transmitters.
There are at least three metllods f$r employing  solid-state devices as radar transmitters: (1) direct replacement of a vacuum tube, (2) multiple  modules in an electronically steered phased-array radar with the power combined in space,  and (3) multiple modules in a mechanically scanned array with the power combined in space.
 A significant restriction in attempting to utilize solid-state devices as a direct replacement  for the conventional microwave-tube transmitter is the relatively low power available from a  single solid-state device or even a single power module.
The solid-state device or module finds  application in those radars where high power is not needed, such as aircraft altimeters.
CW  police speedmeters, and short-range intrusion detectors.
Higher power can be obtained by  combining the outputs of a large number of individual devices.
Unfortunately.
for many radar  applications hundreds or thousands of devices would have to be employed in order to achieve  the requisite power levels.
The res~ltant loss with the combining of a large number of devices  in some microwave circuits can sometimes negate the advantage achieved by combining.
Thus  as a direct replacement for conventional microwave tubes, solid-state devices have been  limited to low or moderate power applications.
 A phased-array transmitting-antenna combines in space the power from each of many  transmitting sources.
Solid-state sources at each radiating element of a large phased-array  antenna can produce the total power required for many radar applications.
The radiated beam  is steered by electronic phase shifters at each element, usually on the input side of the  individual power amplifiers.
The transmitter, receiver, duplexer, and phase shifters for each  element of the array antenna can be incorporated into a single integrated package, or module.
 Although there has been much development work in solid-state phased arrays with each  element fed by its own integrated module, this approach usually results in a costly and  complex system.
This has tended, in the past, to weigh against the widespread usc of such  phased-array radars when the number of elements is large.
 The combining of the power from a large number of individual solid-state devices is  attractive when using an array antenna since the power is "combined in space," rattier tliatl by  a lossy microwave network.
A fixed phased array requires electronic beam steering that  complicates the radar.
If the flexibility of an electronically steered array is not needed.
tllc  advantages of an array antenna for combining the radiated power from many individual  sources can be had by mechanically scanning the entire antenna.
A separate solid-state source  can be used at each element of the antenna, or a number of sources can be combined to feed  each row (or each column) as in the AN/TPS-59, Fig.
6.15.~' The mechanically rotating array  antenna with solid-state transmitters has some special problems of its own that must be  overcome.
One such problem is the need to convey large power to the solid-state devices on  the rotating antenna.
Another is that the weight of the transmitter is now added to that of the  218INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS energy(typically 10to15keY).Onstrikingthediode,whichisreversebiasedwellbelowthe avalanche threshold, eachimpacting electrongivesrisetothousands ofadditional carrierpairs toprovideacurrentamplification of2000ormore.Acontrolgridisinserted between the cathode andthediodetodensity-modulate theelectron beam.(Thebasicgeometry issimilar tothatoftheclassictriodevacuum tube,butwithasemiconductor diodeastheplate.) TheEBScanalsobedeflection-modulated byvaryingthepositionofthebeamrelativetotwo ormoreseparated semiconductor targetswhoseoutputsarecombined.
TheEBSisclaimedto bebroadband andtohavehighgain(25to35dB),highefficiency (50percent), andlonglife.At 1GHz,anEBSamplifier mightbecapableofapeakpowerof2to3kW,andanaverage powerofabout200W.TheEBShasdecreasing capability atthehigherfrequencies.
Alimita­ tionoftheEBS,notfoundwithothersemiconductor devices, isthatitrequires apowersupply of10to15kVaswellasacathode heatersupply.
'.
Methods foremploying solid-state transmitters.
Thereareatleastthreemethods foremploying solid-state devicesasradartransmitters: (1)directreplacement ofavacuum tube,(2)multiple modules inanelectronically steeredphased-array radarwiththepowercombined inspace, and(3)multiple modules inamechanically scanned arraywiththepowercombined inspace.
Asignificant restriction inattempting toutilizesolid-state devicesasadirectreplacement fortheconventional microwave-tube transmitter istherelatively lowpoweravailable froma singlesolid-state deviceorevenasinglepowermodule.Thesolid-state deviceormodulefinds application inthoseradarswherehighpowerisnotneeded,suchasaircraftaltimeters, CW policespeedmeters,andshort-range intrusion detectors.
Higherpowercanbeobtained by combining theoutputsofalargenumberofindividual devices.Unfortunately, formanyradar applications hundreds orthousands ofdeviceswouldhavetobeemployed inordertoachieve therequisite powerlevels.Theresultant losswiththecombining ofalargenumberofdevices insomemicrowave circuitscansometimes negatetheadvantage achieved bycombining.
Thus asadirectreplacement forconvention~l microwave tubes,solid-state deviceshavebeen limitedtolowormoderate powerapplications.
Aphased-array transmitting· antenna combines inspacethepowerfromeachofmany transmitting sources.
Solid-state sourcesateachradiating element ofalargephased-array antenna canproduce thetotalpowerrequired formanyradarapplications.
Theradiated beam issteeredbyelectronic phaseshifters.ateachelement, usuallyontheinputsideofthe individual poweramplifiers.
Thetransmitter, receiver, duplexer, andphaseshiftersforeach elementofthearrayantenna canbeincorporated intoasingleintegrated package, ormodule.
Although therehasbeenmuchdevelopment workinsolid-state phasedarrayswitheach element fedbyitsownintegrated module, thisapproach usuallyresultsinacosl1yand complex system.Thishastended,inthepast,toweighagainstthewidespread liseofsuch phased-array radarswhenthenumberofelements islarge.
Thecombining ofthepowerfromalargenumber ofindividual solid-state devices is attractive whenusinganarrayantennasincethepoweris..combined inspace,"ratherthanby alossymicrowave network.
Afixedphasedarrayrequires electronic beamsteering that complicates theradar.Iftheflexibility ofanelectronically steeredarrayisnotneeded,the advantages ofanarrayantenna forcombining theradiated powerfrommanyindividual sourcescanbehadbymechanically sc~nning theentireantenna.
Aseparate solid-state source canbeusedateachelementoftheantenna, oranumberofsourcescanbecombined tofeed eachrow(oreachcolumn) asintheAN{fPS-59, Fig.6.15.38Themechanically rotatingarray antenna withsolid-state transmitters hassomespecialproblems ofitsownthatmustbe overcome.
Onesuchproblem istheneedtoconveylargepowertothesolid-state deviceson therotating ~ntenna.
Another isthattheweightofthetransmitter isnowaddedtothatofthe Figure 6.15 ANITPS-59 [.-hand radar.
The 30 ft by 15 ft antenna consists of 54 rows of 24 elements each.
 1:;tcIi of rile 54 rows coutnills ils ow11 transceiver with twenty-two 50-W niodules along with phase stiiftzr.
 low-rioisc anlplificr.
output filter.
circulntor.
alid 28-V power supply.
Ttie antenna rotates mechanically iri  ;i~irnutll and scans clec~ronically in elevation.
 :trltcrirln.
Ever1 if the solid-state transtnitter were lighter than a conventional tube transmitter,  tllc weight is found at a bad place, on ttie antenna itself.
This is especially important for  sllipbonrd application wllcre weight lligll on tlle rnast must be minimized.
 System considerations.
Tlle potential advantages claimed for solid-state sources in radar may  he summarized as (1) long, failure-free life, (2) low transmitter voltage, which eliminates the  risk of X-rays and electric sl~ock.
(3) amplitude control of the transmitted waveform by selec-  tively switclling rnodules or itldividi~al devices on or off, (4) wide bandwidth, (5) low projected  volttme-production costs, and (6) air coolitlg.
There are some problems, however, in the use of  solid-state devices for ratlar systems other than cost.
 RADAR TRANSMITTERS 219 ;r;;: .,!;', , .., .l~;••'.';',I,\.\.'\'.
I••( Figure6.15AN/TPS-59 L-nand radar.The30ftby15ftantenna consists of54rowsof24elements each.
Fachofthe54rowscontains itsowntransceiver withtwcnty-two 50-Wmodules alongwithphaseshifter.
low-noise amplifier.
outputfilter.circulator.
andn-vpowersupply.Theantenna rotatesmechanically in ,Ilirnuth andscansclectronically inelevation.
antenna.
Evenifthesolid-state transmitter wcrelighterthanaconventional tubetransmitter, thcweighIisfoundatahadplace,ontheantenna itself.Thisisespecially important for shipboard application whereweighthighonthemastmustbeminimized.
S)'stemconsiderations.
Thcpotcntial advantages claimedforsolid-state sourcesinradarmay besummarized as(1)long,failure-free life,(2)lowtransmitter voltage,whicheliminates the riskofX-raysandelectricshock.(3)amplitude controlofthetransmitted waveform byselec­ tivelyswitching modules orindividual dcvicesonoroff,(4)widebandwidth, (5)lowprojected volume-production costs,and(6)aircooling.Therearesomeproblems, however, intheuseof solid-statc dcvicesforradarsystemsotherthancost. 220 INTRODLJCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  As mentioned, the solid-state transmitter has some significant differences as compared to  the conventional tube transmitter.
The basic power-generating unit comes in a relatively small  size; hence, many units have to be combined in some manner to achieve the power levels  required for radar.
The higher the frequency, the less the power available from an individual  solid-state device and the more difficult will be the combining problem because of the larger  number of devices required.
At the lower microwave frequencies, the transistor is one of the  better available solid-state sources.
Since the transistor cannot operate efficiently with the low  duty-cycles characteristic of conventional radars, radars using transistors must operate with  long pulses or high pulse repetition frequency.
Neither is desirable except in special cases (as in  pulse-doppler radar or CW radar).
Long pulses result in a long minimum radar-range since  the receiver cannot be turned on until the transmitted pulse is turned off.
To see targets at  ranges closer than that determined by the long pulse, a short pulse of lower energy and at LI  different frequency can be used in addition t6 the long pulse.
This adds to t t.re systcm complex-  ity, however.
Long pulses can be a disadvantage in military radars since they reduce the  effectiveness of pulse-to-pulse frequency agility.
A jammer can determine the radar frequency  at the beginning of the long pulse and quickly tune a jammer to the correct freqtlcncy wit llin  the duration of the pulse.
To achieve improved range-resolution with the long pulse, pulse  compression is needed.
This further complicates the radar.
(Pulse compression does not rcl~eve  the minimum-range problem of long pulses.)  Although the solid-state transmitter does not require high voltage, it does require large  current, perhaps several thousands of amperes in some applications.
Wide bandwidth is one of  the more favorable properties of such devices; but the overall transmitter efficiency, especially  at the higher microwave frequencies, is not always as great as might be desired.
Solid-state  devices also are less "forgiving" than microwave tubes of transients due to lightning and  nearby radars.
The advantage of long life claimed for solid-state transmitters seems matched  by the long life obtained with linear beam tube transmitters.
 The transistor amplifier, and the bulk-effect and avalanche diodes have important appli-  cations in radar; but in the form in which they have been known, it is not likely that they will  cause the high-power microwave tubes to disappear in the way their lower frequency counter-  parts have displaced the receiver vacuum tube.
 REFERENCES  I.
Weil, Thomas A.: Transmitters, Chap.
7 of the " Radar Handbook," M.
I.
Skolnik (ed.), McGraw-[{ill  Book Co., New York, 1970.
 2.
Boot, H.
A.
H., and J.
T.
Randall: The Cavity Magnetron, J.
Inst.
Elect.
Eng., vol.
93, pt.
illA,  pp.
928-938, 1946.
 3.
Wathen, R.
L.: Genesis of a Generator: The Early History of the Magnetron, J.
Fru~ililitl Itist.,  vol.
255, pp.
271-288, April, 1953.
 4.
Collins, G.
B.
(ed.): "Microwave Magnetrons," MIT Radiation Laboratory Series, vol.
6, McGraw-  Hill Book Co., New York, 1948.
 5.
Smith, W.
A.: Ring-Tuned Agile Magnetron Improvcs Radar Performance, Microwave Systrnl Nrws,  vol.
3, pp.
97-102, February, 1974.
 6.
Clampitt, L.
L.: Microwave Radar Tubes at Raytheon, Electronic Progress, vol.
17, no.
2, pp.
6-13,  Summer, 1975.
 7.
Staprans, A., E.
W.
McCune, and J.
A.
Ruetz: High-Power Linear-Beam Tubes, Proc.
IEEE, vol.
61,  pp.
299-330, March, 1973.
 8.
Lien, E.
L.: Advances in Klystron Amplifiers, Microwave J., vol.
16, pp.
33-36, 39, December, 1973.
 9.
Dodds, W.
J., T.
Moreno, and W.
J.
McBride, Jr.: Methods of Increasing Bandwidth of High Power  Microwave Amplifiers, IRE WESCON Conv.
Record, vol.
1, pt.
3, pp.
101-1 10, 1957.
 220INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS Asmentioned, thesolid-state transmitter hassomesignificant differences ascompared to theconventional tubetransmitter.
Thebasicpower-generating unitcomesina relatively small size;hence,manyunitshavetobecombined.
insomemanner toachieve thepowerlevels required forradar.Thehigherthefrequency, thelessthepoweravailable fromanindividual solid-state deviceandthemoredifficult willbethecombining problem becauseofthelarger number ofdevicesrequired.
Atthelowermicrowave frequencies, thetransistor isoneofthe betteravailable solid-state sources.
Sincethetransistor cannotoperateefficiently withthelow duty-cycles characteristic of'conventional radars,radarsusingtransistors mustoperate wiIh longpulsesorhighpulserepetition frequency.
Neither isdesirable exceptinspecialcases(asin pulse-rloppler radarorCWradar).Longpulsesresultinalongminimum radar-range since thereceiver cannotbeturnedonuntilthetransmitted pulseisturnedoff.Toseetargetsat rangescloserthanthatdetermined bythelongpulse,ashortpulseoflowerenergyandata different frequency canbeusedinaddition t6thelongpulse.Thisaddstothesysu:mcomplex­ ity,however.
Longpulsescanbeadisadvantage inmilitary radarssincetheyreducethe effectiveness ofpulse-to-pulse frequency agility.Ajammer candetermine theradarfrequency atthebeginning ofthelongpulseandquicklytuneajammer tothecorrectfrequency within theduration ofthepulse.Toachieve improved range-resolution withthelongpulse,pulse compression isneeded.Thisfurthercomplicates theradar.(Pulsecompression doesnotrelieve theminimum-range problem oflongpulses.) Although thesolid-state transmitter doesnotrequirehighvoltage, itdoesrequirelarge current, perhaps severalthousands ofamperes insomeapplications.
Widebandwidth isoneof themorefavorable properties ofsuchdevices; buttheoveralltransmitter efficiency, especially atthehighermicrowave frequencies, isnotalwaysasgreatasmightbedesired.
Solid-slate devicesalsoareless"forgiving" thanmicrowave tubesoftransients duetolightning and nearbyradars.Theadvantage oflonglifeclaimed forsolid-state transmitters seemsmalched bythelonglifeobtained withlinearbeamtubetransmitters.
Thetransistor amplifier, andthebulk-effect andavalanche diodeshaveimportant appli­ cationsinradar;butintheforminwhichtheyhavebeenknown,itisnotlikelythattheywill causethehigh-power microwave tubestodisappear inthewaytheirlowerfrequency counter­ partshavedisplaced thereceiver vacuum tube.
REFERENCES I.Weil,Thomas A.:Transmitters, Chap.7ofthe..RadarHandbook," M.LSkolnik (cd.).McGraw-Hili BookCo.,NewYork,1970.
2.Boot,H.A.H.,andJ.T.Randall: TheCavityMagnetron, J.Inst.Elect.Eng.,vol.93,pt.lilA, pr.928-938, 1946.
3.Wathen, R.L.:Genesis ofaGenerator: TheEarlyHistory oftheMagnetron, J.Franklin Inst., vol.255,pp.271-288, April,1953.
4.Collins, G.B.(ed.):..Microwave Magnetrons," MITRadiation Laboratory Series,vol.6,McGraw­ HillBookCo.,NewYork,1948.
5.Smith,W.A.:Ring-Tuned AgileMagnetron Improves RadarPerformance, Microwave SystemNews, vol.3,pp.97-102, February, 1974.
6.Clampitt, L.L.:Microwave RadarTubesatRaytheon, Electronic Progress, vol.17,no.2,pp.6-13, Summer, 1975.
7.Slaprans, A.,E.W.McCune, andJ.A.Ruetz:High-Power Linear-Beam Tubes,Proc.IEEE,vol.61, pp.299-330, March,1973.
8.Lien,E.L.:Advances inKlystron Amplifiers, Microwave J.,vol.16,pp.33-36,39,December, 1973.
9.Dodds,W.J.,T.Moreno, andW.J.McBride, Jr.:Methods ofIncreasing Bandwidth ofHighPower Microwave Amplifiers, IREWESCON Conv.Record,vol.1,pt.3,pp.101-110, 1957. RADAR TRANSMITTERS 221 10.Beaver.
W..(iCaryotakis.
A.Slaprans.
andR.Symons: WideBandHighPowerKlystrons.
IRE WESCON COllI'.HI'cord.
vol..I.pI.1.pp.101111.1959.
11.Mendel.
J.T.:HelixandCoupled-Cavity Traveling-Wave Tubes.Proc.IEEE.vol.61,pp.280-298.
March.
1971 12.Piltack.U..andR.A.Handy: Progress inHelixTraveling-wave TubesforRadarSystems, MicrowQl'e SystemNews.vol.5.pp.6975.February/March, 1975.
I.lNnlos.F.J.:PresentStaleofArtinHighPowerTraveling-Wave Tubes.pI.l,MicrOlvar'e i..vol.2.
rrJ1JR.Decemher.1959;pI.IIfiticrow(/('l' i..vol.3.pp.4652,January.
1960.
14.Phillips.
R.M.:HighPowerRing-Loop Traveling-Wave TubesforAdvanced Radar,MicrowQl'e ."IrS(1'/11NI'\\'S.vol.5.pp.4741).Fehruary /March.1975.
15.Wei!.'I'.A.:Comparison ofCFA'sforPulsed-Radar Transmitters.
Mierowa!w i..vol.16.pp.5154.
72.June.197J 16.1\nonymous: IntroductiontoPulsedCrossed-Field Amplifiers.
brochure published byVarian, Beverly.
Mass..nodate.
17.Skowron.
J.F.:TheContinuous-Cathode (Emitting.-Sole) Crossed-Field Amplifier, Proc.IEEE.
vol.61.pr330J56,March,197J IX.Smith.W..andA.Wilczek: CFATubeEnables New-Generation Coherent Radar,Microwave i., \01.to.PI'.J942.74.April.197J.
II}IIill.R.'1'.:Shiphoard RadarSystems.
Research andDcvelopment.
EASCON-77 RECORD.
pp.411\ to4II.Sepl.2(JlX.11}77.Arlington.
Va.IEEEPublication 77CB1255-9EASCON.
20.Barker.Ci.(j.:CFAorTWT?WhichValveWillBestMeetYourTransmitter OutputStageRequire­ Illcnts;lEECIIIlt:PI/hI.No.[05."Radar -Present andFuture," London, Oct.23-25, 1973.
pp.IX9194.
21.Spangcnherg.
K.R.:"Vacuum Tubes." McGraw-Hili BookCompany, NewYork,1948.
22.Yingst.
TF..D.R.Carter.
J.1\.Eshleman.
andJ.M.Pawlikowski: High-Power Gridded Tuhcs 1972.l'roc.IEEE.vol.61.pp.J57381,March, 1973.
D.Reed.J.E.:TheAN/FPS-85 RadarSystem,Proc.IEEE,vol.57,pp.324-335, March, 1969.
24.(Jlasoe,G.N..andJ.V.Lebacqz: ..PulseGenerators," MITRadiation Laboratory Series,vol.5, McGraw-Hili BookCompany.
NewYork,194R.
25.Weil.T.1\.:SurveyofRaytheon PulsedRadarTransmillers, Electronic Progress, vol.17,no.2.
pp.1424,Summer.
1975.
26.Reintjes, J.F..andG.T.Coate:"Principles ofRadar." Chap.3,McGraw-Hili BookCompany, New York.1952.
27.Parker.
W.N.andM.V.Hoover: GasTuhesProtectHigh-Power Transmitters, Electronics, vol.29, pp.144147,January.
1956.
2R.Hoft.D.J..andL.R.Lavallee: Solid-State Transmitters, Electronic Progress, vol.17,no.2,pp.25-33, Summer, 1975.
29.Hyltin.T.M.:Solid-state Radar.Chap.30of"RadarHandbook," M.I.Skolnik (ed.),McGraw-Hili BookCompany.
NewYork.1970.
JO.Collins.
J.R..andT.F.Harwell: RASSRArrayComesofAge,Microwaves, vol.II,pp.36-42,August, 1972.
31.Anonymous: Phased-Array PowerAmplifier.
Microwave J.,vol.17,p.28,February, 1974.
32.Harper,' A.Y.:General Considerations intheSelection ofanAllSolidStateorPowerTubeApproach foraPhasedArrayRadarApplication, lEEConfPubl.
no~/05,"Radar-Present andFuture," Oct.
n25.1973.pp.112J17.
.
3.1.(iclnovatch.
V.(i.:AReviewofMicrowave Transistors forRadarApplication.
NEREM Rec.,1974.
rl.4.pp.116125.
34.Ronconi, R.:L-bandSolid-state PowerAmplifier, RevistaTeOlica Selenia, vol.2,no.3,pp.21-32, 1975.
35.Davis,M.E.,J.K.Smith,andC.E.Grove: L-band T/RModule forAirborne Phased Array, flticrowal'l:' i.,vol.20,pp.54-61,February, 1977.
36.Kawamoto.
H..H.J.Prager.
E.L.Allen,Jr..andV.A.Mikenas: Advances inHighPower,S-Band Trapall-Diode Amplifier Design,Microwave i.,vol.17,pp.41-44,February, 1974.
37.Cohen.E.D.:Trapalls andImpalls: Current StatusandFutureImpactonMilitary Systems, IEEE EASCON'75, pp.130-Ato130-G.
38.Lain.C.M.,andE.J.Gersten: AN/TPS-59 System,IEEE1975International RadarConf.,April21-23, 1975.pp.527-532,IEEEPuhlication 75CHO938-1AES.
39.Gerard, W.A.:Frequency-Agile Coaxial Magnetrons, Microwave i.,vol.16,pp.29-33,March, 1973.
40.Day,W.R..Jr..andT.H.Luchsinger: NewDevelopments inElectrostatically Focused Klystrons, MicrowQ('(' i..vol.13,pp.5963,April.1970. 222 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  41.
Metivier, R.
L.: Broadband Klystrons for Multimegawatt Radars, hfrcrowave J, vol.
14, pp.
29-32,  April, 1971.
 42.
Acker, A.: Selecting Tubes for Airborne Radars, Microwuc~e Sysrrrr~ News, vol.
7, pp.
55-60, May,  1977.
 43.
Kaisel, S.
F.: Microwave Tube Technology Review, Mrcrowuve J., vol.
20, pp 23-42, July, 1977.
 44.
Butler, N.: The Microwave Tubes Reliability Problem, Microwave J., vol.
16, pp.
41-42, March, 1973  45.
Cohen, E.
D.: Trapatts and Irnpatts-State of the Art and Applications, hficro~vave J., vol.
20,  pp.
22-28, February, 1977.
 46.
DiLorenzo, J.
V.: GaAs FET Development-Low Noise and High Power, Microwave J., vol.
21,  pp.
39-44, February, 1978.
 47.
Bates, D.
J., R.
I.
Knight, and S.
Spinella: Electron-Bombarded Semiconductor Devices, "Advances in  Electronics and Electron Physics, vol.
44," Academic Press, Inc., New York, 1977.
 48.
Staprans, A.: High-Power Microwave Tubes, IEEE International Electron Devices Meeting Technical  Digest 1976, Washington, D.C., pp.
245-248, IEEE Pub.
no.
76 CH 1151-OED.
 49.
Pickering, A.
H.: Electronic Tuning of Magnetrons, Microwave J., vol.
22, pp.
73-78, July, 1979.
 50.
Staprans, A.: Linear Beam Tubes, chap.
22 of "Radar Technology," E.
Brookner (ed.), A'rtech House,  Inc., Dedharn, Mass., 1977.
 222INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS 41.Metivier, R.L.:Broadband Klystrons forMultimegawatt Radars,Microwave J.,vol.14,pp.29-32, April,1971.
42.Acker,A.:Selecting TubesforAirborne Radars,Microwalle SystemNews,vol.7,pp.55-60,May, 1977.
43.Kaisel,S.F.:Microwave TubeTechnology Review,Microwave J.,vol.20,pp.23-42,July,1977.
44.Butler,N.:TheMicrowave TubesReliability Problem, Microwave J.,vol.16,pp.41-42,March,1973.
45.Cohen, E.D.:Trapatts andImpatts-State oftheArtandApplications, Microwave J.,vol.20, pp.22-28,February, 1977.
46.Dilorenzo, J.V.:GaAsFETDevelopment-low NoiseandHighPower,Microwave J.,vol.21, pp.39-44,February, 1978.
47.Bates,D.J.,R.I.Knight,andS.Spinella: Electron-Bombarded Semiconductor Devices, "Advances in Electronics andElectron Physics, vol.44,"Academic Press,Inc.,NewYork,1977.
48.Staprans, A.:High-Power Microwave Tubes,IEEEInternational Electron DevicesMeeting Technical Digest1976,Washington, D.C.,pp.245-248, IEEEPub.no.76CH1151-0ED.
49.Pickering, A.H.:Electronic TuningofMagnetrons, Microwave J.,vol.22,pp.73-78,July,1979.
50.Staprans, A.:linearBeamTubes,chap.22of"RadarTechnology," E.Brookner (ed.), ~rtechHouse, Inc.,Dedham, Mass.,1977. CHAPTER  SEVEN  RADAR ANTENNAS  7.1 ANTENNA PARAMETERS1,*  The purpose of the radar antenna is to act as a transducer between free-space propagation and  guided-wave (transmission-line) propagation.
The function of the antenna during transmission  is to concentrate the radiated energy into a shaped beam which points in the desired direction  in space.
On reception the antenna collects the energy contained in the echo signal and delivers  it to the receiver.
Thus the radar antenna is called upon to fulfill reciprocal but related roles.
In  the radar equation derived in Chap.
1 [Eq.
(1.7)] these two roles were expressed by the trans-  mitting gain and the effective receiving aperture.
The two parameters are proportional to one  another.
An antenna with a large effective receiving aperture implies a large transmitting gain.
 The latge apertures required for long-range detection result in narrow beamwidths, one of  the prime characteristics of radar.
Narrow beamwidths are important if accurate angular  measurements are to be made or if targets close to one another are to be resolved.
The  advantage of microwave frequencies for radar application is that with apertures of relatively  small physical size, but large in terms of wavelengths, narrow beamwidths can be obtained  conveniently.
 Radar antennas are characterized by directive beams which are scanned, usually rapidly.
 The parabolic reflector, well known in optics, has been extensively employed in radar.
The vast  majority of radar antennas use the parabolic reflector in one form or another.
Microwave  lenses have also found some radar application, as have mechanically rotated array antennas.
 The electronically scanned phased array, described in Chap.
8, is an antenna with unique  properties that has been of particular interest for radar application.
 In this chapter, the radar antenna will be considered either as a transmitting or a receiving  device.
depending on wliicli is more convenient for the particular discussion.
Results obtained  for one may be readily applied to the other because of the reciprocity theorem of antenna  theory.'  CHAPTER SEVEN RADAR ANTENNAS 7.1ANTENNA PARAMETERS1.2 Thepurposeoftheradarantenna istoactasatransducer between free-space propagation and guided-wave (transmission-line) propagation.
Thefunction oftheantennaduringtransmission istoconcentrate theradiated energyintoashapedbeamwhichpointsinthedesireddirection inspace.Onreception theantenna collectstheenergycontained intheechosignalanddelivers ittothereceiver.
Thustheradarantenna iscalledupontofulfillreciprocal butrelatedroles.In theradarequation derivedinChap.1[Eq.(1.7)]thesetworoleswereexpressed bythetrans­ mittinggainandtheeffective receiving aperture.
Thetwoparameters areproportional toone another.
Anantenna withalargeeffective receiving aperture impliesalargetransmitting gain.
Thelacgeapertures required forlong-range detection resultinnarrowbeamwidths, oneof theprimecharacteristics ofradar,Narrow beamwidths areimportant ifaccurate angular measurements aretobemadeoriftargetsclosetooneanother aretoberesolved.
The advantage ofmicrowave frequencies forradarapplication isthatwithapertures ofrelatively smallphysical size.butlargeintermsorwavelengths, narrowbeamwidths canbeobtained conveniently.
Radarantennas arecharacterized bydirective beamswhicharescanned, usuallyrapidly.
Theparabolic reflector, wellknowninoptics,hasbeenextensively employed inradar.Thevast majority ofradarantennas usetheparabolic reflector inoneformoranother.
Microwave lenseshavealsofoundsomeradarapplication, ashavemechanically rotatedarrayantennas.
Theelectronically scanned phasedarray,described inChap.8,isanantenna withunique properties thathasbeenofparticular interestforradarapplication.
Inthischapter, theradarantenna willbeconsidered eitherasatransmitting orareceiving device.depending onwhichismoreconvenient fortheparticular discussion.
Resultsobtained foronemaybereadilyappliedtotheotherbecauseofthereciprocity theorem ofantenna theory,' Directive gain.
A measure of the ability of an antc~lr~ii to cor~ccrltratc clicrgy in a partictrlar  direction is called the gain.
Two different, but related definitions of antenna gain are tile  directive gain and the power gain.
The former is sometimes called the directivity, while the latter  is often simply called the gain.
Both definitions are of interest to the radar systems engineer.
 The directive gain is descriptive of the antenna pattern, but the power gain is more appropriate  for use in the radar equation.
 The directive gain of a transmitting antenna may be defined as  maximum radiation intensity GD = ..- ....
..
-- .
-  average radiation intensity  where the radiation intensity is the power per unit solid angle radiated in the direction (0, 4)  and is denoted P(8, 4).
A plot of the radiation as a function of the angular coordinates is called  a radiation-intensity pattern.
The power density, or power per unit area, plotted as'fi function of  angle is called a power pattern.
The power pattern and the radiation-intensity pattern are  identical when plotted on a relative basis, that is, when the maximilm is normalizz(f to a valt~e  of unity.
When plotted on a relative basis both are called the utltetltlu rr~diutiolr putfrrtl.
 An example of an antenna radiation pattern for a paraboloid antenna is shown plotted in  Fig.
7.1.3 The main lobe is at zero degrees.
The first irregularity in this particular radiation  pattern is the vestigial lobe, or "shoulder," on the side of the main beam.
The vestigial lobe  does not always appear in antenna radiation patterns.
It can result from an error in the  aperture illumination and is generally undesired.
In most antennas the first sidelobe appears  instead.
The first sidelobe is smeared into a vestigial lobe as in Fig.
7.1 if the phase distribution  across the aperture is not constant.
Following the first sidelobe are a series of minor lobes  which decrease in intensity with increasing angular distance from the main lobe.
In the vicinity  of broadside (in this example 100 to 115"), spillover radiation from the feed causes the sidelobe  level to rise.
This is due to energy radiated from the feed which is not intercepted by the  reflector.
The radiation pattern also has a pronounced lobe in the backward direction (180")  due to diffraction effects of the reflector and to direct leakage through the mesh reflector  surface.
 -10 0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180  Degrees off axis 0  m u - -10- 5r t .-  V) t  0) t c -- -20 t 0 .
- .- 0 .
- u 0  L -30- al > .
- t 0 - w a -40-  - 50  Figure 7.1 Radiation pattern for a particular paraboloid reflector antenna illustrating the main beam and  the sidelobe radiation.
(Alter Cutler et uI.,~ Proc.
IRE.) 11 111111~111111~ 1  Moin lobe  - i" \/ Vestigial lobe or shoulder f -  st side lobe  Spillover radiation  (7.1)224INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS Directive gain.Ameasure oftheahilityofanantellna tocollccntratecncrgy inaparticular direction iscalledthegain.Twodifferent, butrelateddefinitions ofantenna gainarethe directive gainandthepowergain.Theformerissometimes calledthedirectivity, whilethelatter isoftensimplycalledthegain.Bothdefinitions areofinteresttotheradarsystems engineer.
Thedirective gainisdescriptive oftheantenna pattern, butthepowergainismoreappropriate foruseintheradarequation.
Thedirective gainofatransmitting antenna maybedefined as G _maximum r~~~a~!~!1_i~~~~~ity D-average radiation intensity wheretheradiation intensity isthepowerperunitsolidangleradiated inthedirection (0,4» andisdenotedP(8,4».Aplotoftheradiation asafunction oftheangularcoordinates iscalled aradiation-intensity pattern.Thepowerdensity,orpowerperunitarea,plotted as'~function of angleiscalledapowerpattern.
Thepowerpatternandtheradiation-intensity patlernare identical whenplottedonarelativehasis,thatis,whenthemaximum isnormalized toavalue ofunity.Whenplottedonarelativebasisbotharecalledthelltltemw radiation patkm.
Anexample ofanantenna radiation patternforaparaboloid antenna isshownplottedin Fig.7.1.3Themainlobeisatzerodegrees.
Thefirstirregularity inthisparticular radiation pattern isthevestigial lobe,or"shoulder," onthesideofthemainbeam.Thevestigial lobe doesnotalwaysappearinantenna radiation patterns.
Itcanresultfromanerrorinthe aperture illumination andisgenerally undesired.
Inmostantennas thefirstsidelobe appears instead.Thefirstsidelobe issmeared intoavestigial lobeasinFig.7.1ifthephasedistribution acrosstheaperture isnotconstant.
Following thefirstsidelobe areaseriesofminorlobes whichdecrease inintensity withincreasing angulardistance fromthemainlobe.Inthevicinity ofbroadside (inthisexample 100to115°),spillover radiation fromthefeedcausesthesidelobe leveltorise.Thisisduetoenergyradiated fromthefeedwhichisnotintercepted bythe reflector.
Theradiation patternalsohasapronounced lobeinthebackward direction (180°) duetodiffraction effectsofthereflector andtodirectleakage through themeshreflector surface.
c.2 :2 "0 E-30 Q> :> +­o 4U 0::-40 20406080100120 Degreesoffaxis140160180 Figure7.1Radiation patternforaparticular paraboloid reflectorantennaillustrating themainbeamand thesideloberadiation.
(AfterCutleretal.,JProc.IRE.) The radiation pattern shown in Fig.
7.i is plotted as a function of one angular coordinate,  but the actual pattern is a plot of the radiation intensity P(0, 0) as a function of the two angles  0 and 4.
Tile two angle coordinates commonly employed with ground-based antennas are  azirnutti and elevation, but any other convenient set of angles can be used.
 A coniplcte three-dimensional plot of the radiation pattern is not always necessary.
For  example, at1 antenna with a symnietrical pencil-beam pattern can be represented by a plot in  one angular coordinate.
The radiation-intensity pattern for rectangular apertures can often be  written as ttie product of the radiation-intensity patterns in the two coordinate planes; for  instance,  Tlic cornplete radiation patter11 can be specified from the two single-coordinate radiation  ~xittcrt~s irl the 0 plarie arid the d, plane.
 Since the average radiation intensity over a solid angle of 4n radians is equal to the total  power radiated divided by 4n, the directive gain as defined by Eq.
(7.1) can be written as  4lr(rnaxitnum power radiatedlunit solid angle) GD = total power radiated by the antenna  This equation indicates the procedure whereby the directive gain may be found from the  radiation pattern.
The maximum power per unit solid angle is obtained simply by inspection,  and the total power radiated is found by integrating the volume contained under the radiation  pattern.
Equation (7.2) can be written as  where B is defined as the beam area:  The beam area is the solid angle through which all the radiated power would pass if the power  per unit solid angle were equal to P(O, +),,,,, over the beam area.
It defines, in effect, an equivalent  antenna pattern.
If OB and (bB are the beamwidths in the two orthogonal planes, the beam area  B is approximately equal to BB 4B.
Substituting into Eq.
(7.3) gives  Ariotller expression for the gain sometimes used is  This was derived assuming a gaussian beamshape and with O,, (6, defined as the half-power  beamwidths.I3'  Power gain The definition of directive gain is based primarily on the shape of the radiation  pattern.
It does not take account of dissipative losses.
The power gain, which will be denoted  by G, includes the antenna dissipative losses, but does not involve system losses arising from  mismatch of impedance or of polarization.
It can be defined similarly to the definition of  p.2)RADAR ANTENNAS 225 Theradiation patternshowninFig.7.1isplottedasafunction ofoneangularcoordinate, buttheactualpatternisaplotoftheradiation intensity P(O,cP)asafunction ofthetwoangles oand¢y.Thetwoanglecoordinates commonly employed with ground~based antennas are azimuth andelevation, butanyotherconvenient setofanglescanbeused.
Acomplete three-dimensional plotoftheradiation patternisnotalwaysnecessary.
For example, anantenna withasymmetrical pencil-beam patterncanberepresented byaplotin oneangularcoordinate.
Theradiation-intensity patternforrectangular apertures canoftenbe writtenastheproductoftheradiation-intensity patterns inthetwocoordinate planes;for instance, P(U,4»=P(O,O)P(O,4» Thecomplete radiation patterncanbespecified fromthetwosingle-coordinate radiation patterns inthe(}planeandthel'plane.
Sincetheaverageradiation intensity overasolidangleof4nradiansisequaltothetotal powerradiated dividedby4n,thedirective gainasdefinedbyEq.(7.1)canbewrittenas GD=4n(maximum powerradiated/unit solidangle) totalpowerradiated bytheantenna Thisequation indicates theprocedure whereby thedirective gainmaybefoundfromthe radiation pattern.Themaximum powerperunitsolidangleisobtained simplybyinspection, andthetotalpowerradiated isfoundbyintegrating thevolumecontained undertheradiation pattern.
Equation (7.2)canbewrittenas 4nP(O,cP)max 4n GD=IIP(O,¢)dOd¢ -B whereBisdefinedasthebeamarea: B=IIP(O,cjJ)dOdcjJ P(O,cjJ)max(7.3) (7.4) (7.Sa)Thebeamareaisthesolidanglethroughwhichalltheradiated powerwouldpassifthepower perunitsolidanglewereequaltoP(O,cPkaxoverthebeamarea.Itdefines,ineffect,anequivalent antenna pattern.If08and<P8arethebeamwidths inthetwoorthogonal planes,thebeamarea BisapproxiPlately equalto08cP8'Substituting intoEq.(7.3)gives 4n.
Go~08cjJ8 Another expression forthegainsometimes usedis (7.5b) Thiswasderivedassuming agaussian beamshape andwith0a,cP8definedast~ehalf·power beamwidths.137 PowergailLThedefinition ofdirective gainisbasedprimarily ontheshapeoftheradiation pattern.Itdoesnottakeaccountofdissipative losses.Thepowergain,whichwillbedenoted byG,includes theantenna dissipative losses,butdoesnotinvolvesystemlossesarisingfrom mismatch ofimpedance orofpolarization.
Itcanbedefinedsimilarly tothedefinition of 226 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  directive gain in Eq.
(7.2), except that the denominator is the net power rlccrprrd by the  antenna from the connected transmitter, or  4n(maximum power radiatedlunit solid angle) G = --  net power accepted by the antenna  An equivalent definition is  maximum radiation intensity from subject antenna G = --- - - - - -.
-- - - .- -  radiation intensity from (lossless) isotropic source with same power input (7.6h)  The power gain should be used in the radar equation since it includes the losses in-  troduced by the antenna.
The directive gain, which is always greater than the power gain, is of  importance for coverage, accuracy, or resolution considerations and is more closely related to  the antenna beamwidth.
The difference between the two antenna gains is usually small.
The  power gain and the directive gain may be related by the radiation efficiency factor p, as follows:  G = ~,GD (7.7)  The radiation efficiency is also the ratio of the total power radiated by the antenna to the net  power accepted by the antenna at its terminals.
The difference between the total power  radiated and the net power accepted is the power dissipated within the antenna.
The radiation  efficiency is an inherent property of an antenna and is not dependent on such factors as  impedance or polarization match.
 The relationship between the gain and the beamwidth of an antenna depends on the  distribution of current across the aperture.
For a "typical" reflector antenna the following  expression is sometimes used:  where OB and +B are the half-power beamwidths, in degrees, measured in the two principal  planes.
This is a rough rule of thumb that can be used when no other information is available,  but it should not be a substitute for more exact expressions that acount for the actual aperture  illumination.
 The definitions of the directive and the power gains have been in terms of the maximum  radiation intensity.
Thus, the gains so defined describe the maximum concentration of radi-  ated energy.
It is also common to speak of the gain as a function of angle.
Quite often the  ordinate of a radiation pattern is given as the gain normalized to unity and called relative gain.
 Unfortunately the term gain is used to denote both the peak gain and the gain as a function of  angle.
Confusion as to which meaning is correct can usually be resolved from the context.
 The definitions of power gain and directive gain were described above in terms of a  transmitting antenna.
One of the fundamental theorems of antenna theory concerns reci-  procity.
It states that under certain conditions (usually satisfied in radar practice) the transmit-  ting and receiving patterns of an antenna are the same.' Thus the gain definitions apply equally  well whether the antenna is used for transmission or for reception.
The only practical distinc-  tion which must be made between transmitting and receiving antennas is that the transmitting  antenna rnusibe capable of withstanding greater power.
 I '.
 Effective apertuve.
Another useful antenna parameter related to the gain is the effective receiv-  ing aperture, or effective area.
It may be regarded as a measure of the effective area presented  226INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS directive gaininEq.(7.2),exceptthatthedenominator isthenetpoweraccepted bythe antenna fromtheconnected transmitter~or G=4n(maximum powerradiated/unit solidangle) netpoweraccepted bytheantenna Anequivalent definition is(7.6a) G= maximum radiation intensity fromsubject a~~_enn~________ (b) radiation intensity from(lossless) isotropic sourcewithsamepowerinput 7.6 Thepowergainshouldbeusedintheradarequation sinceitincludes thelossesin­ troduced bytheantenna.
Thedirective gain,whichisalwaysgreaterthanthepowergain,isof importance forcoverage, accuracy, orresolution considerations andismorecloselyrelatedto theantenna beamwidth.
Thedifference between thetwoantenna gainsisusuallysmall.The powergainandthedirective gainmayberelatedbytheradiation efficiency factorp,asfollows: G=p,GD (7.7) Theradiation efficiency isalsotheratioofthetotalpowerradiated bytheantenna tothenet poweraccepted bytheantenna atitsterminals.
Thedifference between thetotalpower radiated andthenetpoweraccepted isthepowerdissipated withintheantenna.
Theradiation efficiency isaninherent property ofanantenna andisnotdependent onsuchfactorsas impedance orpolarization match.
Therelationship between thegainandthebeamwidth ofanantenna depends onthe distribution ofcurrentacrosstheaperture.
Fora..typical" reflector antenna thefollowing expression issometimes used: (7.8) where (}Band<PBarethehalf-power beamwidths, indegrees, measured inthetwoprincipal planes.Thisisaroughruleofthumbthatcanbeusedwhennootherinformation isavailable, butitshouldnotbeasubstitute formoreexactexpressions thatacountfortheactualaperture illumination.
Thedefinitions ofthedirective andthepowergainshavebeenintermsofthemaximum radiation intensity.
Thus,thegainssodefineddescribe themaximum concentration ofradi­ atedenergy.Itisalsocommon tospeakofthegainasafunction ofangle.Quiteoftenthe ordinate ofaradiation patternisgivenasthegainnormaliz~d tounityandcalledrelativegain.
Unfortunately thetermgainisusedtodenoteboththepeakgainandthegainasafunction of angle.Confusion astowhichmeaning iscorrectcanusuallyberesolved fromthecontext.
Thedefinitions ofpowergainanddirective gainweredescribed aboveintermsofa transmitting antenna.
Oneofthefundamental theorems ofantenna theoryconcerns reci­ procity.Itstatesthatundercertainconditions (usually satisfied inradarpractice) thetransmit­ tingandreceiving patterns ofanantenna arethesame.
1Thusthegaindefinitions applyequally wellwhether theantenna isusedfortransmission orforreception.
Theonlypractical distinc­ tionwhichmustbemadebetween transmitting andreceiving antennas isthatthetransmitting antenna must-becapableofwithstanding greaterpower.
ii..
Effective aperture.
Another usefulantenna parameter relatedtothegainistheeffective receiv­ ingaperture, oreffective area.Itmayberegarded asameasure oftheeffective areapresented by tllc arltetlrla to tlle iricitlcrit wave.
.l'tlc gain G and the effective area A, of a lossli~ss atltetltla  are related by  where A = wavelengtll  A = pllysical area of atltctltla  pal = antenna aperture efficiency  Polarization.
?'he directiot~ of polarization is defined as the direction of the electric field  vector.
Most radar antennas are linearly polarized; that is, the direction of the electric field  vector is either vertical or horizontal.
The polarization may also be elliptical or circular.
 Elliptical polarization may be considered as the combination of two linearly polarized waves  of the same frequency, traveling in the same direction, which are perpendicular to each other in  space.
The relative amplitudes of the two waves and the phase relationship between them can  assume any values.
If the amplitudes of the two waves are equal, and if they are 90" out of  (time) phase, the polarization is circular.
Circular polarization and linear polarization are  special cases of elliptical polarization.
The degree of elliptical polarization is often described by  the axial ratio, which is the ratio of the major axis to the minor axis of the polarization ellipse.
 Linear polarization is most often used in conventional radar antennas since it is the  easiest to achieve.
The choice between horizontal and vertical iinear polarization is often left to  the discretion of the antenna designer, although the radar systems engineer might sometimes  want to specify one or the other, depending upon the importance of ground reflections.
For  example, horizontal polarization might be employed with long range air-search radars operat-  ing at VHF or UHF so as to obtain longer range because of the reinforcement of the direct  radiation by the ground-reflected radiation, Sec.
12.2.
Circular polarization is often desirable  in radars which must " see " through weather disturbances.
 Sidelobe radiation.
An example of sidelobe radiation from a typical antenna was show11 in  Fig.
7.1.
Low sidelobes are generally desired for radar applications.
If too large a portion of the  radiated energy were contained in the sidelobes, there would be a reduction in the main-beam  energy, with a consequent lowering of the maximum gain.
 No gqieral rule can be given for specifying the optimum sidelobe level.
This depends  upon the application and how difficult it is for the antenna designer to achieve low sidelobes.
If  the sidelobes are too high, strong echo signals can enter the receiver and appear as false  targets.
A high sidelobe level makes jamming of the radar easier.
Also, the radar is more  subject to interference from nearby friendly transmitters.
 The first sidelobe nearest the main beam is generally the highest.
A typical parabolic  reflector antenna fed from a waveguide horn might have a first sidelobe 23 to 28 dB below the  main beam.
Lower first sidelobes require a highly tapered aperture illumination, one with the  illumination at the edge of the aperture considerably less than that at the center.
It is not easy to  obtain with a reflector antenna the precisely tapered aperture illuminations necessary for low  sidelobe radiation.
Because of its many radiating elements, an array antenna is better suited for  achieving the low-sidelobe aperture illumination than is a reflector.
First sidelobes of from 40  to 50 dB below the main beam may be possible with the proper aperture illuminations and the  proper care in implementation.
A high-gain antenna is usually necessary to achieve such low  sidelobes.
(When referred to the radiation from an isotropic antenna, the peak sidelobes from a  low-sidelobe antenna might be approximately 10 to 15 dB below the isotropic level.) The  RADAR ANTENNAS 227 bytheantenna totheincident wave.ThegainGandthecf[ectivcarea l1..ofalosslessantellna arerelatedby .4rr11"(J= ---r-A(7.9) whereA=wavelength A=physical areaofantenna fla=antenna aperture erticiency Polarization.
Thedirection ofpolarization isdefinedasthedirection oftheelectricfield vector.Mostradarantennas arelinearlypolarized; thatis,thedirection oftheelectricfield vectoriseitherverticalorhorizontal.
Thepolarization mayalsobeelliptical orcircular.
Elliptical polarization maybeconsidered asthecombination oftwolinearlypolarized waves ofthesamefrequency, traveling inthesamedirection, whichareperpendicular toeachotherin space.Therelativeamplitudes ofthetwowavesandthephaserelationship between themcan assumeanyvalues.Iftheamplitudes ofthetwowavesareequal,andiftheyare90°outof (time)phase,thepolarization iscircular.
Circular polarization andlinearpolarization are specialcasesofelliptical polarization.
Thedegreeofelliptical polarization isoftendescribed by theaxialratio,whichistheratioofthemajoraxistotheminoraxisofthepolarization ellipse.
Linearpolarization ismostoftenusedinconventional radarantennas sinceitisthe easiesttoachieve.Thechoicebetween horizontal andverticallinearpolarization isoftenleftto thediscretion oftheantenna designer, although theradarsystemsengineer mightsometimes wanttospecifyoneortheother,depending upontheimportance ofgroundreflections.
For example, horizontal polarization mightbeemployed withlongrangeair-search radarsoperat­ ingatVHForUHFsoastoobtainlongerrangebecauseofthereinforcement ofthedirect radiation bytheground-reflected radiation, Sec.12.2.Circular polarization isoftendesirable inradarswhichmust"see"through weather disturbances.
Sidelobe radiation.
Anexample ofsidelobe radiation fromatypicalantenna wasshownin Fig.7.1.Lowsidelobes aregenerally desiredforradarapplications.
Iftoolargeaportionofthe radiated energywerecontained inthesidelobes, there would beareduction inthemain-beam energy,withaconsequent lowering ofthemaximum gain.
Nog~leralrulecanbegivenforspecifying theoptimum sidelobe level.Thisdepends upontheapplication andhowdirftcultitisfortheantennadesigner toachievelowsidelobes.If thesidelobes aretoohigh,strongechosignalscanenterthereceiver andappearasfalse targets.Ahighsidelobe levelmakesjamming oftheradareasier.Also,theradarismore subjecttointerference fromnearbyfriendlytransmitters.
Thefirstsidelobe nearestthemainbeamisgenerally thehighest.Atypicalparabolic reflector antenna fedfromawaveguide hornmighthaveafirstsidelobe 23to28dBbelowthe mainbeam.Lowerfirstsidelobes requireahighlytaperedaperture illumination, onewiththe illumination attheedgeoftheaperture considerably lessthanthatatthecenter.Itisnoteasyto obtainwithareflector antenna theprecisely taperedaperture illuminations necessary forlow sidelobe radiation.
Becauseofitsmanyradiating elements, anarrayantenna isbettersuitedfor achieving thelow-sidelobe aperture illumination thanisareflector.
Firstsidelobes offrom40 to50dBbelowthemainbeammaybepossible withtheproperaperture illuminations andthe propercareinimplementation.
Ahigh-gain antenna isusuallynecessary toachievesuchlow sidelobes.
(Whenreferredtotheradiation fromanisotropic antenna, thepeaksidelobes froma low-sidelobe antenna mightbeapproximately 10to15dBbelowtheisotropic level.)The achievement of extremely low sidelobes requires the antenna to be well constructed so as to  maintain the necessary mechanical and electrical tolerances.
It takes only a small deviation of  the antenna surface to have an increase of the peak sidelobe of a very low sidelobe antenna.
 Furthermore, there must be no obstructions in the vicinity of the antenna that can divert  energy to the sidelobe regions and appear as high sidelobes.
A low sidelobe antenna might  have to be 20 to 30 percent larger than a conventional antenna to achieve the same beamwidtll.
 Aperture efficiency.
The aperture efficiency is the ratio of the actual antenna directivity to the  maximum possible directivity.
Maximum directivity is achieved with a uniform apcrti~re  illumination.' Although it might seem that the higher the aperture efficiency the better, apcr-  ture efficiency is seldom a suitable measure of the quality of a radar antenna.
Other factors are  usually more important.
For instance, the high sidelobes that accompany a uniform illt~mina-  tion are seldom desired, and the aperture efficiency is usually willingly sacrificed for lower  sidelobes.
When a shaped beam is desired in a surveillance radar, such as a cosecant-squared  pattern, again it is more important to achieve the overall pattern required rather than simply  nlax'imize the directivity at the peak of the beam.
 Aperture efficiency is a measure of the radiation intensity only at the center of the beam.
 In a search radar, however, the radiation intensity throughout the entire beam is of interest,  not just that at the beam center.
A number of hits are received as the antenna scans by each  target.
The detection decision is based on the energy from all.the hits received and not just on  the energy received when the ,center of the beam' illuminates the target.
Thus it is not the  maximum directivity which is important, but the total directivity integrated over the number  of hits processed by the radar.
A better criterion for selecting the aperture illumination might  be one which maximizes the radiated energy within,a specified angular regi~n.~ Such illumina-  tions are more typical of radar antenna practice than the uniformly illuminated aperture.
 In a monopulse tracking antenna, uniform illumination might be desirable to maxinlize  directivity when the target is being tracked by the center of the beam.
However, a monopulse  antenna with a uniform illumination for the sum-pattern will have a poor difference-pattern,  even if the high sidelobes can be tolerated.
A compromise must be made, and something other  than a uniform illumination is generally selected.
 Thus the parameter of aperture efficiency, which sometimes is held sacred by thc anteillla  designer and to some who write antenna specifications, is often ofsecondary importance to the  systems engineer wishing to optimize total radar performance.
It can usually be traded for  some more important characteristic.
 7.2 ANTENNA RADIATION PATTERN AND APERTURE DISTRIBUTION  The electric-field intensity E(4) produced by the radiation emitted from the antenna is a  function ofthe amplitudeand the phase ofthecurrent distribution across the  aperture.'^'.^ E(4)  may be found by adding vectorially the contribution from the various current elements con- : 1 stituting the aperture.
The mathematical summation of all the contributions from the current  elements contained within the aperture gives the field intensity in terms of an integral.
This  integral cannot be readily evaluated in the general case.
However, approxin~ations to the solu-  tion may be had by dividing the area about the antenna aperture into three regions as deter-  mined by the mathematical approximations that must be made.
The demarcations among these  three regions are not sharp and blend,one into the other.
 The region in the immediate neighborhood of the aperture is the neur jiclrl.
It extcnds  228INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS achievement ofextremely Jowsidelobes requires theantenna tobewel/constructed soasto maintain thenecessary mechanical andelectrical tolerances.
Ittakesonlyasmalldeviation of theantenna surfacetohaveanincrease ofthepeaksidelohc ofaverylowsidelobe antenna.
Furthermore, theremustbenoobstructions inthevicinityoftheantenna thatcandivert energytothesidelobe regionsandappearashighsidelobes.
Alowsidelobe antenna might havetobe20to30percentlargerthanaconventional antenna toachievethesamebeamwidth.
Aperture efficiency.
Theaperture efficiency istheratiooftheactualantenna directivity tothe maximum possible directivity.
Maximum directivity isachieved withauniform apnture illumination.lAlthough itmightseemthatthehighertheaperture efficiency thebetter,aper­ tureefficiency isseldomasuitable measure ofthequalityofaradarantenna.
Otherfactorsarc usuallymoreimportant.
Forinstance, thehighsidelobes thataccompany auniform illumina­ tionareseldomdesired, andtheaperture efficiency isusuallywillingly sacrificed forlower sidelobes.
Whenashapedbeamisdesiredinasurveillance radar,suchasacosecant-squared pattern, againitismoreimportant toachievetheoverallpatternrequired ratherthansimply max'imize thedirectivity atthepeakofthebeam.
Aperture efficiency isameasure oftheradiation intensity onlyatthecenterofthebeam.
Inasearchradar,however, theradiation intensity throughout theentirebeamisofinterest, notjustthatatthebeamcenter.Anumberofhitsarereceived astheantenna scansbyeach target.Thedetection decision isbasedontheenergyfromallthehitsreceived andnotjuston theenergyreceived whenthecenterofthebeam'illuminates thetarget.Thusitisnotthe maximum directivity whichisimportant, butthetotaldirectivity integrated overthenumber ofhitsprocessed bytheradar.Abettercriterion forselecting theaperture illumination might beonewhichmaximizes theradiated energywithin'aspecified angular region.sSuchillumina­ tionsaremoretypicalofradarantenna practice thantheuniformly illuminated aperture.
Inamonopulse tracking antenna, uniform illumination mightbedesirable tomaximize directivity whenthetargetisbeingtrackedbythecenterofthebeam.However, amonopulse antenna withauniform illumination forthesum-pattern willhaveapoordifference-pattern, evenifthehighsidelobes canbetolerated.
Acompromise mustbemade,andsomething other thanauniform illumination isgenerally selected.
Thustheparameter ofaperture efficiency, whic~sometimes isheldsacredbytheantenna designer andtosomewhowriteantenna specifications, isoftenofsecondary importance tothe systems engineer wishing tooptimize totalradarperformance.
Itcanusuallybetradedfor somemoreimportant characteristic.
7.2ANTENNA RADIATION PAITERN ANDAPERTURE DISTRIBUTION Theelectric-field intensity E(cP)p'roctucedbytheradiation emitted fromtheantenna isa function oftheamplitude andthephaseofthecurrentdistribution acrosstheaperture.
1,4.SE(cP) maybefoundbyaddingvectorially; Jhecontribution fromthevariouscurrentelements con­ stituting theaperture.
Themathematical summation ofallthecontributions fromthecurrent elements contained withintheaperture gives'thefieldintensity intermsofanintegral.
This integralcannotbereadilyevaluated intheg~neralcase.However, approximations tothesolu­ tionmaybehadbydividing'the areaabouttheantenna aperture intothreeregionsasdeter­ minedbythemathematical approximations thatmustbemade.Thedemarcations amongthese threeregionsarenotsharpandblend'oneintotheother.
Theregionintheimmediate n~ighborhood oftheaperture istheflearJield.Itextends several antenna diameters from the aperture and, for this reason, is usually of little importance  to the radar engineer.
 'I'lre near field is followed by tlie Frestlel region.
In the Fresnel region, rays from the  radiating aperture to tlie observation point (or target) are not parallel and the antenna  radiatioli pattern is not constant with distance.
Little application is tnade of tlie Fresnel region  iri radar.
'Tlie rrcrir.,licxlrl and the f.'rosrrcl rc~yiort have sornetimes beeti called by antenna engin-  eers tlie r.c~trc.tir~c~ rrclrrr-jicld rcginrr and tlrc radiatirlg near-jield regioti, respe~tively.~  The fart licst region from tile aperture is tlie FrartnhoJer, or far-field, region.
In the Fraun-  Ilofcr rcgiori.
tlrc radiating source and the observation point are at a sufficiently large distance  frorri each otllcr so tliat the rays originating from the aperture may be considered parallel to  one anotlier at the target (observation point).
Radar antennas operate in the Fraunhofer  region.
 The "boundary " RF between Fresnel and Fraunhofer regions is usually taken to be either  RF = DZ/A or the distance RF = 2D2/A, where D is the size of the aperture and ,I is the  waveletigth, D and A being measured in the same units.
At a distance given by D2/A, the gain of  a ~rriifortnly illuminated antenna is 0.94 that of the Fraunhofer gain at infinity.
At a distance of  2D2/?,, the gain is 0.99 that at infinity.
 The plot of tlie electric field ititensity I E(0, 4)I is called thefie1d-intetrsity pattert~ of the  antenna.
The plot of the square of tlie field intensity I E(0, 4) /* is the power radiatiotl patterti  P(O.
c$), defined in the previous section.
 I11 tlie Fraurillofer region, the integral for electric field intensity in terms of current  distributioti across the aperture is given by a Fourier transform.
Consider the rectangular  aperture and coordiriate system shown in Fig.
7.2.
The width of the aperture in the z dimension  is tr, and tile angle in tile y,- plane as ~neasured from tlie y axis is 4.
The far-field electric field  intensity, assuming (1 5> A, is  where A(:) = ci~rrent at distance ;, assumed to be nowing in .u direction.
A(z), the aperture  distrihrrtiot~.
or ill~ir~rirr~~tiori, may be written as a complex quantity, including both the ampli-  tilde arid pllase.
or  42) = I 44 l exp jy(zj (7.1 1)  / E(4)  _/ --  ' Y  Figure 7.2 Rectangular aperture and  coordinate system for illustrating the  relationship between the aperture dis-  tribution and the far-field electric-field-  intensity pattern.
 RADAR ANTENNAS 229 severalantenna diameters fromtheaperture and,forthisreason,isusuallyoflittleimportance totheradarengineer.
ThenearriekJisfollowed bytheFresnelregion.IntheFresnel region,raysfromthe radiating aperture totheobservation point(ortarget)arenotparallel andtheantenna radiation pattern isnotconstant withdistance.
Littleapplication ismadeoftheFresnelregion inradar.TheIIf'W'fieldandtheF/'(Is/lelreg;o/lhavesometimes beencalledbyantenna engin­ eersther{'(lct;!'C/Icar-fidd regionandtheradiating near-field region,respectively,6 Thefarthest regionfromtheaperture istheFraunhofer, orfar-field, region.IntheFraun­ horerregion,theradiating sourceandtheobservation pointareatasufficiently largedistance fromeachothersothattheraysoriginating fromtheaperture maybeconsidered parallel to oneanother atthetarget(observation point).Radarantennas operate in'theFraunhofer regIon.
The"boundary" RFbetween FresnelandFraunhofer regionsisusuallytakentobeeither RF=Dl/J...orthedistance RF=2Dl/l,whereDisthesizeoftheaperture andlisthe wavelength, DandJ...beingmeasured inthesameunits.Atadistance givenbyDZIl,thegainof auniformly illuminated antenna is0.94thatoftheFraunhofer gainatinfinity.
Atadistance of 2Dl/A,thegainis0.99thatatinfinity.
Theriotoftheelectricfieldintensity1£(0,1»Iiscalledthefield-intensity pattemofthe antenna.
Theplotofthesquareofthefieldintensity1£(0,1»IZisthepowerradiation pattent P(O,1»,defined intheprevious section.
IntheFraunhofer region,theintegral forelectric fieldintensity intermsofcurrent distrihution acrosstheaperture isgivenbyaFourier transform.
Consider therectangular aperture andcoordinate systemshowninFig.7.2.Thewidthoftheaperture inthezdimension isa.andtheangleinthey:planeasmeasured fromtheyaxisis1>.Thefar-field electricfield intensity.
assuming a~A.is .all(z)E(!/»=.1aiZA(z)exP j2rr~sin1> dz (7.10) where11(:)=current atdistance z,assumed tobeOowing inxdirection.
A(z),theaperture distrihlltieJll, orillllllli/latioll, maybewrittenasacomplex quantity, including boththeampli­ tudeandphase,or ..
xA(z)=IA(z)Iexpj'P(z) (7.11) !----'----------y Figure7.2Rectangular aperture and coordinate systemforillustrating the relationship between theaperture dis­ tribution andthefar-fieldelectric-field­ intensity pattern. where I A(z)l = amplitude distribution and Y(z) = phase distribution.
[Equation (7.10)  applies to a one-dimensional line source lying along tllc 2 axis.
For tllc two-dirnc~lsior~al  aperture of Fig.
7.2, A(z) is the integral of A(x, z) over the variable x.]  Equation (7.10) represents the summation, or integration, of the individt~al contributions  from the current distribution across the aperture according to tluygclls' principle.
At an angle  4, the contribution from a particular point on the aperture will be advanced or retarded in  phase by 2n(z/12) sin 4 radians.
Each of these contributions is weighted by the factor A(z).
The  field intensity is the integral of these individual contributions across the face of the aperture.
 The aperture distribution has been defined in terms of the current i,.
It may also be  defined in terms of the magnetic field component Hz for polarization in the .u direction, or in  terms of the electric field component E, for polarization in the z direction, provided these field  components are confined to the apert~re.~  The expression for the electric field intensity [Eq.
(7.10)] is mathematically s~pilar to the  inverse Fourier transform.
Therefore the theory of Fourier transforms can be applied to the  calculation of the radiation or field-intensity patterns if the aperture distribution is known.
 The Fourier transform of a function f (t) is defined as  F(/) = I * ~(1) exp (-j27c~) dr (7.12)  .-m  and the inverse Fourier transform is  The limits of Eq.
(7.10) can be extended over the infinite interval from - oo to + oo since the  aperture distribution is zero beyond z = +a/2.
 The Fourier transform permits the aperture distribution A(z) to be found for a given  field-intensity pattern E(+), since  This may be used as a basis for synthesizing an antenna pattern, that is, finding the aperture  distribution A(z) which yields a deqired antenna pattern E(4).
 In the remainder of this section, the antenna radiation pattern will be examined for  various aperture distributions using Eq.
(7.10).
It will be assumed that the phase distribution  across the aperture is constant and only the effects of the amplitude distribution need be  considered.
 The inverse Fourier transform gives the electric field intensity when the phase and ampli-  tude of the distribution across the aperture are known.
The aperture is defined as the projec-  tion of the antenna on a plane perpendicular to the direction of propagation.
It does not  matter whether the distribution is produced by a reflector antenna, a lens, or an array.
 Onedimensional aperture distribution Perhaps the simplest aperture distribution to conceive  is the uniform, or rectangular, distribution.
The uniform distribution is constant over the  aperture extending from -a12 to +a12 and zero outside.
For present purposes it will be  assumed that the aperture extends in one dimension only.
This might represent the distribution  across a line source or the distribution in one plane of a rectangular aperture.
If the constant  230INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS whereIA(z)I=amplitude distribution and'P(z)=phasedistribution.
[Equation (7.10) appliestoaone-dimensional linesourcelyingalongtill:zaxis.Fortill:two-uiml:llsional aperture ofFig.7.2,A(z)istheintegralofA(x,z)overthevariablex.] Equation (7.10)represents thesummation, orintegration, oftheindiviuualcontributions fromthecurrentdistribution acrosstheaperture according toHuygclls' principle.
Atanangle ¢,thecontribution fromaparticular pointontheaperture willbeadvanced orretarded in phaseby21£(zI1)sin¢radians.Eachofthesecontributions isweighted bythefactorA(z).The fieldintensity istheintegraloftheseindividual contributions acrossthefaceoftheaperture.
Theaperture distribution hasbeendefinedintermsofthecurrentix.Itmayalsobe definedintermsofthemagnetic fieldcomponent Hzforpolarization inthexdirection, orin termsoftheelectricfieldcomponent Ezforpolarization inthezdirection, provided thesefield components areconfined totheaperture.? Theexpression fortheelectricfieldintensity [Eq.(7.10)]ismathematically s.i]nilartothe inverseFouriertransform.
Therefore thetheoryofFouriertransforms canbeappliedtothe calculation oftheradiation orfield-intensity patterns iftheaperture distribution isknown.
TheFouriertransform ofafunctionf(t)isdefinedas F(f)=roof(t)exp(-j21lft)dt • -00 andtheinverseFouriertransform is f(t)=rooF(f)exp(j21£Ji)df • -00(7.12) (7.13) ThelimitsofEq.(7.10)canbeextended overtheinfiniteintervalfrom-00to+00sincethe aperture distribution iszerobeyondz=±a12.
TheFourier transform permitstheaperture distribution A(z)tobefoundforagiven field-intensity patternE(¢),since (7.14) Thismaybeusedasabasisforsynthesizing anantenna pattern,thatis,findingtheaperture distribution A(z)whichyieldsadec;iredantenna patternE(4)).
Intheremainder ofthissection, theantenna radiation patternwillbeexamined for variousaperture distributions usingEq.(7.10).Itwillbeassumed thatthephasedistribution acrosstheaperture isconstant andonlytheeffectsoftheamplitude distribution needbe considered.
TheinverseFouriertransform givestheelectricfieldintensity whenthephaseandampli­ tudeofthedistribution acrosstheaperture areknown.Theaperture isdefinedastheprojec­ tionoftheantenna onaplaneperpendicular tothedirection ofpropagation.
Itdoesnot matterwhether thedistribution isproduced byareflector antenna, alens,oranarray.
One-dimemional aperture distributiolL Perhaps thesimplest aperture distrihution toconceive istheuniform, orrectangular,distribution.
Theuniform distribution isconstant overthe aperture extending from-a12to+a12andzerooutside.
Forpresentpurposes itwillbe assumed thattheaperture extendsinonedimension only.Thismightrepresent thedistribution acrossalinesourceorthedistribution inoneplaneofarectangular aperture.Iftheconstant value of the aperturedistribution is equal to A, and if the phase distribution across the aperture  is constant, the antenna pattern as computed from Eq.
(7.10) is  - /to sin [n(n/A) sill $1 - - .
- -.
.
-.
- - - .- -.
-- - - .- [sin n(a/A) sin $1 = Aoa -  (n/A) sir1 4 n(a/A) sin 4  Normalizing to make E(O) = 1 results in A, = I/a; therefore  sir1 [n(m/A) sin $1  E(') = n(a/l) sin 4  This pattern, which is of the form (sin .u)/x, is shown by the solid curve in Fig.
7.3.
The  intensity of tile first sidelobe is 13.2 dB below that of the peak.
The angular distance between  the nulls adjacent to the peak is 2A/a rad, and the beamwidth as measured between the half-  power poirits is 0.8811~ rad, or 5 lA/a deg.
The voltage pattern of Eq.
(7.16) is positive over the  entire main lobe, but changes sign in passing through the first zero, returning to a positive  value in passing through the second zero, and so on.
The odd-numbered sidelobes are  therefore out of phase with the main lobe, and the even-numbered ones are in phase.
Also  shown in Fig.
7.3 is the radiation pattern for the cosine aperture distribution.
 71 z a A(z) = cos - 111 < 2 a  -4rr -3rr -27l -7l 0 7r 27 3n 47  T(Q/A) sin 4  Figure 7.3 The solid curve is the antenna radiation pattern produced by a uniform aperturedistribution;  the dashed curve represents the antenna radiation pattern of an aperture distribution proportional to the  cosine function.
 RADAR ANTENNAS 231 valueoftheaperture distribution isequaltoAoandifthephasedistribution acrosstheaperture isconstant, theantenna patternascomputed fromEq.(7.10)is E(¢)=Ao(:2expJ(21£lsin¢)dz =A~_~i!1_1~~~~Jl~~~J =Aoa[sin1£(a/J)sin¢J (1£/J)sin¢ 1£(a/J)sin¢ Normalizing tomakeE(O)=IresultsinAo=I/a;therefore E(¢)=sin[1£(ajA)sin¢] n(a/J)sin¢(7.15) (7.16) Thispattern, whichisoftheform(sinx)/x,isshownbythesolidcurveinFig.7.3.The intensity ofthefirstsidelobe is13.2dBbelowthatofthepeak.Theangular distance between thenullsadjacent tothepeakis2A/arad,andthebeamwidth asmeasured between thehalf­ powerpointsisO.88J/arad,or5lA/adeg.ThevoltagepatternofEq.(7.16)ispositive overthe entiremainlobe,butchanges signinpassing through thefirstzero,returning toapositive valueinpassing through thesecond zero,andsoon.Theodd-numbered sidelobes are therefore outofphasewiththemainlobe,andtheeven-numbered onesareinphase.Also showninFig.7.3istheradiation patternforthecosineaperture distribution.
nzA(z)=cos­a..,:,.
-41T-3,.,.-21Tc 0....a -15"0a L (1) >....a -20(1) L N- -a -25'-l.l -1T 0 1T 1T(a/A) sin¢21T 3rT Figure7.3Thesolidcurveistheantenna radiation patternproduced byauniformaperture distribution; thedashedcurverepresents theantenna radiation patternofanaperture distribution proportional tothe cosinefunction. 232 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  The normalized radiation pattern is  where +b = n(a/il) sin 4.
In Fig.
7.3 the gains of both patterns are normalized.
However, the  maximum gain of the pattern resulting from the cosine distribution is 0.9 dB less than the gain  of a uniform distribution.
 Table 7.1 lists some of the properties of the radiation patterns produced by various  aperture distributions.' The aperture distributions are those which can be readily expressed in  analytic form and for which the solution of the inverse Fourier transform of Eq.
(7.10) can be  conveniently carried out.
Although these may not be the distributions employed with practical  radar antennas, they serve to illustrate how the aperture distribution affects the antenna  pattern.
More complicated distributions which cannot be readily found from available tables  of Fourier transforms or which cannot be expressed in analytical form may be determined by  numerical computation methods or machine computation.
(The Taylor distribution, men-  tioned in Sec.
7.6, is a more popular model for antenna design than the analytical models of  Table 7.1.)  An examination of the information presented in this table reveals that the gain of the  uniform distribution is greater than the gain of any other distribution.
It is shown by Silver'  that the uniform distribution is indeed the most efficient aperture distribution, that is, the one  which maximizes the antenna gain.
Therefore the relative-gain column may be considered as  the efficiency of a particular aperture distribution as compared with the uniform, or most  efficient, aperture distribution.
The relative gain is also called the aperture eficiency [Eq.
(7.9)].
 The aperture efficiency times the physical area of the aperture is the <flective aperture.
 Table 7.1.
Radiation-pattern characteristics produced by various aperture distributions  1 = wavelength; a = aperture width  Type of distribution, I z I < 1  Uniform; A(z) = 1  Cosine; A(z) = cos" (nz/2):  It = 0  11= 1  n=2  n=3  n = 4  Parabolic; A(z) = 1 - (1 - A)z2  A = 1.0  A = 0.8  A = 0.5  A = 0  Triangular; A(z) = 1 - 1 z /  Circular; A(z) = Jz2  cosine-squared plus pedestal;  0.33 + 0.66 cos2(nz/2)  0.08 + 0.92 cos2(nz/2), Hamming Relative  gain Half-power  beamwidth,  deg Intensity of first sidelobe,  dB below maximum ~ntenslty  (7.17)232INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS Thenormalized radiation patternis E(¢)=~[sin(IjJ+nil)+sin(IjJ-nI2)] 4IjJ+nl2 IjJ-nl2 whereIjJ=n(all)sin¢.InFig.7.3thegainsofbothpatterns arenormalized.
However, the maximum gainofthepatternresulting fromthecosinedistribution is0.9dBlessthanthegain ofauniform distribution.
Table7.1listssomeoftheproperties oftheradiation patterns produced byvarious aperture distributions.1Theaperture distributions arethosewhichcanbereadilyexpressed in analytic formandforwhichthesolutionoftheinverseFouriertransform ofEq.(7.10)canbe conveniently carriedout.Although thesemaynotbethedistributions employed withpractical radarantennas, theyservetoillustrate howtheaperture distribution affectstheantenna pattern.Morecomplicated distributions whichcannotbereadilyfoundfromavailable tables ofFouriertransforms orwhichcannotbeexpressed inanalytical formmaybedetermined by numerical computation methods ormachine computation.
(TheTaylordistribution, men­ tionedinSec.7.6,isamorepopular modelforantenna designthantheanalytical modelsof Table7.1.) Anexamination oftheinformation presented inthistablerevealsthatthegainofthe uniform distribution isgreaterthanthegainofanyotherdistribution.
ItisshownbySilveri thattheuniformdistribution isindeedthemostefficientaperture distribution, thatis,theone whichmaximizes theantenna gain.Therefore therelative-gain columnmaybeconsidered as theefficiency ofaparticular aperture distribution ascompared withtheuniform, ormost efficient, aperture distribution.
Therelativegainisalsocalledtheapertureefficiency [Eq.(7.9)].
Theaperture efficiency timesthephysical areaoftheaperture istheeffectiveaperture.
Table7.1.Radiation-pattern characteristics produced byvariousaperture distributions A.=wavelength; a=aperture width Typeofdistribution,IzI<1 Uniform; A(z)=1 Cosine;A(z)=cos"(1tz/2): 1/=0 II=1 1/=2 1/=3 1/=4 Parabolic; A(z)=1-(1-~)Z2: ~=1.0 ~=0.8 ~=0.5 ~=o Triangular; A(z)=1-IzI Circular; A(z)=J1="? Cosine-squared pluspedestal; 0.33+0.66cos2(1tz/2) 0.08+0.92cos2(1tz/2),HammingRelative gain 1 0.810 0.667 0.575 0.515 1 0.994 0.970 0.833 0.75 0.865 0.88 0.74Half-power beamwiqth, deg 5U/a 5U/'1 69A./a 83A./a 95A./a 11U/a 51A./a 53A./a 56)./a 66)./a 73)./a 58.5)./a 63)./a 76.5)./aIntensity offirstsidclohc, dBbelowmaximum intensity 13.2 13.2 23 32 40 48 13.2 15.8 17.1 20.6 26.4 17.6 25.7 42.8 Another property of the radiation patterns illustrated by 'Table 7.1 is that the antennas  with the lowest sidelobes (adjacent to the main beam) are those with aperture distributions in  wliicli the amplitude tapers to a sniall value at the edges.
The greater the amplitude taper, tlie  lower tlic sidelobe lcvcl 1,111 tl~c less tllc rclative gait1 and tlie broader the beainwidtli.
Thus low  sidelobes and good aperture eficiency run counter to one another.
 A word of carttion sliould be give11 concerning the ability to achieve in practice low  sidclol~e levels wit11 cxtrcr~lcly tapered illutnil~ations.
It was assumed in the cortlpittatiotl of  tlicse radiatiorl patterns that the distribution of the phase across the aperture was constant.
In  a practical antenna this will tlot tiecessarily be true since there will always be some unavoid-  able pliase variations caused by the inability to fabricate tlie antenna as desired.
Any practical  device iq ricvcr perfect: it will always he cotistructed with some error, albeit small.
The phase  variations due to the uriavoidable errors can cause the sidelobe level to be raised and the gain  to be lowered.
Tllcre is a practical limit beyond which it becomes increasingly difficult to  achieve low sidelobes even if a considerable amplitude taper is used.
 Circular aperture.'.' Tlie examples of aperture distribution presented previously in this sec-  tion applied to distributions in one dimension.
We shall consider here the antenna pattern  prodi~ced by a two-diniensional distribution across a circular aperture.
The polar coordinates  (r, 0) are used to describe the aperture distribution A(r, O), where r is the radial distance from  the center of the circi~lar aperture, arid 0 is the angle measured in the plane of the aperture with  rcspcct to a reference.
I-iuyge~is' principle may be applied it1 the far field by dividing the plane  wave across the circular aperture into a great many spherical wavelets, all of the same phase  but of different amplitude.
To find the field intensity at a point a distance R from the antenna,  the amplitudes of all the waves are added at the point, taking account of the proper phase  relationships due to tlie difference in path lengths.
Th'e field intensity at a distance R is thus  proportional to  where ro is tlie radius of the aperture.
For a circular aperture with uniform distribution, the  field intensity is proportional to  tn .ro  E(4) = / d0 1 exp r dr = nrg2~1(t)/S  ' 0 0  where < = 2k(ro /A) sin 4 and J ,(t) = first-order Bessel function.
A plot of the normalized  radiation pattern is shown in Fig.
7.4.
The first sidelobe is 17.5 dB below the main lobe, and  tlie beamwidth is 58.5L/1).
 The effect of tapering the amplitude distribution of a circular aperture is similar to  tapering the distribrltio~l of a linear aperture.
Tile sidelobes may be reduced, but at the expense  of broader beamwidtli and less aritenrla gain.
One aperture distribution which has been  considered in the past' is [l - (r/ro)2]P, where p = 0, 1, 2, .
.
.
.
The radiation pattern is of the  form J, + ,({)/tPt '.
When p = 0, the distribution is uniform and the radiation pattern reduces  to that given above.
For p = 1, the gain is reduced 75 percent, the half-power beamwidth is  72.6L/D, and the first sidelobe is 24.6 dB below the maximum.
The sidelobe level is 30.6 dB  down for p = 2, but the gain relative to a uniform distribution is 56 percent.
Additional  properties of this distribution can be found in Ref.
1, table 6.2, and in Ref.
5, table 1.
 Aperture blo~king.~-'~ An obstacle in front of an antenna can alter the aperture illumination  and the radiated pattern.
This is called aperture blocking or shadowing.
The chief example is  RADAR ANTENNAS 233 Another property oftheradiation pattcrns illustrated byTable7.1isthattheantennas withthelowestsidelobes(adjaccnt tothemainbeam)arethosewithaperture distributions in whichtheamplitude taperstoasmallvalueattheedges.Thegreatertheamplitude taper,the lowerthesidclobe levelhutthelesstherelativegainandthebroaderthebeamwidth, Thuslow sidelobes andgoodaperture efficiency runcountertooneanother.
Awordofcautionshouldbegivenconcerning theabilitytoachieveinpractice low sidclohe levelswithcxtrcmcly tapercdilluminations.
Itwasassumed inthecomputation of tlieseradiation patterns thatthedistribution ofthephaseacrosstheaperture wasconstant.
In apractical antenna thiswillnotnecessarily betruesincetherewillalwaysbesomeunavoid­ ablephasevariations causedbytheinability tofabricate theantennaasdesired.Anypractical deviceisneverperfcct: itwillalwaysheconstructed withsomeerror,albeitsmall.Thephase variations duetotheunavoidable errorscancausethesidelobe leveltoberaisedandthegain tobelowered.
Thereisapractical limitbeyondwhichitbecomes increasingly difficultto achievelowsidelobes evenifaconsiderable amplitude taperisused.
Circular aperture.5.R Theexamples ofaperture distribution presented previously inthissec­ tionappliedtodistributions inonedimension.
Weshallconsider heretheantenna pattern produced byatwo-dimensional distribution acrossacircularaperture.
Thepolarcoordinates (r,0)areusedtodescribe theaperture distribution A(r,0),where I'istheradialdistance from thecenterofthecircularaperture, and0istheanglemeasured intheplaneoftheaperture with rcspecttoareference.
Huygens' principle maybeappliedinthefarfieldbydividing theplane waveacrossthecircularaperture intoagreatmanyspherical wavelets, allofthesamephase butofdilTerent amplitude.
Tofindthefieldintensity atapointadistanceRfromtheantenna, theamplitudes ofallthewavesareaddedatthepoint,takingaccountoftheproperphase relationships duetothedilTerence inpathlengths.Thefieldintensity atadistance Risthus proportional to 2IT ro (21tR)E(R)=.f odO.foA(r,0)expjTrdr (7.18) where 1'0istheradiusoftheaperture.
Foracircularaperture withuniformdistribution, the fieldintensity isproportional to E(1))=(ITdO(Oexp(.i21tisin1>cos0)1'dr=1tr~2JI(~)j~ (7.19) where ~=2h(ro/A) sin1>andJI(~)=first-order Besselfunction.
Aplotofthenormalized radiation patternisshowninFig.7.4.The'firstsidelobe is17.5dBbelowthemainlobe,and thebcamwidth is58.5A/D.
TheeITectoftapering theamplitude distribution ofacircularaperture issimilarto tapering tltedistribution ofalinearaperture.
Thesidelobes maybereduced, butattheexpense ofbroader beamwidth andlessantenna gain.Oneaperture distribution whichhasbeen considered inthepastlis[1-(r/ro)2]p, wherep=0,1,2,....Theradiation patternisofthe formJp+I(O/~p+I.Whenp=0,thedistribution isuniformandtheradiation patternreduces tothatgivenabove.Forp=1,thegainisreduced 75percent, thehalf-power beamwidth is n.6A/D, andthefirstsidelobe is24.6dBbelowthemaximum.
Thesidelobe levelis30.6dB downforp=2,butthegainrelativetoauniform distribution is56percent.
Additional properties ofthisdistribution canbefoundinRef.1,table6.2,andinRef.5,table1.
Aperture blocking.9-12Anobstacle infrontofanantennacanaltertheaperture illumination andtheradiated pattern.Thisiscalledaperture blocking orshadowing.
Thechiefexample is ( = 27r(~/X) sin 4  Figure 7.4 Radiation pattern for a uniformly illuminated circular aperture.
 the blocking caused by the feed and its supports in reflector-type antennas.
Aperture blocking  degrades the performance of an antenna by lowering the gain, raising the sidelobes, and filling  in the nulls.
The effect of aperture blocking can be approximated by subtracting the antenna  pattern produced by the obstacle from the antenna pattern of the undisturbed aperture.
This  procedure is possible because of the linearity of the Fourier-transform that relates the aperture  illumination and the radiated pattern, An example9 of the effect of aperture blocking caused by  the feed in a paraboloid-reflector antenna is shown in Fig.
7.5.
Buildings in the vicinity of  ground-based radar, and masts and other obstructions in the vicinity of shipboard antennas  can also degrade the radiation pattern because of aperture bl~cking.'~'  -  - -  7  Figure 7.5 Effect of apcrt ure block -  ing caused by the feed in a para-  20 -15 -10 -5 0 5 10 15 20 bolic-reflector antenna.
(From C.
 Degrees off oxis C~tler,~ Proc.
I RE.)  234INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS -20Q) >'';:: 0 Q) L..-25N ~I'v ••-30 ~ -35 -10-8 -4-20 2 46 ~:;:27T(ro/A) sin<p Figure7.4Radiation patternforauniformly illuminated circularaperture, theblocking causedbythefeedanditssupports inreflector-type antennas.
Aperture blocking degrades theperformance ofanantenna bylowering thegain,raisingthesidelobes, andfilling inthenulls.Theeffectofaperture blocking canbeapproximated bysubtracting theantenna patternproduced bytheobstacle fromtheantenna patternoftheundisturbed aperture.
This procedure ispossible becauseofthelinearity oftheFourier-transform thatrelatestheaperture illumination andtheradiated patterntAnexample9oftheeffectofaperture blocking causedby thefeedinaparaboloid-reflector antenna isshowninFig.7.5.Buildings inthevicinityof ground-based radar,andmastsandotherobstructions inthevicinityofshipboard antennas canalsodegrade theradiation patternbecauseofaperture blocking.131 -20,...-25 1'\ I\ I \ I\ I \ ~"-30 I \I\II , \ f\III-35 ," -15-10-5 0 5 Degreesoffaxis1520Figure7.5Effeclofaperlureblock­ ingcausedbythefeedinapara­ bolic-reflector antenna.
(Fromc.
Cutler,9 Proc.IRE.) RADAR ANTENNAS 235  Broadband signals.
The Fourier-i~itegral-transform relationship between the radiation pattern  E(4) and the aperture distribution A(z) as expressed in Eqs.
(7.11) and (7.14) applies only  when the signal is a CW sine wave.
If the signal were a pulse or some other radar waveform  with a spectrum of noninfinitesimal width, the simple Fourier integral which applies to a CW  sinc wavc would not give the correct radiation patter11 nor would it predict the transient  behavior.
In most cases of practical interest the spectral width of the signal is relatively small,  with the conseqiletice that the pattern is not affected appreciably and the Fourier-integral  relatior~sl~ips arc satisfactoty al>ptoxiniatiotis.
However, wlieti the reciprocal of tlic sigrial  bandwidth is comparable with the time taken by a radar wave to transverse the antenna  aperture, batldwidth effects can be irriportant and signal distortion may result.
 7.3 PARABOLIC-REFLECTOR ANTENNAS  One of the most widely used microwave antennas is the parabolic reflector (Fig.
7.6).
The  parabola is illuminated by a source of energy called the feed, placed at the focus of the  parabola and directed toward the reflector surface.
The parabola is well suited for microwave  antennas because (I) any ray from the focus is reflected in a direction parallel to the axis of  the paraboia atid (2) the distance traveled by any ray from the focus to the parabola and by  reflection to a plane perpendicular to the parabola axis is independent of its path.
Therefore a  point source of energy located at the focus is converted into a plane wavefront of uniform  phase.
 The basic parabolic contour has been used in a variety of configurations.
Rotating the para-  bolic curve shown in Fig.
7.6 about its axis produces a parabola of revolution called a circular  parabola, or a paraboloid.
When properly illuminated by a point source at the focus, the  paraboloid generates a nearly symmetrical pencil-beam antenna pattern.
Its chief application  has been for tracking-radar antennas.
 An asymmetrical beam shape can be obtained by using only a part of the paraboloid.
This  type of antenna, an example of which is shown in Fig.
7.25, is widely used when fan beams are  desired.
 Another means of producing either a symmetrical or an asymmetrical antenna pattern is  with the parabolic ~ylinder.'.~.'~ The parabolic cylinder is generated by moving the parabolic  contour parallel to itself.
A line source such as a linear array, rather than a point source, must  be used to feed the parabolic cylinder.
The beamwidth in the plane containing the linear feed is  r*  Figure 7.6 Parabolic-reflector antenna.
 RADAR ANTENNAS 235 Broadband signals.TheFourier-integral-transform relationship between theradiation pattern £(4))andtheaperture distributionA(z) asexpressed inEqs.(7.11)and(7.14)appliesonly whenthesignalisaCWsinewave.Ifthesignalwereapulseorsomeotherradarwaveform withaspectrum ofnoninfinitesimal width,thesimpleFourierintegralwhichappliestoaCW sincwavcwouldnotgivcthecorrectradiation patternnorwoulditpredictthetransient behavior.
Inmostcasesofpractical interestthespectral widthofthesignalisrelatively small, withtheconsequence thatthepattern isnotaffected appreciably andtheFourier-integral relationships arcsatisfactory approximations.
However, whenthereciprocal ofthesignal bandwidth iscomparable withthetimetakenbyaradarwavetotransverse theantenna aperture, bandwidth efTectscanbeimportant andsignaldistortion mayresult.
7.3PARABOLIC-REFLECTOR ANTENNAS Oneofthemostwidelyusedmicrowave.
antennas istheparabolic reflector (Fig.7.6).The parabola isilluminated byasourceofenergycalledthefeed,placedatthefocusofthe parabola anddirected towardthereflector surface.Theparabola iswellsuitedformicrowave antennas because(I)anyrayfromthefocusisreflected inadirection paralleltotheaxisof theparabola and(2)thedistance traveled byanyrayfromthefocustotheparabola andby reflection toaplaneperpendicular totheparabola axisisindependent ofitspath.Therefore a pointsourceofenergylocatedatthefocusisconverted intoaplanewavefront ofuniform phase.
Thebasicparabolic contourhasbeenusedinavarietyofconfigurations.
Rotating thepara­ boliccurveshowninFig.7.6aboutitsaxisproduces aparabola ofrevolution calledacircular parabola.
oraparaboloid.
Whenproperly illuminated byapointsourceatthefOCllS,the paraboloid generates anearlysymmetrical pencil-beam antenna pattern.Itschiefapplication hasbeenfortracking-radar antennas.
Anasymmetrical beamshapecanbeobtained byusingonlyapartoftheparaboloid.
This typeofantenna, anexample ofwhichisshowninFig.7.25,iswidelyusedwhenfanbeamsare desired.
Another meansofproducing eitherasymmetrical oranasymmetrical antenna patternis withtheparabolic cylinder.l.7.13Theparabolic cylinder isgenerated bymovingtheparabolic contour paralleltoitself.Alinesourcesuchasalineararray,ratherthanapointsource,must beusedtofeedtheparabolic cylinder.
Thebeamwidth intheplanecontaining thelinearfeedis ~.
Parabolic surface VerIexI----------:'~--+----- or ~....-'~FocusIBeamaxis apex _._._.._~ I I I ~I Figure7.6Parabolic-reflector antenna. determined by the illitmination of the line source, while tlie heamwidtll ill tlic perpendici~lar  plane is determined by the illumination across the parabolic profile.
TIie refiector is made  longer than the linear feed to avoid spillover and diffraction effects.
One of tlie advantages of'  the parabolic cylinder is that it can readily generate an asymmetrical fan beam with a ~nuch  larger aspect ratio (length to width) than can a section of a paraboloid.
It is not practical to i~se  a paraboloidal reflector with a single horn feed for aspect ratios greater than about 8 : I,  altho~lgh it is practical to use the parabolic cylinder for aspect ratios of this magnitude or  larger.
Another advantage of the parabolic cylinder antenna is that the line feed allows better  control of the aperture illumination than does a single point source feeding a paraboloid.
The  patterns in the two orthogonal planes can be controlled separately, which is of importance for  generating shaped beams.
Also there is usually less depolarization in a parabolic cylinder than  in a paraboloid fed from a point source.
Since a directive feed is used w~th a parabolic cylinder,  leakage through a mesh reflector will cause a higher backlobe than wo~lld a poidi-source feed.
 Therefore, solid reflector-surfaces are generally employed.
When the feed mttst be pressurired  in order to sustain high power it is often easier to do so with a paraboloid fed by a sirlgle  point-source than with the larger line feed of a parabolic cylinder.
i  Still another variation of the parabola is the parabolic torus shown in Fig.
7.16 and  discussed in Sec.
7.4.
It is generated by moving the parabolic contour over an arc of a circle  whose center is on the axis of the parabola.
It is useful where a scan angle less than 120" is  required and where it is not convenient to scan the reflector itself.
Scanning is accomplished in  the parabolic torus by moving the feed.
 There are other variations of parabolic reflectors such as cheeses, pillboxes, and Iioghorns,  descriptions of which may be found in the literature.'.'  I7eeds for paraboloids.1.9.'30 The ideal feed for a paraboloid consists of a point source of  illumination with a pattern of proper shape to achieve the desired aperture distribution.
It is  important in a paraboloid that the phase of the radiation emitted by the feed be independent of  the angle.
The radiation pattern produced by the feed is called the prirtlary patrrrtl; the  radiation pattern of the aperture when illuminated by the feed is called the sccotidary pattcrri.
 A simple half-wave dipole or a dipole with a parasitic reflector can be itsed as the feed for  a paraboloid.
A dipole is of limited utility, however, because it is difficult to achieve the desired  aperture illuminations, it has poor polarization properties in that some of the energy incident - ,j  on the reflector is converted to the orthogonal polarization, and it is limited in power.
The  open-ended waveguide as the feed for a paraboloid directs the energy better than a dipole, and  the phase characteristic is usually good if radiating in the proper mode.
A circular paraboloid  might be fed by a circular, open-ended waveguide operating in the TE,, mode.
A rectangitlar  guide operating in the TElo mode does not give a circularly symmetric radiation pattern since  the dimensions in the E and H planes, as well as the current distribirtions in tllese two plancs,  are different.
As this is generally true of most waveguide feeds, a perfectly symmetrical antenna  pattern is difficult to achieve in practice.
The rectangular guide may he used, liowever, for  fccding all asymmetrical section of a paraboloid that generates a fail beam wider in the I1  plane than in the E plane.
 When more directivity is required than can be obtained with a sinlple opetl-ended  waveguide, some form of waveguide horn may be used.
The waveguide horn is probably the  most popular method of feeding a paraboloid for radar application.
 Optimum feed illumination angle.
If the radiation pattern of the feed is known, the illumina-  tion of the aperture can be determined and the resulting secondary beam pattcrn can be found  by evaluating a Fourier integral or performing a numerical calculation.
The radiation pattern  236INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS determined bytheillumination ofthelinesource,whilethebeamwidth illtheperpendicular planeisdetermined bytheillumination acrosstheparabolic profile.Therdkc(or ismade longerthanthelinearfeedtoavoidspillover anddiffraction effects.Oneoftheadvantages of theparabolic cylinder isthatitcanreadilygenerate anasymmetrical fanbeamwithamuch largeraspectratio(lengthtowidth)thancanasectionofaparaboloid.
Itisnotpractical touse aparaboloidal reflector withasinglehornfeedforaspectratiosgreaterthanaboutH:I, although itispractical tousetheparabolic cylinder foraspectratiosofthismagnitude or larger.Another advantage oftheparabolic cylinder antenna isthatthelinefeedallowsbetter controloftheaperture illumination thandoesasinglepointsourcefeedingaparaboloid.
The patterns inthetwoorthogonal planescanbecontrolled separately, whichisofimportance for generating shapedbeams.Alsothereisusuallylessdepolarization inaparabolic cylinder than inaparaboloid fedfromapointsource.Sinceadirective feedisusedwithaparabolic cylinder, leakagethrough ameshreRector willcauseahigherbacklobe thanwouldaPOilH-source feed.
Therefore, solidreRector-surfaces aregenerally employed.
Whenthefeedmustbepressurized inordertosustainhighpoweritisofteneasiertodosowithaparaboloid fedbyasingle point-source thanwiththelargerlinefeedofaparabolic cylinder.
Stillanother variation oftheparabola istheparabolic torusshowninFig.7.16and discussed inSec.7.4.Itisgenerated bymoving theparabolic contour overanarcofacircle whosecenterisontheaxisoftheparabola.
Ilisusefulwhereascananglelessthan1200is required andwhereitisnotconvenient toscanthereflector itself.Scanning isaccomplished in theparabolic torusbymovingthefeed.
Thereareothervariations ofparabolic reflectors suchascheeses, pillboxes, andhoghorns, descriptions ofwhichmaybefoundintheliterature.
I.? Feedsforparaboloids.l.9.130 Theidealfeedforaparaboloid consists ofapointsourceof illumination withapatternofpropershapetoachievethedesiredaperture distribution.
Itis important inaparaboloid thatthephaseoftheradiation emitted bythefeedbeindependent of theangle.Theradiation pattern produced bythefeediscalledtheprimary pattem; the radiation patternoftheaperture whenilluminated bythefeediscalledthesecOndtlry pattem.
Asimplehalf-wave dipoleoradipolewithaparasitic reRector canbeusedasthefeedfor aparaboloid.
Adipoleisoflimitedutility,however, because itisdifficulttoachievethedesired aperture illuminations, ithaspoorpolarization properties inthatsomeoftheenergyincident onthereflector isconverted totheorthogonal polarization, anditislimitedinpower.The opcn-ended waveguide asthefeedforaparaboloid directstheenergybetterthanadipole,and thephasecharacteristic isusuallygoodifradiating inthepropermode.Acircular paraboloid mightbefedbyacircular, open-ended waveguide operating intheTE11mode.Arectangular guideoperating intheTElomodedoesnotgiveacircularly symmetric radiation patternsince thedimensions intheEandHplanes,aswellasthecurrentdistributions inthesetwoplanes, aredifferent.
Asthisisgenerally trueofmostwaveguide feeds,aperfectly symmetrical antenna pattern isdifficult toachieve inpractice.
Therectangular guidcmaybeused,however, for feedingallasymmctrical sectionofaparaboloid thatgenerates afanbeamwiderintheJl planethanintheEplane.
Whenmoredirectivity isrequired thancanbeobtained withasimpleopen-ended waveguide, someformofwaveguide hornmaybeused.Thewaveguide hornisprobably the mostpopular methodoffeedingaparaboloid forradarapplication.
Optimum feedillumination angle.Iftheradiation patternofthefeedisknown,theillumina­ tionoftheaperture canbedetermined andtheresulting secondary beampatterncanbefound byevaluating aFourierintegralorperforming anumerical calculation.
Theradiation pattern RADAR ANTENNAS 237  0, degrees off axis  Figure 7.7 Radiatlorl patterrl of O.X4/1-dia~iietcr circular-waveguide aperture.
(From C.
Cutl~~r,~ 1'1.o~.
 IRE )  of a 0.841-diameter circular waveguide is shown in Fig.
7.7.
If one wished to obtain relatively  uriifor~n illunlination across a paraboloid aperture with a feed of this type, only a small  angular portiori of tlie pattern sllould be used.
An antenna with a large ratio of focal distance  to aritenna diameter would be necessary to achieve a relatively uniform illumination across the  aperture.
Also, a significant portion of the energy radiated by the feed would not intercept the  paraboloid and would be lost.
The lost "spillover" energy results in a lowering of the overall  efficiency arid defeats the purpose of the uniform illumination (maximum aperture efficiency).
 011 the other hand, if the angle subtended by the paraboloid at the focus is large, more of  tlie radiation from the feed will be intercepted by the reflector.
The less the spillover, the higher  the efficieticy.
However, the illumination is more tapered, causing a reduction in the aperture  efficiency.
Therefore.
there will be some angle at which these two counteracting effects result in  niaxitnilnl efficiency.
This is illustrated in Fig.
7.8 for the circular-waveguide feed whose pat-  ter~~ is showtl in Fig.
7.7.
The maximurn of the curve is relatively broad, so that the optimum  angle subterided by the antenna at tlie focus is not critical.
The greatest efficiency is obtained  with n rcflcctor in wt~icti the ratliation fro111 tlle reed in the direction of the edges is between 8  arid 12 dl3 below tliat at the cetltel-.
As a rough rule of thumb, the intet~sity of tlie etiergy  $ 80-  er L  3 +  k 60.- a  D - 0  -40- U C  % U - .t ;5 20- -  0 I I I 1 Figure 7.8 Efficiency of a paraboloid as a function of  0 20 40 60 80 100 the half angle subtended by the paraboloid at the focus.
 Holf angle subtended by paraboloid at focus (From C.
~utler,~ Proc.
IRE.)  RADAR ANTENNAS 237 0CD D >- '"-5c (lJ...c c .~~10- a ua L ';;-15-...a (lJ fY..?U I--l__--L__L_---L__L-_--'-_-'-_---L-->-.
-100-80 -60-·40-20 020406080100 8.degrees offaxis FiJ!ure7.7Radiation patternorO.R4.l.-diamcler circular-waveguide aperture.
(FromC.Cutler.Q/'roc.
IRE.) ofaO.84,t-diameter circularwaveguide isshowninFig.7.7.Ifonewishedtoobtainrelatively uniform illumination acrossaparaboloid aperture withafeedofthistype,onlyasmall angular portionoflhepatternshouldbeused.Anantenna withalargeratiooffocaldistance toantenna diameter wouldbenecessary toachievearelatively uniform illumination acrossthe aperture.
Also.asignificant portionoftheenergyradiated bythefeedwouldnotintercept the paraboloid andwouldbelost.Thelost"spillover" energyresultsinalowering oftheoverall efficiency anddefeatsthepurpose oftheuniform illumination (maximum aperture efficiency).
Ontheotherhand,iftheanglesubtended bytheparaboloid atthefocusislarge,moreof theradiationfromthefeedwillbeintercepted bythereflector.
Thelessthespillover, thehigher theefficiency.
However.
theillumination ismoretapered, causingareduction intheaperture efficiency.
Therefore.
therewillbesomeangleatwhichthesetwocounteracting effectsresultin maximum efficiency.
Thisisillustrated inFig.7.8forthecircular-waveguide feedwhosepat­ tcrnisshowninFig.7.7.Themaximum ofthecurveisrelatively broad,sothattheoptimum anglesubtended bytheantenna atthefocusisnotcritical.Thegreatest efficiency isobtained withareflector inwhichthcradiation fromthefeedinthedirection oftheedgesisbetween R and12dBbelowthatatthecenter.Asaroughruleofthumb,theintensity oftheenergy 100,------,----.,----,-----.-------, ;;.!?80- (lJ L ::J...
:v60- 0.a o G40 c (lJ U 0<-W20 Ol--_--L__---L__ ....L-__..L-_--' a20406080100 Holfanglesubtended byparaboloid atfocusFigure7.8Efficiency ofaparaboloid asafunction of lhehalfanglesubtended bytheparaboloid atthefocus.
(FromC.Cutler,9 Proc.IRE.) 238 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  radiated toward the edge of the reflector should usually be about one-tenth the maximum  intensity.
The aperture distribution at the edges will be even less than one-tenth the maximum  because of the longer path from the feed to the edge of the reflector than from the feed to the  center of the dish.
When the primary feed pattern is 10 dB down at the edges, the first minor  lobe in the secondary pattern is in the vicinity of 22 to 25 dB.
 Calculations of the antenna efficiency based on the aperture distribution set up by the  primary pattern as well as the spillover indicate theoretical efficiencies of about 80 percent for  paraboloidal antennas when compared with an ideal, uniformly illuminated aperture.
In prac-  tice, phase variations across the aperture, poor polarization characteristics, and antenna mis-  match reduce the efficiency to the order of 55 to 65 percent for ordinary paraboloidal-reflector  antennas.
 Feed support.
The resonant half-wave dipole and the waveguide horn can be ahanged to fed  the paraboloid as shown in Fig.
7.9~ and b.
These two arrangements are examples of rear  feeds.
The waveguide rear feed shown in Fig.
7.9b produces an asymmetrical pattern since the  transmission line is not in the center of the dish.
A rear feed not shown is the Cutler feed,g a  dual-aperture rear feed in which the waveguide is in the center of the dish and the energy is  made to bend 180" at the end of the waveguide by a properly designed reflecting plate.
The rear  feed has the advantage of compactness and utilizes a minimum length of transmission line.
 The antenna may also be fed in the manner shown in Fig.
7.9~.
This is an example of a  front feed.
It is well suited for supporting horn feeds, but it obstructs the aperture.
 Two basic limitations to any of the feed configurations mentioned above are aperture  blocking and impedance mismatch in ,the feed.
The feed, transmission line, and supporting  structure intercept a portion of the radiated energy and alter the effective antenna pattern.
 Some of the energy reflected by the paraboloid enters the feed and acts as any other wave  traveling in the reverse direction in the transmission line.
Standing waves are prodi~ced along  the line, causing an impedance mismatch and a degradation of the transmitter performance.
 The mismatch can be corrected by an impedance-matching device, but this remedy is effective  only over a relatively narrow frequency band.
Another technique for reducing the effect of the  reflected radiation intercepted by the feed is to raise a portion of the reflecting surface at the  center (apex) of the paraboloid.
The raised surface is made of such a size and distance from  the original reflector contour as to produce at the focus a reflected signal equal in amplitude  but opposite in phase to the signal reflected from the remainder of the reflector.
The two  reflected signals cancel at the feed, so that there is no mismatch.
The raised portion of the  Parasitic  reflector J  (a (61 (c)  Figure 7.9 Examples of the placement of the feeds in parabolic reflectors.
(a) Rear feed using half-wave  dipole; (b) rear feed using horn; (c) front feed using horn.
 238INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS radiated towardtheedgeofthereflector shouldusuallybeaboutone-tenth themaximum intensity.
Theaperture distribution attheedgeswillbeevenlessthanone-tenth themaximum becauseofthelongerpathfromthefeedtotheedgeofthereRector thanfromthefeedtothe centerofthedish.Whentheprimary feedpatternis10dBdownattheedges,thefirstminor lobeinthesecondary patternisinthevicinityof22to25dB.
Calculations oftheantenna efficiency basedontheaperture distribution setupbythe primary patternaswellasthespillover indicatetheoretical efficiencies ofabout80percentfor paraboloidal antennas whencompared withanideal,uniformly illuminated aperture.
Inprac­ tice,phasevariations acrosstheaperture, poorpolarization characteristics, andantenna mis­ matchreducetheefficiency totheorderof55to65percentforordinary paraboloidal-reflector antennas.
Feedsupport.
Theresonant half-wave dipoleandthewaveguide horncanbeattanged tofeed theparaboloid asshowninFig.7.9aandb.Thesetwoarrangements areexamples ofrear feeds.Thewaveguide rearfeedshowninFig.7.9bproduces anasymmetrical patternsincethe transmission lineisnotinthecenterofthedish.ArearfeednotshownistheCutlerfeed,9a dual-aperture rearfeedinwhichthewaveguide isinthecenterofthedishandtheenergyis madetobend1800attheendofthewaveguide byaproperly designed reflecting plate.Therear feedhastheadvantage ofcompactness andutilizesaminimum lengthoftransmission line.
Theantenna mayalsobefedinthemannershowninFig:7.9c.Thisisanexample ofa frontfeed.Itiswellsuitedforsupporting hornfeeds,butitobstructs theaperture.
Twobasiclimitations toanyofthefeedconfigurations mentioned aboveareaperture blocking andimpedance mismatch in,thefeed.Thefeed,transmission line,andsupporting structure intercept aportionofthe.radiated energyandaltertheeffective antenna pattern.
Someoftheenergyreflected bytheparaboloid entersthefeedandactsasanyotherwave traveling inthereversedirection inthetransmission line.Standing wavesareproduced along theline,causinganimpedance mismatch andadegradation ofthetransmitter performance.
Themismatch canbecorrected byanimpedance-matching device,butthisremedyiseffective onlyoverarelatively narrowfrequency band.Another technique forreducing theeffectofthe reflected radiation intercepted bythefeedistoraiseaportionofthereflecting surfaceatthe.
.
center(apex)oftheparaboloid.
Ther~isedsurfaceismadeofsuchasizeanddistance from theoriginal reflector contour astoproduceatthefocusareflected signalequalinamplitude butopposite inphasetothesignalreflected fromtheremainder ofthereflector.
Thetwo reflected signalscancelatthefeed,sothatthereisnomismatch.
Theraisedportionofthe Dipole~ (alParasitic reflector ~ (b) (e) Figure7.9Examples oftheplacement ofthefeedsinparabolic reflectors.
(a)Rearfeedusinghalf-wave dipole;(b)rearfeedusinghorn;(c)front·feedusinghorn. RADAR ANTENNAS 239  reflector is called an ape-u-n~iifchi~~g plate.
Altliough the apex-matching plate has a broader  bandwidth than matching devices inside tlie transmission line, it causes a slight reduction in  the gai~i and increases the niirior-lobe level of the radiation pattern.
 Offset feed.' Both the aperture blockilig and the mismatch at the feed are eliminated with the  offset-$eed parabolic antenna shown in Fig.
7.10.
The center of the feed is placed at the focus of  the parabola, but t11c Iior~t is tipped wit11 respect to tlie parabola's axis.
The major portioti of  the lower half of the parabola is removed, leaving that portion shown by the solid curve it1  Fig.
7.10.
For all practical purposes tlie feed is out of the path of the reflected energy, so that  there is no pattern deterioration due to aperture blocking nor is there any significant amount  of energy intercepted by the feed to produce an impedance mismatch.
 It should be rioted that tlie antenna aperture of an offset parabola (or any parabolic  reflector) is the area projected on a plane perpendicular to its axis and is not the surface area.
 Tlie offset parabola eliminates two of the major limitations of rear or front feeds.
 However, it introduces problems of its own.
Cross-polarization lobes are produced by the  offset geometry, which tnay seriously deteriorate the radar system performance.'~17 Also, it is  usually niore difficult to properly support and to scan an offset-feed antenna than a circular  paraboloid with rear feed.
 j'/D ratio.
An important design parameter for reflector antennas is the ratio of the focal length  .(to the antenna diameter D, orflD ratio.
The selection of the properflD ratio is based on both  meclianical arid electrical considerations.
A smallflD ratio requires a deep-dish reflector, while  a large j;lD ratio requires a shallow reflector.
The shallow reflector is easier to support and  move mechanically since its center of gravity is closer to the vertex, but the feed must be  supported farther from the reflector.
The farther from the reflector the feed is placed, the  narrower must be the primary-pattern beamwidth and the larger must be the feed.
On the  other hand, it is difficult to obtain a feed with uniform phase over the wide angle necessary to  properly illuminate a reflector with smallflD.
Most parabolic-reflector antennas seem to have  f/D ratios ranging from 0.3 to 0.5.
 Reflector surfaces.
Tlie reflecting surface may be made of a solid sheet material, but it is often  preferable to use a wire screen, metal grating, perforated metal, or expanded metal mesh.
The  expanded metal mesh made from aluminum is a popular form.
A nonsolid surface such as a  mesh offers low wind resistance, light weight, low cost, ease of fabrication and assembly, and  the ability tcrconform to variously shaped reflector surfaces.14 However, a nonsolid surface  Figure 7.10 Parabolic reflector with offset feed.
 RADAR ANTENNAS 239 reflector iscalledanapex-matc!ling plate.Although theapex-matching platehasabroader bandwidth thanmatching devicesinsidethetransmission line,itcausesaslightreduction in thegainandincreases theminor-lobe leveloftheradiation pattern.
Offsetfeed.1Boththeaperture blocking andthemismatch atthefeedareeliminated withthe offset-feed parabolic antenna showninFig.7.10.Thecenterofthefeedisplacedatthefocusof theparabola, butthehornistippedwithrespecttotheparabola's axis.Themajorportionof thelowerhalfoftheparabola isremoved, leavingthatportionshownbythesolidcurvein Fig.7.10.Forallpractical purposes thefeedisoutofthepathofthereflected energy,sothat thereisnopatterndeterioration duetoaperture blocl~ing noristhereanysignificant amount ofenergyintercepted bythefeedtoproduce animpedance mismatch.
Itshouldbenotedthattheantenna aperture ofanoffsetparabola (oranyparabolic reRector) istheareaprojected onaplaneperpendicular toitsaxisandisnotthesurfacearea.
Theoffsetparabola eliminates twoofthemajorlimitations ofrearorfrontfeeds.
However, itintroduces problems ofitsown.Cross-polarization lobesareproduced bythe offsetgeometry, whichmayseriously deteriorate theradarsystemperformance.
1,17Also,itis usuallymoredifficult toproperly support and toscananoffset-feed antenna thanacircular paraboloid withrearfeed.
flDratio.Animportant designparameter forreflector antennas istheratioofthefocallength Itotheantenna diameter D,orflDratio.Theselection oftheproperflD ratioisbasedonboth mechanical andelectrical considerations.
AsmallflD ratiorequires adeep-dish reflector, while alarge1IDratiorequires ashallow reOector.
Theshallow reOector iseasiertosupport and movemechanically sinceitscenterofgravityisclosertothevertex,butthefeedmustbe supported fartherfromthereflector.
Thefartherfromthereflector thefeedisplaced,the narrower mustbetheprimary-pattern beamwidthandthelargermustbethefeed.Onthe otherhand,itisdifficulttoobtainafeedwithuniform phaseoverthewideanglenecessary to properly illuminate areflector withsmallJ7D.
Mostparabolic-reflector antennas seemtohave fIDratiosranging from0.3to0.5.
Reflector surfaces.
Thereflecting surfacemaybemadeofasolidsheetmaterial, butitisoften preferable touseawirescreen,metalgrating,perforated metal,orexpanded metalmesh.The expanded metalmeshmadefromaluminum isapopular form.Anonsolid surfacesuchasa meshofferslowwindresistance, light weig~t,lowcost,easeoffabrication andassembly, and theability t~<:onform tovariously shapedreflector surfaces.14However, anonsolid surface ---- .....
I I I I--/----+ \ I \ I \ I \ I---...--\I----~ ----~FeedFigure7.10Parabolic rellectorwithoffsetfeed. may permit energy to leak through, with the result that the backlobe will increase and the  antenna gain decrease.
 Solid sheet surfaces may be of either aluminum or steel.ls-l6 Steel is a popular choice,  particularly where weight is not a controlling factor.
It is cheap and strong but is relatively  difficult to form.
Stainless steel or plastic coated galvanized steel are used when the surface:  must be resistant to corrosion.
Aluminum is light in weight but is more expensive than steel.
 Aluminum honeycomb with aluminum skin in a sandwich construction has been employeci  where highly accurate surfaces are required.
Reflector surfaces may also be formed from  fiberglass and asbestos resinated laminates with the reflecting surface made of embedded mesh  or metal spray.
Plastic structures have the advantage of being light, rigid, and capable of being  made with highly accurate surfaces.
Their thermal properties, however, require care in design  and construction.
 The presence of ice on the reflector surface is an important consideratian for both 111~  electrical and the mechanical design of the antenna.
Ice adds to the weight of the antenna and  makes it more difficult to rotate.
In addition, if the ice were to close the holes of a mesh  antenna so that a solid rather than an open surface is presented to the wind, bigger motors  would be needed to operate the antenna.
The structure also would have to be stronger.
 The effect of ice on the electrical characteristics of a mesh reflecting surface is twofold.''  On the one hand, ice which fills a part of the space between the mesh conductors nlay br:  considered a dielectric.
A dielectric around the wires is equivalent to a shortening of the  wavelength incident on the mesh.
The spacing between wires appears wider, electrically,  causing the transmission coefficient of the surface to increase.
On the other hand, the total  reflecting surface is increased by the presence of ice, reducing the transmission throi~gh ttie  mesh.
The relative importance of these two effects determines whether there is a net increase or  a net decrease in transmission.
In unfavorable cases, even strongly reflecting meshes can lose  their reflecting properties almost completely.
 Cassegrain antenna.'9-23 This is an adaptation to the microwave region of an optical technique  invented in the seventeenth century by William Cassegrain, a contemporary of Isaac Newton.
 The Cassegrain principle is widely used in telescope design to obtain high magnification wit\\ a  physically short telescope and allow a convenient rear location for the observer.
Its application  to microwave reflector antennas permits a reduction in the axial dimension of the antenna, just  as in optics.
But more importantly it eliminates the need for long transmission lines and allows  greater flexibility in what can be placed at the focus of the antenna.
 The principle of the Cassegrain antenna is shown in Fig.
7.1 1.
It is a two-reflector system  with the larger (primary) reflector having a parabolic contour and a (secondary) subreflector  *with a hyperbolic contour.
One of the two foci of the hyperbola is the real focal point of the  system.
The feed is located at this point, which can be at the vertex of the parabola or in front  of it.
The other focus of the hyperbola is a virtual focal point and is located at the focus of the  parabolic surface.
Parallel rays coming from a target are reflected by the parabola as a  convergent beam and are re-reflected by the hyperbolic subreflector, converging at the pos-  ition of the feed.
There exists a family of hyperbolic surfaces which can serve as the subreflector.
 The larger the subreflector, the nearer will it be to the main reflector and the shorter will be the  axial dimension of the antenna assembly: However, a large subreflector reslrlts in iargc apcr-  ture blocking, which may be undesirable.
A small subreflector reduces aperture blocking, but it  Itas to be supported at a greater distance from the main reflector.
 The geometry of the Cassegrain antenna is especially attractive for monopulse tracking  radar since the RF plumbing can be placed behind the reflector to avoid blocking of the  aperture.
Also, the long runs of transmission line out to the feed at the focus ofa convcrltiorlal  parabolid are avoided.
 240INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS maypermitenergytoleakthrough, withtheresultthatthebacklobewillincrease andIhe antenna gaindecrease.
Solidsheetsurfaces maybeofeitheraluminum orsteel.15,16Steelisapopular choice, particularly whereweightisnotacontrolling factor.Itischeapandstrongbutisrelatively difficult toform.Stainless steelorplasticcoatedgalvanized steelareusedwhenthesurface mustberesistant tocorrosion.
Aluminum islightinweightbutismoreexpensive thansteel.
Aluminum honeycomb withaluminum skininasandwich construction hasbeenemployed wherehighlyaccurate surfaces arerequired.
Reflector surfaces mayalsobeformedfrom fiberglass andasbestos resinated laminates withthereflecting surfacemadeofembedded mesh ormetalspray.Plasticstructures havetheadvantage ofbeinglight,rigid,andcapableofbeing madewithhighlyaccurate surfaces.
Theirthermal properties, however, requirecareindesign andconstruction.
Thepresence oficeonthereflector surface isanimportant consideratio.n forboththe electrical andthemechanical designoftheantenna.
Iceaddstotheweightoftheantenna and makesitmoredifficult torotate.Inaddition, iftheiceweretoclosetheholesofamesh antenna sothatasolidratherthananopensurfaceispresented tothewind,biggermotors wouldbeneededtooperatetheantenna.
Thestructure alsowouldhavetobestronger.
Theeffectoficeontheelectrical characteristics ofameshreflecting surfaceistwofold.
III Ontheonehand,icewhichfillsapartofthespacebetween themeshconductors mayhe considered adielectric.
Adielectric aroundthewiresisequivalent toashortening ofthe wavelength incident onthemesh.Thespacing between wiresappears wider,ekctrically, causing thetransmission coefficient ofthesurfacetoincrease.
Ontheotherhand,thetotal reflecting surfaceisincreased bythepresence ofice,reducing thetransmission through the mesh.Therelativeimportance ofthesetwoeffectsdetermines whetherthere isanetincreaseor anetdecrease intransmission.
Inunfavorable cases,evenstrongly relkcting meshescanJose theirreflecting properties almostcompletely.
Cassegrain antenna.19-23Thisisanadaptation tothemicrowave regionofanopticaltechnique invented intheseventeenth centurybyWilliam Cassegrain, acontemporary ofIsaacNewton.
TheCassegrain principle iswidelyusedintelescope designtoobtainhighmagnification witha physically shorttelescope andallowaconvenient rearlocation fortheobserver.
Itsapplication tomicrowave reflector antennas permitsareduction intheaxialdimension oftheantenna,just asinoptics.Butmoreimportantly iteliminates theneedforlongtransmission linesandallows greaterflexibility inwhatcanbeplacedatthefocusoftheantenna.
Theprinciple oftheCassegrain antenna isshowninFig.7.11.Itisatwo-reflector system withthelarger(primary) reflector havingaparabolic contouranda(secondary) subreflector withahyperbolic contour.
Oneofthetwofociofthehyperbola istherealfocalpointofthe system.Thefeedislocatedatthispoint,whichcanbeatthevertexoftheparabola orinfront ofit.Theotherfocusofthehyperbola isavirtualfocalpointandislocatedatthefocusoflhe parabolic surface.
Parallel rayscoming fromatargetarereflected bytheparabola asa convergent beamandarere-reflected bythehyperbolic subreflector, converging atthepos­ itionofthefeed.Thereexistsafamilyofhyperbolic surfaces whichcanserveasthesubreflector.
Thelargerthesubreflector, thenearerwillitbetothemainreflector andtheshorterwillbethe axialdimension oftheantenna assembly: However, alargesubrellcctor resultsinlargeaper­ tureblocking, whichmaybeundesirable.
Asmallsubreflector reducesaperture blocking, butit hastohesupported atagreaterdistance fromthemainreflector.
Thegeometry oftheCassegrain antenna isespecially attractive formonopulse tracking radarsincetheRFplumbing canbeplacedbehindthereflector toavoidblocking ofthe aperture.
Also,thelongrunsoftransmission lineouttothefeedatthefocusofaconventional parabolid areavoided. \  ref lector Porobola - \  \  \  '\  \  .
.
.
.
.
- .
.
\  \  Figure 7.1 1 (a) Cassegrain antenna showing the hyperbolic subreflector and the feed at the vertex of tile  main parabolic reflector; (h) geometry of the Cassegrain antenna.
 The Cassegrain antenna can, ifdesired, be designed to have a lower antenna noise tempera-  ture than the conventional parabolid.
This is due to the elimination of the long transnlission  lines from the feed to the receiver and by the fact that the spillover-sidelobes from the feed see the  cold sky rather than the warm earth.
Low antenna noise temperature is important in radio  astronorny or space communications, but generally is of little interest in radar since extremely  low noise receivers are not always desirable.
 Still another advantage of the Cassegrain antenna is the flexibility with which diNerent  trarismitte~s and receivers can be substituted because of-the availability of the antenna feed  system at the back of the reflector rather than out front at the normal focus.
The Haystack  microwave research system,24 for example, is a fully steerable Cassegrain antenna 120 ft in  diameter, enclosed by a 150-ft diameter metal space-frame randome.
It was designed to oper-  ate at frequepcies from 2 to 10 GHz for radar, radio astronomy, and space communications.
 To facilitate multifunction use, the RF components are installed in a number of plug-in  rnodules, S by 8 by 12 feet in size, which mount directly behind the Cassegrain reflector.
 The presence of the subreflector in front of the main reflector in the Cassegrain  configuration causes aperture blocking.
Part of the energy is removed, resulting in a reduction  of the main-beam gain and an increase in the sidelobes.
If the main reflector is circular and  assumed to have a completely tapered parabolic illumination, a small circular obstacle in the  center of the aperture will reduce the (power) gain by approximately [l - 2(Db/D)2]2, where  I),, is the diameter of the obstacle (hyperbolic subreflector) and D is the diameter of the main  aperture.19 The relative (voltage) level of the first sidelobe is increased by (2Dh/D)2.
For  exariiple if D,/D = 0.122.
the gain would be lowered by about 0.3 dB and a -20 dB sidelohe  would hc increased to about - 18 dB.
 Aperture blocking may be reduced by decreasing the size of the subreflector.
By making  the feed more directive or by moving it closer to the subreflector, the size of the subreflector  rnay he reduced without incmring a spillover loss.
However, the feed cannot be made too large  (too directive) since it partially slladows the energy reflected from the main parabolic reflector.
 "._....(..Hyperbolic _.'\<;ubreflecrar --/'//.., talParabola-, neolfocol pointRADAR ANTENNAS 241 \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ (\f1;perboIO /"Virtual focal ;'point / / I / / / / / (b) Figure7.11(a)Cassegrain antennashowing thehyperbolic subreflector andthefeedatthevertexofthe mainparabolic reflector; (h)geometry oftheCassegrain antenna.
TheCassegrain antenna can,ifdesired,bedesigned tohavealowerantenna noisetempera­ turethantheconventional parabolid.
Thisisduetotheelimination ofthelongtransmission Jinesfromthefeedtothereceiverandbythefactthatthespillover-sidelobes fromthefeedseethe coldskyratherthanthewarmearth.Lowantenna noisetemperature isimportant inradio astronomy orspacecommunications, butgenerally isoflittleinterestinradarsinceextremely lownoisereceivers arenotalwaysdesirable.
Stillanother advantage oftheCassegrain antenna istheflexibility withwhichdifferent transmitters andreceivers canbesubstituted because of'theavailability oftheantenna feed systematthebackofthereflector ratherthanoutfrontatthenormalfocus.TheHaystack microwave research system,24 forexample, isafullysteerable Cassegrain antenna 120ftin diameter, enclosed bya150-ftdiameter metalspace-frame randome.
Itwasdesigned tooper­ ateatfreque.pcies from2to10GHzforradar,radioastronomy, andspacecommunications.
Tofacilitate multifunction use,theRFcomponents areinstalled inanumber ofplug-in modules, 8by8by12feetinsize,whichmountdirectly behindtheCassegrain reflector.
Thepresence ofthesubreflector infrontofthemainreflector intheCassegrain configuration causesaperture blocking.
Partoftheenergyisremoved, resulting inareduction ofthemain-beam gainandanincrease inthesidelobes.Ifthemainreflector iscircular and assumed tohaveacompletely taperedparabolic illumination, asmallcircular obstacle inthe centeroftheaperture willreducethe(power) gainbyapproximately [1-2(DbID)2]2,where D"isthediameter oftheobstacle (hyperbolic subreflector) andDisthediameter ofthemain aperture.19Therelative (voltage) levelofthefirstsidelobe isincreased by(2D"ID)2.
For example ifD"ID=0.122,thegainwouldbelowered byabout0.3dBanda-20dBsidelobe wouldheincreased toabout-18dB.
Aperture blocking maybereduced bydecreasing thesizeofthesubreflector.
Bymaking thefeedmoredirective orbymoving itclosertothesubreflector, thesizeofthesubreOector mayhereduced without incurring aspillover Joss.However, thefeedcannotbemadetoolarge (toodirective) sinceitpartially shadows theenergyreOected fromthemainparabolic reflector. Main reflector with  Subreflector with  polarization -  dependent surface  Figure 7.12 Polarization-twisting Cassegraln antenna.
 Aperture blocking by the subreflector is reduced with  this design.
 Minimum total aperture blocking occurs when the shadows produced by the subreflector and  the feed are of equal area.lg Aperture blocking is less serious with narrow beamwidths and  small .flD ratios.
 If operation with a single polarization is permissible, the technique diagramed in Fig.
7.12  can reduce aperture blocking.
The subreflector consists of a horizontal grating of wires, called  a trart~r~jlector, which passes vertically polarized waves with negligible attenuation but reflects  the horizontally polarized wave radiated by the feed.
The horizontally polarized wave reflected  by the subreflector is rotated 90" by the twist rejector at the surface of the main reflector.
 The twist reflector consists of a grating of wires oriented 45" to the incident polarization and  placed one-quarter wavelength from the' reflector's surface.13* (Modifications to this simple  design can provide a 90" twist of the incident polarization over a broad frequency band and a  wide range of incident  angle^.^'*''^)   he wave reflected from the main reflector is vertically  polarized and passes through the subreflector with negligible degradation.
The subreflector is  transparent to vertically polarized waves and does not block the aperture.
Some aperture  blocking by the feed does occur, but this can be made small.
In one airborne monopulse radar  antenna23 using the polarization twisting technique, good performance was obtained over a 12  percent bandwidth.
The subreflector was supported by a transparent (dielectric) cone, with  resistive-card absorbers embedded in the support cone and oriented so as to reduce the  cross-polarized wide-angle radiation by rn&e than 20 dB.
 3.
.
I  Mechanical beam-scanning with planar twist-reflector.
The antenna configuration shown in  Fig.
7.13 may be employed to rapidly scan a beam over a relatively wide angle by mechanical  motion of the planar mirror.
This configuration has been called a mirror scan antenna (by the  Naval Research Laboratory), polarization twist Cassegrain and pat plate Cassegrain (by  Westinghouse Electric), and a parabolic'reJlector with planar auxiliary mirror (by Russian  authors13').
The parabolic reflector is made up of parallel wires spaced less than a half-  >,  242INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS Figure7.12Polarization-twisting Cassegrain antenna.
Aperture blocking bythesubreflector isreduced with thisdesign..j Subreflector with polarization ­ dependent surfaceVertical polorilotionMainreflector with .ypolarization twister V'{/(twistreflector) ~ ~ f f 'I 'I 'I ~ ~ Minimum totalaperture blocking occurswhentheshadows produced bythesubrd1ector and thefeedareofequalarea.19Aperture blocking islessseriouswithnarrowbeamwidths and smallIIDratios.
Ifoperation withasinglepolarization ispermissible, thetechnique diagramed inFig.7.12 canreduceaperture blocking.
Thesubreflector consistsofahorizontal gratingofwires,called atrallsre.flector, whichpassesvertically polarized waveswithnegligible attenuation butreflects thehorizontally polarized waveradiatedbythefeed.Thehorizontally polarized wavereflected bythesubreflector isrotated90°bythetwistreflectoratthesurfaceofthemainreflector.
Thetwistreflectorconsistsofagratingofwiresoriented 45°totheincidentpolarization and placedone-quarter wavelength fromthe'reflector's surface.132(Modifications tothissimple designcanprovidea90°twistoftheincidentpolarization overabroadfrequency bandanda widerangeofincidentangles.2S.133) The\yavereflected fromthemainreflector isvertically polarized andpassesthroughthesubreflector' withnegligible degradation.
Thesubreflector is transparent tovertically polarized.
waves.anddoesnotblocktheaperture.
Someaperture blocking bythefeeddoesoccur,butthis'canbemadesmall.Inoneairborne monopulse radar antenna23usingthepolarization twistingtechnique, goodperformance wasobtained overa12 percentbandwidth.
ThesUbreflector wassupported byatransparent (dielectric) cone,with resistive-card absorbers embedded inthe'support coneandoriented soastoreducethe I .
cross-polarized wide-angle radiation bymore t~an20dB.
.
• .
1..
, Mechanical beam-scanning withplanartwist-reflector.
Theantennaconfiguration shownin Fig.7.13maybeemployed to'rapidly scanabeamoverarelatively wideanglebymechanical motionoftheplanarmirror.Thisconfiguration hasbeencalledamirrorscanantenna(bythe NavalResearch Laboratory), polarization twistCassegrain andflatplateCassegrain (by Westinghouse Electric), andaparabolic: reflector withplanarauxiliary mirror(byRussian authors138).Theparabolic reflector isniadeup ofparallelwiresspacedlessthanahalf- 'I' • F~xed parohl~c  reflector  w~th porollel  wires  \  L-- , .
 ' '- AXIS of mlrror movement  Figure 7.13 Geometry of the polarization-  * ,Y.;,~\ Movable twist nrirror-scan antenna, using a polar- , - --plonar  twist reflector ization-sensitive parabolic reflector and a  planar polarization-rotating twist reflector.
 \ Scanning of the beam is accomplished by  mechanical motion of the planar twist-  reflector.
 wavelength apart which are usually supported by low-loss dielectric material.
The construc-  tion of the parabolic reflector with thin parallel wires makes it polarization sensitive.
That is, it  will completely reflect one sense of linear polarization and be transparent to the orthogonal  sense of polarization.
The sense of the linear polarization of the energy radiated by the feed is  rnade tile same as the orientation of the wires of the parabolic reflector.
The feed in the center  of the figure illuminates the parabolic reflector and the reflected energy is incident on a planar  mirror constructed as a twist reyector.
As mentioned previously a twist reflector reflect5 the  incident energy with a 90" rotation of the plane of polarization.
The reflected energy therefore  will have a polarization perpendicular to the wires of the parabolic reflector and will pass  through with negligible attenuation.
The twist reflector can be made relatively broadband.
An  attractive feature of this antenna configuration is that the beam can be readily scanned over a  wide angle by mechanical motion of the low inertia planar reflector.
Another advantage is that  a deflection of the planar mirror by an angle 0 results in the beam scanning through an angle  20,  A similar principle is used in the configuration shown in Fig.
7.14 to obtain a 360"  rotating-bca~n antctirla without the need for RF rotary joints.
111 this cutaway sketch, four  polarization sensitive parabolic reflectors surround a rotating twist-reflector mirror.
For  convenience, tb.e entire structure is shown enclosed within a radome.
Fixed feeds illuminate  each reflector.
A single radar transmitter and receiver is switched among the four sets of feeds  on a time-shared basis every 90" rotation of the mirror.
As in the antenna of Fig.
7.13, the  parabolas consist of closely spaced parallel wires that reflect the polarization radiated by the  feed, but pass the ortliogonal polarization.
The planar mirror rotates the plane of polarization  90" on reflection.
Tile beam will illuminate the target twice for every revolution of the planar  mirror.
However, the scanning is not continuous in angle, and the time between observations  alternates between two values.
With a single-sided planar mirror, the two time intervals  between observations correspond to the time it takes for the planar mirror to rotate $th and  4th of a revolution.
If the mirror is double-sided, the times between observations correspond to  ith and 8th of a revolution.
 Three reflectors can be used instead of four to produce a uniform target observation rate.
 [lie rnirror is double-sided.
Two target observations per rotation of the mirror are obtained,  ut the scanning is not continuous.
That is, if the region from 0 to 120" is scanned first, the next  egion to be scanned is from 240 to 360°, followed by the region from 120 to 240".
 RADAR ANTENNAS 243 naypathFigure7.13Geometry ofthepolari7.ation­ twistmirror-scan antenna, usingapolar­ ization-sensitive parabolic reflector anda planarpolarization-rotating twistreflector.
Scanning ofthebeamisaccomplished by mechanical motion oftheplanartwist­ reflector.Movable ..--planar twistreflector'\-e--.-1 , I '.I "II I I , Irixedfeed'---- .....---"""~ ~"-AXIsofmirrormovement, ?B \Fixedparabolic reflector withparallel wires \ wavelength apartwhichareusuallysupported bylow-loss dielectric material.
Theconstruc­ tionoftheparabolic reflector withthinparallelwiresmakesitpolarization sensitive.
Thatis,it willcompletely reflectonesenseoflinearpolarization andbetransparent totheorthogonal senseofpolarization.
Thesenseofthelinearpolarization oftheenergyradiated bythefeedis madethesameastheorientation ofthewiresoftheparabolic reflector.
Thefeedinthecenter orthefigureilluminates theparabolic reflector· andthereflected energyisincidentonaplanar mirrorconstructed asatwistreflector.
Asmentioned previously atwistreflector reflect~the incident energywitha90°rotation oftheplaneofpolarization.
Thereflected energytherefore willhaveapolarization perpendicular tothewiresoftheparabolic reflector andwillpass through withnegligible attenuation.
Thetwistreflector canbemaderelatively broadband.
An attractive featureofthisantenna configuration isthatthebeamcanbereadilyscanned overa wideanglebymechanical motionofthelowinertiaplanarreflector.
Another advantage isthat adeflection oftheplanarmirrorbyanangle0resultsinthebeamscanning through anangle 20.
Asimilarprinciple isusedintheconfiguration showninFig.7.14toobtaina360° rOlating-beam antenna without theneedforRFrotaryjoints.Inthiscutaway sketch,four polarization sensitive parabolic reflectors surround arotating twist-reflector mirror.For convenience, tb.eentirestructure isshownenclosed withinaradome.
Fixedfeedsilluminate eachreflector.
Asingleradartransmitter andreceiver isswitched amongthefoursetsoffeeds onatime-shared basisevery90°rotation ofthemirror.Asintheantenna ofFig.7.13,the parabolas consistofcloselyspacedparallelwiresthatreflectthepolarization radiated bythe feed,butpasstheorthogonal polarization.
Theplanarmirrorrotatestheplaneofpolarization 90°onreflection.
Thebeamwillilluminate thetargettwiceforeveryrevolution oftheplanar mirror.However, thescanning isnotcontinuous inangle,andthetimebetween observations alternates between twovalues.Withasingle-sided planarmirror,thetwotimeintervals between observations correspond tothetime'ittakesfortheplanarmirrortorotate!thand ~thofarevolution.
Ifthemirrorisdouble-sided, thetimesbetween observations correspond to ~thandithofarevolution.
Threerenectors canbeusedinsteadoffourtoproduce auniform targetobservation rate, ifthemirrorisdouble-sided.
Twotargetobservations perrotation ofthemirrorareobtained, 'Jutthescanning isnotcontinuous.
Thatis,iftheregionfrom0to1200isscanned first,thenext regiontobescanned isfrom240to360°,followed bytheregionfrom120to240°. Figure 7.14 Configuration of the mirror-scan antenna for obtaining 360" scanning without RF rotating  jo~nts.
(From B.
Lewis.13')  7.4 SCANNING-FEED REFLECTOR ANTENNAS  Large antennas are sometimes difficult to scan lllcclia~~ically wit11 irs 11li1clr I1cxil)illty as olic  might like.
Some technique for scanning the beam of a large antenna must often be used other  (liar1 the brute-force technique of mechanically positioning the entire structtire.
Phased array  antennas and lens antennas offer the possibility ofscanning the beam without tile necessity for  moving large mechanical masses.
The present section considers the possibility of scanning the  beam over a limited angle with a fixed reflector and a movable feed.
It is much easier to  mechanically position the feed than it is to position the entire antenna structure.
In addition,  large fixed reflectors are usually cheaper and easier to manufactirre than antennas which must  be moved about.
 The beam produced by a simple paraboloid reflector can be scanned over a limited angle  by positioning the  feed.'^^^-^^ Ho wever, the beam cannot be scanned too far without encoun-  tering serious deterioration of the antenna radiation pattern because of increasing coma and  astigmatism.
The gain of a paraboloid with flD = 0.25 (.f = focal distance, D = antenna  244INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS Twistreflector (900polarizafion- rotation mirror) ',.
ij .~\ Radome Figure7.14Configuration ofthemirror-scan antenna forobtaining 3600scanning without RFrotating joints.(FromB.Lewis.139) 7.4SCANNING-FEED REFLECTOR ANTENNAS Largeantennas aresometimes difficult toscanmechaniGully withusmuchllexibility asone mightlike.Sometechnique forscanning thebeamofalargeantenna mustoftenbeusedother thanthehrute-force technique ofmechanically positioning theentirestructure.
Phasedarray antennas andlensantennas offerthepossibility ofscanning thebeamwithout thenecessity for movinglargemechanical masses.Thepresentsectionconsiders thepossibility ofscanning the beamoveralimitedanglewithafixedreflector andamovable feed.Itismucheasierto mechanically position thefeedthanitistoposition theentireantenna structure.
Inaddition, largefixedreflectors areusuallycheaper andeasiertomanufacture thanantennas whichmust bemovedabout.
Thebeamproduced byasimpleparaboloid reflector canbescanned overalimitedangle bypositioning thefeed.1,26-29However, thebeamcannotbescanned toofarwithoutencoun­ teringseriousdeterioration oftheantenna radiation patternbecauseofincreasing comaand astigmatism.
Thegainofaparaboloid withliD=0.25(f=focaldistance,D=antenna KAljAK ANTliNN AS 245  diameter) is reduced to 80 percent of its rnaximum value when the beam is scanned L-3  beamwidths off axis.
A paraboloid wit11 f/V = 0.50 can be scanned k6.5 beamswidths off axis  before the gain is reduced to 80 percent of maxitnum (Ref.
1, p.
488).
The antenna impedance  also changes with a change ill feed position.
Hence scanning a simple p~raboloid antenna by  scanning the feed is possible, but is generally limited in angle because ol the deterioration in  the antenna patter11 after scanning but a few beamwidths off axis.
 Spherical rellcctors.
II' t11c paraboloid reflector is replaced by a spherical-reflector surface, it is  possible to achieve a wide scanning angle because of the symmetry of the sphere.
However, a  simple spherical reflector does not produce an equiphase radiation pattern (plane wave), and the  pattern is generally poor.
The term splterical aherratiort is used to describe the fact that the  ~'lt:t~c frotlt of tlic wave radiated hy :I splierical reflector is not plane as it is with a wave  ~adiittcd hy 311 idcltl parabolic rcllcctor.
'l'llerc arc at least tllrce tech~liques w11icl1 rlligllt bc  used to miriimi7e tile effect of spherical aberration.
One is to employ a reflector of sufficiently  I;trgc r;~tli~~s so t11:lt tile portiotl of tile splicrc is a reasonable approxi~natio~i to a  paraboloid.'" 32 The second approacll is to compensate for the spherical aberration with  special feeds or correcting len~es.~~.~~ These techniques yield only slightly larger scan angles  tllan tile single paraboloid reflector with movable feed.
 A third technique to approximate the spherical surface and minimize the effects of spheri-  cal aberration is to step a parabolic reflector as shown in Fig.
7.15.7.35.36 The focal length is  reduced in half-wavelength steps, making a family of confocal paraboloids.
It is possible to  scan tile stepped reflector to slightly wider angles than a simple paraboloid, but not as wide as  with some other scanning techniques.
Disadvantages of this reflector are'the scattered radia-  tion from the stepped portions and the narrow bandwidth.
 If only a portion of the spherical reflector is illuminated at any one time, much wider scan  angles are possible than if the entire aperture were illuminated.
Li32 has described experiments  using a 10-ft-diameter spherical reflector at a frequency of 11.2 GHz.
The focal length was  29.5 in.
If the phase error from the sphere is to differ from that of a paraboloid by no more  than A/ t 6.
the maximum permissible diameter of the illuminated surface should be 3.56 ft.
The  bearnwidtll required of the primary feed pattern is determined by the illuminated portion of  tlie aperture.
Li used a square-aperture horn with diagonal polarization in order to obtain the  required primary beamwidth and low primary-pattern sidelobes (better than 25 dB).
The  Figure 7.15 Stepped parabolic reflector.
 RADAR ANTENNAS 245 diameter) isreduced to80percent ofitsmaximum valuewhenthebeamisscanned ± 3 beamwidths offaxis.AparaboloidwithflD= 0.50canbescanned ±6.5beamswidths offaxis beforethegainisreducedto80percentofmaximum (Ref.1,p.488).Theantenna impedance alsochanges withachangeillfeedposition.
Hencescanning asimpleparaboloid antenna by scanning thefeedispossible, butisgenerally limitedinanglebecauseofthedeterioration in theantenna patlernafterscanning butafewbeamwidths offaxis.
Spherical reflectors.
Irtheparaboloid renector isreplaced byaspherical-reflector surface.
itis possible toachieveawidescanning anglebecauseofthesymmetry ofthesphere.However, a simplespherical reflector doesnotproduceanequiphase radiation pattern(planewave),andthe pattern isgenerally poor.Thetermspherical aberratioll isusedtodescribe thefactthatthe phasefrontofthewaveradiated byaspherical reflector isnotplaneasitiswithawave Iadiatcd byallidealparabolic reflector.
Therearcatleastthreetechniques whichmightbe usedtominimize theeffectofspherical aberration.
Oneistoemployareflector ofsufficiently largeradiussothattheportion ofthesphere isareasonable approximation toa paraboloid.3032Thesecondapproach istocompensate forthespherical aberration with specialfeedsorcorrccting lenses.33.34Thesetechniques yieldonlyslightlylargerscanangles thanthesingleparaboloid reflector withmovable feed.
i\.thirdtechnique toapproximate thespherical surfaceandminimize theeffectsofspheri­ calaberration istostepaparabolic reflector asshowninFig.7.15.7.35.36 Thefocallengthis reducedinhalf-wavelength steps,makingafamilyofconfocal paraboloids.
Itispossible to scanthestepped rellector toslightlywideranglesthanasimpleparaboloid, butnotaswideas withsomeotherscanning techniques.
Disadvantages ofthisreflector are"thescattered radia­ tionfromthestepped portions andthenarrowbandwidth.
Ifonlyaportionofthespherical reflector isilluminated atanyonetime,muchwiderscan anglesarepossible thaniftheentireaperture wereilluminated.
Li32hasdescribed experiments usingalO-ft-diameter spherical reflector atafrequency of11.2GHz.Thefocallengthwas 29.5in.Ifthephaseerrorfromthesphereistodifferfromthatofaparaboloid bynomore thanA/16.themaximum permissible diameter oftheilluminated surfaceshouldbe3.56ft.The heamwidth required oftheprimary feedpatternisdetermined bytheilluminated portionof theaperture.Liusedasquare-aperture hornwithdiagonal polarization inordertoobtainthe required primary beamwidth andlowprimary-pattern sidelobes (betterthan25dB).The Centerof sphere Figure7.15Stepped parabolic reflector. 246 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  resulting secondary beamwidth from the sphere was about 1 .8" (39.4 dB gain) with a relative  sidelobe level of 20 dB.
A total useful scan angle of 140" was demonstrated.
This type of  antenna is similar in many respects to the torus antenna described below.
 Parabolic Torus.
Wide scan angles in ene dimension can be obtained with a parabolic-torus  config~ration,~'-~~ the principle of which is shown in Fig.
7.16.
The parabolic torus is gen-  erated by rotating a section of a parabolic arc about an axis parallel to the latus rectum of the  parabola.
The cross section in one plane (the vertical plane in Fig.
7.16) is parabolic, while the  cross section in the orthogonal plane is circular.
The beam angle may be scanned by moving  the feed along a circle whose radius is approximately half the radius of the torus circle.
 The radius of the torus is made large enough so that the portion of tile circular cross section  illuminated by the feed will not differ appreciably from the surface of a true parabola.
Because  of the circular symmetry of the reflector surface in the horizontal plane, th~ beam can bc  readily scanned in the plane without any deterioration in the pattern.
 The wave reflected from the surface of the parabolic torus is not perfectly plane, but it can  be made to approach a plane wave by proper choice of the ratio of focal length f to the radius  of the torus R.
The optimum ratio offlR lies between 0.43 and 0.45.39  Good radiation patterns are possible in the principal planes with sidelobes only sl~ghtly  worse than those of a conventional paraboloid.
The larger the ratio of f/D, the better the  radiation pattern.
(The diameter D in the parabolic torus is the diameter of the illuminated  area rather than the diameter of the torus itself.) The highest sidelobes produced by the  parabolic torus do not lie within the principal planes.
The inherent phase errors of  the parabolic-torus surface due to its deviation from a true parabola can cause sidelobes on  the order of 15 dB in intermediate planes.38 These sidelobes usually lie in the 45" plane and are  called eyes, because of their characteristic appearance on a contour plot of the radiation  pattern.
 In principle the parabolic torus can be scanned 180°, but because of beam spillover near  the end of the scan and self-blocking by the opposite edge of the reflector, the maximum scan  angle is usually limited to the vicinity of 120".
 Only a portion of the parabolic-torus is illuminated by the feed at any particular time.
 This may appear to result in low aperture utilization or poor efficiency since the total physical  area is not related in a simple manner.to the gain as it is in a fully illuminated antenna.
 However, the cost of the fixed reflector of the parabolic torus is relatively cheap compared with  antennas which must be mechanically scanned.
Nonutilization of the entire apertare is  probably not too important a consideration when overall cost and feasibility are taken into  account.
 Figure 7.16 Principle of the parabolic-torus antenna.
 246INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS resulting secondary beamwidth fromthespherewasabout1.8°(39.4dBgain)witharelative sidelobe levelof20dB.Atotalusefulscanangleof140°wasdemonstrated.
Thistypeof antenna issimilarinmanyrespectstothetorusantenna described below.
Parabolic Torus.Widescananglesinonedimension canbeobtained withaparabolic-torus configuration,37-41theprinciple ofwhichisshowninFig.7.16.Theparabolic torusisgen­ eratedbyrotatingasectionofaparabolic arcaboutanaxisparalleltothelatusrectumofthe parabola.
Thecrosssectioninoneplane(theverticalplaneinFig.7.16)isparabolic, whilethe crosssectionintheorthogonal planeiscircular.
Thebeamanglemaybescanned bymoving thefeedalongacirclewhoseradiusisapproximately halftheradiusofthetoruscirck.
Theradiusofthetorusismadelargeenoughsothattheportionofthecircularcrosssection illuminated bythefeedwillnotdifferappreciably fromthesurfaceofatrueparabola.
Because ofthecircular symmetry ofthereflector surfaceinthehorizontal plane, th~beamcanbe readilyscanned intheplanewithoutanydeterioration inthepattern.
Thewavereflected fromthesurfaceoftheparabolic torusisnotperfectly plane,butitcan bemadetoapproach aplanewavebyproperchoiceoftheratiooffocallengthfto theradius ofthetorusR.Theoptimum ratioofIIRliesbetween 0.43and0.45.39 Goodradiation patterns arepossible intheprincipal planeswithsidelobes onlyslightly worsethanthoseofaconventional paraboloid.
ThelargertheratioofliD,thebetterthe radiation pattern.
(Thediameter Dintheparabolic torusisthediameter oftheilluminated arearatherthanthediameter ofthetorusitself.)Thehighestsidelobes produced bythe parabolic torusdonotliewithintheprincipal planes.Theinherent phaseerrorsof theparabolic-torus surfaceduetoitsdeviation fromatrueparabola cancausesidelobeson theorderof15dBinintermediate planes.38Thesesidelobes usuallylieinthe45°planeandare calledeyes,because oftheircharacteristic appearance onacontour plotoftheradiation pattern.
Inprinciple theparabolic toruscanbescanned 180°,butbecauseofbeamspillover near theendofthescanandself-blocking bytheopposite edgeofthereflector, themaximum scan angleisusuallylimitedtothevicinity'of120°.
Onlyaportionoftheparabolic-torus isilluminated bythefeedatanyparticular time.
Thismayappeartoresultinlowaperture utilization orpoorefficiency sincethetotalphysical areaisnotrelatedinasimplemanner,tothegainasitisinafullyilluminated antenna.
However, thecostofthefixedreflectoroftheparabolic torusisrelatively cheapcompared with antennas whichmustbemechanically scanned.
Nonutilization oftheentireaperture is probably nottooimportant aconsideration whenoverallcostandfeasibility aretakeninto account.
Centerof torus\ L~ ....."\ (motteed positionsGenerating parabola Figure7.16Principle oftheparabolic-torus antenna. Tlie advantage of the parabolic torus is that it provides an economical method for rapidly  scanning the beam of a physically large antenna aperture over a relatively wide scan angle witti  110 deterioration of tile pattern over tliis angle of scan.
Its disadvantages are its relatively large  pliysical size wlien cotill>ared witli other means for scaliriitlg arid the large sidelobes obtained  in intermediate planes.
 Organ-pipe scanner.
Scanning tlie beat11 in tile parabolic torus is accomplished by moving a  sitigle feed or by switching tlie transmitter between many fixed feeds.
A single moving feed may  he rotated about the center of tlie torus on an arm of length approximately one-half the radius  of tlie torus.
For exaniple, a 120" torus antenna might be scanned by continuously rotating  three feeds spaced 120" apart on the spokes of a wheel so that one feed is always illuminating  tlic reflector.
Altliougli tliis may be practical in small-size antennas, it becomes a difficult  ti~echariical probleni if tlic radius of the rotating arm is large.
 Scanning may also be accomplished by arranging a series of feeds on the locus of the focal  points of tile torus and switching the transmitter power from one feed to the next with an  organ-pipe  canner.'*^.'^^ The principle of the organ-pipe scanner is shown in Fig.
7.17.
The  traiist~iissioti lines from tile feeds are arranged to terminate on the periphery of a circle.
A feed  liorti is rotated witliin tliis circle, transferring power from the tratismitter to each feed or group  of feeds it1 turn.
The rotary horn may be flared to illuminate more than one elementary feed of  tllc row of feeds.
A11 the trans~nission lines in the organ-pipe scanner must be of equal length.
 The radiation pattern from a torus with a well-designed organ-pipe scanner changes but  little until the beam reaches one elid of ttie scanning aperture.
At this point the energy appears  at botli crids of tile aperture ar~d two beams are found in the secondary pattern.
The antenna  Figure 7.17 Principle of the organ-pipe  scanner.
 RADAR ANTENNAS 247 Theadvantage oftheparabolic torusisthatitprovides aneconomical methodforrapidly scanning thebeamof aphysically largeantenna aperture over.arelatively widescananglewith 110deterioration ofthepatternoverthisangleofscan.Itsdisadvantages areitsrelatively large physical sizewhencompared withothermeansforscanning andthelargesidelobes obtained inintermediate planes.
Organ-pipe scanner.
Scanning thebeamintheparabolic torusisaccomplished bymoving a singlefeedorbyswitching thetransmitter between manyfixedfeeds.Asinglemovingfeedmay berotatcdabouttheccnterofthetorusonanarmoflengthapproximately one-half theradius ofthetorus.Forcxampie,a1200torusantenna mightbescanned bycontinuously rotating threefeedsspaced1200apartonthespokesofawheelsothatonefeedisalwaysilluminating thcrenector.
Although thismaybepractical insmall-size antennas, itbecomes adifficult mcchanical problcm ifthcradiusoftherotating armislarge.
Scanning mayalsobeaccomplished byarranging aseriesoffeedsonthelocusofthefocal pointsofthetorusandswitching thetransmitter powerfromonefeedtothenextwithan organ-pipe scanner.128.129 Theprinciple oftheorgan-pipe scanner isshowninFig.7.17.The transmission linesfromthefeedsarearranged toterminate ontheperiphery ofacircle.Afeed hornisrotatedwithinthiscircle,transferring powerfromthetransmitter toeachfeedorgroup offeedsinturn.Therotaryhornmaybenaredtoilluminate morethanoneelementary feedof thcrowoffeeds.Allthetransmission linesintheorgan-pipe scanner mustbeofequallength.
Theradiation patternfromatoruswithawell-designed organ-pipe scanner changes but littleuntilthebeamreachesoneendofthescanning aperture.
Atthispointtheenergyappears athothcndsofthcaperture andtwobeamsarefoundinthesecondary pattern.
Theantenna Figure7.17Principle ortheorgan-pipe scanner. 248 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  cannot be used during this period of ambiguity, called the dead tinte.
In one model of the  organ-pipe scanner, 36 elements were fed, three at a time.''* The dead time for this model is  equivalent to rotation past two of the 36 elements; conseqi~ently it was inoperative about 6  percent of the time.
 In Fig.
7.17 the feeds are shown on a straight line, but in the parabolic torus they would  lie on the arc of a circle.
 The many feed horns plus all the transmission lines of the organ-pipe scanner result in a  relatively large structure with significant aperture blocking.
Aperture blocking can be min-  imized by designing the parabolic portion of the torus as an offset parabola, just as in tlie casc  of a paraboloid.
 Other feed-motion scanners.
There exist a number of antennas in which the beam is rapidly  scanned over a limited sector by the mechanical motion of the feed.
The motion of the feed is  generally circular.
The electromagnetic path within the antenna structure is designed to con-  vert the circular motion of the feed to a linear motion of the antenna beam.
In some designs the  beam sweeps across a plane and then returns by the same route.
In other designs the scan is i ../ saw-tooth with the beam sweeping across the plane of scan and then stepping back almost  instantaneously to its starting point.
The saw-tooth scan is generally preferred in radar applica-  tions.
Such antennas would be used where a small angular sector needs to be covered with a  rapid scan rate.
These antennas can cover a sector of from 10 to 20 degrees or more, at a rate of  10 to 20 scans per second or greater.
This is a rapid enough rate to permit essentially contin-  uous observation of the target.
A radar which uses such a sector-scanning antenna to track the  path of airborne targets is sometimes called a track-wllile-scan radar.
 The details of feed-motion scanners may be found in the literat~re.'.~~*'~ Many of tl~cse,  such as the Robinson, Foste~-,~~+'~~ Lewis, and Schwarzchild, were developed during World  War 11.
Various types of lenses, pillboxes, and trough waveguides have also been used for  mechanically scanning a beam over an angular sector.
Another mechanical scanner is a coaxial  line with radiating slots cut in its side.' The inner conductor is corrugated and eccentric with  respect to the outer conductor.
As the inner conductor rotates the wavelength in the linc  varies, causing the beam to scan.
 7.5 LENS ANTENNAS  The most common type of radar antenna is the parabolic reflector in one of its varioi~s forms.
 The microwave paraboloid reflector is analogous to an automobile headlight or to a searcti-  light mirror.
The analogy of an optical lens is also found in radar.
Three types of microwave  lenses applicable to radar are (1) dielectric lenses, (2) metal-plate lenses, and (3) lenses with  noni~nif~rm index of refraction.
 Dielectric lenses.
The homogeneous, solid, dielectric-lens antenna of Fig.
7.18a is similar to  the conventional optical lens.
A point at the focus of the lens produces a plane wave on the  opposite side of the lens.
Focusing action is a result of the difference in the velocity of  propagation inside the dielectric as compared with the velocity of propagation in air.
The  index of refraction q of a dielectric is defined as the speed of light in free space to the speed of  light in the dielectric medium.
It is equal to the square root of the dielectric constant.
Materials  such as polyethylene, polystyrene, Plexiglas, and Teflon are suitable for small microwave  lenses.
They have low loss and may be easily shaped to the desired contour.
Since the velocity  of propagation is greater in air than in the dielectric medium, a converging lens is thicker in the  middle than at the outer edges, just as in the optical case.
 248INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS cannotbeusedduringthisperiodofambiguity, calledthedeadtime.Inonemodelofthe organ-pipe scanner,J6elements werefed,threeatatime.121lThedeadtimeforthismodelis equivalent torotation pasttwoofthe36elements; consequently itwasinoperative about6 percentofthetime.
InFig.7.17thefeedsareshownonastraight line,butintheparabolic torustheywould lieonthearcofacircle.
Themanyfeedhornsplusallthetransmission linesoftheorgan-pipe scanner resultina relatively largestructure withsignificant aperture blocking.
Aperture blocking canhemin­ imizedbydesigning theparabolic portionofthetorusasanoffsetparabola,just asinthecase ofaparaboloid.
Otherfeed-motion scanners.
Thereexistanumherofantennas inwhichthebeamisrapidly scanned overalimitedsectorbythemechanical motionofthefeed.Themotionofthefeedis generally circular.
Theelectromagnetic pathwithintheantenna structure isdesigned tocon­ vertthecircularmotionofthefeedtoalinearmotionoftheantenna beam.Insomedesignsthe beamsweepsacrossaplaneandthenreturnsbythesameroute.Inotherdesignsthescanis saw-tooth withthebeamsweeping acrosstheplaneofscanandthenstepping backalmost instantaneously toitsstarting point.Thesaw-tooth scanisgenerally preferred inradarapplica­ tions.Suchantennas wouldbeusedwhereasmallangular sectorneedstobecovered witha rapidscanrate.Theseantennas cancoverasectoroffrom10to20degreesormore,ata'rateof 10to20scanspersecondorgreater.Thisisarapidenoughratetopermitessentially contin­ uousobservation ofthetarget.Aradarwhichusessuchasector-scanning antenna totrackthe pathofairborne targetsissometimes calledatrack~wlJile-scan radar.
Thedetailsoffeed-motion scanners maybefoundintheliterature.,·42.43 Manyofthese, suchastheRobinson, Foster,44.134 Lewis,andSchwarzchild, weredeveloped duringWorld WarII.Various typesoflenses,pillboxes, andtroughwaveguides havealsobeenusedfor mechanically scanning abeamoveranangularsector.Another mechanical scanner isacoaxial linewithradiating slotscutinitsside.1Theinnerconductor iscorrugated andeccentric with respecttotheouterconductor.
Astheinnerconductor rotatesthewavelength intheline varies,causing thebeamtoscan.
7.5LENSANTENNAS Themostcommon typeofradarantenna istheparabolic reflector inoneofitsvariousforms.
Themicrowave paraboloid reflector isanalogous toanautomobile headlight ortoasearch­ lightmirror.Theanalogy ofanopticallensisalsofoundinradar.Threetypesofmicrowave lensesapplicable toradarare(1)dielectric lenses,(2)metal-plate lenses,and(3)lenseswith nonuniform indexofrefraction.
Dielectric lenses.Thehomogeneous, solid,dielectric-lens antenna ofFig.7.18aissimilarto theconventional opticallens.Apointatthefocusofthelensproduces aplanewaveonthe opposite sideofthelens.Focusing actionisaresultofthedifference inthevelocity of propagation insidethedielectric ascompared withthevelocity ofpropagation inair.The indexofrefraction 11ofadielectric isdefinedasthespeedoflightinfreespacetothespeedof lightinthedielectric medium.Itisequaltothesquarerootofthedielectric constant.
Materials suchaspolyethylene, polystyrene, Plexiglas, andTeflonaresuitable forsmallmicrowave lenses.Theyhavelowlossandmaybeeasilyshapedtothedesiredcontour.
Sincethevelocity ofpropagation isgreaterinairthaninthedielectric medium, aconverging lensisthickerinthe middlethanattheouteredges,justasintheopticalcase. Fi~urc 7.18 ((I) ('orivcrgirip-lcri nritcnri:i coristr~ictcd of Iiomoger~cnus solid dielectric.
Direct niicrowavc  ;tr~;~logy of tlic optic;~l lcr~g (11) Zorlcld diclcctric Icns.
 Orlc of the lirnit;~tio~ls of tile solid llotnogerieous dielectric lcns is its thick size and large  weight.
Both the tllickness arid tile weight may be reduced considerably by stepping or zoning  the lcrls (Fig.
7.1Xh).
Zoning is based on the fact that a 360" cliange of phase at the aperture 11x9  no eCPect on the aperture phase distribution.
Starting with zero thickness at the edge of the lens,  the thickness of the dielectric is progressively increased toward the lens axis as in the design of  a riormal lens.
However, when the path length introduced by the dielectric is equal to a  wavelength.
the path in the dielectric can be reduced to zero without altering the phase across  the aperture.
The thickness of the lens is again increased in the direction of the axis according  to the leris design until the path length in the dielectric is once more 360°, at which time  another step may be made.
The optical path length through each of the zones is one  wavelength less than the next outer zone.
 Although zoning reduces the size and weight of a lens, it is not without disadvantages.
 1)ielcctric lenses are normally wideband; however, zoning results in a frequency-sensitive  device.
Another limitation is the loss in energy and increase in sidelobe level caused by the  sliadowing produced by the steps.
The effect of the steps may be minimized by using a design  with large 111).
on the order of 1 or niore.
Even with these limitations, astepped lens is usually  to be preferred because of the significant reduction in weight.
 The larger the dielectric constant (or index of refraction) of a solid dielectric lens, the  thinner it witt be.
However, the larger the dielectric constant, the greater will be the mismatch  between the lens and free space and the greater the loss in energy due to reflections at the  surface of the lens.
Compromise values of the index of refraction lie between 1.5 and 1.6.
Lens  reflections may also be reduced with transition surfaces as in optics.
These surfaces should be a  quarter wave thick and have a dielectric constant which is the square root of the dielectric  constant of the lens material.
 Artificial  dielectric^.^^ 47 Instead of using ordinary dielectric materials for lens antennas, it is  possible to construct them of artificial dielectrics.
The ordinary dielectric consists of molecular  particles of microscopic size, but the artificial dielectric consists of discrete metallic or dielec-  tric particles of macroscopic size.
The particles may be spheres, disks, strips, or rods imbedded  in a material of low dielectric constant such as polystyrene foam.
The particles are arranged in  some particular configuration in a three-dimensional lattice.
The dimension of the particles in  the direction parallel to the electric field as well as the spacing between particles should be  sniall cornpared with a wavelength.
If these conditions are met.
the lens will be insensitive to  frequency.
 RADAR ANTENNAS 249 (a)Focus--------- (b) Fi~un'7.IR(II)Converging-lens antenna constrllctcd ofhomogcncolls soliddielectric.
Dircctmicrowave analogy oftheoplicallens.(11)Zoneddielectric lens.
Oneofthelimitations ofthesolidhomogeneous dielectric lensisitsthicksizeandlarge weight.Boththethickness andtheweightmaybereducedconsiderably bystepping orzoning thclcns(Fig.7.1HI,).Zoningisbasedonthefactthata360°changeofphaseattheaperture has noeffectontheaperture phasedistribution.
Starting withzerothickness attheedgeofthelens, thethickness ofthedielectric isprogressively increased towardthelensaxisasinthedesignof anormal lens.However, whenthepathlengthintroduced bythedielectric isequaltoa wavelength.
thepathinthedielectric canbereduced tozerowithout alteringthephaseacross theaperture.
Thethickness ofthelensisagainincreased inthedirection oftheaxisaccording tothelensdesignuntilthepathlengthinthedielectric isoncemore360°,atwhichtime another stepmaybemade.Theopticalpathlengththrough eachofthezonesisone wavelength lessthanthenextouterzone.
Although zoningreduces thesizeandweightofalens,itisnotwithout disadvantages.
Dielectric lensesarenormally wideband; however, zoningresultsinafrequency-sensitive device.Another limitation isthelossinenergyandincrease insidelobe levelcausedbythe shadowing produced bythesteps.Theerfectofthestepsmaybeminimized byusingadesign withlargefiD.ontheorderof1ormore.Evenwiththeselimitations, astepped lensisusually tobeprererred because ofthesignificant reduction inweight.
Thelargerthedielectric constant (orindexofrefraction) ofasoliddielectric lens,the thinneritwinbe.However, thelargerthedielectric constant, thegreaterwillbethemismatch between thelensandfreespaceandthegreaterthelossinenergyduetoreflections atthe surfaceofthelens.Compromise valuesoftheindexofrefraction liebetween 1.5and1.6.Lens reflections mayalsobereduced withtransition surfaces asinoptics.Thesesurfaces shouldbea quarter wavethickandhaveadielectric constant whichisthesquarerootofthedielectric constant ofthelensmaterial.
Artificial dielectrics.4547Insteadofusingordinary dielectric materials forlensantennas, itis possible toconstruct themofartificial dielectrics.
Theordinary dielectric consistsofmolecular particles ofmicroscopic size,buttheartificial dielectric consistsofdiscrete metallicordielec­ tricparticles ofmacroscopic size.Theparticles maybespheres, disks,strips,orrodsimbedded inamaterial oflowdielectric constant suchaspolystyrene foam.Theparticles arearranged in someparticular configuration inathree-dimensional lattice.Thedimension oftheparticles in thedirection paralleltotheelectric fieldaswellasthespacing between particles shouldbe smallcompared withawavelength.
]ftheseconditions aremet.thelenswillbeinsensitive to frequency. When the particles are metallic spheres of radius u and spacing s between centers, the  dielectric constant of the artificial dielectric is approxima(e1y  assuming no interaction between the spheres.47  An artificial dielectric may also be constructed by using a solid dielectric material with a  controlled pattern of voids.
This is a form of Babinet inverse of the more usual artificial  dielectric composed of particles imbedded in a low-dielectric-constant material."' The voids  may be either spheres or cylinders, but the latter are easier to machine.
 Lenses made from artificial dielectrics are generally of less weight than those from solid  dielectrics.
For this reason, artificial dielectrics are often preferred when the size of the antenna is  large, as, for example, at the lower radar frequencies.
Artificial-dielectric Imses may bz  designed in the same manner as other dielectric lenses.
 Metal-plate lens.49- An artificial dielectric may be constructed with parallel-plate wave-  guides as shown in Fig.
7.19.
The phase velocity in parallel-plate waveguide is greater than that  in free space; hence the index of refraction is less than unity.
This is opposite to the usual  optical refracting medium.
A converging metal-plate lens is therefore thinner at the center than  at the edges, as opposed to a converging dielectric lens which is thinner at the edges.
The  metal-plate lens shown in Fig.
7.19 is an E-plane lens since the electric-field vector is parallel to  the plates.
Snell's law is obeyed in an E-plane lens, and the direction of the rays through the  lens is governed by the usual optical laws involving the idex of refraction.
 The surface contour of a metal-plate lens is, in general, not parabolic as in the case of the  refle~tor.~ For example, the surface closest to the feed is an ellipsoid of revolution if the sirrfact  at the opposite face of the lens is plane.
 The spacing s between the plates of the metal-plate lens must lie between 1/2 and A if only  the dominant mode is to be propagated.
The index of refraction for this type of metal-plate  lens is  H  Direction.
of Figure 7.19 Plan, elevation, and end  propagat~on views of a converging lens antenna  constructed from parallel-plate wave-  guide.
(E-plane metal-plate lens.)  (7.20)250INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS Whentheparticles aremetaIlic spheresofradiusaandspacingsbetween centers, the dielectric constant oftheartificial dielectric isapproximately (= 1+41r~l3 5 assuming nointeraction between thespheres.47 Anartificial dielectric mayalsobeconstructed byusingasoliddielectric material witha controlled patternofvoids.ThisisaformofBabinet inverseofthemoreusualartificial dielectric composed ofparticles imbedded inalow-dielectric-constant material.4!lThevoids maybeeitherspheresorcylinders, butthelatterareeasiertomachine.
Lensesmadefromartificial dielectrics aregenerally oflessweightthanthosefromsolid dielectrics.
Forthisreason,artificial dielectrics areoftenpreferred whenthesizeoftheantenna is large,as,forexample, atthelowerradarfrequencies.
Artificial-dielectric lensesmaybe designed inthesamemanner asotherdielectric lenses.
Metal-plate lens.49-52Anartificial dielectric maybeconstructed withparallel-plate wave­ guidesassl\OwninFig.7.19.Thephasevelocity inparallel-plate waveguide isgreaterthanthat infreespace;hencetheindexofrefraction islessthanunity.Thisisopposite totheusual opticalrefracting medium.
Aconverging metal-plate lensistherefore thinneratthecenterthan attheedges,asopposed toaconverging dielectric lenswhichisthinnerattheedges.The metal-plate lensshowninFig.7.19isanE-plane lenssincetheelectric-field vectorisparallelto theplates.Snell'slawisobeyedinanE-plane lens,andthedirection oftheraysthrough the lensisgoverned bytheusualopticallawsinvolving theidexofrefraction.
Thesurfacecontour ofametal-plate lensis,ingeneral, notparabolic asinthecaseofthe reflector.7Forexample, thesurfaceclosesttothefeedisanellipsoid ofrevolution ifthesurface attheopposite faceofthelensisplane.
Thespacingsbetween theplatesofthemetal-plate lensmustliebetween A/2andA.ifonly thedominant modeistobepropagated.
Theindexofrefraction forthistypeofmetal-plate lensis IIII1I1111111I11 EH(3..
E[().)2]1/2'1=1-­2s E L-r Direction ofpropogotion(7.21) Figure7.19Plan,elevation, andend viewsofaconverging lensantenna constructed fromparallel-plate wave­ guide.(E-plane metal-plate lens.) RAI)AR ANTENNAS 251  tvl~ere A is tlie wiivclerigtli ill air.
f'qtlatiori (7.21) is always less tliati unity.
At the upper limit of  spacing.
s = /I.
tlie iridcx of rcl'riictiori is equal to 0.866.
The closer the spacing, the less will be  tlie index of refractiori arid tlic tliiritier will be the ieris.
However, the spacing, and therefore the  index of refractiori.
cannot bc made arbitrarily small since the reflection from the interface  between the lens arid air will increase just as in the case of the solid-dielectric lenses.
For a  valilc of s = Ai2.
rllc iridex of rcfractioti is zero and the waveguide is beyond cutoff.
The wave  iriciderir or1 the lens will be cornpletely reflected.
Iri practice, a compromise value of q between  0.5 arid 0.6 is ofteri selected, corresponding to plate spacings of0.557A and 0.625A and to power  rcllcctioris ;it riorrn;~l iricidericc of 1 1 arid 6.25 percent, respectively (Ref.
1, p.
410).
 liven wit11 an iridcx of refractiori in the vicinity of 0.5 to 0.6, the thickness of the metal-  plate leris becomes large unless inconveniently long focal lengths are used.
The thickness may  he recttrced by zo~iirig just as with a dielectric lens.
The bandwidth of a zoned metal-plate lens  is larger than tlii~t of an urizoticd lens, but tile steps in the lens coritour scatter tlie incident  energy iri undesired directions, reduce the gain, and increase the sidelobe level.
An example of  an .Y-barid rrietal-plate zoned leris is shown in Fig.
7.20.
 Atlottier class of rr~etal-plate lerls is the constrained lens, or path-length lens, in which the  rays are guided or constrairled by the metal plates.
In the H-plane metal-plate constrained  letis.
tlie electric field is perpendicular to the plates (H field parallel); thus the velocity of the  wave wliicli propag;ites tlirougli tlie plates is relatively unaffected provided the plate spacing is  Figure 7.20 .Y-hand metal-plate zoned lens.
 RADAR ANTENNAS 251 whereAisthewavelength inair.Equation (7.21)isalwayslessthanunity.Attheupperlimitof spacing.
S=A.tileindexofrefraction isequalto0.866.Thecloserthespacing, thelesswillbe theindexofrefraction andthethinnerwillbethelens.However, thespacing, andtherefore the indexorrefraction.
cannot bemadearbitrarily smallsincethereflection fromtheinterface bctween theIcnsandairwillincrease justasinthecaseofthesolid-dielectric lenses.Fora valueors=,1./2.theilldexorrefraction iszeroandthewaveguide isbeyondcutoffThewave incident onthelenswillbecompletely reflected.
Inpractice, acompromise valueoftTbetween 0.5and0.6isoftenselected.
corresponding toplatespacings of0.557,1.and0.625..1.andtopower rellcctions atnormal incidence orIIand6.25percent, respectively (Ref.1,p.410).
Evenwithanindexofrefraction inthevicinity of0.5to0.6,thethickness ofthemetal­ platelensbecomes largeunlessinconveniently longfocallengthsareused.Thethickness may hereduced byzoningjustaswithadielectric lens.Thebandwidth ofazonedmetal-plate lens islargerthanthatofanunlOned lens,butthestepsinthelenscontour scattertheincident energyinundesired directions, reducethegain,andincrease thesidelobe level.Anexample of anX-bandmetal-plate zonedlensisshowninFig.7.20.
Another classofmetal-plate lellsistheconstrained lens,orpath-length lens,inwhichthe raysareguidedorconstrained bythemctalplates.IntheH-plane metal-plate constrained ICllS.theelectric fieldisperpendicular totheplates(Hfieldparallel); thusthevelocity ofthe wavewhichpropagates through theplatesisrelatively unaffected provided theplatespacing is Figure7.20X-handmetal-plate zonedJens. 252 I~I KODUCTION TO KADAK SYSI'EMS  gsciiter ~IIWII A/2.
Tlie direction of tile rays is [lot affccted by the refractive indcx, and Sncll's law  does not apply.
Focusing action is obtained by constraining the waves to pass bet wren thc  plates in such a manner that the path length can be increased above that in free space.
In one  type of cylindrical constrained lens with the E field parallel to the plates, a I" beam coi~ld bc  scauiled over a 100" sector by positioning the line feed." The lcris was 72 wavelengths in sire,  had an /;ID = 1.5, and operated at a wavelength of 1.25 cm.
 Luneburg lens.
Workers in the field of optics have from time to timc devised lenses in whicl~  the index of refraction varied in some prescribed manner within the lens.
Althoi~gh such lerlstls  Ilad interesting properties, they were only of academic interest since optical materials with the  required variation of index of refraction were not practical.
However, at microwave freqilen-  cies it is possible to control the index of refraction of materials (q is the square root of the  dielectric constant 0, and lenses with a noni~niform index of refraction art: practical.
 One of the most important of the variable-index-of-refraction lenses in the field of radar is  that due to Luneburg.'' The Luneburg lens is spherically symmetric and has the property that  a plane wave incident on the sphere is focused to a point on the surface at the diametrically  opposite side.
Likewise, a transmitting point source on the surface of the sphere is converted to  a plane wave on passing through the lens (Fig.
7.21).
Because of the spherical symmetry of the  lens, the focusing property does not depend upon the direction of the incident wave.
The beam  may be scanned by positioning a single feed anywhere on the surface of the lens or by locating  many feeds along the surface of the sphere and switching the radar transmitter or receiver from  one horn to another.
The Luneberg lens can also generate a number of fixed beams.
 The index of refraction q or the dielectric constant c varies with the radial distance in a  Luneburg lens of radius r,, according to the relationship  The iadex of refraction is a maximum at the center, where it equals fl, and decreases to a  valuc of 1 on the periphery.
 Practical three-dimensional Luneburg lenses have been constructed of a large number of  spherical shells, each of constant index of refraction.
Discrete changes in index of refraction  approximate a continuous variation.
In one example of a Luneburg lens 10 concentric spheri- + --  cal shells are arranged one within the ~ther.~~.~~ The dielectric constant of the individual shells  varies from 1.1 to 2.0 in increments of 0.1.
 I t  Point I  source I >  I  I >  I h  I .
Figure 7.21 Luneburg-lens geometry showing rays from  I a point source radiated as a plane wave after passage  I through the lens.
 (7.22)252INTlWDUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS greatathanJ../2.Thedirection oftheraysisnotaffected bytherefractive index,andSnell'slaw doesnotapply.Focusing actionisobtained.byconstraining thewavestopassbetween the platesinsuchamanner thatthepathlengthcanbeincreased abovethatinfreespace.Inone typeofcylindrical constrained lenswiththeEfieldparalleltotheplates,a 10beamcouidbe scanned overa1000sectorbypositioning thelinefeed.52Thelenswas72wavelengths insile, hadan/lD=1.5,andoperated atawavelength of1.25cm.
Luneburg lens.Workers inthefieldofopticshavefromtimetotimedevised lensesinwhich theindexofrefraction variedinsomeprescribed manner withinthelens.Although suchlenses hadinteresting properties, theywereonlyofacademic interest sinceopticalmaterials withthe required variation ofindexofrefraction werenotpractical.
However, atmicrowave frequen­ ciesitispossible tocontrol theindexofrefraction ofmaterials (tlisthesquarerootofthe dielectric constant (),andlenseswithanonuniform indexofrefraction arepractical.
Oneofthemostimportant ofthevariable-index-of-refraction lensesinthefieldofradaris thatduetoLuneburg.53TheLuneburg lensisspherically symmetric andhastheproperty that aplanewaveincident onthesphereisfocused toapointonthesurfaceatthediametrically opposite side.Likewise, atransmitting pointsourceonthesurfaceofthesphereisconverted to aplanewaveonpassingthrough thelens(Fig.7.21).Because ofthespherical symmetry ofthe lens,thefocusing property doesnotdependuponthedirection oftheincident wave.Thebeam maybescanned bypositioning asinglefeedanywhere onthesurfaceofthelensorbylocating manyfeedsalongthesurfaceofthesphereandswitching theradartransmitter orreceiver from onehorntoanother.
TheLuneberg lenscanalsogenerate anumber offixedbeams.
Theindexofrefraction tlorthedielectric constant £varieswiththeradialdistance ina Luneburg lensofradiusro,according totherelationship ~~(~"~[2-(:JI'" The[;ldexofrefraction isamaximum atthecenter,whereitequalsfitanddecreases toa valueof1ontheperiphery.
Practical three-dimensional Luneburg lenseshavebeenconstructed ofalargenumber of spherical shells,eachofconstant indexofrefraction.
Discrete changes inindexofrefraction approximate acontinuous variation.
Inoneexample ofaLuneburg lens10concentric spheri­ calshellsarearranged onewithintheother.54•55Thedielectric constant oftheindividual shells variesfrom1.1to2.0inincrements of0.1.
Point source fl.::------l>-------+-.---~ Figure7.21Luneburg-Iens geometry showing raysfrom apointsourceradiated asaplanewaveafterpassage through thelens. The dielectric materials must not be too heavy, yet they must be strong enough to support  tlterr own weight without collapsing.
They should have low dielectric loss and not be affected  by the weattier or by changes in temperature.
They should be easily manufactured wit11  ilriiform properties and must be liomogeneous and isotropic if the performance characteristics  are to be iridepeildcrit of positio~i.
 The antenna pattern of a Luneburg lens lias a slightly narrower beamwidth than that of a  ~>;~~;tl~oloiditl reflector of tlic s;ttr~c circul:~r cross scctiori, but tlie sidelohe level is greater.
56 60  'I liis is due to tlic fact that tlie paths followed by the rays in a Luneburg lens tend to  coricetitrate energy toward the edge of tlie aperture.
This makes it difficult to achieve extremely  low sidclobes.
In practice, tile sidelobe level of a Luneburg lens seetns to be in the vicinity of 20  to 22 dB.
 When the full 4n radiaris ~f solid coverage is not required, a smaller portion of the lens can  be used, with a saving in size and  eight.^'.^^ The Luneburg-lens principlecan also be applied as  a passive reflector iri a niariner arialogous to a corner refle~tor.~' If a reflecting cap is placed  over a portion of tlie spherical lens, an incident wave emerges in the same direction from which  it eritered.
The cap may be made to cover a sector as large as a hemisphere.
 Otie of [lie liniitatioris of a dielectric lens is tlie problem of removing heat dissipated  witliin the interior.
Dielectrics are generally poor conductors of heat.
Unless materials are of  low loss and can operate at elevated temperatures,63 dielectric lenses such as the Luneburg  letis are more suited to receiving, rather than transmitting, applications.
 Tile Luneburg principle may also be applied to a two-dimensional lens which generates a  fan bean1 in one plane.
In the geodesic analog of a two-dimensional Luneburg lens the  variation iri dielectric constant is obtained by the increased path length for the RF energy  traveling in ttie TEM mode between parallel The result is a dome-shaped parallel-  plate region as shown in Fig.
7.22.
 Other types of lenses based or? the principle of nonuniform index of refraction have been  d~scribed.~~.~".~~ Hornogerieoi~s sptierical lenses with uniform dielectric constant are also of  interest69 " if tlie index of refractiori is not too high and if the diameter is not greater than  about 30i.
They can be competitive to the Lunebuig lens, especially for high-power  applications.'  Lens  tolerance^.'.^ In general, tlie mechanical tolerances for a lens antenna are less severe than  for a reflector.
A given error in the contour of a mechanical reflector contributes twice to the  error in ttie wavefront because of the two-way path on refection.
Mechanical errors in the lens  contour, IJbwever, contribute but once to the phase-front error.
Although the theoretical  tolerance of a lens may be less than required of a reflector, in practice it might be more difficult  to achieve a given level of performance in a lens.
A reflector can be readily supported mechan-  ically from the back.
This is not available in a lens where the mechanical support is from the  ~~eriphery of the leris arid from the mechanical properties of the lens material itself.
Another  source of error in the lens not found in reflector antenna is the variation in the properties of  tlie leris material.
Both real arid artificial dielectrics are not always perfectly uniform from  sar~iple to sar~iple or even witliin tlie same sample.
 Figure 7.22 The "tin-hat" geodesic analog of a two-  dimensional Luneburg lens.
 RADAR ANTENNAS 253 Thedielectric materials mustnotbetooheavy,yettheymustbestrongenoughtosupport theirownweightwithout collapsing.
Theyshouldhave lowdielectric lossandnotbeaffected bytheweather orbychanges intemperature.
Theyshouldbeeasilymanufactured with uniform properties andmusthehomogeneous andisotropic iftheperformance characteristics aretobeindependent ofposition.
Theantenna patternofaLuneburg lenshasaslightlynarrower beamwidth thanthatofa paraholoidal rellector ofthesalliecircular crosssection, hutthesidelohe levelisgreater.5660 Thisisduetothefactthatthepathsfollowed bytheraysinaLuneburg lenstendto concentrate energytowardtheedgeoftheaperture.
Thismakesitdifficulttoachieveextremely lowsidclobes.
Inpractice, thesidelobe levelofaLuneburg lensseemstobeinthevicinityof20 to22dB.
Whentheful14rcradiansIJfsolidcoverage isnotrequired, asmallerportionofthelenscan heused,withasavinginsizeandweight.61.62TheLuneburg-Iens principle canalsobeappliedas apassivereflector inamanner analogous toacornerrenector.61Ifareflecting capisplaced overaportionofthespherical lens,anincident waveemerges inthesamedirection fromwhich itentered.
Thecapmaybemadetocoverasectoraslargeasahemisphere.
Oneoftltelimitations ofadielectric lensistheproblem ofremoving heatdissipated withintheinterior.
Dielectrics aregenerally poorconductors ofheat.Unlessmaterials areof lowlossandcanoperate atelevated temperatures,63 dielectric lensessuchastheLuneburg lensaremoresuitedtoreceiving, ratherthantransmitting, applications.
TheLuneburg principle mayalsobeappliedtoatwo-dimensional lenswhichgenerates a fanbeaminoneplane.Inthegeodesic analogofatwo-dimensional Luneburg lensthe variation indielectric constant isobtained bytheincreased pathlengthfortheRFenergy traveling intheTEMmodebetween parallelplates.64--67Theresultisadome-shaped parallel­ plateregionasshowninFig.7.22.
Othertypesoflenseshasedontheprinciple ofnonuniform indexofrefraction havebeen dcscrihed.43.6o.6R Homogeneous spherical lenseswithuniform dielectric constant arealsoof interest6971iftheindexofrefraction isnottoohighandifthediameter isnotgreaterthan about30kTheycanbecompetitive totheLuneburg lens,especially forhigh-power applications.71 Lenstolerances.1.2Ingeneral, themechanical tolerances foralensantenna arelessseverethan forarenector.
Agivenerrorinthecontour ofamechanical reflector contributes twicetothe errorinthewavefront because ofthetwo-way pathonreflection.
Mechanical errorsinthelens contour, However, contribute butoncetothephase-front error.Although thetheoretical tolerance ofalensmaybelessthanrequired ofareflector, inpractice itmightbemoredifficult toachieve agivenlevelofperformance inalens.Areflector canbereadilysupported mechan­ icallyfromtheback.Thisisnotavailable inalenswherethemechanical support isfromthe periphery ofthelensandfromthemechanical properties ofthelensmaterial itself.Another sourceoferrorinthelensnotfoundinreflector antenna isthevariation intheproperties of thelensmaterial.
Bothrealandartificial dielectrics arenotalwaysperfectly uniform from sampletosampleorevenwithinthesamesample.
Figure7.22The"tin-hat" geodesic analogoratwo­ dimensional Luneburg lens. Evaluation of lenses as antennas.
One of the advantages of a lens over a reflector antenna is the  absence of aperture blocking.
Considerable equipmen1 can be placed at the focus of the lens  without interfering with the resultant antenna pattern.
The first monopulse radars used lenses  for this purpose, but with time the monopulse RF circuitry was reduced in size and the  reflector antenna came to be preferred over the lens.
The lens is capable of scanning the beam  over a wide angle.
Theoretically the Luneburg lens or the homogeneous sphere can cover  4n steradians.
Constrained metal-plate lenses are capable of wide scan angles as compared to  the limited scanning possible by moving the feed in a paraboloid reflector.
 The lens is usually less efficient than comparable reflector antennas because of loss when  propagating through the lens medium and the redectioris from the two lens surfaces.
In a  zoned lens there will be additional, undesired scattering from the steps.
Although it is danger-  ous to generalize, the additional losses from the sources in a stepped lens might be 1 or 2 dB.72  The lack of suitable solid or artificial dielectric materials has limited the de,yelopment of  lenses.
The problem of dissipating heat from large dielectric lenses can sometimes restrict their  use to moderate-power or to receiver applications.
Conventional lenses are usually large and  heavy, unless zoned.
To reduce the loss caused by scattering from the steps in a zoned lens,  the ratio of the focal length f to the antenna diameter D must be made large (of the ordcr of  unity).
Lenses which must scan by positioning the feed should also have large f/D ratio.
A large  flD requires a greater mechanical structure because the feeds are bigger and must be supported  farther from the lens.
The mechanical sapport of a lens is usually more of a problem than with  a reflector.
 The wide-angle scanning capability of a lens would be of interest in radar as a competitor  for a phased array if there were available a practical means for electronically switching the  transmitter and receiver among fixed feeds so as to achieve a rapidly scanning beam.
 7.6 PATTERN SY NTHESlS  The problem of pattern synthesis in antenna design is to find the proper distribution of current  across a finite-width aperture so as to produce a radiation pattern which approximates the  desired pattern under some condition of optimization.
Pattern-synthesis methods may be  divided into two classes, depending upon whether the aperture is continuous or an array.
The  current distributions derived for continuous apertures may sometimes be used to approximate  the array-aperture distributions, and vice versa, when the number of elements of the array-  antenna is large.
The discussion in this section applies, for the most part, to linear one-  dimensional apertures or to rectangular apertures where the distribution is separable, that is,  where A(x, z) = A(x)A(z).
 The synthesis techniques which apply to array antennas usually assume uniformly spaced  isotropic elements.
The element spacing is generally taken to be a llalf wave-length.
If ttlc  elemerlts were not isotropic but had a pattern Ee(8), and if the desired overall pattern were  derloted E,(8), the pattern to be found by synthesis using techniques derived for.
isotropic  elements would be given by E,(B)/E,(B).
 Fourier-integral synthesis.
The Fourier-integral relationship between the field-intensity pat-  tern and the aperture distribution was discussed in Sec.
7.2.
The distribution A(z) across a  continuous aperture was given by Eq.
(7.14).
 (7.14)254INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS Evaluation oflensesasantennas.
Oneoftheadvantages ofalensoverareflector antenna isIhe absenceofaperture blocking.
Considerable equipme_nl canbeplacedatthefocusofthelens withoutinterfering withtheresultant antenna pattern.Thefirstmonopulse radarsusedlenses forthispurpose, butwithtimethemonopulse RFcircuitry wasreduced insizeandthe reflector antennacametobepreferred overthelens.Thelensiscapableofscanning thebeam overawideangle.Theoretically theLuneburg lensorthehomogeneous spherecancover 4nsteradians.
Constrained metal-plate lensesarecapableofwidescananglesascompared to thelimitedscanning possible bymovingthefeedinaparaboloid reflector.
Thelensisusuallylessefficientthancomparable reflector antennas becauseoflosswhen propagating through thelensmedium andthereflections fromthetwolenssurfaces.
Ina zonedlenstherewillbeadditional, undesired scattering fromthesteps.Although itisdanger­ oustogeneralize, theadditional lossesfromthesourcesinasteppedlensmightbe1or2dB.72 Thelackofsuitablesolidorartificial dielectric materials haslimitedthede.yelopment of lenses.Theproblem ofdissipating heatfromlargedielectric lensescansometimes restricttheir usetomoderate-power ortoreceiverapplications.
Conventional lensesareusuallylargeand heavy,unlesszoned.Toreducethelosscausedbyscattering fromthesiepsinazonedlens, theratioofthefocallengthItotheantenna diameter Dmustbemadelarge(oftheorderof unity).Lenseswhichmustscanbyposidoning thefeedshouldalsohavelargellD ratio.Alarge liDrequires agreatermechanical structure becausethefeedsarebiggerandmustbesupported fartherfromthelens.Themechanical supportofalensisusuallymoreofaproblem thanwith areflector.
Thewide-angle scanning capability ofalenswouldbeofinterestinradarasacompetitor foraphasedarrayiftherewereavailable apractical meansforelectronically switching the transmitter andreceiveramongfixedfeedssoastoachievearapidlyscanning beam.
7.6PATIERN SYNTHESIS Theproblem ofpatternsynthesis inantennadesignistofindtheproperdistribution ofcurrent acrossafinite-width aperture soastoproduce aradiation patternwhichapproximates the desiredpatternundersomecondition ofoptimization.
Pattern-synthesis methods maybe dividedintotwoclasses,depending uponwhether theaperture iscontinuous oranarray.The currentdistributions derivedforcontinuous apertures maysometimes beusedtoapproximate thearray-aperture distributions, andviceversa,whenthenumberofelements ofthearray­ antenna islarge.Thediscussion inthissectionapplies,forthemostpart,tolinearone­ dimensional apertures ortorectangular apertures wherethedistribution isseparable, thatis, whereA(x,z)=A(x)A(z).
Thesynthesis techniques whichapplytoarrayantennas usuallyassumeuniformly spaced isotropic elements.
Theelement spacingisgenerally takentoheahalfwave-length.
Ifthe elemerlts werenotisotropic buthadapatternEe(8),andifthedesiredoverallpatternwere denotedEd(8),thepatterntobefoundbysynthesis usingtechniques derived for.isotropic elements wouldbegivenbyEd(8)/Ee(8).
Fourier-integral synthesis.
TheFourier-integral relationship between thefield-intensity pat­ ternandtheaperture distribution wasdiscussed inSec.7.2.Thedistribution A(z)acrossa continuous aperture wasgivenbyEq.(7.14).
A(z)=~LCXl~E(</J)exp(-j2nIsin</J)d(sin4» where z = distance along the aperture and E(4) = field-intensity pattern.
If only that portion of  ttie aperture distribution which extends over the finite-aperture dimension d were used.
the  resulting antenna pattern would be  .
d: 2  ha($) = ( A(z) exp  ' -dl2  Suhstituririg Eq.
(7.14) irito tlie above and changing the variable of integration from b, to 5' to  avoid corifi~siori.
ti\c :triteriria patter11 hecornes  Intcrclinrigirig tlie order of integration, the approximate antenna pattern is ~~(4) = I id" la E(i) exp (sin d, - sin <) .I.
n,z .
,I,  tl ." sin [n(d/A)(sin 4 - sin i)] En(&) = - 1 E(S) d(sin <)  2.
Cm n(d/A)(sin 4 - sin {) d(sin €) dr (7.24)  where E,($) is tlie Fourier-integral pattern which approximates the desired pattern E(4) when  A(=) is rcstrictcd to a finite apci ture of diinensioti d.
 Ri17e~~ has shown that tlie approximation to the antenna pattern derived on the basis of  tlie Fourier integral for continuous antennas (or the Fourier-series method for discrete arrays)  has tlie property that the mean-square deviation between the desired and the approximate  patterns is a minimum.
It is in this sense (least mean square) that the Fourier method is  optimum.
The larger the aperture (or the greater the number of elements in the array), the  better will be the approximation.
 The Fourier series may be used to synthesize the pattern of a discrete array, just as the  Fourier integral may be used to synthesize the pattern of a continuous apert~re.'~ Similar  conclusions apply.
The Fourier-series method is restricted in practice to arrays with element  spacing in tlie vicirlity of a half wavelength.
Closer spacing results in supergrain arrays which  are not 75.76 Spacings larger than a wavelength produce undesired grating lobes.
 Wodward-Levinson method.
Another method of approximating the desired antenna pattern  with a finite aperture distribution consists in reconstructing the antenna pattern from a finite  number ofs9,mpled values.
The principle is analogous to the sampling theorem of circuit theory  in which a time waveform of limited bandwidth may be reconstructed from a finite number of  samples.
The antenna-synthesis technique based on sampled values was introduced by Levin-  son at the MIT Radiation Laboratory in the early forties and was apparently developed  independently by Woodward in England.7.77-79  The classical sampling theorem of information theory states: If a function f (t) contains no  frequencies higher than W Hz, it is completely determined by giving its ordinates at a series of  points spaced 112 W seconds apart.
The analogous sampling process applied to an antenna  pattern is that the radiation pattern E,(4) from an antenna with a finite aperture d is com-  pletely determined by a series of values spaced L/d radians apart, that is, by the sample values  E,(itA/d), where ti is an integer.73 In Fig.
7.23~ is shown the pattern E(4) and the sampled  points spaced A/d radians apart.
The sampled values E,(nA/d), which determine the antenna  pattern, are shown in b.
 Tlie antenna pattern E,(4) can be constructed from the sample values E,(tiA/d) with a  pattern of the form (sin $)/$ about each of the sampled values, where $ = n(d/L) sin 4.
The  (sin I//)/$ function is called the coti~posit~g~fitttctiott and is the same as that used in information  RADAR ANTENNAS 255 wherez=distance alongtheaperture andE(1')=field-intensity pattern.Ifonlythatportionof theaperture distribution whichextendsoverthefinite-aperture dimension dwereused.the resulting antenna patternwouldbe •d,'2(z)Ea(¢)=rA(z)exp j2rr,sin¢ dz .
-d/2 A(7.23) Suhstituting Eq.(7.14)intotheahoveandchanging thevariable ofintegration froml'to~to avoidconfusion.
theantenna patternbecomes 1 .di2.r£'IzIE,,(¢)=1.1.rE(()expj2rr:;(sinl'-sin()d(sin0dz 1\a,l," Il Interchanging theorderofintegration.
theapproximate antenna patternis EA1')=c!("E(C)sin[rr(d/A)~sin ¢-.sinOJd(sin ~) A.
OCJ -rr(d/A)(sln ¢-Sill0(7.24) (7.25) whereEa(1')istheFourier-integral patternwhichapproximates thedesiredpatternE(¢)when A(z)isrestricted toafiniteaperture ofdimension d.
Ruze73hasshownthattheapproximation totheantenna patternderivedonthebasisof theFourierintegralforcontinuous antennas (ortheFourier-series methodfordiscretearrays) hastheproperty thatthemean-square deviation between thedesiredandtheapproximate patterns isaminimum.
Itisinthissense(leastmeansquare) thattheFourier method is optimum.
Thelargertheaperture (orthegreaterthenumber ofelements inthearray),the betterwillbetheapproximation.
TheFourier seriesmaybeusedtosynthesize thepatternofadiscrete array,justasthe Fourier integral maybeusedtosynthesize thepatternofacontinuous aperture.74Similar conclusions apply.TheFourier-series method isrestricted inpractice toarrayswithelement spacing inthevicinityofahalfwavelength.
Closerspacing resultsinsupergrain arrayswhich areno!practical.75.76Spacings largerthanawavelength produce undesired gratinglobes.
Woodward-Levinson method.
Another methodofapproximating thedesiredantenna pattern withafiniteaperture distribution consists inreconstructing theantenna patternfromafinite number ofs~.mpled values.Theprinciple isanalogous tothesampling theoremofcircuittheory inwhichatimewaveform oflimitedbandwidth maybereconstructed fromafinitenumberof samples.
Theantenna-synthesis technique basedonsampled valueswasintroduced byLevin­ sonattheMITRadiation Laboratory intheearlyfortiesandwasapparently developed independently byWoodward inEngland.7.77-79 Theclassical sampling theorem ofinformation theorystates:Irafunctionf(t) contains no frequencies higherthanWHz,itiscompletely determined bygivingitsordinates ataseriesof pointsspaced1/2Wseconds apart.Theanalogous sampling processappliedtoanantenna pattern isthattheradiation patternEa(¢)fromanantenna withafiniteaperture discom­ pletelydetermined byaseriesofvaluesspacedA/dradiansapart,thatis,bythesamplevalues E,(IJA/d), where IJisaninteger.73InFig.7.23aisshownthepatternE(¢)andthesampled pointsspacedAidradiansapart.Thesampled valuesE,(nA/d), whichdetermine theantenna pattern, areshowninb.
Theantenna patternEa(¢)canbeconstructed fromthesamplevaluesE,(lIA/d) witha patternoftheform(sin"')N abouteachofthesampled values,where'" =rr(d/A)sin¢.The (sin1//)/tI!function iscalledthecomposilJg flmctiolJ andisthesameasthatusedininformation 3x 2X X -- -- -- x 21 2 g 5L sin#  ddd O Zddd d  31 2X: X - -- -- -- A 3_1 4_1: sin$  ddd ddddd  x 2JafiQ 3x 2x X 0 - -- -- --  ddd ddddd Figure 7.23 (a) Radiation pattern  E(4) with sampled values 1/11 radians  apart, where d = aperture dimen-  sion; (b) sampled values E,(nA/d),  which specify the antenna pattern of  (a); (c) reconstructed pattern E,(+)  using (sin $)I$ composing function  to approximate the desired radiation  pattern E(4).
 theory to construct the time waveform from the sampled values.
The antenna pattern is ,  given by ,  " nll sin [n(d/l)(sin 4 - nA/d)] - - - .
- .
.
 Ea(4) = n=-w () n(d/l)(sin 4 - ,ll/d)  that is, the antenna pattern from a finite aperture is reconstructed from a sum of (sin $)/I)  composing functions spaced A/d rad apart, each weighted according to the sample vali~es  E,(r~l/d), as illustrated in Fig.
7.23~.
 The (sin $)/I) composing function is well suited for reconstructing the pattern.
Its value at  a particular sample point is unity, but it is zero at all other sample points.
In addition, the  (sin I))/$ function can be readily generated with a uniform aperture distribution.
The  Woodward-Levinson synthesis technique consists in determining the amplitude and phase of  the uniform aperture distribution corresponding to each of the sample values and performing  a summation to obtain the required overall aperture distribution.
 The aperture distribution may be found by substituting the antenna pattern of Eq.
(7.26)  into the Fourier-transform relationship given by Eq.
(7.14).
The aperture distribution becomes  1 j2nnz A,(zl= - f ~~($1 exp (- d,=-,  256INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS oA2A3A.11~ dddd d (a)sins6 Es(nA/d) ..
I II 3A_2X >.0A2A3A4A5Asins6d d d d d ddd (b) oA2A3A4>'5A d dddd (c)sin¢Figure7.23(a)Radiation pattern £(cP)withsampled valuesA./dradians apart,whered=aperture dimen­ sion;(b)sampled values£.(n).jd), whichspecifytheantenna patternof (a);(c)reconstructed paltern£a(lji) using(sin1jJ)!t/Jcomposing function toapproximate thedesiredradiation' pattern£(cP).
theorytoconstruct thetimewaveform fromthesampled values.Theantenna pattern IS givenby./ E(¢)=fE(nA)sin[n(dIA)(sin ¢-n~Hn a n=-oo 3dn(dIA)(sin¢-IlAld)(7.26) thatis,theantenna patternfromafiniteaperture isreconstructed fromasumof(sint/J)N composing functions spacedAidradapart,eachweighted according tothesamplevalues Es(llAld),asillustrated inFig.7.23c.
The(sint/J)!t/Jcomposing function iswellsuitedforreconstructing thepattern.
Itsvalueat aparticular samplepointisunity,butitiszeroatallothersamplepoints.]naddition, the (sint/J)!t/Jfunction canbereadilygenerated withauniform aperture distribution.
The Woodward-Levinson synthesis technique 'Consists indetermining theamplitude andphaseof theuniform aperture distribution corresponding toeachofthesamplevaluesandperforming asummation toobtaintherequired overallaperture distribution.
Theaperture distribution maybefoundbysubstituting theantenna patternofEq.(7.26) intotheFourier-transform relationship givenbyEq.(7.14).Theaperture distribution becomes (7.27) Therefore the aperture distributiorl which generates the nth (sin ~)/$ composing pattern has  uniform amplitude and is proportional to the sampled value E,(rtA/d).
The phase across the  aperture is sucil that tile individual cornposing patterns are displaced from one another by a  half a bearnwidtli (wliere tlic beamwidth is here defined as the distance between tile two nulls  wl~icli surround tlie mait1 bcarn).
The phase is given by the exponential term of Eq.
(7.27) and  tcprcscrits ;I liric;~r pliasc cii;~rigc of rrn radialis across the aperture.
Tlle number of sarnldes  required to approxinlatc tlie radiation pattern from a finite aperture of width d is 2dlA.
 Tlic esseritial cliffererice hetween Fourier-integral synthesis and the Woodward-Levinsc-V;I  tllcthotl is tlint tlic forriicr gives a radiation pattcrn whose mcari-square deviation from 111,  desired pattern is a niiriitiiurn.
and tlie Woodward-Levinson method gives an antenna pattern  wliicll exactly fits tile desired pattern at a finite number of points.
 I)olpl~-('l~i~l~ysl~cv arrays.'" ' 'I'liis pnttc~ri produccs the ~larrowest beamwidtli for a specificcf  sidciol~c Icvcl l'lic l>ea~nw~dtli is rneasut-cd by the distance between the first nulls that straddle  tlic r~inr~i t>cnrii I'lie sidelol>cs arc all of equal magnitude.
DolpliSO derived the aperture  illutiiiliatiori w~tli tli~s property by forcing a correspondence between the Chebyshev poly-  rlotiiial arid the polyllornial describing the pattern of an array antenna.
Although a radiation  jlattetli with tlie t~arrowest beamwidth for a given sidelobe level seems a reasonable choice for  radar.
it is seldoln employed since it cannot be readily ichieved with practical antennas wllere  I~igli gain and low sidelobes are desired.
As the antenna size increases, the currents at the end  of the aperture become large compared with the currents along the rest of the aperture, and the  radiation pattern becomes sensitive to the edge excitation.
This sets a practical upper limit to  the si7e of an antenna that can have a Dolph-Chebyshev pattern and therefore sets a lower  limit to the width of the main beam which can be achieved.
 'Ta? lor aperture illumination.
The Taylor aperture illumination is a r 2alizable approximation to  tile Ijolph-Chcbysllev illuminatiot~.~~ It produces a pattern with uniform sidelobes of a  specified value, but only in the vicinity of the main beam.
Unlike the theoretical Dolph-  Cliehysliev pattern.
the sidelobes of tlie Taylor pattern decrease outside a specified angular  region.
l'he sidelobe level is uniform within the region defined by I(d/A) sin 41 < i and  decreases with increasing angle 4 for /(&A) sin 41 > ii, and where ii is an integer, d is the  aritenna dimension and 1 is the wavelength.
Hence fi divides the radiation pattern into a  uniforni sidelohc region straddling the main beam and a decreasing sidelobe region.
The  number ofrkqual sidelobes on each side of the main beam is iI - 1.
 l'lie bcarnwidtl~ of a Taylor pattern will be broader than that of tlie Dolph-Cllebysliev.
If  tlie desigrl sidelobe level is 25 dB, a Taylor pattern with ii = 5 gives a beamwidth 7.7 percent  grc;ltcr tiiarl tlic Ilolpli-Cliebyshev, and wit11 ir = 8 it is 5.5 percent greater.
 -1'lie I'aylor pattern is specified by two parameters: the design sidelobe level and ,I, wliich  defines the boundary between uniform sidelobes and decreasing sidelobes.
The integer fi  catlnot be too small.
Taylor states that fi must be at least 3 for a design-sidelobe ratio of25 dB  and at least 6 for a design-sidelobe ratio of 40 dB.
The larger iI is, the sharper will be the beam.
 However, if TI is too large, the same difficulties as arise with the Dolph-Chebyshev pattern will  occur.
The aperture illuminations for high values of ii are peaked at the center and at the edge  of tlic aperture.
and tniglit be difficult to achieve in practice.
 Care must be exercised in the selection of the sidelobe level of a Taylor pattern.
Large  antennas with narrow beamwidths can exhibit a severe degradation in gain because of  the large energy contained within the sidelobes as compared with that within the main beam.
 The value of ir must be properly cl~osen consistent with the beamwidth and sidelobe  RADAR ANTENNAS 251 Therefore theapcrture distribution whichgenerates the11th(sint/!)Ncomposing patternhas uniform amplitude andisproportional tothesampled valueEs(lIA/d).Thephaseacrossthe aperture issuchthattheindividual composing patterns aredisplaced fromoneanother bya halfabeamwidth (whcrcthcbeamwidth ishcredefinedasthedistance between thetwonulls whichsurround thcmainbcam).Thcphaseisgivenbytheexponential termof~q.(7.27)and n:rresents alincarplHlsechangeofIITtradians acrossthcapcrturc.
Thenumberofsamples required toapproximate theradiation pattcrnfromafiniteaperture ofwidthdis2djX Theesscntial differcncc betwecn Fouricr-integral synthesis andtheWoodward-Levinsr.;t method isthattheformergivesaradiation pattcrnwhoscmcan-squarc deviation fromtill.
desiredpattern isaminimum, andthcWoodward-Levinson method givesanantenna pattern whichcxactlyfitsthcdesircdpatternatafinitenumberofpoints.
1>()II)h-C1ll'hlSIH.·~' arrays.
AOA.\Thispatternproducesthenarrowest beamwidt hforaspecifled sidelohe level.Theheamwidth ismeasurcd bythedistance betwecn thefirstnullsthatstraddle themainbeam.Thesidelobes arcallofequalmagnitudc.
DolphBOderived thcaperturc illumination withthispropcrty byforcingacorrespondence between theChebyshev poly­ nomialandthepolynomial describing thepatternofanarrayantenna.
Although aradiation patternwiththenarrowest bcamwidth foragivensidelobe levelseemsareasonable choicefor radar,itisseldomcmployed sinceitcannotbereadilyachieved withpractical antennas where highgainandlowsidelobes aredesired.
Astheantenna sizeincreases, thecurrents attheend oftheaperture bccome largecompared withthecurrents alongtherestoftheaperture, andthe radiation patternbecomes sensitive totheedgeexcitation.
Thissetsapractical upperlimitto thesizeofanantenna thatcanhaveaDolph-Chebyshev patternandtherefore setsalower limittothewidthofthemainbeamwhichcanbeachieved.
Ta~loraperture illumination.
TheTayloraperture illumination isaI~alizable approximation to theDolph-Chebyshev illumination.84Itproduces apattern withuniform sidelobes ofa specified value,butonlyinthevicinityofthemainbeam.Unlikethetheoretical Dolph­ Chehyshev pattern, thesidelobes oftheTaylorpatterndecrease outsideaspecified angular region.Thesidelohe levelisuniform withintheregiondefined byI(dl..1.)sin¢I<iiand decreases withincreasing angle¢forI(dj..1.)sin¢I>n,andwherenisaninteger,disthe antenna dimcnsion andAisthewavelength.
Hence"dividestheradiation patternintoa uniform sidelobc regionstraddling themainbeamandadecreasing sidelobe region.The numher of~cqual sidelobes oneachsideofthemainbeamis"-1.
Thcbeamwidth ofaTaylorpatternwillbebroader thanthatoftheDolph-Chebyshev.
If thedesignsidelobe levelis25dB,aTaylorpatternwith"=5givesabeamwidth 7.7percent greaterthantheDolph-Chehyshcv, andwith"=8itis5.5percentgreater.
TheTaylorpattcrnisspccified bytwoparameters: thedesignsidelobe leveland",which definestheboundary bctween uniform sidelobes anddecreasing sidelobes.
TheintegerIt cannotbetoosmall.Taylorstatesthat"mustbeatleast3foradesign-sidelobe ratioof25dB andatleast6foradesign-sidelobe ratioof40dB.Thelarger"is,thesharper willbethebeam.
However.
if"istoolarge,thesamedifficulties asarisewiththeDolph-Chebyshev patternwill occllr.Theaperture illuminations forhighvaluesofnarepeakedatthecenterandattheedge ofthcaperture, andmightbedifficult toachieve inpractice.
Caremustbeexercised intheselection ofthesidelobelevelofaTaylorpattern.
Large antennas withnarrow beamwidths canexhibit aseveredegradation ingainbecause of thelargeenergycontained withinthesidelobes ascompared withthatwithinthemainbeam.
Thevalueof"mllstbeproperly chosenconsistent withthebeamwidth andsidelobe level.85 Although the Taylor pattern was developed as a realizable approxinlation to the 1)olpli-  Chebyshev, it does not resemble the theoretical equal-sidelobe pattern.
Values of ii are not  large so that a Taylor pattern exhibits decreasing sidelobes over most of its range.
Decreasing  sidelobes are not undesired in radar application.
If the radar designer has a choice, it is  preferred that the high sidelobes be near the main beam, where they are easier to recognize,  rather than to have isolated high sidelobes elsewhere.
This is one time nature is cooperative  since it is natural for the sidelobes to be large in the vicinity of the main beam.
 The Taylor aperture illumination has also been applied to syntt~esiring thc: patterns of  circular, two-dimensional It has been widely used as a guide for selecting  antenna aperture illuminations.
 When the difference pattern of a monopulse antenna can be selected independently of thc  sum pattern, as in a phased array, the criterion for a good difference pattern is to obtain  maximum angle sensitivity commensurate with a given sidelobe level.
Bayliss8%s described  a method for obtaining suitable monopulse difference patterns on this basis.
It parallels  Taylor's approach to the sum pattern.
 7.7 COSECANTSQUARED ANTENNA PAITERN  It was shown in Sec.
2.11 that a search radar with an antenna pattern proportional to csc2tl,  where 8 is the elevation angle, produces a constant echo-signal power for a target ttying at  constant altitude, if certain assumptions are satisfied.
Many fan-beam air-search radars  employ this type of pattern.
A constant echo signal with range, however, is probably not as  important an application of the cosecant-squared pattern as is achieving the desired elevation  coverage in an efficient manner.
Shaping of the beam is desirable since the needed range at  high angles is less that at low angles; hence, the antenna gain as a function of elevation angle  can be tailored accordingly.
Shaped patterns like the cosecant-squared pattern are also used in  airborne radars that map the surface of the earth."  Antenna design.
The design of a cosecant-squared antenna pattern is an application of ttie  synthesis techniques discussed in the preceding section.
Examples of cosecant-squared-pattern  synthesis are given in the literatu~-e.7s7 3*77*90  The cosecant-squared pattern may be approximated with a reflector antenna by shaping  the surface or by using more than one feed.
The pattern produced in this manner may not hc as  accurate as might be produced by a well-designed array antenna, but operationally, it is riot  necessary to approximate the cosecant-squared pattern very precisely.
A common method of  producing the cosecant-squared pattern is shown in Fig.
7.24.
The upper half of the reflector is  a parabola and reflects energy from the feed in a direction parallel to the axis, as in any other  parabolic antenna.
The lower half, however, is distorted from the parabolic contour so as to  direct a portion of the energy in the upward direction.
 A cosecant-squared antenna pattern can also be produced by feeding the parabolic  reflector with two or more horns or with a linear array.
If ttie horns are spaced and fed  properly, the combination of the secondary beams will give a smooth cosecant-squared pat-  tern over some range of angle.
A reasonable approximation to the cosecant-squared pattern  can be obtained with but two horns.
A single horn, combined with a properly located ground  plane, can also generate a cosecant-squared pattern with a parabolic refle~tor.~' The feed  horn, plus its image in the ground plane, has the same effect as two horns.
The traveling-wave  slot antennag2 and the surface-wave antennag3 can also be designed to produce a cosecant-  squared antenna pattern.
 The shaping of the beam is generally in one plane, with a narrow pattern of conventionai  258INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS Although theTaylorpatternwasdeveloped asarealizable approximation totheDolph­ Chebyshev, itdoesnotresemble thetheoretical equal-sidelobe pattern.
Valuesof'1arcnot largesothataTaylorpatternexhibitsdecreasing sidelobes overmostofitsrange.Decreasing sidelobes arenotundesired inradarapplication.
Iftheradardesigner hasachoice,itis preferred thatthehighsidelobes benearthemainbeam,wheretheyarceasiertorecognize, ratherthantohaveisolated highsidelobes elsewhere.
Thisisonetimenatureiscooperative sinceitisnaturalforthesidelobes tobelargeinthevicinityofthemainbeam.
TheTayloraperture illumination hasalsobeenappliedtosynthesizing thepatterns of circular, two-dimensional antennas.86.87Ithasbeenwidelyusedasaguideforselecting antenna aperture illuminations.
WhentheditTerence patternofamonopulse antenna canbeselectedindependent Iyofthe sumpattern, asinaphasedarray,thecriterion foragooddifrerence patternistoobtain maximum anglesensitivity commensurate withagivensidelobe level.Bayliss8!1txlsdescribed amethod forobtaining suitable monopulse difference patterns onthisbasis.Itparallels Taylor's approach tothesumpattern.
7.7COSECANT-SQUARED ANTENNA PATfERN ItwasshowninSec.2.11thatasearchradarwithanantenna patternproportional tocsclO, where8istheelevation angle,produces aconstant echo-signal powerforatargetllyingat constant altitude, ifcertainassumptions aresatisfied.
Manyfan-beam air-sea~ch radars employthistypeofpattern.
Aconstant echosignalwithrange,however, isprobably notas important anapplication ofthecosecant-squared patternasisachieving thedesiredelevation coverage inanefficient manner.
Shaping ofthebeamisdesirable sincetheneededrangeat highanglesislessthatatlowangles;hence,theantenna gainasafunction ofelevation angle canbetailoredaccordingly.
Shapedpatterns likethecosecant-squared patternarealsousedin airborne radarsthatmapthesurfaceoftheearth.89 Antenna design.Thedesignofacosecant-squared antenna patternisanapplication ofthe synthesis techniques discussed inthepreceding section.Examples ofcosecant-squared-pattern synthesis aregivenintheliterature.7•73,77,9o Thecosecant-squared patternmaybeapproximated withareflector antenna byshaping thesurfaceorbyusingmorethanonefeed.Thepatternproduced inthismannermaynotbeas accurate asmightbeproduced byawell-designed arrayantenna, butoperationally, itisnot necessary toapproximate thecosecant-squared patternveryprecisely.
Acommon methodof producing thecosecant-squared patternisshowninFig.7.24.Theupperhalfofthereflector is aparabola andreflectsenergyfromthefeedinadi,rection paralleltotheaxis,asinanyother parabolic antenna.
Thelowerhalf,however, isdistorted fromtheparabolic contour soasto directaportionoftheenergyintheupwarddirection.
Acosecant-squared antenna patterncanalsobeproduced byfeedingtheparabolic reflector withtwoormorehornsorwithalineararray.Ifthehornsarespacedandfed properly, thecombination ofthesecondary beamswillgiveasmoothcosecant-squared pat­ ternoversomerangeofangle.Areasonable approximation tothecosecant-squared pattern canbeobtained withbuttwohorns.Asinglehorn,combined withaproperly locatedground plane,canalsogenerate acosecant-squared patternwithaparabolic reflector.91Thefeed horn,plusitsimageinthegroundplane,hasthesameeffectastwohorns.Thetraveling-wave slotantenna92andthesurface-wave antenna93canalsobedesigned to produce acosecant­ squared antenna pattern.
Theshapingofthebeamisgenerally inoneplane,withanarrowpatternofconventional - .
-- - .
.- -- - - - - -.
.
.-.
- +-  Parabolic  reflect; -fi,-\ :--- :  Displaced  from oriqinol  porobolic -,-"''  contour -' \ Figure 7.24 Cosecant-squared antenna  produced by displacing the reflector  surface from the original parabolic  shape.
 design in the orthogonal plane.
The parabolic cylinder antenna fed from a line source is  convenient for obtaining independent control of the patterns in the two orthogonal planes.
 This type of antenna, however, is generally bulkier and heavier than a reflector fed from a  si~iglc poirit source.
Ttie line feed is more difficult to pressurize than a point feed.
The antenrla  with a point-source feed requires a reflector surface with double curvature, as compared to the  single curvature of the cylindrical antenna, in order to obtain a shaped beam.
The double  curvature reflector is designed to provide both the desired shaping of the beam in one plane  and focusing in transverse  plane^.'*^^-^^ The surface is formed by the envelope of a system of  paraboloids whose axes all lie in the plane of the shaped beam, but at varying angles of  inclination to each other and to a fixed line.
 The antenna of the S-band Airport Surveillance Radar (ASR) of the ANlTPN-19 landing  system is shown in Fig.
7.25.
The 14 ft (4.3 m) by 8 ft (2.4 m) reflector is an offset paraboloid  fed from a 12-element vertical line-source.
The uppermost feedhorn is located at the focal point  of the paraboloid.
The azimuth beamwidth is 1.6" and the vertical beamwidth is 4" with  cosecant-squared shaping from 6" to 30".
Being a transportable equipment, the antenna is  self-erecting and is stowed inside the shelter through a roof hatch.
The radar system provides  coverage to 60 nmi and 40,000 feet with a 15 rpm rotation rate.
 P'  Loss in gain An antenna with a cosecant-squared pattern will have less gain than a normal  fan-beam pattern generated from the same aperture.
To obtain an approximate estimate of the  loss in gain incurred by beam shaping, the idealized patterns in Fig.
7.26 will be assumed.
The  normalantenna pattern is depicted in Fig.
7.26~ as a square beam extending from 8 = 0 to  0 = (I,.
I'he cosecant-squared pattern in Fig.
7.26b is shown as a uniform beam over the  range 0 i 0 5 0, arid decreases as csc2 O/csc2 8, over the range 0, < 8 2 Om.
The gain G of the  square beam in Fig.
7.26n divided by the gain G, of the cosecant-squared antenna beam in  Fig.
7.26h i?  For small values of (I,,  RADAR ANTENNAS 259 Parabolic reflector ~ \ \ \ Displaced \ fromoriginal ,._, parabolic //'\ contour-----\Figure7.24Cosecant-squared antenna produced bydisplacing thereflector surfacefromtheoriginal parabolic shape.
designintheorthogonal plane.Theparabolic cylinder antenna fedfromalinesourceis convenient forobtaining independent controlofthepatterns inthetwoorthogonal planes.
Thistypeofantenna, however, isgenerally bulkierandheavierthanareflector fedfroma singlepointsource.Thelinefeedismoredifficulttopressurize thanapointfeed.Theantenna withapoint-source feedrequires areflector surfacewithdoublecurvature, ascompared tothe singlecurvature ofthecylindrical antenna, inordertoobtainashapedbeam.Thedouble curvature reflector isdesigned toprovideboththedesiredshaping ofthebeaminoneplane andfocusing intransverse planes.1,94-96Thesurfaceisformedbytheenvelope ofasystemof paraboloids whoseaxesalllieintheplaneoftheshapedbeam,butatvarying anglesof inclination toeachotherandtoafixedline.
Theantenna oftheS-bandAirportSurveillance Radar(ASR)oftheAN{IPN-19 landing systemisshowninFig.7.25.The14ft(4.3m)by8ft(2.4m)reflector isanoffsetparaboloid fedfroma12-element verticalline-source.
Theuppermost feedhorn islocatedatthefocalpoint oftheparaboloid.
Theazimuth beamwidth is1.6°andthevertical beamwidth is4°with cosecant-squared shaping from6°to30°.Beingatransportable equipment.
theantenna is self-erecting andisstowedinsidetheshelterthrough aroofhatch.Theradarsystemprovides coverage to60nmiand40,000feetwitha15rpmrotation rate.
(7.28).6..
(Jo+[1/(csc200)]Iese20dO • 60 00+sin20o(eol00-cotOm)------------"---- =00 00=G~.
Lossingain.Anantenna withacosecant-squared patternwillhavelessgainthananormal fan-beam patterngenerated fromthesameaperture.
Toobtainanapproximate estimate ofthe lossingainincurred bybeamshaping, theidealized patterns inFig.7.26willbeassumed.
The normalantenna patternisdepicted inFig.7.26aasasquarebeamextending from0=°to (J=00,Thecosecant-squared patlerninFig.7.26bisshownasauniform beamoverthe range0:s;(/:s;(Joanddecreases ascsc20(csc200overtherange00<0:s;Om'ThegainGofthe squarebeaminFig.7.26adivided bythegainGcofthecosecant-squared antenna beamin Fig.7.26h i~ Forsmallvaluesof00, GG:::::::2 -00cotOm c(7.29) 260 INTHODUCTION TO KADAH SYSTEMS  ., .
 Figure 7.25 Cosecant-squared antenna of the ANlTPN-19 landing system.
(Colrrtesy Raythrorr Con~pntry.)  Figure 7.26 Idealized anlcana pat-  tern assumed in the cortlpcrtatior~ of  the loss in gain incurred with a  cosecant-squared antenna pattern.
 (a) Normal antenna pallern; (h)  cosecant-squared pattern.
 260INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS ·J~!}~l ;,.:..: .,~,......
,,, '", Figure7.25Cosecant-squared antennaoftheAN(TPN-19 landingsystem.(Courtesy Raythf!(/lI COnipatl}'.) c o CJ' <lJ > o <lJlr o (alc o0' OJ> .~ o OJ 0: oFigure7.26Idealized antenna pat­ lemassumed inthecompulation of thelossingainincurred witha cosecant-squared antenna pattern.
(a)Normal antenna pattern; (h) cosecant-squared pattern. where all angles in the above formulas are measured in radians.
For example, if do = 6" and  0, = 20".
the gain is reduced by 2.2 dB compared with a fan beam 6" wide.
If 8, is made 40°,  the loss is 2.75 dB.
In tlie limit of large 0, and small 00, the loss approaches a maximum of  3 dB.
 Shaped beams and S'I'C.
A radar that can detect a 1 m2 target at 200 nmi can detect a loe4 1n2  target at 20 tirni hccaitse of the inverse fourth power variation of signal strength with range.
 'I'llcrcfore.
snlitll ricart3y tatgcts sucll as hircls arid insects can clutter tlie output of a radar.
To  avoid this, tlic rccciver gain call bc teduccd at short range and increased during the period  between pulses so that the received signal from a target of constant cross section remains  i~ncliatigctl with riinge.
Tllc ~>rograrntiied control of the receiver gain to maintain a constant  ccllo sigrl;il strerigtll is callctl scvrsirirliry tirjrc i.o,ttrol (STC').
It is all effective i~letllod for  eli~nirlatirlg radar eclloes due to urlwar~ted birds and insects.
 SI'C makes use of the inverse fourth power variation of signal strength with range.
The  cosecatlt-sqi~ared sllapitig of the atltctirla also utilizes tlie inverse fourth power variation witli  range (Sec.
2.1 1).
Tllus, when STC is used witli a cosecant-squared antenna pattern, the  high-angle coverage of the radar is reduced.
Targets that are seen at long range and at a  particular tieight with a cosecant-squared antenna, will be missed at shorter ranges when STC  is used.
To incorporate both beam shaping and STC, the pattern must have higher gain at  higher-elevation angles than would a cosecant-squared pattern.
Figure 7.27~ illustrates the  antenna elevation pattern for an air-search radar which is desired to compensate for STC and  yet provide a signal independent of range, as does the cosecant-squared pattern." Figure 7.27b  sliows the coverage of a long-range radar with such an antenna pattern.
 Beam shaping may also be employed to increase the target-to-clutter ratio in some cases.
 A target at high elevation angles competes with surface clutter at low angles.
Increasing the  antenna gain at high angles but not At low angles will therefore improve the target echo with  respect to the  Figttre 7.27 Antcnrla clcvatiorl pattern for a long-range air-search radar lo achieve high-angle coverage  when S'TC is employed.
(a) Comparison with tile cosecant-squared pattern; (b) free-space coverage  diagram.
(Frotn ~hrader.~' corrrtt7sy McGro\c--Hill Book Conrparty.)  RADAR ANTENNAS 261 whereallanglesintheaboveformulas aremeasured inradians.
Forexample, if00=6°and Om=20°,thegainisreduced by2.2dBcompared withafanbeam6°wide.Ifemismade40°, thelossis2.75dB.InthelimitoflargeOmandsmall00,thelossapproaches amaximum of 3dB.
ShapedbeamsandSTC.t\radarthatcandetecta 1 m2targetat200nmicandetecta10-4m2 targetat20nmibecauseoftheinversefourthpowervariation ofsignalstrength withrange.
Therefore, smallncarby targctssuchasbirdsandinsectscancluttertheoutputofaradar.To avoidthis,thcreceivcr gaincanbcreduced atshortrangeandincreased duringtheperiod bctwecn pulsessothatthcreceived signalfromatargetofconstant crosssectionremains unchanged withrange.Theprogrammed controlofthereceiver gaintomaintain aconstant echosignalstrength iscallcdsl'lIsitil';ty t;1IIecolltro[(STC).Itisaneffective method for eliminating radarechoesduetounwanted birdsandinsects.
STCmakesuseoftheinversefourthpowervariation ofsignalstrength withrange.The cosecant-squared shaping oftheantenna alsoutilizestheinversefourthpowervariation with range(Sec.2.11).Thus,whenSTCisusedwithacosecant-squared antenna pattern, the high-angle coverage oftheradarisreduced.
Targets thatareseenatlongrangeandata particular heightwithacosecant-squared antenna, willbemissedatshorterrangeswhenSTC i~used.Toincorporate bothbeamshaping andSTC,thepattern musthavehighergainat higher-elevation anglesthanwouldacosecant-squared pattern.
Figure7.27aillustrates the antenna elevation patternforanair-search radarwhichisdesiredtocompensate forSTCand yetprovideasignalindependent ofrange,asdoesthecosecant-squared pattern.97 Figure7.27b showsthecoverage ofalong-range radarwithsuchanantenna pattern.
Beamshaping mayalsobeemployed toincrease thetarget-to-clutter ratioinsomecases.
t\targetathighelevation anglescompetes withsurfaceclutteratlowangles.Increasing the antenna gainathighanglcsbutnotatlowangleswilltherefore improve thetargetechowith respecttothcc1uHer.9A ](C~!(A'l,tfso'd01:"1 lA"'Ic·~ ;-," O(l~ (\(...A,.rl~ a.,.(.l(,<,' ,.' FiIitIlH'7.27Antcnna e1cvation pallcrnforalong-range air-search radartoachievehigh-angle coverage whenSTCisemployed.
(a)Comparison withthecosecant-squared pattern;(b)free-space coverage diagram.
(FromSIJrader,97 courtesy McGraw-Hill BookCompallY.) 262 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  7.8 EFFECT OF ERRORS ON RADIATION PATTERNS~~." I"'  Antenna-pattern synthesis techniques such as those discussed in Sec.
7.6 permit the a11tz11na  designer to compute the aperture illumination required to achieve a specified radiation  pattern.
However, when the antenna is constructed, it is usually found that the experimentally  measured radiation pattern deviates from the theoretical one, especially in the region of the  sidelobes.
Generally, the fault lies not with the theory, but in the fact that it is'not possible to  reproduce precisely in practice the necessary aperture illumination specified by synthesis  theory.
Small, but ever-present, errors occur in the fabrication of an antenna.
These contribute  unavoidable perturbations to the aperture illumination and result in a pattern different in  detail from the one anticipated.
 Errors in the aperture illumination may be classed as either systematic or random.
The  former are predictable, but the latter are not and can only be described in statistical terms.
 Examples of systematic errors include (1) mutual coupling between the elements of an array,  (2) aperture blocking in reflector antennas due to the feed and its supports, (3) diffraction at  the steps in a zoned-lens antenna, and (4) periodicities included in the construction of the  antenna.
Random errors include (1) errors in the machining or manufacture of the antenna as  a consequence of the finite precision of construction techniques, (2) RF measurement errors  incurred in adjusting an array, (3) wall-spacing errbrs in metal-plate lenses, (4) random distor-  tion of the antenna surface, and (5) mechanical or electrical phase variations caused by  temperature or wind gradients across the antenna.
Although random errors may be relatively  small, their effect on the sidelobe radiation can be large.
Systematic errors are usually the same  from antenna to antenna in any particular design constructed by similar techniques.
On the  other hand, random errors differ from one antenna to the next even though they be of the same  design and constructed similarly.
Therefore the effect of random errors on the antenna pattern  can be discussed only in terms of the average performance of many such antennas or in terms  of statistics.
 The effect of errors on the radiation pattern has long bee? recognized by the practical  antenna designer.
The usual rule-of-thumb criterion employed in antenna practice is that the.
 phase of the actual wavefront must not differ from the phase of the desired wavefront by more  than + 1/16 in order to ensure satisfactory performance.
The application of this criterion to a  reflector antenna requires the mechanical tolerance of the surface to be witl~in ?1/32.
It is  possible, however, to obtain more precise criteria for specifying the maximum errors which  may be tolerated in the aperture illumination.
 Systematic errors.
The effect of systematic errors on the radiation pattern may be found by  properly modifying the aperture distribution to take account of the known errors.
For exam-  ple, a linear phase error across the antenna aperture causes the beam position to tilt in angle.
A  quadratic, or square-law, variation in phase is equivalent to defocusing the antcnna.
A pc~ iodic  error with fundamental period p/l, where p is measured in the same units as is the wavelength  I, will produce spilrious beams displaced at angles 4, from the origin, according to the rclatiol~  sin 4, = ttA/p, where n is an integer.
The patterns of the spurious beams are of similar shape as  the original pattern but are displaced in angle and reduced in amplitude.
 Random errors in reflectors.
The cl&sical work on the effects of random errors on antenna  radiation patterns is due to Ruze.73.99.101 He pointed out that in a reflector antenna, only the  phase error in the aperture distribution need be considered.
Such a phase error, for example,  might be caused by a deformation of the surface from its true value.
Ruze'O ' showed in a simple  derivation that the gain of a circular aperture with arbitrary phase error is approxin~atcly  262INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS 7.8EFFECT OFERRORS ONRADIATION PATIERNS7J•99101 Antenna-pattern synthesis techniques suchasthosediscussed inSec.7.6permittheantenna designer tocompute theaperture illumination required toachieve aspecified radiation pattern.
However, whentheantenna isconstructed, itisusuallyfoundthattheexperimentally measured radiation patterndeviates fromthetheoretical one,especially intheregionofthe sidelobes.
Generally, thefaultliesnotwiththetheory,butinthefactthatitisnotpossible to reproduce precisely inpractice thenecessary aperture illumination specified bysynthesis theory.Small,butever-present, errorsoccurinthefabrication ofanantenna.
Thesecontribute unavoidable perturbations totheaperture illumination andresultinapatterndifferent in detailfromtheoneanticipated.
Errorsintheaperture illumination maybeclassedaseithersystematic orrandom.
The formerarepredictable, butthelatterarenotandcanonlybedescribed instatistical terms.
'Ii Examples ofsystematic errorsinclude(1)mutualcoupling between theelements ofanarray, (2)aperture blocking inreflector antennas duetothefeedanditssupports, (3)dirrraction at thestepsinazoned-lens antenna, and(4)periodicities included intheconstruction ofthe antenna.
Random errorsinclude(1)errorsinthemachining ormanufacture oftheantenna as aconsequence ofthefiniteprecision ofconstruction techniques, (2)RFmeasurement errors incurred inadjusting anarray,(3)wall-spacing errorsinmetal-plate lenses,(4)random distor­ tionoftheantenna surface, and(5)mechanical orelectrical phasevariations causedby temperature orwindgradients acrosstheantenna.
Although random errorsmayberelatively small,theireffectonthesidelobe radiation canbelarge.Systematic errorsareusuallythesame fromantenna toantenna inanyparticular designconstructed bysimilartechniques.
Onthe otherhand,randomerrorsdifferfromoneantenna t<?thenexteventhoughtheybeofthesame designandconstructed similarly.
Therefore theeffectofrandomerrorsontheantenna pattern canbediscussed onlyintermsoftheaverage performance ofmanysuchantennas orinterms ofstatistics.
Theeffectoferrorsontheradiation patternhaslongbee"recognized bythepractical antenna designer.
Theusualrule-of-thumb criterion employed inantenna practice isthatthe.
phaseoftheactualwavefront mustnotdifferfromthephaseofthedesiredwavefront bymore than±A/16inordertoensuresatisfactory performance.
Theapplication ofthiscriterion toa reflector antenna requires themechanical tolerance ofthesurfacetobewithin±A/31.Itis possible, however, toobtainmoreprecisecriteriaforspecifying themaximum errorswhich maybetolerated intheaperture illumination.
Systematic errors.The effe~tofsystematic errorsontheradiation patternmaybefoundby properly modifying theaperture distribution totakeaccount oftheknownerrors.Forexam­ ple,alinearphaseerroracrosstheantenna aperture causesthebeamposition totiltinangle.A quadratic, orsquare-law, variation inphaseisequivalent todefocusing theantenna.
Aperiodic errorwithfundamental periodpIA,wherepismeasured inthesameunitsasisthewavelength .A,willproduce spurious beamsdisplaced atangles¢nfromtheorigin,according totherelation sin¢n=IIAlp,wherenisaninteger.Thepatterns ofthespurious beamsareofsimilarshapeas theoriginal patternbutaredisplaced inangleandreduced inamplitude.
Random errorsinreflectors.
The'classical workontheeffectsofrandom errorsonantenna radiation patterns isduetoRuze.73.99.101 Hepointedoutthatinareflector antenna, onlythe phaseerrorintheaperture distribution needbeconsidered.
Suchaphaseerror,forexample, mightbecausedbyadeformation ofthesurfacefromitstruevalue.RuzelOIshowedinasimple derivation thatthegainofacircularaperture witharbitrary phaseerrorisapproximately ..,I (7.30) where Go is the gain of the antenna in tile absence of errors, and 6 is the phase error, in radians,  calculated from the mean phase plane.
This simple expression is valid for any aperture illumin-  ation and reflector deformation.
provided that the latter is small compared to the wavelength.
 It indicates that the rrns phase variation about the mean phase plane must be less than A114 for  a one dB loss of pain.
For shallow reflectors, the two-way path of propagation means that the  sirrfacc error nlirst be one-lialf this arnount, or 1/28.
 Errors do more than reduce the peak gain of an antenna.
They affect the entire pattern.
 Using a model of an antenna in which the reflector is distorted by a large number of random  gaussian-sl~aj~cd burnps, K117e stlowed that the radiation pattern can be expressed as  wlicrc (;,,((I.
4) is the no-error radiatio~i pattern wllose axial value (at O = 0, 4 = 0) is  I~,(nl)/A)2.
D is the antenna diameter, p, is the aperture efficiency, C is the correlation interval  of tlic error, arid It ccjtrals sit1 0.
'I'lic rriean square phase error is assumed to be gaussian.
The  angles 0, 4 are those usually employed in classical antenna theory and are defined in Fig.
7.28.
 They are not to be confused with the usual elevation and azimuth angles.
The antenna lies in  the x-!! plane of Fig.
7.28.
The error current in one region of the antenna is assumed independ-  ent of the error currents in adjacent regions.
The size of the regions in which the error  currents cannot be considered independent is the correlation interval, C.
The size of the  correlation interval affects both the magnitude and the directional characteristic of the spuri-  ous radiation that results from the presence of errors.
 The first term of Eq.
(7.31) represents the no-error radiation pattern reduced by the  factor, exp - p.
The second term describes the disturbing pattern and represents a source of  sidelobe energy whicli depends on the mean-square phase error and the square of the correla-  tion interval.
For small phase errors, when only the first term of the series (n = 1) need be  considered.
Eq.
(7.3 1) becomes  -  G(O, 4) = Go(O.
$)e-" + (2n~/1)~~e-("~"'"~ (7.32)  From Eq.
(7.31), tlie reduction in gain on axis can be written as  Figure 7.28 Coordinate system defining the angles 0, 4 of Eq.
 (7.3 1).
 RADAR ANTENNAS 263 whereGoisthegainortheantenna intheabsenceoferrors,and1Jisthephaseerror,inradians, calculated fromthemeanphaseplane.Thissimpleexpression isvalidforanyapertureiIJumin­ ationandreflector deformation.
provided thatthelatterissmallcompared tothewavelength.
Itindicates thatthermsphasevariation aboutthemeanphaseplanemustbelessthanA./14for aonedBlossofgain.Forshallow reflectors, thetwo-way pathofpropagation meansthatthe surfaceerrormustbeone-half thisamount, orA./28.
Errorsdomorethanreducethepeakgainofanantenna.
Theyaffecttheentirepattern.
Usingamodeloranantenna inwhichthereflector isdistorted byalargenumberofrandom gaussian-shaped bumps,Rllzeshowedthattheradiation patterncanbeexpressed as (7.31) where (;0(0.1J)istheno-error radiation pattern whoseaxialvalue(at0=0,¢=0)is Ila(rrlJ/A)2, ()istheantenna diameter, Paistheaperture efficiency, Cisthecorrelation interval ortheerror,andIIequalssinO.ThemeansquarephaseerrorPisassumed tobegaussian.
The anglesO.1Jarethoseusuallyemployed inclassical antenna theoryandaredefinedinFig.7.28.
Theyarenottobeconfused withtheusualelevation andazimuth angles.Theantenna liesin thex-yplaneofFig.7.28.Theerrorcurrentinoneregionoftheantenna isassumed independ­ entoftheerrorcurrents inadjacent regions.
Thesizeoftheregions inwhichtheerror currents cannotbeconsidered independent isthecorrelation interval, C.Thesizeofthe correlation intervalaffectsboththemagnitude andthedirectional characteristic ofthespuri­ ousradiation thatresultsfromthepresence oferrors.
ThefirsttermofEq.(7.31)represents theno-error radiation patternreduced bythe factor,exp-P".Thesecondtermdescribes thedisturbing patternandrepresents asourceof sidelobe energywhichdepends onthemean-square phaseerrorandthesquareofthecorrela­ tioninterval.
Forsmallphaseerrors,whenonlythefirsttermoftheseries(n=1)needbe considered, Eq.(7.31)becomes (7.32) FromEq.(7.31),thereduction ingainonaxiscanbewrittenas (7.33) Beamdirectian r ){::----+-----y ---¢-~ Figure7.28Coordinate systemdefining theanglese,t/JofEq.
(7.31). 264 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  When the second term can be neglected (as when the correlation interval is small compared to  the diameter of the antenna and the phase error is not too large), the gain can be written  where c is the effective reflector tolerance measured in the same units as A; i.e., it is the rms  surface tolerance of a shallow reflector (large focal-length-to-diameter ratio) which will pro-  duce the phase-front variance d2.
For a given reflector size D, the gain increases as the square  of the frequency until the exponential term becomes significant.
Differentiation of Eq.
(7.34)  shows that the maximum gain corresponds to a wavelength  At this wavelength the gain will be 4.3 dB below what it would be in the absence &errors.
The  maximum gain is then  The gain of an antenna is thus limited by the mechanical tolerance to which the surface can be  constructed and maintained.lo2 The most precise reflector antennas seem to be limited to a  precision of not much greater than about one part in 20,000, which from Eq.
(7.36) corre-  sponds to a diameter of about 1600 wavelengths for maximum gain.
The beamwidth of such an  antenna would be about 0.04" with a gain of about 68 dB.
 In practice, the construction tolerance of an antenna is often described by the "peak"  error, rather than the rms error.
The ratio of the peak to the rms error is found experimentally  to be about 3 : 1.
This truncation of errors occurs since large errors usually are corrected in  manufacture.
 The effect of errors in array antennas and further discussion of errors in continuous  apertures is given in Sec.
8.8.
 Antennas for ground-based radars are often subjected to high winds, icing, andlor temperature .
,2  extremes.
They must be sheltered if they are to continue to survive and perform under advcrse  weather conditions.
Antennas which must be operated in severe weather are usually enclosed  for protection in a sheltering structure called a radome.
Radomes must be mechanically strong  if they are to provide the necessary protection, yet they must not interfere with the normal  operation of the antenna.
Antennas mounted on aircraft must also be housed within a radome  to offer protection from large aerodynamic loads and to avoid disturbance to the control of the  aircraft and minimize drag.
 The design of radomes for antennas may be divided into two separate and relatively  distinct classes, depending upon whether the antenna is for airborne or ground-based (or  ship-based) application.
The airborne ra'dome is characterized by smaller size than ground-  based radomes since the antennas that can be carried in an aircraft are generally smaller.
The  airborne radome must be strong enough to form a part of the aircraft structure and usi~ally  must be designed to conform to the aerodynamic shape of the aircraft, missile, or space vehicle  in which it is to operate.
 A properly designed radome should distort the antenna pattern as little as possible.
The  presence of a radome can affect the gain, beamwidth, sidelobe level, and the direction of the  (7.34)264INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS Whenthesecondtermcanbeneglected (aswhenthecorrelation interval issmallcompared to thediameter oftheantennaandthephaseerrorisnottoolarge),thegaincanbewritten G- G -el2_(TCD) 2-(4"l/AI2-oe-PoTe where £.istheeffective reflector tolerance measured inthesameunitsasA;Le.,itistherms surfacetolerance ofashallow reflector (largefocal-Iength-to-diameter ratio)whichwillpro­ ducethephase-front variance,,2.Foragivenreflector sizeD,thegainincreases asthesquare ofthefrequency untiltheexponential termbecomes significant.
Differentiation ofEq.(7.34) showsthatthemaximum gaincorresponds toawavelength (7.35) Atthiswavelength thegainwillbe4.3dBbelowwhatitwouldbein·theabsencedferrors.The maximum gainisthen Po(D)2 Gmax=43'£(7.36) Thegainofanantenna isthuslimitedbythemechanical tolerance towhichthesurfacecanbe constructed andmaintained.102Themostprecisereflector antennas seemtobelimitedtoa precision ofnotmuchgreaterthanaboutonepartin20,000,whichfromEq.(7.36)corre­ spondstoadiameter ofabout1600wavelengths formaximum gain.Thebeamwidth ofsuchan antenna wouldbeabout0.04°withagainofabout68dB.
Inpractice, theconstruction tolerance ofanantenna isoftendescribed bythe"peak" error,ratherthanthermserror.Theratioofthepeaktothermserrorisfoundexperimentally tobeabout3 :1.Thistruncation oferrorsoccurssincelargeerrorsusuallyarecorrected in manufacture.
Theeffectoferrorsinarrayantennas andfurtherdiscussion oferrorsincontinuous apertures isgiveninSec.8.8.
7.9RADOMES 14,103,115,122-124 Antennas forground-based radarsareoftensubjected tohighwinds,icing,and/ortemperature extremes.
Theymustbesheltered iftheyaretocontinue tosurviveandperform underadvase weather conditions.
Antennas whichmustbeoperated insevereweather areusuallyenclosed forprotection inasheltering structure calledaradome.Radomes mustbemechanically strong iftheyaretoprovidethenecessary protection, yettheymustnotinterfere withthenormal operation oftheantenna.
Antennas mounted onaircraftmustalsobehousedwithinaradome toofferprotection fromlargeaerodynamic loadsandtoavoiddisturbance tothecontrolofthe aircraftandminimize drag.
Thedesignofradomes forantennas maybedivided intotwoseparate andrelatively distinct classes,depending uponwhether theantenna isforairborne orground-based (or ship-based) application.
Theairborne raoome ischaracterized bysmallersizethanground­ basedradomes sincetheantennas thatcanbecarriedinanaircraftaregenerally smaller.
The airborne radomemustbestrongenoughtoformapartoftheaircraftstructure andusually mustbedesigned toconform totheaerodynamic shapeoftheaircraft,missile,orspacevehicle inwhichitistooperate.
Aproperly designed radomeshoulddistorttheantenna patternaslittleaspossible.
The presence ofaradomecanaffectthegain,beamwidth, sidelobe level,andthedirection ofthe boresiglit (pointirig directioti), as well as cliange the VSWR and the antenna noise tempera-  ture.
Sometimes in tracking radars, tlie rate of change of the boresight shift can be important.
 (;cnerally, an antenna situated witliin a large ground-based radome sees the same approxi-  mate rado~ne envirorinierit rio rnattcr wlicre tlie beam points within its normal coverage.
 Kadar antennas located in tlic nose of aircraft, however, generally require an ogive-shaped  radonle whicli does not 17rcscnt the same environment for all beam positions.
When  tl~c aritcrlria is directed lo~ward (cne~gy ~)~oj>:~gating parallel to tlie radome axis) the angle of  incidence on the radorne surface can be in excess of 80".
In other look directions the incidence  ;~r~glc might be zero degrees.
Since the transrnission properties of radome materials varies with  ;triglc of inciderice and polariration, tile design of an airborne radome to achieve uniform  scart~iirig properties might not be easy.
The desigrl is further complicated by the need for  structural strengtli, liglitnitig protection, and protection from erosion by rain, hail, and dust.
It  1s not sr~rprisirig tlierefore tliat tlie electrical performance of a radome must sometimes be  sacrificed to accorntnodate these other factors.
 A radonie permits a ground-based radar antenna to operate in tlie presence of high winds.
 It ~11so preve~lts ice formation on the antenna.
Although it is possible to design antennas strong  cr~ough to survive extreme weather conditions and to provide sufficiently large motors to  rotate them in high winds, it is often more economical to design lighter antennas with modest  drive power and operate them inside radomes.
 Tlie shape of a radome for a ground-based antenna is usually a portion of a sphere.
The  .;l~ltcre is a good ~ilecllariical structure and offers aerodynamic advantage in high winds.
 Precipitation particles blow around a sphere rather than impinge upon it.
Hence snow or  ottier fr07cn precipitation is not readily deposited.
 .I-lle first large radornes (50-ft diameter or more) for gr-outid-based radar antennas ap-  peared stiortly afier World War 11.
They were constructed of a strong, flexible rubberized  airtiglit material and were supported by air pressure from witIlin.'O3 Since tlie material of  air-supported radomes can be relatively thin and uniform, they approximate the electrically  ideal tliiu sliell which provides good electrical properties.
Such radomes can operate with high  t I ansmissiorl efficiency at almost all radar frequencies.
Materials include single-ply neoprene-  coated terylene or nyloti fabric, Hypaloti-coated Dacron, and Teflon-coated fiberglass.
 Inflation pressures are it] the vicinity of0.5 Ib/in2 gauge.
Air-supported radomes can be folded  i~tto a srnall package wtiicli make them suitable for transportable radars requiring mobility  and quick erectiori times.
Typically, a 50-ft radome can be installed at a prepared site in about  one or two hoirrs.'" They are also of interest on static sites where wideband frequency  operatio11 is desired.
One of tlie largest examples of an air-supported radome was the 210 ft  diameter radonie for the Bell Telephone System Telstar satellite communication antenna at  Andover.
Maine.
 Air-supported radomes have a number of disadvantages.
Their life is limited by exposure  to ultraviolet liplit.
surface erosion.
and the constant flexing of the material in the wind.
In high  winds the rliatcrial car1 he daniaged by flying debris and the rotation of the antenna might have  to cease to prevent the fabric from being blown against the antenna and torn.
Maintenance of  tlic iriterrial pressure in liigli winds can sometimes be difficult.
Another problem is that costly  ~naintena~~ce is reqirir-cd at f~cqucrlt i~itcrvals.
 The limitations of air-supported radomes are overcome by the use of rigid self-supporting  radornes.
The most cornrnoii is the rigid space-frame, Fig.
7.29, which consists of a three-  dimensional lattice of primary load-bearing members enclosed with thin dielectric panels.
The  panels can be very thin, even for large-diameter radomes, since they are not required to carry  main loads or stresses.
This type of construction, whereby a spherical structure is constructed  from flat plastic panels of simple geometrical shapes, is sometimes called a geodesic dorne.
The  RADAR ANTENNAS 265 horesight (pointing dircction), aswcllaschangetheVSWRandtheantenna noisetempera­ ture.Sometimes intrackingradars, therateofchangeoftheboresightshiftcanbeimportanl.
(,cnerally, anantenna situated withinalargeground-based radomeseesthesameapproxi­ matcradome cnvironlllcnt nomatterwhercthcbeampointswithinitsnormalcoverage.
Radarantennas locatedinthenoscofaircraft, however, generally requireanogive-shaped radome whichdocsnotprcscnt thcsameenvironment forallbeam posit~ons.
When theantelllla isdirected forward (energypropagating paralleltotheradomeaxis) theangleof incidence ontheradomesurfacecanbeinexcessof800 •Inotherlookdirections theincidence anglemightbezcrodegrees.
Sincethetransmission properties ofradomematerials varieswith angleofincidcnce andpolarization, thedcsignofanairborne radome toachieve uniform scanning properties mightnotbeeasy.Thedesignisfurthercomplicated bytheneedfor structural strength, lightning protection, andprotection fromerosionbyrain,hail,anddust.It isnotsurprising therefore thattheelectrical performance ofaradome mustsometimes be sacrificed toaccommodate theseotherfactors.
Aradomepermitsaground-based radarantenna tooperateinthepresence ofhighwinds.
Italsoprevents iceformation ontheantenna.
Although itispossible todesignantennas strong cnoughtosurviveextreme weather conditions andtoprovide sufficiently largemotorsto rotatetheminhighwinds,itisoftenmoreeconomical todesignlighterantennas withmodest drivepowerandoperatetheminsideradomes.
Theshapeofaradome foraground-based antenna isusuallyaportionofasphere.The sphereisagoodmcchanical structure andoffersaerodynamic advantage inhighwinds.
Prccipitation particles blowaroundasphereratherthanimpinge uponit.Hencesnowor othcrfrolcnprccipitation isnotreadilydcposited.
Thcfirstlargeradomes (50-ftdiameter ormore)forground-based radarantennas ap­ peenedshortlyafterWorldWarII.Theywereconstructed ofastrong,flexiblerubberized airtight matcrial andweresupported byairpressure fromwithin.t03Sincethematerial of air-supported radomes canberelatively thinanduniform, theyapproximate theelectrically idealthinshellwhichprovides goodelectrical properties.
Suchradomes canoperatewithhigh transmission efficiency atalmostallradarfrequencies.
Materials includesingle-ply neoprene­ coatcdtcrylcne ornylonfabric,Hypalon-coated Dacron, andTeflon-coated fiberglass.
lnnation pressures areinthevicinityof0.5Ib/in2gauge.Air-supported radomes canbefolded intoasmallpackage whichmakethemsuitable fortransportable radarsrequiring mobility andquickerection times.Typically, a50-ftradomecanbeinstalled ataprepared siteinabout oneortwohours.135Theyarealsoofinterestonstaticsiteswherewideband frequency operation isdcsired.Oneofthelargestexamplesoranair-supported radomewasthe210ft diameter radome fortheBellTelephone SystemTelstarsatellite communication antenna at Andover.
Maine.
Air-supported radomes haveanumberofdisadvantages.
Theirlifeislimitedbyexposure toultraviolet light.surfaceerosion.
andtheconstant flexingofthematerial inthewind.Inhigh windsthematerial canhedamaged byflyingdebrisandtherotation oftheantenna mighthave toceasetopreventthefabricfrombeingblownagainsttheantenna andtorn.Maintenance of theinternal pressure inhighwindscansometimes bedifficult.
Another problem isthatcostly maintenance isrequired atfrequellt intervals.
Thelimitations ofair-supported radomes areovercome bytheuseofrigidself-supporting radomes.
Themostcommon istherigidspace-frame, Fig.7.29,whichconsists ofathree­ dimensional latticeofprimary load-bearing members enclosed withthindielectric panels.The panelscanbeverythin,evenforlarge-diameter radomes, sincetheyarenotrequired tocarry mainloadsorstresses.
Thistypeofconstruction, whereby aspherical structure isconstructed fromflalplasticpanelsofsimplegeometrical shapes,issometimes calledageodesicdome.The 266 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  Figure 7.29 Rigid radome for ground-based antenna.
(From Davis and Cohen,'" courtesy Elrctrotzics atd  MI T Lincoln Laboratory.)  55-ft-diameter radome shown in Fig.
7.29 is designed so that the plastic flanges between  the panels take the load while the plastic panels act as thin diaphragms which merely transmit  wind-pressure loads to the framework to which they are attached.
The supporting framework  can also be of steel or aluminum members rather than plastic.
Metal space-frame radomes can  be of large size, 150-ft diameter being quite practical.
Designs up to 500-ft diameter have been  considered.
The cross section of metallic members can be smaller than that of dielectric  members of equivalent strength; hence, the effect of aperture blocking is less.
Metal members  are not only superior in electrical performance to the equivalent dielectric members but metal  space-frame radomes are generally cheaper and easier to fabricate, transport, and assemble,  and can be used for larger diameter configurations.
 Aluminum structural members, which might be larger than steel of equivalent strength,  are of light weight, noncorrosive, and require no maintenance.
The load-bearing framework is  covered with low-loss fiberglass-reinforced plastic panels.
The panels should be non-erosive,  water repellent, and designed to reject much of the incident solar radiation.
In somc radomes,  the exterior surface is coated with a white radar-transparent paint, such as Hypalon, to reduce  the interior temperature rise caused by solar radiation.
 A rnctal space-frame radsme might consist OF individual triangular panels ~nacic tap of a  frame of aluminum extrusions encapsulating a low-loss dielectric reinforced plastics laminate  membrane.
Instead of the uniform panel sizes of Fig.
7.29, the space-frame radome can use a  quasi-random selection of different panel sizes to minimize periodic errors in the aperture  distribution which can give rise to spurious sidelobes.
It also tends to make the radome  insensitive to polarization.
A typical metal space-frame radome of this type might have  266INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS Figure7.29Rigidradomeforground-based antenna.
(FromDavisandCohen,! Bcourtes}'Electronics wul MITLincolnLaboratory.) .
55-ft-diameter radome showninFig.7.29isdesigned sothattheplasticflangesbetween thepanelstaketheloadwhiletheplasticpanelsactasthindiaphragms whichmerelytransmit wind~pressure loadstotheframework towhichtheyareattached.
Thesupporting framework canalsobeofsteeloraluminum members ratherthanplastic.Metalspace-frame radomes can beoflargesize,150-ftdiameter beingquitepractical.
Designs upto500-ftdiameter havebeen considered.
Thecrosssectionofmetallic members canbesmallerthanthatofdielectric members ofequivalent strength; hence, t~eeffectofaperture blocking isless.Metalmembers arenotonlysuperior inelectrical performance totheequivalent dielectric members butmetal space-frame radomes aregenerally cheaperandeasiertofabricate, transport, andassemble, andcanbeusedforlargerdiameter configurations.
Aluminum structural members, whichmightbelargerthansteelofequivalent strength, areoflightweight,noncorrosive, andrequirenomaintenance.
Theload-bearing framework is covered withlow-loss fiberglass-reinforced plasticpanels.Thepanelsshouldbenon-erosive, waterrepellent, anddesigned torejectmuchoftheincident solarradiation.
Insomeradomes, theexteriorsurfaceiscoatedwithawhiteradar-transparent paint,suchasHypalon, toreduce theinteriortemperature risecausedbysolarradiation.
Ametalspace-frame radomemightconsistofindividual triangular pandsmade.:upofa frameofaluminum extrusions encapsulating alow-loss dielectric reinforced plasticslaminate membrane.
Insteadoftheuniform panelsizesofFig.7.29,thespace-frame radomecanusea quasi-random selection ofdifferent panelsizestominimize periodic errorsintheaperture distribution whichcangiverisetospurious sidelobes.
Italsotendstomakethe~adome insensitive topolarization.
Atypicalmetalspace-frame radomeofthistypemighthave a transmission loss of 0.5 d13 arid cause the antenna sidelobes to increase an average of 1 dB at  the - 25 dB level.
The boresight might be shifted less than 0.1 mrad and the antenna noise  temperature might increase less tliari 5 K.~~~ Approximate formulas are available for predict-  ing the electrical effects (gain.
beamwidth, sidelobes, and boresight error) of a metal space-  franie radome, assuming a uriiform or nearly uniform distribution of space-frame elements  over the surface of the radorne.lo4  Tl~c rrlhhcri7cd air-sr~pported radome is an example of a tllir~ wall radome in which the  tl~ick~lcsc of tl~c wrtll is ~11la1l coit~pu~ccl to a wnvclc~igtl~.
A tl~i~i-wall radorlic c:111 itlso I,c  constructed of plastic with low dielectric constant and low loss tangent.
This type of radonie  ;ipl1rc~.uir11;1tcs ;I tt~ir~ sl~cll wl~crc the loacis arid stresses are carried iri the sllell membrane itself.
 Ur~forti~rlately, tlrc tl~iri ski11 required for good electrical properties is not consistent with good  rnecliar~ical ~voperties.
7'11is liniits the size arid the frequency of operation of thin-wall rigid  rado~lics.
 (;round-based radonies rtiay utilize foam materials, such as polyester polyuretliane, of  low dielectric constarit and low loss tangent in a relatively thick-wall construction to meet  strtlctural requiremerits with excellent electrical performance over a wide frequency band.
Tliis  is kr~owri as a fi~artr slrell rado~ne.
The individual panels may be joined together by applicatiori  of an epoxy adhesive to the panel edges or by "welding" together with the same material to  form a homogeneous shell.'os  The structural limitation of the thin wall radome can be overcome by the haIflwave wall  radonie whicli utilizes a homogeneous dielectric with an electrical thickness of half  wavelength, or a niultiple thereof, at the appropriate incidence angle.
The half-wave thickness  is norireflecting if ohmic losses are negligible.
The bandwidth of such a radome is limited, as is  the range of inciderice angles over which the energy is transmitted with minimal reflection.
 The A sandwich is a three-layer wall consisting of a core of low-dielectric-constant mater-  ial with a thickness of approximately one-quarter wavelength.
This inner core is sandwiched  between two thin outer layers, or skins, of a high-dielectric-constant material relative to that of  the core.
The skins might typically have a dielectric constant of about 4, and the core might  have a value of about 1.2.
The skins are thin compared to a wavelength.
The core might be a  honeycomb or fluted construction.
The strength-to-weight ratio of the A sandwich is greater  than that of a solid-wall radome.
It is also capable of broader bandwidth.
However, it is more  sensitive to variations in polarization and angle of incidence.
The electrical characteristics of  the adhesive used for bonding the skins to the core must be taken into account in the design  since it can make the skin look (electrically) thicker than its physical length.
The structure  must be sealed against moisture absorption.
 The B satldwiclt is the "inverse" of the A sandwich.
It is a three layer structure whose  quarter-wave-thick skins have a dielectric constant lower than that of tne core material.
The B  sandwich is the microwave analog of matching coatings used in optical lenses.
Although it is  superior electrically to the A sandwich, it is heavier and is not generally suited to the environ-  mental conditions encountered in aircraft.
It is not commonly used.
 The C sa~ldwiclt can be thought of as two back-to-back A sandwiches.
It consists of five  layers.
There are two outer skins, a center skin, and two intermediate cores.
It is used when the  ordinary A sandwich does not provide sufficient strength.
 When extreme structural rigidity or broad band capabilities are required with relatively  light weight, multiple-layer sandwiches of seven, nine, eleven, or more layers may be con-  sidered.
 Aircraft radomes, especially those used at supersonic speeds, are subject to mechanical  stress and aerodynamic heating so severe that the electrical requirements of radomes made of  dielectric materials nitrst be sacrificed to obtain sufficient mecl~anical strength.
The radome  RADAR ANTENNAS 267 atransmission lossof0.5dBandcausetheantenna sidelobes toincreaseanaverageof1dBat the-25dBlevel.Theboresight mightbeshiftedlessthan0.1mr-adandtheantenna noise temperature mightincrease lessthan5K.'36Approximate formulas areavailable forpredict­ ingtheelectrical effects(gain.beamwidth.
sidelobes, andboresight error)ofametalspace­ frameradome.
assuming auniform ornearlyuniform distribution ofspace-frame elements overthesurfaceoftheradome.'o4 Theruhhcri7(~d air-suprorted radome isanexample ofat1li"wallradomeinwhichthe thicknt:ss oftilt:wallissmallcompart:d toawavelength.
!\thill-wall radollle canalsohe constructed ofplasticwithlowdielectric constant andlowlosstangent.
Thistypeofradome arproximales athinshellwllerctheloadsandstressesarecarriedintheshellmembrane itself.
Unfortunately, thethinskinrequired forgoodelectrical properties isnotconsistent withgood mechanical properlies.
Thislimitsthesizeandthefrequency ofoperation ofthin-wall rigid radolllcs.
Ground-based radomes lIlayutilizefoammaterials, suchaspolyester polyurethane.
of lowdielectric constant andlowlosstangent inarelatively thick-wall construction tomeet structural requirements withexcellent electrical performance overawidefrequency band.This isknownasa{cwmshellradome.
Theindividual panelsmaybejoinedtogether byapplication ofanepoxyadhesive tothepaneledgesorby..welding" together withthesamematerial to formahomogeneous shell.' 05 Thestructural limitation ofthethinwallradomecanbeovercome bythehalFwave wall radome whichutilizes ahomogeneous dielectric withanelectrical thickness ofhalf wavelength.
oramultiple thereof,attheappropriate incidence angle.Thehalf-wave thickness isnonref1ecting ifohmiclossesarenegligible.
Thebandwidth ofsucharadome islimited,asis therangeofincidence anglesoverwhichtheenergyistransmitted withminimal reflection.
TheAsandwich isathree-layer wallconsisting ofacoreoflow-dielectric-constant mater­ ialwithathickness ofapproximately one-quarter wavelength.
Thisinnercoreissandwiched between twothinouterlayers,orskins,ofahigh-dielectric-constant material relativetothatof thecore.Theskinsmighttypically haveadielectric constant ofabout4,andthecoremight haveavalueofabout1.2.Theskinsarethincompared toawavelength.
Thecoremightbea honeycomb orflutedconstruction.
Thestrength-to-weight ratiooftheAsandwich isgreater thanthatofasolid-wall radome.Itisalsocapableofbroader bandwidth.
However, itismore sensitive tovariations inpolarization andangleofincidence.
Theelectrical characteristics of theadhesive usedforbonding theskinstothecoremustbetakenintoaccount inthedesign sinceitcanmaketheskinlook(electrically) thickerthanitsphysical length.Thestructure mustbeprolJerly sealedagainstmoisture absorption.
TheBsandwic1t isthe"inverse" oftheAsandwich.
Itisathreelayerstructure whose quarter-wave-thick skinshaveadielectric constant lowerthanthatofthecorematerial.
TheB sandwich isthemicrowave analogofmatc;hing coatings usedinopticallenses.Although itis superiorelectrically totheAsandwich, itisheavierandisnotgenerally suitedtotheenviron­ mentalconditions encountered inaircraft.Itisnotcommonly used.
TheCsandwic11 canbethought ofastwoback-to-back Asandwiches.
Itconsistsoffive layers.Therearetwoouterskins,acenterskin,andtwointermediate cores.Itisusedwhenthe ordinary Asandwich doesnotprovidesufficient strength.
Whenextreme structural rigidityorbroadband capabilities arerequired withrelatively lightweight,multiple-layer sandwiches ofseven,nine,eleven,ormorelayersmaybecon­ sidered.
Aircraft radames, especially thoseusedatsupersonic speeds,aresubjecttomechanical stressandaerodynamic heatingsoseverethattheelectrical requirements ofradomes madeof dielectric materials musthesacrificed toohtainsufficient mechanical strength.
Theradome wall configt~rations described above arc applicahlc to aisbor~ie radars, bill anotllcl.
approacl~ is  based on the fact that a metal sheet with periodically spaced slots exhibits a bandpass charac-  teristic.
Thus thin metallic radomes, pierced with many openings (slots) to makeit transparent  to microwaves, offer the possibility of overcoming the mecl~anical limitations of dielectric  radomes, yet result in good eiectrical properties.'06 lo* A metallic structure not only has the  potential for greater mechanical strength than dielectric radomes and to better dis[ribtrtc:  frictionally-induced heating, bir t it sliould be able to better withstand the stresses caused by  rain, hail, dust, and lightning.
Static buildt~p of charge and subseqi~ent discllarge to tlle  airframe, encountered with dielectric radomes, can be eliminated with nletallic radon~es.
In  one experimental design of'a conical-shape radome, periodic resonant slots were cut illto tht:  metallic surface so that approximately 90 percent of tlie radome surface was metal.
Within its  design band (8.8-9.0 GHz) the transmission properties were nearly ideal and accornmodatt.ti  scanning antennas transmitting arbitrary polarized signals.
Tllc reduced respotlse outsidz tlic  design band reduces the effects of out-of-band interference and can rcducl: the nose-on riid:t~.
 cross section of the aircraft at frequencies other than tliat for wliicl~ the antenna is designed.
 In conventional application, the radome is fixed and the antenna is scanned.
It is sometimes  of advantage to constr~tct the antenna and radome to rotate together as a unit.
This ib  called a rorodomr.
They have been used in ground-based systems as well as in airborne  aircraft-surveillance radars such as the 24-ft-diameter I-adomt: in the U.S.
Navy's t!-3('  (Fig.
7.30) or the 30-ft-diameter radome of AWACS.
Tlie E-2C radome weighs just over  2000 1b.
The entire unit rotates at a 6 rpm rate.
It houses a broadside array of Yagi-type  endfire elements.
 It' 1.
 Figure 7.30 E-2C AEW aircraft with rotodorne antenna.
 268INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS wallcontlgurations d-:scrib-:d ahov-:arcapplicable toairborn-: radars,bUIanotlJ-:f approach is basedonthefactthatametalsheetwithperiodically spacedslotsexhibits abandpass charac­ teristic.Thusthinmetallic radomes, piercedwithmanyopenings (slots)tomakeittranspar-:nt tomicrowaves, offerthepossibility ofovercoming themechanical limitations ofdielectric radomes, yetresultingoodelectrical properties.106lOllAmetallic structure notonlyhasth~ potential forgreater mechanical strength thandielectric radomes andtobettcrdistribute frictionally-induced heating, butitshouldbeabletobetlerwithstand thestresses causedby rain,hail,dust,andlightning.
Staticbuildup ofchargeandsubsequent discharg-: toth~ airframe, encountered withdielectric radomes, canbeeliminated withmetallic radomes.
In oneexperimental designofaconical-shape radome, periodic resonant slotswerecutintothe metallic surfacesothatapproximately 90percentoftheradome surfacewasmetal.Withinib designband(8.8-9.0GHz)thetransmission properties werenearlyidealandaccommodakd scanning antennas transmitting arbitrary polarized signals.Thereduced respotlse outsidethe designbandreduces theeffectsofout-of-band interference andcanreducethenose-on radar crosssectionoftheaircraftatfrequencies otherthanthatforwhichtheantenna isdesigned Inconventional application, theradome isfixedandtheantenna isscanned.
Itissametimes ofadvantage toconstruct theantenna andradome torotatetogether asaunit.Thisis calledarotodome.
Theyhavebeenusedinground-based systems aswellasinairhorne aircraft-surveillance radarssuchasthe24-ft-diameter radome intheU.S.Navy'sE-2C (Fig.7.30)orthe30-ft-diameter radome ofAWACS.
TheE-2Cradome weighsjustover 2000lb.Theentireunitrotatesata 6rpmrate.Ithousesabroadside arrayofVagi-type endfireelements.
Figure7.30E-2CAEWaircrartwithrotodome antenna. Weather eflhcts.
A ground-based radar that operates without benefit of a radorne must be  designed to withstand wind loads.'09 ' l3 Surveillance radars must not only be able to operate  in strong winds, but must rotate uniformly.
Rotating antennas outside of radomes cannot be  operated at winds that are too great.
They sometimes have to beshut down and securely fastened  in strong gale winds.
Even ifextreme winds are not encountered, a radome-enclosed antenna has  the advantage that it car1 be rotated wit11 a much smaller motor than if it were outside the  radorne exposed to even normal winds.
 Solid reflector surfaces require more drive power in wind than do lattice or tubular  surfaces If tlie exposed antenna is subject to icing that can close the holes of a mesh reflector,  the mectlanical design rliigtit have to be made on the basis of a solid surface anyway.
Since the  torque on ari antetitla depends 011 tlie wind direction, it will vary as the antenna rotates.
It is  ofteri possible to reduce the wind torques by selecting the optimum position for tlie axis of  rotatioil and by adding fins to the structure.' l4 The torque on the fins can be made to be in the  opposite direction to tlie torque on the antenna so as to cause a net reduction.
 One of tlie attractions of the rigid radome is its ability to withstand the rigors of severe  climate.
Kitlie ice, tlic prevale~it type of icing found in the Arctic region, has little or no effect  on most radomes.
Although it tends to collect on many types of structures and can obtain large  thickriesses.
both theory and experinlent show a lack of rime-ice formation on a spherical  radome.' ' "The trajectories of water droplets in the air stream flowing around large spheres do  not result in much impingement.
Collection efficiencies might be only a few percent.
The  droplet sizes of freezirig rain, however, are large and the collection efficiency can approach 100  percent.
Dry snow does not stick to cold surfaces and is generally no problem.
Snow might  collect on the top portio~i of the radome but will be quickly removed by any following wind.
 Also, the effect of snow on electromagnetic propagation is less than with water.
Wet snow can  stick to the radome and its high liquid-water content can adversely affect propagation.
The  rernoval of snow by thermal means (heaters) is generally quite expensive.
In some of the  smaller rigid radornes, snow can be removed mechanically by tying a rope at the top and  having someone walk the rope around the radome to knock off the snow.
 Liquid water can collect on a radome due to condensation or rainfall.
In some cases, the  impirigement of rain on a radome can have a more serious effect on the system performance  than the rainfall along tlie propagation path.
The losses due to water layers on radomes have  been calculated by Blevis." 6q1 l7  Theory predicts that a w/h-~ain will produce a layer of water 0.142 mm thick on a  55-ft diameter radorne.
The theoretical loss through such a water layer is 1.5 dB at 4.2 GHz  and 4.4 dH af'9.36 (;Hz.
Ruze'" confirmed Blevis's calculations and noted that a nonuni-  forrrily wet radome can cause significant phase perturbations in the aperture illumination, as  well as a transmissio~i loss.
 If the radome surface absorbs moisture it can seriously degrade its performance in rain.
 Colien and Smolskil l9 attribute most of the measured loss in the Bell Telephone air-inflated  radome at Andover, Maine to this effect.
In immersion tests, the Hypalon-coated Dacron  fabric of the Andover air-inflated radome was found to absorb 13.2 percent water while the  fibrous glass-reinforced laminate of rigid radomes absorbed less than 0.5 percent.
Furthermore  tlie fibrous-glass-reinforced laminate took about two minutes to dry but the air-inflated  radome material required about 30 to 45 min.
 The losses due to rain can be reduced significantly by treating the radome surface to make  it notiwetting.
or water repellent."9 I*' Experiments at 4.2 GHz with a 554 rigid metal  space-frame radome at a simulated rain rate of 40 mm/h (a very high rate) had a measured loss  of from 1.0 to 1.7 dB.' l9 When treated to decrease its wettability the loss was less than 0.3 dB.
 The theoretical loss calculated by the method described by Blevis was 3.4 dB.
The experimen-  RADAR ANTENNAS 269 Weather effects.AgrouIH.l-based radarthatoperates without benefitofaradome mustbe designed towithstand windloads.
1o9i13Surveillance radarsmustnotonlybeabletooperate instrongwinds,butmustrotateuniformly.
Rotating antennas outsideofradomes cannotbe operated atwindsthataretoogreat.Theysometimes havetobeshutdownandsecurely fastened instronggalewinds.Evenifextreme windsarenotencountered, aradome-enclosed antenna has theadvantage thatitcanberotatedwithamuchsmallermotorthanifitwereoutsidethe radomeexposed toevennormalwinds.
Solidreflector surfaces requiremoredrivepowerinwindthandolatticeortubular surfaces.Iftheexposed antenna issubjecttoicingthatcanclosetheholesofameshreflector, themechanical designmighthavetobemadeonthebasisofasolidsurfaceanyway.
Sincethe tort~ueonanantenna depends onthewinddirection, itwillvaryastheantenna rotates.Itis oftenpossible toreducethewindtorques byselecting theoptimum position fortheaxisof rotation andbyaddingfinstothestructure.
114Thetorqueonthefinscanbemadetobeinthe opposite direction tothetorqueontheantenna soastocauseanetreduction.
Oneoftheattractions oftherigidradome isitsabilitytowithstand therigorsofsevere climate.
Rimeicc,I.heprevalent typeoficingfoundintheArcticregion,haslittleornoeffect onmostradomes.
Although ittendstocollectonmanytypesofstructures andcanobtainlarge thicknesses.
boththeoryandex'periment showalackofrime-ice formation onaspherical radome.115Thetrajectories ofwaterdroplets intheairstre~mflowingaroundlargespheresdo notresultinmuchimpingement.
Collection efficiencies mightbeonlyafewpercent.
The dropletsizesoffreezing rain,however, arelargeandthecollection efficiency canapproach 100 percent.
Drysnowdoesnotsticktocoldsurfaces andisgenerally noproblem.
Snowmight collectonthetopportionoftheradomebutwillbequicklyremoved byanyfollowing wind.
Also.theeffectofsnow 011electromagnetic propagation islessthanwithwater.Wetsnowcan sticktotheradome anditshighliquid-water contentcanadversely afTectpropagation.
The removal ofsnowbythermal means(heaters) isgenerally quiteexpensive; Insomeofthe smaller rigidradomes.
snowcanberemoved mechanically bytyingaropeatthetopand havingsomeone walktheropearoundtheradometoknockofTthesnow.
Liquidwatercancollectonaradomeduetocondensation orrainfall.Insomecases,the impingement ofrainonaradomecanhaveamoreseriousefTectonthesystemperformance thantherainfallalongthepropagation path.Thelossesduetowaterlayersonradomes have beencalculated byBlevis.116.117 Theory predicts thata~lh--Fain willproduce alayerofwater0.142mmthickona 55-ftdiameter radame.
Thetheoretical lossthrough suchawaterlayeris1.5dBat4.2GHz and4.4dBat9.36GHz.Ruzel18confirmed Blevis'scalculations andnotedthatanonuni­ fortnlywetradomecancausesignificant phaseperturbations intheaperture illumination, as wellasatransmission loss.
Iftheradome surfaceabsorbs moisture itcanseriously degrade itsperformance inrain.
CohenandSmolski 119attribute mostofthemeasured lossintheBellTelephone air-inflated radome atAndover, Mainetothiseffect.Inimmersion tests,theHypalon-coated Dacron fabricoftheAndover air-inflated radome wasfoundtoabsorb13.2percentwaterwhilethe fibrousglass-reinforced laminate ofrigidradomes absorbed lessthan0.5percent.Furthermore thefibrous-glass-reinforced laminate tookabouttwominutes todrybuttheair-inflated radome material required about30to45min.
Thelossesduetoraincanbereducedsignificantly bytreating theradomesurfacetomake itnonwetting.
orwaterrepellent.
119121Experiments at4.2GHzwitha55-ftrigidmetal space-frame radomeatasimulated rainrateof40mm/h(averyhighrate)hadameasured loss offrom1.0to1.7dB.!19Whentreatedtodecrease itswettability thelosswaslessthan0.3dB.
Thetheoretical losscalculated bythemethoddescribed byB1eviswas3.4dB.Theexperimen- tal values were less than predicted by theory since the water was not a uniform film, but  formed many small streaks that rapidly ran off the radome in narrow rivulets.
 The performance of a reflector without the protection of a radome can also bc degraded  by rain.
The effect is small, however, at frequencies below X band.
Water impinging on the  antenna feed can have serious effects.
The wetting of surfaces through which signals are  transmitted should be avoided.
Also, adequate drainage should be provided to prevent the  accumulation of water in the reflector.
Ice coating a reflector surface does not usually cause a  problem.
When ice is in the process of melting, however, the water surface can distort the  pattern and in some instances can completely destroy the main beam.
 7.10 STABILIZATION OF ANTENNASI4  .Z  If the radar platform is unsteady, as when it is located on a ship or an aircraft, the antenna  pointing must be properly compensated for this undesired motion.
Stabilization is the use of a  servomechanism to control the angular position of an antenna so as to compensate automati-  cally for changes in the angular position of the vehicle carrying the antenna.
An antenna not  compensated for the angular motion of the platform will have degraded coverage.
On a ship,  for example, an unstabilized antenna with its beam parallel to the deck plane will have its  coverage shortened for surface targets since the beam will be looking into the water or up in  the air as the ship rolls or pitches.
In addition to degraded coverage, the measurement of the  angular position with an unstabilized antenna can be in error unless the tilting of the platform  is properly taken into account.
 Stabilization of the antenna adds to the weight and size of the radar, but it is necessary in  many applications of radar on ships and aircraft.
The requirements for stabilization depend in  part on the nature of the application.
Requirements differ whether the radar is used for surface  search, air search, tracking, or height finding.
 There are three kinds of platform motion that can affect the location of the antenna beam.
 Roll is the side-to-side angular motion around the longitudinal (fore-and-aft) axis of the ship or  aircraft.
Pitch is the alternating motion of the fore and aft (bow and stern) parts of the vehicle.
 Yaw is the motion of the platform around the vertical axis.
 Stabilization requires that the vehicle be equipped with a device, such as gyroscope, which  is sensitive to directions in space and which measures the deviation of the platform from its  level position.
The gyroscope device used as the reference from which to stabilize the antenna  is called a stable element or a stable vertical.
 The direct approach to stabilization would be to provide a stable base that maintains the  level no matter what the tilt of the ship or aircraft.
The stable base compensates for roll and  pitch.
Yaw can usually be taken into account by a correction to the angle read-out.
 In some applications, the pitch is small so ,that little harm results from omitting the  stabilization of the pitch axis, leaving only the roll axis stabilized.
This results in a simpler  system compared to providing a stable base.
This is called roll stabilization.
 A different approach to the problem is line-of-sight, or tilt, stabilization.
Instead of mount-  ing the antenna on a level platform, the antenna is tilted about the elevation axis so as  to automatically maintain the beam pointed at the horizontal.
(The beam direction can also be  maintained constant at whatever angle above or below the horizon is desired.) The line of sight  is thereby stabilized.
 The unsteady motions of the platform can cause errors in the angular measurement' and  distortion of the data on indicators like the PPI.
Corrections can be applied in some cases to  account for these distortions.
This is called data stabilization.
Correction of the data may still  270INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS talvalueswere l~ssthanpredicted bytheQrysincetilewaterwasnotauniform film,but formedmanysmallstreaksthatrapidlyranofftheradome innarrowrivulets.
Theperformance ofareflector withouttheprotection ofaradomecanalsobedegraded byrain.Theeffectissmall,however, atfrequencies belowXband.Waterimpinging onthe antenna feedcanhaveseriouseffects.Thewettingofsurfaces through whichsignalsare transmitted shouldbeavoided.
Also,adequate drainage shouldbeprovided topreventthe accumulation ofwaterinthereflector.
Icecoatingareflector surfacedoesnotusuallycausea problem.
Wheniceisintheprocessofmelting, however, thewatersurfacecandistortthe patternandinsomeinstances cancompletely destroythemainbeam.
7.10STABILIZATION OFANTENNAS14 •• Iftheradarplatform isunsteady, aswhenitislocatedonashiporanaircraft, theantenna pointing mustbeproperly compensated forthisundesired motion.
Stabilization istheuseofa servomechanism tocontroltheangularposition ofanantenna soastocompensate automati­ callyforchanges intheangularposition ofthevehiclecarrying theantenna.
Anantenna not compensated fortheangularmotionoftheplatform willhavedegraded coverage.
Onaship, forexample, anunstabilized antenna withitsbeamparalleltothedeckplanewillhaveits coverage shortened forsurfacetargetssincethebeamwillbelookingintothewaterorupin theairastheshiprollsorpitches.Inaddition todegraded coverage, themeasurement ofthe .angular position withanunstabilized antenna canbeinerrorunlessthetiltingoftheplatform isproperly takenintoaccount.
Stabilization oftheantenna addstotheweightandsizeoftheradar,butitisnecessary in manyapplications ofradaronshipsandaircraft.Therequirements forstabilization dependin partonthenatureoftheapplication.
Requirements differwhether theradarisusedforsurface search,airsearch,tracking, orheightfinding.
Therearethreekindsofplatform motionthatcanaffectthelocation oftheantenna beam.
Rollistheside-to-side angularmotionaroundthelongitudinal (fore-and-aft) axisoftheshipor aircraft.
Pitchisthealternating motionoftheforeandaft(bowandstern)partsofthevehicle.
Yawisthemotionoftheplatform aroundtheverticalaxis.
Stabilization requiresthatthevehiclebeequipped withadevice,suchasgyroscope, which issensitive todirections inspaceandwhichmeasures thedeviation oftheplatform fromits levelposition.
Thegyroscope deviceusedasthereference fromwhichtostabilize theantenna iscalledastableelementorastablevertical.
Thedirectapproach tostabilization wouldbetoprovideastablebasethatmaintains the levelnomatterwhatthetiltoftheshiporaircraft.Thestablebasecompensates forrolland pitch.
Yaw canusuallybetakenintoaccount byacorrection totheangleread-out.
Insomeapplications, thepitchissmallso,thatlittleharmresultsfromomitting the stabilization ofthepitchaxis,leavingonlytheroll axis stabilized.
Thisresultsinasimpler systemcompared toproviding astablebase.Thisiscalledrollstabilization.
Adifferent approach totheproblem isline-oj-sight, ortilt,stabilization.
Insteadofmount­ ingtheantenna onalevelplatform, theantenna istiltedabouttheelevation axissoas toautomatically maintain thebeampointedatthehorizontal.
(Thebeamdirection canalsobe maintained constant atwhatever angleaboveorbelowthehorizon isdesired.) Thelineofsight istherebystabilized.
.
Theunsteady motions oftheplatform cancauseerrorsintheangularmeasurement and distortion ofthedataonindicators likethePPI.Corrections canbeappliedinsomecasesto account forthesedistortions.
Thisiscalleddatastabilization.
Correction ofthedatamaystill be required even with some for111 of r~~echanically stabilized mounts.
Data stabilizatioli is  usually used with pencil-beam tracking antennas.
A computer can readily calculate the angu-  lar corrections to the output data to account for platform tilt.
 An example of the data stabilization is tl~e correction applied for yaw.
If a PPI were to  display relative bearing (azimuth) the apparent bearing would change as the platform yawed.
 With the aid of a horizontal gyroscope to provide a north reference, a correction signal can be  ohtailled which cat1 be ;~pplicd to tlic indicator to pertilit the display of the target in its true  bearing rather than the bearing relative to the platform heading.
Generally the top of the  display correspolids to north.
This true bearing display eliminates the blurring of a persistent  screeri display caused by the natural random clianges in heading of the vehicle.
It also elimirt-  ates the confusion sometimes found in a relative-bearing display caused by the entire display  rotating as the course of the veliicle is altered.
 Correction of the data is also needed with line-of-sight stabilization using a two-axis  mount.
Data stabilization is not necessary if a three-axis mount is used, such as e or f of  Fig.
7.31.
 Nine possible arrangements for mounting antennas are shown in Fig.
7.31.
The one-axis  mount is the simplest.
Most commercial marine shipboard radars used for navigation employ  such a mount.
The elevation beamwidth is made broad enough (typically 20") so that the  surface of the sea remains illuminated during the roll of the ship.
A correction can be applied  to the indicator (data stabilization) to account for the error.
 7'1ie two-axis rnount of Fig.
7.31h, sometimes called an az-el mount, enables the beam to  he rnairitairied at the horizontal or at any angle above or below the horizon (line-of-sight  stabili7ation).
The beam can be directed to any point by the proper combination of azimutli  (train) and elevation angles.
For targets overhead, the angular accelerations required are quite  high.
It is not practical to use such a mount, therefore, for tracking targets through the zenith,  as in the tracking of satellites.
The rearrangement of the two axes as in (c) takes care of this  problem.
Tracking through the zenith is possible without encountering impractical drive  accelerations.
Such a mount, however, transfers the problem of excessive accelerations to some  other direction; in this case, in the direction of the elevation axis.
A three-axis mount avoids  the problem of excessive acceleration.
 The two-axis mount of (d) is similar to (c) except that it is arranged to provide roll  stabilization.
The roll data from a stable vertical can be applied to the basic roll axis without  the need for computer orders as required in the other two-axis mounts.
The antenna is then  stabilized about the azimuth axis if the pitch angle is small.
 The three-axis mount of (e) can provide full hemispheric coverage.
The mount in (f)  might be desired where antenna elevation is not required.
The arrangement in (g) can be  trained on target with minimum rate or acceleration requirements on all axes, irrespective of  the position of the target or motion of the platform.
In the three-axis arrangement of (h) a  stable base is provided in which a roll axis lies in a fixed position parallel to the fore-and-aft  line of the vehicle.
This axis carries the pitch axis that supports the train axis.
Pitch and roll  signals from a stable vertical are applied as inputs to the corresponding axes.
The result is that  the azimuth (or train) axis is stabilized in the vertical and may receive a direct order of relative  azimuth.
Computations are not required as in other mounts.
The antenna may be rotated at  constant rates higher than would be practical with other mounts requiring application of a  correction for a variable platform-tilt.
This three-axis stable base antenna has no elevation  angle and is limited to applications which scan the horizon or a fixed angle of elevation with  respect to the horizon.
If elevation scanning at high rates is required, as in height finders or  3-D radar, a fourth axis can be supplied as in (i).
This configuration, although it requires no  computer.
is relatively massive and heavy because it has four servo systems for controlling  RADAR ANTENNAS 271 berequired evenwithsomeformofmechanically stabilized mounts.
Datastabilization is usuallyusedwithpencil-beam tracking antennas.
Acomputer canreadilycalculate theangu­ larcorrections totheoutputdatatoaccount forplatform tilt.
Anexample ofthedatastabilization isthecorrection appliedforyaw.IfaPPIwereto displayrelativebearing(azimuth) theapparent bearingwouldchangeastheplatform yawed.
Withtheaidofahorizontal gyroscope toprovideanorthreference.
acorrection signalcanbe ohtained whichcanbeappliedtotheindicator topermitthedisplayofthetargetinitstrue bearing ratherthanthebearing relative totheplatform heading.
Generally thetopofthe displaycorresponds tonorth.Thistruebearingdisplayeliminates theblurring ofapersistent screendisplaycausedbythenaturalrandom changes inheadingofthevehicle.Italsoelimin­ atestheconfusion sometimes foundinarelative-bearing displaycausedbytheentiredisplay rotating asthecourseofthevehicleisaltered.
Correction ofthedataisalsoneededwithline-of-sight stabilization usingatwo-axis mount.Datastabilization isnotnecessary ifathree-axis mountisused.suchaseorfof Fig.7.31.
Ninepossible arrangements formounting antennas areshowninFig.7.31.Theone-axis mountisthesimplest.
Mostcommercial marineshipboard radarsusedfornavigation employ suchamount.Theelevation beamwidth ismadebroadenough (typically 20°)sothatthe surfaceofthesearemains illuminated duringtherolloftheship.Acorrection canbeapplied totheindicator (datastabilization) toaccount fortheerror.
Thetwo-axis mountofFig.7.3th.sometimes calledanaz-elmount,enablesthebeamto bemaintained atthehorizontal oratanyangleaboveorbelowthehorizon (line-of-sight stabilization).
Thebeamcanbedirected toanypointbythepropercombination ofazimuth (train)andelevation angles.Fortargetsoverhead, theangularaccelerations required arequite high.Itisnotpractical tousesuchamount,therefore, fortracking targetsthrough thezenith, asinthetracking ofsatellites.
Therearrangement ofthetwoaxesasin(c)takescareofthis problem.
Tracking through thezenithispossible without encountering impractical drive accelerations.
Suchamount,however.
transfers theproblem ofexcessive accelerations tosome otherdirection; inthiscase,inthedirection oftheelevation axis.Athree-axis mountavoids theproblem ofexcessive acceleration.
Thetwo-axis mountof(d)issimilarto(c)exceptthatitisarranged toprovide roll stabilization.
Therolldatafromastableverticalcanbeappliedtothebasicrollaxiswithout theneedforcomputer ordersasrequired intheothertwo-axis mounts.
Theantenna isthen stabilized abouttheazimuth axisifthepitchangleissmall.
Thethree-axis mountof(e)canprovide fullhemispheric coverage.
Themountin(I) mightbedesiredwhereantenna elevation isnotrequired.
Thearrangement in(g)canbe trainedontargetwithminimum rateoracceleration requirements onallaxes,irrespective of theposition ofthetargetormotionoftheplatform.
Inthethree-axis arrangement of(h)a stablebaseisprovided inwhicharollaxisliesinafixedposition paralleltothefore-and-aft lineofthevehicle.Thisaxiscarriesthepitchaxisthatsupports thetrainaxis.Pitchandroll signalsfromastableverticalareappliedasinputstothecorresponding axes.Theresultisthat theazimuth (ortrain)axisisstabilized intheverticalandmayreceiveadirectorderofrelative azimuth.
Computations arenotrequired asinothermounts.
Theantenna mayberotatedat constant rateshigherthanwouldbepractical withothermounts requiring application ofa correction foravariable platform-tilt.
Thisthree-axis stablebaseantenna hasnoelevation angleandislimitedtoapplications whichscanthehorizonorafixedangleofelevation with respecttothehorizon.Ifelevation scanning athighratesisrequired, asinheightfindersor 3-Dradar,afourthaxiscanbesupplied asin(i).Thisconfiguration, although itrequires no computer.
isrelatively massive andheavybecause ithasfourservosystems forcontrolling (a) One-axis mount (b) Two-axis mount  Type 1 Cross-  elevot~on  0x1s  /--- I\ Elevation  (c) Two-0x1s mount  Type 2  (dl Two-oxis mount (el Three-axis mount (f) Three-axis mount  Type 3 Type 1 Type 2  (g) Three-axis mount (h) Three-axis mount  Type 3 Type 4 (i) Four-axis mount  Figure 7.31 Arrangements of axes for stabilized antenna mounts.
(From Cady, Karelitz, ar~d Turner,'"  chap.
4, courtesy McGraw-Hill Book Company.)  rotation about each of the four axes.
The three-axis mount of (h) is simpler, bill also 11as similar  disadvantages because of weight and size.
 In the above, the stabilization of the mount was assumed to be by some form of mechanical  compensation.
Radars which electronically scan a beam in elevation (usually a pencil beam)  by either phase shifters or frequency scan can stabilize the beam in elevation as a correction to  the elevation scan orders, thus permitting a reduction in the size of the mount.
The stabiliza-  272INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS Elevation axjs aXIs-\cr05s­ elevallon 01'.15 Train axisTrain aXIs (0)One-axis mount (b)Two-axis mount Type1(c)Two-axIs mounl Type2 .,l Roll axisElevation axis (level) Train axisElevallon axis ---------TrOinaxis ld)Two-axis mount Type3(e)Three-axis mount Type1(f)Three-axis mount Type2 Elevation axis Cross­ -----.,H--!---elevation axis Train axisTrain ~--axis Pitch axis Roll mdsTrain axis __ EI~vation aXIs __PIlCh \_axis Roll axis (g)Three-axis mount Type3(II)Three-axis mount Type4(i)Four-axis mount Figure7.31Arrangements ofaxesforstabilized antenna mounts.(FromCady,Karelitz, andTurtler: ..
chap.4,courtesyMcGraw-Hill BookCompany.) rotationabouteachofthefouraxes.Thethree-axis mountof(h)issimpler, butalsohassimilar disadvantages becauseofweightandsize.
Intheabove,thestabilization ofthemountwasassumed tobebysomeformofmechanical compensation.
Radarswhichelectronically scanabeaminelevation (usually apencilbeam) byeitherphaseshiftersorfrequency scancanstabilize thebeaminelevation asacorrection to theelevation scanorders,thuspermitting areduction inthesizeorthemount.Thestabiliza- tiori of a pliascd array arlterltia capable of electror~ically scannir~g the beam is accomplislied ill  tlte computer that generates the stceri~tg orders.
 Sor~ietirnes the terrns 1c1~~1 arid c.r.oss 1c1-cl are used to refer to the angles in a stabili7ed  system."' Tile lorel ~trgle is tlie arigle between tile horizontal plane arid the deck plarie,  rneasi~red irl tlie vertical platie tllrotrgli the line of sight.
The cross-le~lel urryle is the angle.
 rlleasured about tlie lirle of sight, betwee11 tile vertical plane through the line ofsiglit and tlie  11laric ~xrl~e~icfict~lar to tlic deck tllrotrgli [lie line of sight.
 :\II~CIIII~ drivr~s.' '".' " Mccllit~~ical trnckirig radars arid nodding-bcarn liciglit firiders reqtiisc  v;~r-i;~ hle clrivc power.
I'llc clioice I~its I~ccri twtweeit electrical and hydrit~~iic syster~is.
Electricill  ~1r ivcs ;tsc 1l1c W;\id I_cor\i\rct type 01.
tl~ysistos I>ridgcs drivilig dc ntotors.
f lydrai~lic drives arc  clftcri cl~eapci- tliari electric drives arid iri tlie larger sizes (above 50 hp) tliey are Inore cornpact  ;111tl olicrl liglitcr.
It Ii;is IJCCII sititl t11;tt IlycIr.i~ulics ;tsc lcss tro\~blc to riiair~tairl.
tlowcvcr..
tllcy  tcrid to cxliitit a slow hirt predictable deterioratio~i with respect to iritertial leakage as a result  of r~lccliariical wear.
 llotli electric arid Iiydrarrlic clrives are used i~i surveillance radars.
Surveillatice anten~las  opcrntc at co~istarit rotation rate.
but some variation can be tolerated so lottg as it is not  sufficier~t to produce uneven illunti~iation of tlte cathode-ray tube display or degradation of the  MTI.
 1.
Silver.
S.
(ed.): "Microwave Antenna Tlleory and Design," MIT Radiation Laboratory Series.
 vol.
12, McGraw-Hill Book Compa~\y, New York, 1949.
 2.
Krat~s.
J.
I).: "Antennas," McGraw-Hill Hook Company, New York.
1950.
 3.
Cutler.
C.
C'..
A.
P.
King, and W.
E.
Kock: Microwave Antenna Measuretnents, Proc.
IRE.
vol.
35.
 p11.
1462 1471.
1)cccrnhcr.
1947.
 4.
Strallon.
J.
A.: "Electromagnetic Theory." McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York.
1941.
 5.
Slicrriian.
J.
W.: Aperture-antenna Analysis, chap.
9 of "Radar Handbook," M.
I.
Skolriik (ed.).
 McCiraw-Hill Hook Cornpany.
New York, 1970.
 6.
I f!fJFZ I'est P roccdures for Antennas.
IEEE Tr.(itrs..
vol.
AP-13, pp.
437-466, May, 1965.
 7.
Fry.
I).
W..
and F.
K.
Goward: "Aerials for Ccntirnetre Wavelengths." Cambridge University Press.
 New York, 1950.
 8.
Scianlhi.
A.
F.: l'lte Effect of tile Aperti~re Illumination on the Circular Aperture Antenna Pattern  Characteristics, rlficro\r.are J., vol.
8, pp.
79-84, August, 1965.
 9.
Cutler.
C.
C.: Parabolic-antenna Design for Microwaves, Proc.
IRE, vol.
35, pp.
1284-1294.
Nove~n-  her.
1947.
f'  10.
Gray.
C.
L.: Estimating the Effect of Feed Support Member Blocking on Antenna Gain and Side  Lobe Level, hficrobr.c~ve J., vol.
7, pp.
88-91, March, 1964.
 I I.
Rive.
J.: Feed Support Blockage Loss in Parabolic Antennas, Microwace J., vol.
11.
pp.
76-80.
 1)ccenl ber.
1968.
 12.
Moore.
R.
L.: Passive ECM Applied to False Target Elimination, Record oftlre IEEE 1975 It~terrrci-  tic~rrtll Radar Cot!leretrce.
pp.
458-462.
IEEE Publication 75 CHO 938-1 AES.
 13.
Foster.
K.: Parabolic Cylinder Aerials, Wireless Et~gr., vol.
33, pp.
59-65, March, 1956.
 14.
Cady.
W.
M., M.
B.
Karelitz, and L.
A.
Turner (eds.): "Radar Scanners and Radomes." MIT  Radiation Laboratory Series.
vol.
26.
McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York, 1948.
 15.
Pugh.
S..
and D.
E.
Walker: Reflector Surfaces for Communications and Radar Aerials, " Design and  Construction of Large Steerable Aerials," 11tsrirttti011 of Elecrrical Engineers (London) 1EE Corifere~rcr  Prrhlic.crtiorr no.
2 1.
pp.
369-373.
1966.
 16.
Richards.
C.
J..
and M.
Marchant: Structural Aspects: pt 1, Elementary Design Considerations.
 ctiap.
7 of " Meclianical Engineering in Radar and Communications." C.
J.
Richards (ed.).
Van  Nostrarid Reinllold Co., New York, 1969.
 17.
Ctii~.
T.
S..
and R.
H.
Turriti: Depolarization Properties of Offset Reflector Antennas.
IEEE Tratts.,  vol.
AP-21.
pp.
339-345.
May.
1973.
 RADAR ANTENNAS 273 tionofaphascdarrayantcnna capablc ofelcctronically scanning thebeamisaccomplished in thecomputer thatgenerates thesteering orders.
Sometimes theterms{cI'dandcrossl('l'c{areusedtorefcrtotheanglesinastabilized system.14Thelcre{allyleistheanglebetween thehorizontal planeandthedeckplane, measured inthevertical planethrough thelineofsight.Thecross-level allgleistheangle.
measured ahoutthelineofsight.hetwcen thevertical planethrough thelineofsightandthe planeperpcndicular tothedeckthrough l.hclineofsight.
AIltmll9 drhl'S.llh.t 11Mechanical tracking radarsandnodding-beam heightfindersrequire variahle drivcpower.Thcchoicchashccnhctwcen electrical andhydraulic systems.
Electrical drivcsarcIheWanlLconard typeorthyrislor hridgesdrivingdcmotors.
Hydraulic drivesare (lnencheaper thanelectricdrivesandinthelargersizes(above50hp)thcyaremorecompact andortcnlighter.
IIhasheensaidthathydraulics arelesstroubletomaintain.
However, thcy ll'ndtoexhibilaslowbutpredictable deterioration withrespecttointernal leakage asaresull ofmechanical wear.
Bothelectricandhydraulic drivesareusedinsurveillance radars.Surveillance antcnnas operate atconstanl rOlation rate,butsomevariation canbetolerated solongasitisnot sufficient toproduce unevenillumination ofthecathode-ray tubedisplayordegradation ofthe MTI.
REFERENCES 1.SilvCf.S.(cd.):"Microwave Antenna Theory andDesign," MITRadiation Laboratory Series.
vol.12,McGraw-Hili BookCompany, NewYork,1949.
2.Kraus.J.D.:"Antennas." McGraw-Hili BookCompany, NewYork,1950.
.lCutler.C.C.A.P.King,andW.E.Kock:Microwave Antenna Measurements, Proc.IRE.vol.35.
pp.14621471.Decemher,1947.
4.Slrallon, J.A.:"Electromagnetic Theory," McGraw-Hill BookCompany, NewYork,1941.
5.Sherman.
J.W.:Aperture-antenna Analysis, chap.9of"RadarHandbook," M.1.Skolnik (cd.).
McGraw-Hili BookCompany, NewYork,1970.
6.IEEETestProcedures forAntennas, IEEETrails..vol.AP-I3.pp.437-466, May,1965.
7.Fry.D.W.,andF.K.Goward: "Aerials forCentimetre Wavelengths," Cambridge University Press.
NewYork,1950.
X.Sciamhi, A.F.:TheEffectoftheAperture Illumination ontheCircular Aperture Antenna Pallern Characteristics.
I\ficro\\'al'e J.,vol.8,pp.79-84,August, 1965.
9.Cutler.CC:Parabolic-antenna DesignforMicrowaves, Proc.IRE, vol.35,pp.1284-1294.
Novem­ her.1947.
~.
10.Gray.CL.:Estimating theEffectofFeedSupport Member Blocking onAntenna GainandSide LobeLevel.MicrO\\'IlL'e J.,vol.7,pp.88-91,March, 1964.
II.RU7e.J.:FeedSupport Blockage LossinParabolic Antennas, Microwave J.,vol.II.pp.76-80.
December.
1968.
12.Moore.
R.L.:PassiveECMApplied toFalseTargetElimination.
RecordoftI,eIEEE1975Il1tl.'l'/Ia­ tio/lalRadarCOII(erellce, pp.458-462.
IEEEPublication 75CHO938-1AES.
13.Foster,K.:Parabolic Cylinder Aerials,Wireless Ellgr.,vol.33,pp.59-65,March,1956.
14.Cady.W.M.,M.B.Karelitz.
andL.A.Turner (eds.):"Radar Scanners andRadomes," MIT Radiation Laboratory Series.vol.26,McGraw-Hili BookCompany, NewYork,1948.
15.Pugh,S.,andD.E.Walker: Reflector Surfaces forCommunications andRadarAerials," Designand Construction ofLargeSteerable Aerials," Il1stitlltioll ofElectrical Engineers (London) lEECOI!ference PlIhlicatimt no.21.pp.369-373, 1966.
16.Richards, C.J.,andM.Marchant: Structural AspeCts: ptI.Elementary DesignConsiderations, chap.7of"Mechanical Engineering inRadarandCommunications," C.J.Richards (ed.),Van Nostrand Reinhold Co.,NewYork,1969.
17.Chu.T.S..andR.H.Turrin: Depolarization Properties ofOffsetReflector Antennas, IEEETrailS..
\'01.AP-21.pp.339-345.
May,1973. 274 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  18.
Paramonov, A.
A.: Influence of Precipitation on the Electrical Properties of Wire Mesh Sirrfaces,  Radiotekhnika, vol.
11, no.
9, pp.
12-20, 1956.
 19.
Hannan, P.
W.: Microwave Antennas Derived from the Cassegrain Telescope, IRE Trutrs., vol.
AP-9,  pp.
140-153, March, 1961.
 20.
Morgan, S.
P.: Some Examples of Generalized Cassegrainian and Gregorian Antennas, IEEE Trans.,  vol.
AP-12, pp.
685-691, November, 1964.
 21.
Collins, G.
W.: Shaping of Subreflectors in Cassegrain Antennas for Maximum Aperture Efficiency,  IEEE Trans., vol.
AP-21, pp.
309-313, May, 1973.
 22.
Graham, R.: The Polarisation Characteristics of Offset Cassegrain Aerials, "Radar - Present and  Future," Oct.
23-25, 1973, IEE Conf Plthl.
no.
105, pp.
134-139.
 23.
Dahlsjo, 0.: A Low Side Lobe Cassegrain Antenna," Radar--- Present and Future," Oct.
23 25, 1973,  IEE Cot!/: Pl~bl.
tro.
105, pp.
408-413.
 24.
Weiss, H.
G.: The Haystack Microwave Research Facility, Sprctrrrn~, vol.
2, pp.
50 -59, Fchrt~ary,  1965.
 25.
Josefsson, L.
G.: A Broad-band Twist Reflector, IEEE Tratts., vol.
AP-19, pp.
552-554, July, 1971.
 26.
Lo, Y.
T.: On the Beam Deviation Factor of a Parabolic Reflector, IRE Tb~rt~s., vol.
AP-8,  pp.
347-349, May, 1960.
 27.
Sandler, S.
S.: Paraboloidal Reflector Patterns of Off-axis Feed, IRE Trat~s., vol.
AP-8, pp.
368-379,  July, 1960.
 18.
Rt~ze, J.: Lateral Feed Displacement in a Paraboloid, IEEE Trans., vol.
AP-13.
pp.
660 665.
Scptcm-  ber, 1965.
 29.
Imbriale, W.
A., P.
G.
Ingerson, and W.
C.
Wong: Large Lateral Feed Displacements in a Parabolic  Reflector, IEEE Trans., vol.
AP-22, pp.
742-745, November, 1974.
 30.
Ashmead, J., and A.
B.
Pippard: The Use of Spherical Reflectors as Microwave Scanning Aerials, J.
 IEEE (London), vol.
93, pt.
IIIA, p.
627, 1946.
 31.
Ramsey, J.
F., and J.
A.
C.
Jackson: Wide-angle Scanning Performance of Mirror Antennas, hlurcot~i  Rev., vol.
19, 3d qtr., pp.
119-140, 1956.
 32.
Li, T.: A Study of Spherical Reflectors as Wide-angle Scanning Antennas.
IRE Trut~s., vol.
AP-7,  pp.
223-226, July, 1959.
 33.
Spencer, R.
C., and G.
Hyde: Studies of the Focal-Region of a Spherical Reflector: Geometric Op~ics,  IEEE Trans., vol.
AP-16, pp.
317-324, May, 1968.
 34.
Love, A.
W.: Scale Model Development of a High Efficiency Dual Polarized Feed for the Arecibo  Spherical Reflector, IEEE Trans., vol.
AP-21, pp.
628-639, September, 1973.
 35.
Ronchi, L., and G.
Toraldo di Francia: An Application of Parageometrical Optics to the Design ofa  Microwave Mirror, IRE Trans., vol.
AP-6, pp.
129-133, January, 1958.
 36.
Provencher, J.
H.: Experimental Study of a Diffraction Reflector, IRE Trtrt~s., vol.
AP-8.
 pp.
331-336, May, 1960.
 37.
Kelleher, K.
S.: A New Microwave Reflector, IRE Natl.
Contr.
Record, vol.
1, pt.
2, pp.
56-58, 1953.
 38.
Peeler, G.
D.
M., and D.
H.
Archer: A Toroidal Microwave Reflector, IRE NatI.
Conr.
Record, vol.
4,  pt.
1, pp.
242-247, 1956.
 39.
Kelleher, K.
S., and H.
H.
Hibbs: A New Microwave Reflector, Narul Rrsrrrrcl~ Luh.
Repf.
4141, 1953.
 40.
Jackson, J., and E.
Goodall: A 360" Scanning Microwave Reflector, lvlorcotri Rrtl., vol.
21.
1st qtr.,  pp.
30-38, 1958.
 41.
Barab, J.
D., J.
G.
Marangoni, and W.
G.
Scott: The Parabolic Dome Antenna: A Large Aperture,  360 Degree, Rapid Scan Antenna, IRE WESCON Cotto.
Record, vol.
2, pt.
1, pp.
272-293, 1958.
 42.
Jasik.
H.: "Antenna Engineering Handbook," McGraw-Hill Book Co., New York, 1961, sec.
15.6.
 43.
Johnson.
R.
C.: Optical Scanners, chap.
3 of" Microwave Scanning Antennas, vol.
I." R.
C.
Hanscn  (ed.), Academic Press, New York, 1964.
 44.
Foster, J.
S.: A Microwave Antenna with Rapid Saw-Tooth Scan, Cirt~c~dht~ J.
qf' Phys..
vol.
36,  pp.
1652-1660, 1958.
 45.
Martindale, J.
P.
A.: Lens Aerials at Centimetric Wavelengths, J.
Brit.
IRE, vol.
13, pp.
243-259,  May, 1953.
 36.
Stuetzer, 0.
M.: Development of Artificial Microwave Optics in Gerrnany, Proc.
IRE, vol.
38.
 pp.
1053-1056, September, 1950.
 47.
Harvey, A.
F.: Optical Techniques at Microwave Frequencies, I'roc.
IEE, vol.
106, pt.
H,  pp.
141--157, March, 1959.
Contains an extensive bibliography.
 48.
Kelleher, K.
S., and C.
Goatley: Dielectric Lens for Microwaves.
Elrctrorrics, vol.
28, pp.
142--145,  August, 1955.
 49.
Kock, W.
E.: Metallic Delay Lens, Bell Sysrrm Tech.
J., vol.
27, pp.
58 .HZ, January, 1948.
 50.
Kock, W.
E.: Metal Lens Antennas, Proc.
IRE, vol.
34, pp.
828 836, November, 1946.
 274INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS 18.Paramonov, A.A.:Influence ofPrecipitation ontheElectrical Properties ofWireMeshSurfaces, Radiotekhnika, vol.11,no.9,pp.12-20,1956.
19.Hannan, P.W.:Microwave Antennas Derived fromtheCassegrain Telescope, IRETrails.,vol.AP-9, pp.140-153, March,1961.
20.Morgan, S.P.:SomeExamples ofGeneralized Cassegrainian andGregorian Antennas, IEEETrulls., vol.AP-12,pp.685-691, November, 1964.
2!.Collins, G.W.:Shaping ofSubreflectors inCassegrain Antennas forMaximum Aperture Efficiency, IEEETrans.,vol.AP-21,pp.309-313, May,1973.
22.Graham, R.:ThePolarisation Characteristics ofOffsetCassegrain Aerials,"Radar -Present and Future," Oct.23-25,1973, lEECOI!fPI/hi.no.105,pp.134-139.
23.Dahlsjo,0.:ALowSideLobeCassegrain Antenna, "Radar- PresentandFuture," Oct.2325,1973, lEECOt!fPubl.110.105,pp.408-413.
24.Weiss,H.G.:TheHaystack Microwave Research Facility, SpeClrll1ll, vol.2,pp.50-59,h:bruary, 1965.
25.Josefsson, L.G.:ABroad-band TwistReflector, IEEETrailS.,vol.AP-19,pp.552-554, July,1971.
26.Lo,Y.T.:OntheBeamDeviation FactorofaParabolic Reflector, IREnam.,vol.AP-8, pp.347-349, May,1960.
27.Sandler, S.S.:Paraboloidal Reflector Patterns ofOff-axis Feed,IRETrailS.,vol.AP-8,pp.368-379, July,1960.
28.Ruze,1.:LateralFeedDisplacement inaParaboloid, IEEETram.,vol.AP-I3,pp.660665,Sepkm­ ber,1965.
29.Imbriale, W.A.,P.G.Ingerson, andW.C.Wong:LargeLateralFeedDisplacements inaParabolic Reflector, IEEETrans.,vol.AP-22,pp.742-745, November, 1974.
30.Ashmead, J.,andA.B.Pippard: TheUseofSpherical Reflectors asMicrowave Scanning Aerials,J.
IEEE(London), vol.93,pt.IlIA,p.627,1946.
31.Ramsey, 1.F.,andJ.A.C.Jackson: Wide-angle Scanning Performance ofMirrorAntennas, hiarconi Rev.,vol.19,3dqtr.,pp.119-140, 1956.
32.Li,T.:AStudyofSpherical Reflectors asWide-angle Scanning Antennas, IRETram.,vol.AP-7, pp.223-226, July,1959.
33.Spencer, R.c.,andG.Hyde:StudiesoftheFocal-Region ofaSpherical Reflector: Gcomdric Opti~s, IEEETrans.,vol.AP-16,pp.317-324, May,1968.
34.Love,A.W.:ScaleModelDevelopment ofaHighEfficiency DualPolarized FeedfortheAre~ibo Spherical Reflector, IEEETrans.,vol.AP-21,pp.628-639, September, 1973.
35.Ronchi,L.,andG.Toraldo diFrancia: AnApplication ofParageometrical OpticstotheDesignofa Microwave Mirror,IRETrans.,vol.AP-6,pp.129-133, January, 1958.
36.Provencher, J.H.:Experimental StudyofaDiffraction Reflector, IRETrtms., vol.AP-~, pp.331-336, May,1960.
37.Kelleher, K.S.:ANewMicrowave Reflector, IRENatl.COnti.Record,vol.I,pt.2,pp.56..58,1953.
38.Peeler,G.D.M.,andD.H.Archer:AToroidal Microwave Reflector, IRENelli.Conr.Rt'Cord,vol.-t, pt.I,pp.242-247, 1956.
39.Kelleher, K.S.,andH.
H.Hibbs:ANewMicrowave Reflector, Nal'alResearch Lah.Rept.4141,1953.
40.Jackson, J.,andE.Goodall: A360°Scanning Microwave Reflector, Marconi Rel'.,vol.21.istqtr., pp.30-38,1958.
41.Barab,J.D.,J.G.Marangoni, andW.G.Scott:TheParabolic DomeAntenna: ALargeAperture, 360Degree, RapidScanAntenna, IREWESCON Conv.Record,vol.2,pt.I,pp.272-293, 195H.
42.Jasik.H.:"Antenna Engineering Handbook," McGraw-Hili BookCo.,NewYork,1961,sec.15.6.
43.Johnson, R.c.:OpticalScanners, chap.3of"Microwave Scanning Antennas, vol.I,"R.C.Hansen (cd.),Academic Press,NewYork,1964.
44.Foster, 1.S.:AMicrowave Antenna withRapidSaw-Tooth Scan,CmlL/diel/l J.ofPhys.,vol.36, pp.1652-1660, 1958.
45.Martindale, J.P.A.:LensAerialsatCentimetric Wavelengths, J.Brie.IRE,vol.13,pp.243-259, May,1953.
46.Stuetzer, O.M.:Development ofArtificial Microwave OpticsinCiermany, Proc.IRE,vol.3H, pp.1053-1056, September, 1950.
47.Harvey, A.F.:Optical Techniques atMicrowave Frequencies, Prot.lEE,vol.106,pt.H, pp.141--157, March,1959.Contains anextensive bibliography.
48.Kelleher, K.S.,andC.Goatley: Dielectric LensforMicrowaves, Electronics, vol.28,pp.142-145, August, 1955.
49.Kock,W.E.:Metallic DelayLens,BellSystemTech.J.,vol.27,pp.58M2,January, 1948.
50.Kock,W.E.:MetalLensAntennas, Proc.IRE,vol.34,pp.H28836,November, 1946. 51.
Kock.
W.
E.: Path-length Microwave Lenses, Proc.
IRE, vol.
37, pp.
852-855, August, 1949.
 52.
Ruze, J.: Wide-angle Metal-plate Optics, Proc.
IRE, vol.
38.
pp.
53-59, January, 1950.
 53.
Lunehitrg.
R.
K.: " Mathenlatical Tlteory of Optics " (mimeograplied lecture notes), pp.
2 12--213.
 f3rown l lriiversity Graduate Scliool.
Providence, R.I..
1944.
Published by University of California  Press.
I~crkclcy, 1964.
 54.
Peeler.
(i.
1).
M..
and [I.
P.
C'olernau: Microwave Stepped-index Luneburg Lenses.
IRE T,vr~~s.,  vol.
AP-6.
pp.
202 207.
April.
1958.
 55.
l3ttck Icy.
1'.
F.
: Stcppctl-irldcx I.tt~ichurg Lenses, Elc~ctrortic Desigtl, vol.
8, pp.
86--89, Apr.
13, 1960.
 56.
Jasik.
f 1.: 7'he l:lcct~~o~naprictic '1'licot.y of tlie Luriebttrg Lens, AFCRC Repr.
TR-54-121, Novetnhcr,  1954.
 57.
I3rnun.
t! i I.: Ratliatic,n ('liaracteristics of the Spherical Luneburg Lens, IRE Trnrls..
vol.
AP-4.
 pp.
1.32 138.
April.
1956.
 58.
Morgan.
S.
P.: General Soliltion of tlie Lurieburg Lens Problem, J.
Appl..
Phps., vol.
29.
 pp.
1358 -1368.
September, 1958.
 59.
It'ehster.
R.
E.: Radiatiori Patterns of a Splierical Luneburg Lens with Simple Feeds, IRE Traru.,  vol.
AP-6, pp.
301-302, July, 1958.
 60.
Kellelier.
K.
S.: Uesignirlg Dielectric Microwave Lenses, Electronics, vol.
29, pp.
138-142, June, 1956.
 61.
Holincrt.
J.
I., arid 1-1.
P.
Colernan: Applications of the Luneburg Lens, Naval Research Lab.
Rrpt.
 48R8.
Mar.
7.
1957.
 62.
Peeler, G.
I>.
M..
K.
S.
Kelleher.
and H.
P.
Coleman: Virtual Source Luneburg Lenses, Symposirrrn or1  ;\ticr.o\cc~r.e Oi~tics, McGill University, Montreal, AFCRC-TR-59-I18(1), ASTIA Document 21 1499,  pp.
18-21.
April, 1959.
 63.
(iunderson.
L.
C., and J.
F.
Kauffmnn: A High Temperature Luneburg Lens, Proc.
IEEE, vol.
56.
 pp.
883 - 884.
May.
1968.
 64.
fiollis.
J.
S..
arid M.
W.
Long: A Lunehurg Lens Scanning System.
IRE Tratts., vol.
AP-5, pp.
21 25.
 January.
1957.
 65.
Rincliart, R.
F.: A Solution to the Problem of Rapid Scanning for Radar Antennas.
J.
Appl.
Phys..
 vol.
19.
pp.
860 862, September.
1948.
 66.
Jollnson.
R.
C.: The Geodesic Lttnebt~rg Lens.
Microrraoe J., vol.
5.
pp.
76-85, August, 1962.
 67.
Jolinson.
R.
C., arid R.
M.
Goodman: Geodesic Lenses for Radar Antennas, EASCON Rec., 1968.
 pp.
64- 69.
 6X.
i1uynen.
J.
R.: Theory arid Design of a Class of Luneburg Lenses, IRE WESCON Corlrl.
Record,  vol.
2, pt.
1, pp.
219-230, 1958.
 69.
nckefi.
G., and G.
W.
Farnell: A Homogeneous Dielectric Sphere as a Microwave Lens, Call.
J.
 Phys..
vol.
34.
pp.
790 803, August, 1956.
 70.
ap Rliys.
T.
L.: Ttie Desigti of Radially Symmetric Lenses, 1EEE Trans., vol.
AP-18, pp.
497-506.
 July.
1970.
 71.
Free.
W.
R..
F.
L.
Cain.
C.
E.
Ryan.
C.
P.
Burns, and E.
M.
Turner: High-Power Constant-Index Lens  Antennas, IEEE Trotrs..
vol.
AP-22, pp.
582-584, July, 1974.
 72.
Clieston.
T.
C.: Microwave Lenses, Symposiirm on Microwave Optics, McGill University, Montreal,  AFCRC-TR-59-1 IU(I), ASTIA Document 211499.
pp.
8-17, April, 1959.
 73.
Rwe.
J.: ~liysical Limitations on Antennas.
MlT Researcll Lab.
Electror~ics Trch.
Rept.
248, Oct.
20,  1952.
 74.
WollT.
I.: 1)eterrnination of the Radiating System Which Will Produce a Specified Directional  Cliaractcristic, Proc.
IRE, vol.
25.
pp.
630-643, May, 1937.
 75.
Block, A., R.
C.
Medhi~rst, arid S.
1).
Pool: Superdirectivity, Proc.
IRE, vol.
48, p.
1164, June, 1960.
 76.
Jordan, E.
C.: " Electromagnetic Waves and Radiating Systems," sec.
12.17, Prentice-Hall.
Inc.,  E~iglewood Cliffs, N.
J..
1950.
 77.
Woodward, P.
M.: A Method of Calculating the Field over a Plane Aperture Required to Produce a  Given Polar Diagram, J.
IEE.
vol.
93, pt.
IIIA, pp.
1554-1558, 1946.
 78.
Woodward.
P.
M..
and J.
D.
Lawson: The Theoretical Precision with Which an Arbitrary Radiation  Pattcrn May Re Ohtailled wit11 a Source of Finite Size, J.
IEE, vol.
95, pt.
IIIA, pp.
362-370.
 Scptcniher.
1948.
 79.
Rllodes.
I).
R.: "Syntllcsis of Planar Antenna Sources," Oxford University Press.
London, 1974.
 NO.
Ijolpl\.
C'.
L.: A C'\trrcnt I)istrihutioti for ~roadside'hrra~s Which Optimizes the Relationstrip  hctwccrl I3carnwidtli and Side Lobe Level.
I'roc.
IRE, vol.
34, pp.
335-348, Junc, 1946; also discrts-  siori by 11.
J.
Riblct, vol.
35.
pp.
489 -492.
 81.
1)ratic.
C.
J.: 1)olpli-Cliebysliev Excilaliori Coefficient Approximation.
IEEE Tratts., vol.
AP-12.
 pp.
781 782.
Noveniber.
1964.
 82.
Stegen, R.
J.: Gain of Tchebychcff Arrays.
lEEE Traru..
vol.
AP-8, pp.
629-631.
November, 1960.
 RADAR ANTENNAS 275 5\Kock.W.E.:Path-length Microwave Lenses.Proc.IRE,vol.37,pp.852-855, August, 1949.
52.RUle,J.:Wide-angle Metal-plate Optics,Pmc.IRE,vol.38,pp.53-59,January, J950.
53.Luneburg.
R.K.:"Mathematical TheoryofOptics" (mimeographed lecturenotes),pp.212--213.
BrownUniversity (/r<lduate School.Providence, R.I.,1944.Published byUniversity ofCalifornia Press,Berkeley.
1964.
54.Peeler.G.D.M..andII.P.Coleman: Microwave Stepped-index Luneburg Lenses.IRETrails..
vol.AP-6.pp.2022U7.April.195R.
55Buckley.
FF.:Ste[1ped-inde:'< l.ullchurg Lenses.Electrollic Desigll.vol.8.pp.R6-89.Apr.13.1960.
56.Jasik.II.:TheUectromaglletic TheoryoftheLuneburg Lens,AFCRC Rept.TR-54-121, November.
1954.
57.Braun.Efl.:Radiation Characteristics oftheSpherical Luneburg Lens,IRETrailS..vol.AP-4.
pr1-'2'-'X.April.1956.
5X.Morgan.
S.P:General Solution oftheLuneburg LensProblem, J.Appl..Pllys.,vol.29.
pp.135R1368.September.
1958.
59.Webster.
R.E.:Radiation Patterns ofaSpherical Luneburg LenswithSimpleFeeds,IRETrailS., vol.AP-6.1'1'.301-302.
July.1958.
60.Kelleher.
K.S.:Designing Dielectric Microwave Lenses,Electrollics, vol.29,pp.138-142,June, 1956.
61.Bohnert.
J.I..andH.P.Coleman: Applications oftheLuneburg Lens,NavalResearch Lob.Rt>pt.
4X88.Mar.7.1957.
62.Peeler.G.D.M..K.S.Kelleher.
andH.P.Coleman: VirtualSourceLuneburg Lenses,Symposium 011 Micr(/\\'Clre Optics,McGillUniversity, Montreal.
AFCRC-TR-59-118(1), ASTIADocument 211499.
pp.18-21.April.1959.
6.1.Ciunderson.
L.C.andJF.Kauffman: AHighTemperature Luneburg Lens,Proc.IEEE.vol.56.
pp.883884.
May.1968.
64.Hollis.J.S..andM.W.Long:ALuneburg LensScanningSystcm, IRETraIlS.,vol.AP-5,pp.2125.
January.
1957.
65.Rinehart.
R.F.:ASolution totheProblem ofRapidScanning forRadarAntennas.
J.Appl.Phys..
vol.19.PP860862, September.
1948.
66.Johnson.
R.C:TheGeodesic Luneburg Lens.Microwaue J.,vol.5.pp.76-85,August,1962.
67.Johnson.
R.C,andR.M.Goodman: Geodesic LensesforRadarAntennas, EASCON Rec..1968.
rr6469.
6X.Buynen.
J.R.:TheoryandDesignofaClassofLuneburg Lenses,IREWESCON CO/II'.Record.
vol.2.pI.1,PI'.219230.1958.
69Rckcfi.G.,andG.W.Farnell: AHomogeneous Dielectric SphereasaMicrowave Lens,Call.J.
Phys..vol.34.Pl'.790803.August.
1956.
70apRhys,1'.L.:TheDesignofRadially Symmetric Lenses,IEEETrailS.,vol.AP-18,pp.497-506.
July.197U.
7\Free.W.R..F.L.Cain.C.E.Ryan.C.P.Burns,andE.M.Turner:High-Power Constant-Index Lens Antennas, IEEETrailS..vol.AP-22.pp.582-584, July,1974.
72.Cheston.
1'.C:Microwave Lenses,Symposium 011Microwave Optics.McGillUniversity.
Montreal.
AFCRC-TR-59-1I8(I), ASTIi\Document 211499,pp.8-17.April.1959.n.RUle.J.:physical Limitations onAntennas.
MITResearch Lob.Electrollics Tech.Rept.248.Oct.20, 1952.
' 74.Wolff.I.:Determination oftheRadiating SystemWhichWillProduce aSpecified Directional Characteristic.
Proc.IRE.vol.25.pp.630-643.
May.1937.
75.Block.1\.,R.C.Medhurst, andS.D.Pool:Superdirectivity, Proc.IRE,vol.48.p.1164,June.1960.
76.Jordan.
E.c.:"Electromagnetic WavesandRadiating Systems," sec.12.17,Prentice-Hall.
Inc., Englewood Cliffs,N.1..1950.
77.Woodward.
P.M.:i\MethodofCalculating theFieldoveraPlaneAperture Required toProduce a GivenPolarDiagram, J.IEE.vol.93.pt.lilA.PI'.1554-1558, 1946.
78.Woodward.
P.M..andJ.D.Lawson: TheTheoretical Precision withWhichanArbitrary Radiation Pattern MayAeOhtained withaSourceofFiniteSize,J.lEE.vol.95,pt.IlIA,pp.362-370.
Septemher.
194X.
79.Rhodes.
D.R.:"Synthesis ofPlanarAntenna Sources." OxfordUniversity Press.London.
1974.
RO.Dolph.C.L:ACurrcnt Distrihution forBroadside' ArraysWhichOptimizes theRelationship hetween Bcamwidth andSideLoneLevel.I'roc.IRE.vol.34.pp.335-348.
Junc.1946;alsodiscus­ sionbyII.J.Rinlet,vol.35.pp.489-492.
RI.Drane.C.J.:Dolph-Chehyshcv Excitation Coefficient Approximation.
IEEETrailS.•vol.AP-12.
pp.781782.Novemher.
1964.
82.Stegcn.R.J.:GainofTchebycheff Arrays.IEEETrailS.,vol.AP-8.pp.629-631.
November.
1960. 83.
van der Maas, G.
J.: A Simplified Calculation for I>olpl~-Tsct~ebyscllsff Arrays, J.
,-lppl.
Phys., vol.
25,  pp.
12 1-124, January, 1954.
 84.
Taylor, T.
T.: Design of Line-source Antennas for Narrow Ileamwidth ancl [.ow Side l.ohcs, IRE  Trutu., vol.
AP-3, pp.
16-28, January, 1955.
 85.
Hansen, R.
C.: Gain Limitations of Large Antennas, IRE Truns., vol.
AP-8, pp.
490-495, September,  1960.
 86.
Taylor, T.
T.: Design of Circular Apertures for Narrow Reamwidth and Low Sidelobes, IRE Trans..
 vol.
AP-8, pp.
17-22, January, 1960.
 87.
Hansen, R.
C.: Tables of Taylor Distributions for Circular Aperture Antennas, IRE Trans.,  vol.
AP-8, pp.
23-26, January, 1960.
 88.
Bayliss, E.
T.: Design of Monopulse Antenna Difference Patterns with Low Sidelobcs, Brll Spstrm  Tech.
J., vol.
47, pp.
623-650, May-June, 1968.
 89.
Levine, D.: " Radargrammetry," McGraw-Hill Rook Co., New York, 1960.
 90.
Shanks, H.
E.: A Geometrical Optics Method of Pattern Synthesis for Linear Arrays, IRE Tra~ls.,  vol.
AP-8, pp.
485-490, September, 1960.
 91.
Hutchison, P.
T.: The Image Method of Beam Shaping, IRE Trans., vol.
AP-4, pp.
604 609, October,  1956.
 92.
Hines, J.
N., V.
H.
Rumsey, and C.
H.
Walter: Traveling-wave Slot Antennas, Proc.
IRE, vol.
41,  pp.
1624-1631, November, 1953.
 93.
Hougardy, R.
W., and R.
C.
Hansen: Scanning Surface Wave Antennas: Oblique Strrface Waves over  a Corrugated Conductor, IRE Trans., vol.
AP-6, pp.
370 .376, Octohcr, 1958.
 94.
Dunbar, A.
S.: Calculation of Doubly Curved Reflectors for Shaped Beams, Proc.
IRE, vol.
36,  pp.
1289-1296, October, 1948.
 95.
Carberry, T.
F.: Analysis Theory for the Shaped-Beam Doubly Curved Reflector Antsnna, lEEE  Tratrs., VOI.
AP-17, pp.
131-138, March, 1969.
 96.
Brunner, A.: Possibilities of Dimensioning Doubly Cttrved Reflectors for A~imuth-Searcll Radar  Antennas, IEEE Trans., vol.
AP-19, pp.
52-57, January, 1971.
 97.
Shrader, W.
W.: MTI Radar, "Radar Handbook," M.
I.
Skolnik (ed.), McGraw-Hill Book Co., Ncw  York, 1970, sec.
17.20.
 98.
Shrader, W.
W.: Antenna Considerations for Surveillance Radar Systems, Seoerrrll ..lntrliul E~st Corrst  Conference on Aeronatrtical and Navigatiot~al Electronics, Baltimore, Md., October, 1960.
 99.
Ruze, J.: The Effect of Aperture Errors on the Antenna Radiation Pattern, Slippl.
a1 Nuotto cinrenro,  vol.
9, no.
3, pp.
364-380, 1952; also reprinted in Proc.
Symposilim on Comm~ir~icarion Theory utd  Antenna Design, AFCRC Tech.
Rept.
57-105, ASTIA Document 117067, January, 1957.
 100.
Bracewell, R.
N.: Tolerance Theory of Large Antennas, IRE Tram., vol.
AP-9, pp.
49-58, January,  1961.
 101.
Ruze, J.: Antenna Tolerance Theory-A Review, Proc.
IEEE, vol.
54, pp.
633-640, April, 1966.
 102.
Skolnik, M.
I.: Large Antenna Systems, chap.
28 of "Antenna Theory, pt.
2," K.
E.
Collin and F.
J.
 Zucker (eds.), McGraw-Hill Book Co., New York, 1969.
 103.
Simpson, P.
J.: Mechanical Aspects of Ground-Based Radomes, Chap.
12 of" Mechanical Engincer-  ing in Radar and Communications," C.
J.
Richards (ed.), Van Nostrand Reinhold Co., New 'i'ork.
 1969.
 104.
Kay, A.
F.: Electrical Design of hlletal Space Frame Radomes, IEEE Trans., vol.
AP-13, pp.
188- 207,  March, 1965.
 105.
Larrench, W.: A Homogeneous, Rigid, Ground Radome, Proc.
IEE, vol.
109R, pp.
445 -446, Novcm-  her, 1962.
 106.
Oh, L.
L., C.
D.
Lunden, and C.
Chiou: Fenestrated Metal Radome, Microwaoe J., vol.
7.
pp.
63, 65,  April, 1964.
 107.
011, L.
L., and C.
D.
Lunden: A Slotted Radome Cap for Rain, Hail, and Lightning Protection,  Microwave J., vol.
11, pp.
105-108, March, 1968.
 108.
Pelton, E.
L.,and B.
A.
Munk: A Streamlined Metallic Radome, IEEE Trans., vol.
AP-22, pp.
799 -803,  November, 1974.
 109.
Brown, J.
S., and K.
E.
McKee: Wind Loads on Antenna Systems, Microwuur J., vol.
7, pp.
41 -46,  September, 1964.
 110.
Thorn, H.: Distribution of Extreme Winds in the United States, ASCE Trans., vol.
126, pt.
It, paper  3191, 1961.
 11 1.
Wind Forces on Structures, ASCE Trans., vol.
126, pt.
11, paper 3269, 1961.
 112.
Hirst, H., and K.
E.
McKee: Wind Forces on Parabolic Antennas, Microwaoe J., vol.
8, pp.
43-47,  November, 1965.
 276INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS 83.vanderMaas,G.J.:ASimplified Calculation forDolph-Tschehyscheff Arrays,J.AprlPhrs.,vol.25.
pp.121-124, January, 1954.
84.Taylor,TT:DesignofLine-source Antennas forNarrow Beamwidth andLowSideLohes,IRE TrailS.,vol.AP-3,pp.16-28,January, 1955.
85.Hansen, R.c.:GainLimitations ofLargeAntennas, IRETrailS.,vol.AP-8,pp.490-495, Seplc:=mha, 1960.
86.Taylor,T.T:DesignofCircular Apertures forNarrow Beamwidth andLowSidelobes, IRETraIlS., vol.AP-8,pp.17-22,January, 1960.
87.Hansen, R.c.:TablesofTaylor Distributions forCircular Aperture Antennas, IRETrailS., vol.AP-8,pp.23-26,January, 1960.
88.Bayliss, E.T.:DesignofMonopulse Antenna Difference Patterns withLowSidelobcs, BellS}'stem Tech.J.,vol.47,pp.623-650, May-June, 1968.
89.Levine,D.:"Radargrammetry," McGraw-Hill BookCo.,NewYork,1960.
90.Shanks, H.E.:AGeometrical OpticsMethod ofPattern Synthesis forLinearArrays,IRETrailS, vol.AP-8,pp.485-490, September, 1960.
91.Hutchison, P.T:TheImageMethodofBeamShaping, IRETrailS.,vol.AP-4,pp.60~609,Octoba.
1956.
92.Hines,J.N.,V.H.Rumsey, andC.H.Walter: Traveling-wave SlotAntennas, Proc.IRE,vol.41, pp.1624-1631, November, 1953.
93.Hougardy, R.W.,andR.C.Hansen: Scanning SurfaceWaveAntennas: Oblique Surface Wavesova aCorrugated Conductor, IRETrans.,vol.AP-6,pp.370376, October, 1958.
94.Dunbar, A.S.:Calculation ofDoubly Curved Rellectors forShapedBeams,Proc.IRE,vol.36, pp.1289-1296, October, 1948.
95.Carberry, T.F.:Analysis Theory fortheShaped- BeamDoubly Curved Retlector Antenna, lEEE Trans.,vol.AP-17,pp.131-138, March, 1969.
96.Brunner, A.:Possibilities ofDimensioning Doubly Curved Rel1ectors forAzimuth-Search Radar Antennas, IEEETrans.,vol.AP-19,pp.52-57,January, 1971.
97.Shrader, W.W.:MTIRadar,"Radar Handbook," M.r.Skolnik (ed.),McGraw-Hill BookCo.,New York,1970,sec.17.20.
98.Shrader, W.W.:Antenna Considerations forSurveillance RadarSystems, SevellthAmlllalEClstCOCJS( Conference onAeronautical andNavigational Electronics, Baltimore, Md.,October, 1960.
99.Ruze,1.:TheElfectofAperture ErrorsontheAntenna Radiation Pattern,SlIppl.alNIIOI'Orimellco.
vol.9,no.3,pp.364-380, 1952;alsoreprinted inProc.Symposium onCommullicatioll Theoryalid Antenna Design,AFCRC Tech.Rept.57-105, ASTIADocument 117067,January, 1957.
100.Bracewell, R.N.:Tolerance TheoryofLargeAntennas, IRETrailS.,vol.AP-9,pp.49-58,1anuary, 1961.
IOI.Ruze,1.:Antenna Tolerance Theory-A Review, Proc.IEEE,vol.54,pp.633-640, April,1966.
102.Skolnik, M.I.:LargeAntenna Systems, chap.28of"Antenna Theory, pt.2,"R.E.Collinandf.J.
Zucker(eds.),McGraw-Hili BookCo.,NewYork,1969.
103.Simpson, P.1.:Mechanical AspectsofGround-Based Radomes, Chap.12of"Mechanical Engineer­ inginRadarandCommunications," C.J.Richards (ed.),VanNostrand Reinhold Co.,NewYork.
1969.
104.Kay,A.F.:Electrical Designoftltfetal SpaceFrameRadomes, IEEETrans.,vol.AP-13,pp.IH8-202, March, 1965.
105.Larrench, W.:AHomogeneous, Rigid,Ground Radome, Proc.IEE, vol.109B,pp.445446, Novem­ ber,1962.
106.Oh,L.L.,C.D.Lunden, andC.Chiou:Fenestrated MetalRadome, Microwal'l! J.,vol.7,pro6265, April,1964.
107.Oh,L.L.,andC.D.Lunden: ASlotted Radome CapforRain,Hail,andLightning Proteclion, Microwave J.,vol.II,pp.105-108, March, 1968.
10KPelton,E.L.,andB.A.Munk:AStreamlined Metallic Radome,l EEETrans.,vol.AP-22,pp.799-lW3, November, 1974.
109.Brown,1.
S.,andK.E.McKee: WindLoadsonAntenna Systems, Microwave J.,vol.7,pp.41-46, September, 1964.
110.Thorn,H.:Distribution ofExtreme WindsintheUnitedStates,ASCETrans.,vol.126,pI.II,paper 3191,1961.
Ill.WindForcesonStructures, ASCETrans.,vol.126,pI.II,paper3269,1961.
112.Hirst,H.,andK.E.McKee: WindForcesonParabolic Antennas, Microwave J.,vol.8,pp.43-47, November, 1965. 113.
Scruton, C., and P.
Sachs: Wind Effects on Microwave Reflectors, "Design and Construction  -of Large Steerable Aerials." IICl~E (I,ottclot~) ('or~f: P~chlicntio~t no.
2 1, pp.
29 -38, 1966.
 114.
Webster, A.
J.: Wirid Torques or, Rotating Radar Aerials, Mut.corri Reu., VOI.
28, pp.
147-l70,2d qtr..
 1965.
 115.
Vitale.
J.
A,: Large Radomes, cliap.
5 of" Microwave Scaririing Antennas, vol.
1." R.
C.
Hanseri (ed.).
 Academic Press.
N.Y ..
1964.
 116.
Blevis.
B.
C.: Rairi E3Tects on Radomes and Antenna Reflectors, " Design and Construction of Large  Steerable Aerials." IEE (Lottdon) Cor!fererence P~rhlication no.
21, pp.
148-151, 1966.
 117.
Hlevis.
R.
C.: Losses Due to Rain oil Radomes and Antenna Reflecting Surfaces, IEEE Trans.,  vnl.
Af-I?.
pp.
175 176.
Jnrii~ary.
1965.
 1 IX Ut17c.
J.
('.: MOIV 011 Wct I<;IC~OIIICS.
1I;E'i'; ~'I.[I~Is., VOI.
AP-13, j>p.
823 824.
Scjltct~iI>cr.
1965.
 119.
('ofieri, A,, and A.
Smolski: 'l'lie EfTect of Rain on Satellite Co~nmunications Earth Terniinal Rigid  Rntforncs.
hlic.ro\c~irrtc.
J..
vol.
9.
pp.
1 11 - 121.
September.
1966.
 120.
Wcip;~riti.
K.
M.: I'c~forrii:ir~cc of a Watcl--l<cpcllc~~t Radorlic C'o;ttirig iri an Airpol-t Surveillatice  K;ldnr, /'roc..
IEEE, vol.
61, pp.
1 167 1 168, Augifst, 1973.
 12 1 Ariticrsoli, I.: Mcnsurernctits of 2O-C;Ilz Tra~is~iiissiori Tliroi~gli a Radof~ic in Rain, IEEE Trc~rrs.,  vol.
A 1'-23, 111'.
619 622.
Septcr~lhcr.
1975.
 122.
Kay.
A.
F.: Radornes atid Absorbers, chap.
32 of "Antenna Engineering Handbook," H.
Jasik (ed.),  Mc(iraw-flill Rook Company.
New York, 1961.
 123.
Uicaudo, V.
J.: Radomes, Cfiap.
14 of" Radar Handbook," M.
I.
Skolnik (ed.), McGraw-Hill Book  Co..
New York.
1970.
 124.
Walton.
J.
R., Jr.: " Radonie Iirlgirieeririg tiandbook," Marcel Dekker, Inc., New York, 1970.
 125.
Davis.
P., and A.
Colien: Rigid Radome Design Considerations, Electronics, vol.
32, no.
16, pp.
66,  68 69.
Apr.
1 7.
1959.
 126.
Ilastings.
K.
N..
arid J.
(;.
Cllapli~i: Ilrives for Steerable Antennas.
Hydraulics versus Electro-  Mcchariics, " Desigri and Construction of Large Steera.ble Aerials," IEE (London) Cotlftrence Prrhli-  c-orinn no.
21, pp.
314-318.
1966.
 127.
Sclby.
R.
P.: Power Drives, chap.
9 of" Mechanical Engineering in Radar and Communications," C.
 J.
Richards (ed.).
Van Nostrand Reinhold Co..
New York, 1969.
 128.
Kelleher, K.
S..
and H.
H.
Hibbs: Organ-pipe Radar Scanner, Electronics, vol.
25, pp.
126-127, May,  1952.
 129.
Peeler.
G.
D.
M..
K.
S.
Kelleher, and H.
H.
Hibbs: An Organ Pipe Scanner, IRE Trans., no.
PGAP-1,  pp 1 13 - 122, February, 1952.
 130.
Clarricoates, P.
J.
B., and G.
T.
Poulton: High-Efftciency Microwave Reflector Antennas-A Review,  I'roc.
IEEE, vol.
65, pp.
1470-1504, October, 1977.
 131.
Green, T.
J.: The Influence of Masts on Ship-Borne Radar Performance, RADAR-77, Oct.
25-28,  1977.
London, IEE Conference Publication no.
105, pp.
405-408, available from IEEE, New York,  77C'H 1271-6 AES.
 132.
See Scc.
12.10 of ref.
1.
 !33.
Mattingly.
R.
L.: Radar Antennas, chap.
25 of "Antenna Engineering Handbook," H.
Jasik, (ed.),  McGraw-Hill Rook Company.
New York.
1961, sec.
25.2.
 134.
Nicliolls R.
R.: Advances in the Design of Foster Scanners, RADAR-77, Oct.
25-28, 1977, London,  IEE coiference Publication no.
105.
pp.
401-404.
available from IEEE.
New York.
77CHl271-6.
 AES.
 135.
Punnett.
M.
S.: Developments in Ground Mounted Air Supported Radomes, IEEE 1977 Mechatlical  Engineering in Radar Sympositon, Nov.
8-10, 1977, Arlington, Va., pp.
40-45, IEEE Publication  77Cf.11250-0 AES.
 136.
Sangiolo.
J.
B., and A.
B.
Rohwer: Structural Design Improvements of ESSCO Radomes and  Antennas, IEEE 1977 Mecl~anical Engineeritlg in Radar Symposium, Nov.
8-10, 1977, Arlington, Va,  pp.
46-51, lEEE Publication 77CH1250-0 AES.
 137.
Probert-Jones, J.
R.: The Radar Equation in Meteorology, Quart.
J.
Roy.
Meteor.
Soc., vol.
88,  pp.
485-495.
1962.
 138.
Zhuk.
M.
S., and Yu.
R.
Molochkov: " Proektirovanie Linzovykx, Skaniruyushchikx, Shirokodiapa-  zommykx Antenn i Fidernykx Ustroistv" (Design of Lenses, Scanning Antennas, Wideband  Antennas.
and Transmission Lines.) Energiya, Moscow, 1973, pp.
81-82.
 139.
Lewis, B.
L.: 360" Azimuth Scanning 'Antenna Without Rotating RF Joints, U.S.
Patent  no.
3,916,416.
Oct.
28.
1975.
 RADAR ANTENNAS 277 113.Scruton,C,andP.Sachs:WindEffectsonMicrowave Reflectors, "Design andConstruction ofLargeStecrahlcAerials," IEEE(Lolldoll) COII(:PI/Mica/ iOlIno.21,pp.29-38,1966.
114.Wcbster, A.J.:WindTorqucs onRotating RadarAerials,Marcolli Rev.,vol.28,pp.147-170, 2dqtr., 1965.
115.Vitale,J.A.:LargeRadomes, chap.5of"Microwave Scanning Antcnnas, vol.I."R.CHansen (cd.), Academic Press,N.Y..1964.
116.Blevis.B.c.:RainEffectsonRadomes andAntenna Rel1ectors, "Design andConstruction ofLarge Steerablc Aerials," 1EE(Lolldoll) Coll{erellce Puhlicatioll 110.21,pp.148-151, 1966.
117.Hlcvis.R.c.:LossesDuetoRainonRadomes andAntenna Reflecting Surfaces, IEEETrailS., vol.AP-I\rr175176.January.
1965.
llHRUIl·.J.C:Mort:onWetRadollles, IEEE'{'railS.,vol.AP-IJ.pp.X23X24,Septcmhcr, 1965.
119.Cohcn,A.,andA.Smolski: TheEffectofRainonSatellite Communications EarthTerminal Rigid Radolllcs, Miaml'm'c J.,vol.9.pp.111-121, September, 1966.
120.Weigand, R.M.:Pc,l'orlllancc ofaWatcr-Repcllcnt Radolllc Coating inanAirport Surveillancc Radar,I'roc.IEEE,vol.61,pp.1167116R,August, 1973.
121Andcrson, I.:Measurcmcnts of20-Cillz Transmission Through aRadome inRain,IEEETI'l/IIS., vol.AP-23,pp.619622,Scptcmbcr, 1975.
122.Kay,A.F.:Radomes andAbsorbers, chap.32of"Antenna Engineering Handbook," H.Jasik(ed.), Mc(jraw-Hill BookCompany, NewYork,1961.
In.Dicaudo, V.J.:Radomes, Chap.14of"RadarHandbook," M.I.Skolnik (cd.),McGraw-Hili Book Co.,NewYork.1970.
124.Walton, J,R.,Jr.:"Radome Enginccring Handbook," MarcelDekker, Inc.,NewYork,1970.
125.Davis.P.,andA.Cohen: RigidRadome DesignConsiderations, Elec/rollics, vol.32,no.16,pp,66, fiR69.Apr.17.1959.
126.Hastings, K.N..andJ.(j.Chaplin: DrivesforStecrable Antennas.
Hydraulics versusElcctro­ Mcchanics, "DesignandConstruction ofLargeSteera.ble Aerials," lEE(London) Conferellce Puhli­ ca/imlIlO.
21.pp.314-318,1966.
127.ScIby,R.P.:PowerDrives,chap.9of"Mechanical Engineering inRadarandCommunications," C.
J.Richards (ed.),VanNostrand Reinhold Co.,NewYork,1969.
128.Kclleher, K.S..andH.H.Hibbs:Organ-pipe RadarScanner, ElectrO/lics, vol.25,pp.126-127, May, 1952.
129.Pccler.G.D.M..K.S.Kelleher, andH.H.Hibbs:AnOrganPipeScanner, IRETrans.,no.PGAP-L pp.113-122.
February, 1952.
130.Clarricoates, P.J.B.,andG.T.Poulton: High-Efficiency Microwave Reflector Antennas-A Review, Proc.IEEE,vol.65.pp.1470-1504, October, 1977.
13!.Green,T.J.:TheInfluence ofMastsonShip-Borne RadarPerformance, RADAR-77, Oct.25-28, 1977.London, lEEConference Publication no.lOS,pp.405-408, available fromIEEE,NewYork, 77CI-II27I-6 AES.
132.SecSec.12.10ofref.1.
l33.Mattingly, R.L.:RadarAntennas.
chap.25of"Antenna Engineering Handbook." H.Jasik.(ed.).
McGraw-Hili BookCompany, NewYork,1961,sec.25.2.
134.
Nicholls~R.
B.:Advances intheDesignofFosterScanners, RADAR-77, Oct.25-28,1977,London, lEEConference Publication no.105.pp.401-404, available fromIEEE.NewYork,77CHI271-6.
AES.
135.Punnett.
M.S.:Developments inGround Mounted AirSupported Radomes, [EEE1977Mechanical Engineering inRadarS}'mpOsiIll11.
Nov.8-10.1977,Arlington, Va.,pp.40-45,IEEEPublication 77CH1250-0AES.
136.Sangiolo.
1.B.,andA.B.Rohwer: Structural DesignImprovements ofESSeO Radomes and Antennas, IEEE1977Mechanical Engineering inRadarSymposium, Nov.8-10,1977, Arlington.
Va.
pr.46-51,IEEEPublication 77CHI250-0 AES.
137.Probert-Jones, J.R.:TheRadarEquation inMeteorology.
Quart.J.Roy.Meteor.Soc.,vol.88, pp.485-495.
1962.
1.38.Zhuk.M.S..andYu.8.Molochkov: "Proektirovanie Linzovykx, Skaniruyushchikx.
Shirokodiapa­ zommykx Antenn iFidernykx Ustroistv" (Design ofLenses, Scanning Antennas, Wideband Antennas.
andTransmission Lines.)Energiya, Moscow, 1973,pp.81-82.
139.Lewis, B.L.:3600Azimuth Scanning' Antenna Without Rotating RFJoints.
U.S.Patent no.3.916,416.
Oct.28,1975. CHAPTER  EIGHT  THE ELECTRONICALLY STEERED  PHASED ARRAY ANTENNA IN RADAR  8.1 INTRODUCTION  The phased array is a directive antenna made up of individual radiating antennas, or eleri~znts,  wh~ch generate a radiation pattern whose shape and direction is determined by the relativr:  phases and amplitudes of the currents at the individual elements.
By properly varying the  relative p it is possible to steer the direction of the radiation.
The radiating elements  might b dipoles pen-ended waveguides, slots cut in waveguide, or any other type of antenna.
n The inherent flexibility offered by the phased-array antenna in steering the beam by means of  electronic control is what has made it of interest for radar.
It has been considered in those  radar applications where it is necessary to shift the beam rapidly from one position in space to  another, or where it is required to obtain information about many targets at a flexible, rapid  data rate.
The full potential of a phased-array antenna requires the use of a conlpiltcr that can  determine in real time, on the basis of the actual operational situation, how bcst to ~sc ttlc  capabilities offered by the array.
 The concept of directive radiation from fixed (nonsteered) phased-array antennas wah  known during World War I.' The first use of the phased-array antenna in commercial broad-  casting transmission was in the early thirtiesZ and the first large steered directive array for the  reception of transatlantic short-wave communication was developed and installed by the Bell  Telephone Laboratories in the late thirties.' In World War 11, the United States, Great  Britain, and Germany all used radar with fixed phased-array antennas in which the beam  was scanned by mechanically actuated phase shifters.
In the United States, this was an azimuth  scanning S-band fire control radar, the Mark 8, that was widely used on cruisers and   battleship^,^ and the AN/APQ-7 (~agle) high-resolution navigation and bombing radar at  X band that scanned a 0.5" fan beam over a 60" sector in 14  second^.^ The British used the  phased array in two height-finder radars, one at VHF and the other at S band.6 The Germans  employed VHF radars with fixed planar phased arrays in significant numbers.' One of these,  CHAPTER EIGHT THEELECTRONICALLY STEERED PHASED ARRAY ANTENNA INRADAR ,.
8.1INTRODUCTION Thephasedarrayisadirective antenna madeupofindividual radiating antennas, orelements.
whichgenerate aradiation patternwhoseshapeanddirection isdetermined bytherelativ~ phasesandamplitudes ofthecurrents attheindividual elements.
Byproperly varying the relativepitispossible tosteerthedirection oftheradiation.
Theradiating elements mightb~ipoles pen-ended waveguides, slotscutinwaveguide, oranyothertypeofantenna.
Theinherent flexibility olTeredbythephased-array antenna insteering thebeambymeansof electronic control iswhathasmadeitofinterestforradar.Ithasbeenconsidered inthose radarapplications whereitisnecessary toshiftthebeamrapidlyfromoneposition inspace10 another, orwhereitisrequired toobtaininformation aboutmanytargetsataflexible,rapid datarate,Thefullpotential ofaphased-array antenna requires theuscofacomputer thatcan determine inrealtime,onthebasisoftheactualoperational situation, howbesttousethe capabilities olTeredbythearray.
Theconcept ofdirective radiation fromfixed(nonsteered) phased-array antennas was knownduringWorldWarI.'Thefirstuseofthephased-array antenna incommercial broad­ castingtransmission wasintheearly thirties2andthefirstlargesteereddirective arrayforthe reception oftransatlantic short-wave communication wasdeveloped andinstalled bytheBell Telephone Laboratories inthelatethirties.JInWorldWarII,theUnitedStates,Great Britain,andGermany allusedradarwithfixedphased-array antennas inwhichthebeam wasscanned bymechanically actuated phaseshifters.IntheUnitedStates,thiswasanazimuth scanning S-band firecontrol radar,'theMark8,thatwaswidelyusedoncruisers and battleships,4 andtheAN/APQ-7 (Eagle)high-resolution navigation andbombing radarat Xbandthatscanned a0.50fanbeamovera600sectorinItseconds.sTheBritishusedthe phasedarrayintwoheight-finder radars,oneatVHFandtheotheratSband.6TheGermans employed VHFradarswithfixedplanarphasedarraysinsignificant numbers.7Oneofthese, 278 called [tic Murii~iiut.
was lo() ft wide :tr~cl 30 ft high and scanned a 10" beam over a 120" sector.
 A 11i;tjor ;icIv;iricc iri ~di:tsecl-;irrwy tecli~iology was rnade in the early 1950s with the  rcplacetlienr of riiechariically :tc~uated phase shifters by electrorlic phase shifters.
Frequency  scanriirig in one angular- coordirlate was the first successful electronic scanning technique to bc  applied.
I11 terms of riuriibcrs of operatiollal radars, frequency scanning has probably seen  riiore ;ipplicatiori that1 ariy other electronic scanning method.
The first major electronically  scanned phased arrays that perforrned beam steering without frequency scan employed the  f luggins pilase shifter (Sec.
8.4) which.
in a sense, used the principle of frequency scan without  tlie necessity of ctiarigi~lg the radiated frequerlcy.
The introduction of digitally switched phase  stlifters employing either ferrites or diodes in the early 1960s made a significant improvenient  ir~ [lie ~,r;icticality of l>li;tscd arrays t1i:it could be clcctroriically stccrcd in two orthogon;tl  iirigular coordi~lates.
 8.2 BASIC CONCEP'TS  ,411 array atlterlna corisists of a nuniber of i~idividual radiating elen~ents suitably spac~d witti  rcqpcct lo one i~nollier.
.l~mplitudeFF~nd phase of tksignaIs.applied to each of the  eleriie~~ts are co~ltrolled to obtai~i the desired radiation pattern from the conibined action of all  the eleriients.
Two common geometrical forms of array antennas of interest in radar are the  liticar array arld the planar array.
A litlcur trrruj1 consists of elements arranged in a straight line  in one dimensiot~.
A plcrr~or.
~II.I.LIY is a two-dimensional configuration of elements arranged to  lie it1 a plane.
The planar array may be thought of as a linear array of linear arrays.
A broatlside  irrrii!.
is one in which the direction of maximum radiation is perpendicular, or almost perpen-  dicular.
to the line (or plane) of the array.
An endfire array has its maximum radiation parallel  to the array.
 The linear array generates a fan beam when the phase relationships are such that the  radiation is perpendicular to the array.
When the radiartion is at some angle other than  broadside.
the radiation pattern is a conical-shaped beam.
The broadside linear-array antenna  rnay be used where broad coverage in one plane and narrow beamwidth in the orthogonal  plane are desired.
The linear array can also act as a feed for a parabolic-cylinder antenna.
The  colnbinatiotl of the linear-array feed and the parabolic cylinder generates a more controlled  fan beani than is possible with either a simple linear array or with a section of a parabola.
 The corribiri~tion of a linear array arid parabolic cylinder can also generate a pencil beam.
 -Plie eridfire array is ;I special case of tlie linear or the planar array when the beam is  cfirected alorig the array.
Eridlire linear arrays have not been widely used in radar applications.
 ~l'licy are usi~ally li~nired to low or riicclirrrn gains since an endfire linear antenna of high gain  reqr~irc.; a11 exccssivcly long array.
S~iiall etidfire arrays are sornetirnes used as the radiating  cle~iierlts of i1 broadsiclc array if directive elements are required.
Linear arrays of endfire  cleriie~its are also e~nployed as low-silhouette antennas.
 The two-dinie~isional planar array is probably the array of most interest in radar applica-  tions since it is fundamentally the most versatile of all radar antennas.
A rectangular aperture  can produce a fan-shaped beani.
A square or a circular aperture produces a pencil beam.
The  array can be triade to siriiultaneously generate many search and/or tracking beams with the  sarne aperture.
 Other types of array antennas are possible than the linear or the planar arrangements.
 For example, the elements niigttt be arranged on the surface of a cylinder to obtain 360"  coverage (360" coverage may also be obtained with a number of planar arrays).
The radiating  elements rriight also be mounted on the surface of a sphere, or indeed on an object of any  IIII'1'1ITIIUINJ<'A' IYSIITRI'I> ""ASH) ARRAYANII'NNA INRADAR279 .calledtheManllllut.
wasJOO·ftwiJeand36fthighandscanned a100beamovera1200sector.
Amajoradvance inphased-array technology wasmadeintheearly1950swiththe replacement ofmcchanically actuated phaseshifters byelectronic phaseshifters.
Frequency scanning inoneangularcoordinate wasthefirstsuccessful electronic scanning technique tobe applied.
Interlllsofnumbers ofoperational radars,frequency scanning hasprobably seen moreapplication thananyotherelectronic scanning method.
Thefirstmajorelectronically scanned phasedarraysthatperformed beamsteering without frequency scanemployed the Iluggins phaseshifter(Sec.R.4)which.inasense,usedtheprinciple offrequency scanwithout thenecessity ofchanging theradiated frequency.
Theintroduction ofdigitally switched phase shiftersemploying eitherfcrritesordiodesintheearly1960smadeasignificant improvement inthepracticality ofphasedarraysthatcouldheelectronically steered intwoorthogonal angular coordinates.
8.2BASICCONCEPTS Anarrayantenna consists ofanumber ofindividual radiating elements suitably spac,,:dwith respecttooncanother.
·l~alllpljtud~_l:l:!!~e-~l-1he-.signals..app.Jied toeachofthe elements arccontrolled toobtainthedesiredradiation patternfromthecombined actionofall theelements.
Twocommon geometrical formsofarrayantennas ofinterest inradararethe lineararrayandthcplanararray.Alil/('ararrayconsists ofelements arranged inastraight line inonedimension.
Apill/w"arrayisatwo-dimensional configuration ofelements arranged to lieinaplane.Theplanararraymaybethoughtofasalineararrayoflineararrays.Abroadside arrarisoneinwhichthedirection ofmaximum radiation isperpendicular, oralmostperpen­ dicular.
totheline(orplane)ofthearray.Anendfirearrayhasitsmaximum radiation parallel tothearray.
Thelineararraygenerates afanbeamwhenthephaserelationships aresuchthatthe radiation isperpendicular tothearray.Whentheradiation isatsomeangleotherthan ,.
broadside.
theradiation pattern isaconical-shaped beam.Thebroadside linear-array antenna maybeusedwherebroadcoverage inoneplaneandnarrowbeamwidth intheorthogonal planearedesired.
Thelineararraycanalsoactasafeedforaparabolic-cylinder antenna.
The combination ofthelincar-array feedandtheparabolic cylinder generates amorecontrolled fanbeamthanispossible witheitherasimplelineararrayorwithasectionofaparabola.
Thecombin1.tion ofalineararrayandparabolic cylinder canalsogenerate apencilbeam.
Theendfirearrayisaspccialcaseofthelinearortheplanararraywhenthebeamis directed alongthcarray.End/irclineararrayshavenotbeenwidelyusedinradarapplications.
TheyarclIsuallylimitcdtolowormedium gainssinceanendfirelinearantenna ofhighgain rCt.Juires anexcessively longarray.Smallendflrearraysaresometimes uscdastheradiating elcmcnts ofabroadsidc arrayifdirective elements arerequired.
Lineararraysofendfire clements arealsocmployed aslow-silhouette antennas.
Thetwo-dimensional planararrayisprobably thearrayofmostinterestinradarapplica­ tionssinceitisfundamentally themostversatile ofallradarantennas.
Arectangular aperture canproduce afan-shaped beam.Asquareoracircular aperture produces apencilbeam.The arraycanbemadetosimultaneously generate manysearchand/ortracking beamswiththe sameaperture.
Othertypesofarrayantennas arepossible thanthelinearortheplanararrangements.
Forexample, theelements mightbearranged onthesurfaceofacylinder toobtain3600 coverage (360°coverage mayalsobeobtained withanumber ofplanararrays).Theradiating elements mightalsobemounted onthesurfaceofasphere,orindeedonanobjectofany shape, provided the phase at each element is that needed to give a plane wave when the  radiation from all the.
elements is summed in space.
An array whose elements are distributed  on a nonplanar surface is called a conjorn~al arra),.
 An array in which the relative phase shift between elements is controlled by electronic  devices is called an electronically scanned array.
In an electronically scanned array the antenna  elements, the transmitters, the receivers, and the data-processing portions of the radar are  often designed as a unit.
A given radar might work equally well with a mechanically positioned  array, a lens, or a reflector antenna if they each had the same radiation pattern, but such a  radar could not be converted efficiently to an electronically scanned array by simple replace-  ment of the antenna alone because of the interdependence of the array and the other  portions of the radar.
 Radiation pattern.' " Consider a linear array made up of N elements eqhaIIy spaced a  distance rl apart (Fig.
8.1).
The elements are assumed to be isotropic point sources radiating  uniformly in all directions with equal amplitude and phase.
Although isotropic elements are  not realizable in practice, they are a useful concept in array theory, especially for the coniputa-  tion of radiation patterns.
The effect of practical elements with nonisotropic patterns will be  considered later.
The array is shown as a receiving antenna for convenience, but because of the  reciprocity principle, the results obtained apply equally well to a transmitting antenna.
The  outputs of all the elements are summed via lines of equal length to give a sum output voltage  E,.
Element 1 will be taken as the reference signal with zero phase.
The difference in the phase  of the signals in adjacent elements is \I/ = 2n(d/A) sin 0, where 0 is the direction of the incoming  radiation.
It is further assumed that the amplitudes and phases of the signals at each element  are weighted uniformly.
Therefore the amplitudes of the voltages in each element are the same  and, for convenience, will be taken to be unity.
The sum of all the voltages from the individiral  elements, when the phase difference between adjacent elements is $, can be written  E, = sin wt + sin (wt + \I/) + sin (wt + 2$) + ...
+ sin [cot + (N - I)$] (8.1)  where w is the angular frequency of the signal.
The sum can be written  sin (N$/2)  Incoming siqnol  Figure 8.1 N-element linear array.
 280INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS shape,provided thephaseateachelementjsthatneeded togiveaplanewavewhenthe radiation fromallthe.elements issummed inspace.Anarraywhosedements aredistributed onanonplanar surfaceiscalledaconformal array.
Anarrayinwhichtherelativephaseshiftbetween elements iscontrolled byelectronic devicesiscalledanelectronically scanned array.Inanelectronically scannedarraytheantenna elements, thetransmitters, thereceivers, andthedata-processing portions oftheradarare ortendesigned asaunit.Agivenradarmightworkequallywellwithamechanically positioned array,alens,orareflector antenna iftheyeachhadthesameradiation pattern,butsucha radarcouldnotbeconverted efficiently toanelectronically scanned arraybysimplereplace­ mentoftheantenna alonebecause oftheinterdependence ofthearrayandtheother portions oftheradar.
Radiation pattern.811Consider alineararraymadeupofNelements eqllallyspaceda distancedapart(Fig.8.1).Theelements areassumed tobeisotropic pointsourcesradiating uniformly inalldirections withequalamplitude andphase.Although isotropic elements are notrealizable inpractice, theyareausefulconceptinarraytheory,especially forthecomputa­ tionofradiation patterns.
Theeffectofpractical elements withnonisotropic patterns willbe considered later.Thearrayisshownasareceiving antenna forconvenience, butbecauseofthe reciprocity principle, theresultsobtained applyequallywelltoatransmitting antenna.
The outputsofalltheelements aresummed vialinesofequallengthtogiveasumoutputvoltage Ea.Element 1willbetakenasthereference signalwithzerophase.Thedifference inthephase ofthesignalsinadjacent elements ist/J=2n(dj,.l)sin0,where0isthedirection oftheincoming radiation.
Itisfurtherassumed thattheamplitudes andphasesofthesignalsateachelement areweighted uniformly.
Therefore theamplitudes ofthevoltages ineachelementarethesame and,forconvenience, willbetakentobeunity.Thesumofallthevoltages fromtheindividual elements, whenthephasedifference between adjacent elements ist/J,canbewritten Ea=sinrot+sin(wt+t/J)+sin(rot+2t/J)+...+sin[wt+(N-I)t/J] (H.I) whereroistheangularfrequency ofthesignal.Thesumcanbewritten .
[ .
t/JIsin(Nt/Jj2)Ea=Sinwt+(N-1)2siri'(t/J)2)' Incoming signal(8.2) -d~~-d-~-d E1 Ea Figure8.1N-element lineararray. I Ill I I I ( I KONI( A1 I Y Slf~l~KI:l) I'IIAS1:I) AKKAY ANIFNNA IN KA1)AR 281  The first factor is a sine wave of frequency w with a phase shift (N - l)rC//2 (if the phase  reference were taken at the center of the array, the phase shift would be zero), while the second  terrll represents ;~ri :iniplil uclc f:ictor of the form sin (N$/2)/sin ($12).
The field in tensity pat-  tern is the r~iagriit~~tle of IJq.
(X.2), or  -ilie plttterri 11;1s ri~~lls (~croc) wlien the ~~urilerator is zero.
The latter occurs wlieii  Nn(t1lJ.) sin O = 0, _t n, f 2n, .
.
.
, 2 ~ln, where 11 = integer.
The denominator, however, is zero  when n(tl/A) sin 0, = 0, f n, + 2rr, .
.
.
.
f 11n.
Note that when the denominator is zero, the  numerator is also zero.
The value of the field intensity pattern is indeterminate when both the  denorniriator and nutlierator are zero.
However, by applying L'Hopital's rule (differentiating  tiulnerator and denon~inator separately) it is found that 1 E,I is a rnaxirnum whenever sin 0 =  + rl/l/tl.
These rliaxinia all have the same value and are equal to N.
The tnaximuni at sin 0 = 0  defiles ttie rl~iii~l heccrll.
The other maxima are called grati~lg lobes.
They are generally undesir-  able and are to be avoided.
If the spacing between elements is a half-wavelength ((!/A = 0.5).
 the first grating lobe (rl = fI I) does not appear in real space since sin 0 > I, which cannot be.
 Grating lobes appear at +90° when ti = 1.
For a nonscanning array (which is what is con-  sidered here) this condition (rl = A) is usually satisfactory for the prevention of grating lobes.
 Equation 8.3 applies to isotropic radiating elements, but practical antenna elements that are  designed to maximize the radiation at 0 = 0°, generally have negligible radiation in the direc-  tiori 0 = _+ 90".
Thus the effect of a realistic elernent pattern is to suppress the grating lobes at  +YO'.
It is for tliis reason that an element spacing equal co one wavelength can be tolerated for  a tionqcanning array.
 Frorri Eq.
(8.3), E,(O) = E,(n - 0).
Therefore an antenna of isotropic elements has a  siniilar pattern in the rear of the antenna as in the front.
The same would be true for an array of  tiipoles.
To avoid ambiguities, the backward radiation is usually eliminated by placing a  reflecting screen behind the array.
Thus only the radiation oyer the forward half of the antenna  ( - 90" 5 O 5 90") need be considered.
 The radiation pattern is equal to the norn~alized square of the amplitude, or 1 ; 1 =  / E, l2 sin2 [Nn(ii/A) sin 81 G,(O) = ---- - =  N2 N2 sin2 [n(d/A) sin 01 sill [Nn(tl/A) sin (I] .
-.
 sin [n(rl/A) sin 01  If tlie spacinQ between antenna elements is A12 and if the sine in the denominator of Eq.
(8.4)  is replaced by its argument, the half-power beamwidth is approximately equal to  The first sidelobe, for N sufficiently large, is 13.2 dB be1o.w the main beam.
The pattern of a  uniformly illuminated array with elements spaced A12 apart is similar to the pattern produced  by ;I contirtuously il1urniri;tted urliforrii aperture [Eq.
(7.16)J.
 When directive elenlents are used, the resultant array antenna radiation pattern is  sillZ [Nn(tl/A) sin 01 () = () - - - - -  N sin2 [n(ii/A) sin 01 = Ge(O)Ga(u)  where G',(O) is the radiation pattern of an jtldividuhl element.
The resultant radiation pattern  is the product of the elemertt factor G,(O) and the array factor Ga(0), the latter being the pattern  of an array corli~osed of isotropic elements.
The array factor has also been called the space  (R..1) (8.4)IIII'1:1.1'('1HONICAI.I.Y STI'EHI'D PIIAS!'D AHHAY ANTI'NNA INRADAR28t Thefirstfactorisasinewave.offrequency wwithaphaseshift(N-I)l/J12(ifthephase reference weretakenatthecenterofthearray,thephaseshiftwouldbezero),whilethesecond termrepresents anamplitude factoroftheformsin(Nl/J12)/sin (t/112).Thefieldintensity pat­ tcrnisthemagnitude ofEq.(X.2),or Ir(0)I=Isin[~~!(/~~2_~in_O] I '0 sin[rr(dIA)sin0] Thepaltern hasnulls(zeros)whcnthenumerator iszcro.Thelatteroccurswhcn Nn(dl).)sin0=0,±rr,±2n,...,±lin,where 11=integer.Thedenominator, however, iszero whenn(dIA)sin0,=0,±n,±2rr,...,±IIrr.Notethatwhenthedenominator iszero,the numerator isalsozero.Thevalueofthefieldintensity patternisindeterminate whenboththe denominator andnumerator arezero.However, byapplying L'Hopital's rule(difTerentiating numerator anddenominator separately) itisfoundthatIEaIisamaximum whenever sin0= ±IIAId.ThesemaximaallhavethesamevalueandareequaltoN.Themaximum atsin0=a definesthemaillheam.Theothermaximaarecalledgratinglobes.Theyaregenerally undesir- ableandaretobeavoided.Ifthespacingbetween elements isahalf-wavelength (diA=0.5), thefirstgratinglobe(II=±I)doesnotappearinrealspacesincesin0>I,whichcannotbe.
Grating lobesappearat±90°whend=A.Foranonscanning array(whichiswhatiscon­ sideredhere)thiscondition (d=A)isusuallysatisfactory fortheprevention ofgratinglobes.
Equation 8.3appliestoisotropic radiating elements, butpractical antenna elements thatare dcsignedto maximize theradiation at0=0°,generally havenegligible radiation inthedirec­ tion(1=±90°.ThustheefTectofarealisticelement patt~rnistosuppress thegratinglobesat ±90°.Itisforthisreasonthatanelementspacingequaltoonewavelength canbetolerated for anonscanning array.
FromEq.(8.3),Ea(O)=Ea(rr-0).Therefore anantenna ofisotropic elements hasa similarpatternintherearoftheantennaasinthefront.Thesamewouldbetrueforanarrayof dipoles.
Toavoidambiguities, thebackward radiation isusuallyeliminated byplacinga renecting screenbehindthearray.Thusonlytheradiation O'lertheforwardhalfofthe antenna (-900:::;(}:::;90°)needbeconsidered.
Theradiation patternisequaltothenormalized squareoftheamplitude, or G(0)=J~_aJ~=sin2[Nrr(dIA) sin0] aN2N2sin2[rr(dIA)sin0] Ifthespacink'between antenna elements isAI2andifthesineinthedenominator ofEq.(8.4) isrcplaced byitsargument, thehalf-power beamwidth isapproximately equalto 102OB=----­N(8.5) (8.6)Thefirstsidelobe,forNsufficiently large,is13.2dBbelowthemainbeam.Thepatternofa uniformly illuminated arraywithelements spacedAI2apartissimilartothepatternproduced hyacontinuously illuminated uniform aperture [Eq..(7.16)].
Whendirective elcments areused,theresultant arrayantenna radiation patternis G(O)=G(0)Si!.12 (1}'~(d~~L~i_~_qL =G(O)G(0) eN2sin2[rr(c/IA)sin0] ea whereGe(O)istheradiation patternofanindividual element.
Theresultant radiation pattern istheproductoftheelementfactorGe(O)andthearrayfactorGa(O),thelatterbeingthepattern ofanarraycomposed ofisotropic elements.
Thearrayfactorhasalsobeencalledthespace 282 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  fucror.
Grating lobes caused by a widely spaced array may therefore be eliniinated wit11  directive elements which radiafe little or no energy in the directions of the undesired lobes.
For  example, when the element spacing ti = 24, grating lobes occur at U = -30" and &'H)" In  addition to the main beam at 0 = 0".
If the individual elements have a beamwidth somewhat  less than 60°, the grating lobes of the array factor will be suppressed.
 Equation (8.6) is only an approximation, which rnay be seriously inadequate for many  problems of array design.
It should be used with caution.
It ignores mutual coupling, and it  does not take account of the scattering or diffraction of radiation by the adjacent array  elements or of the outward-traveling-wave coupling.12 l4 These effects cause the element  radiation pattern to be different whe~ located within the array in the presence of the other  elements than when isolated in free space.
 In order to obtain an exact computation of the array radiation pattern, the pattern of each  element must be measured in the presence of all the others.
The array pattern may be found by  suniming the contributions of each element, taking into account the proper amplitude and  phase.
 In a two-dimensional, rectangular planar array, the radiation pattern may sometimes be  written as the product of the radiation patterns in the two planes which contain the principal  axes of the antenna.
If the radiation patterns in the two principal planes are G,(O,) and G,(O,),  the t wn-dimensional antenna pattern is  Note that the angles 0, and 0, are not necessarily the elevation and azimuth angles nor~nally  associated with radar.".16 The normalized radiation pattern of a uniforn~ly illunlinateti rec-  tangular array is  sin2 [Nn(d/A) sin 0,] sin2 [Mn(tl/A) sin O,.]  G(*e' O0) = N2 sin2 [n((l/A) sin 0,] M2 sin2 [n(O/4) sin 0.1  where N = number of radiating elements in 0, dimension with spacing tl and h.l - nunlber in  0,.
dimension.
 Bean1 steering.
The beam of an array antenna may be steered rapitfly in space without moving  large mechanical masses by properly varying the phase of the signals applied to each element.
'  Consider an array of equally spaced elements.
The spacing between adjacent elements is ti, and  the signals at each element are assumed of equal amplitude.
If the same phase is applied to all  elements, the relatire phase difference between adjacent elements is zero and the position of the  main beam will be broadside to the array at an angle 0 = 0.
The main beam will point in a  direction other than broadside if the relative phase difference between elelnents is other than  zero.
The direction of the main beam is at an angle 0, when the pllase tlifference ib  4 = 2n(tl/l) sin 0,.
The phase at each element is therefore 9, + t~4, where ttr = 0, I, 2, .
.
.
,  (N - I), and 4, is any constant phase applied to all elements.
The norrnalizetl radiation  pattern of the array when the phase difference between adjacent elements is 9 is given by  sin2 [Nn(tl/l)(sin O - sin no)] G(B) = N~ sin2 [n(rl/l)(sin O - sin 001  The maximum of the radiation pattern occurs when sin 0 = sin OO.
 Equation (8.9) states that the main beam of the antenna pattern may be positioned to an  angle 8, by the insertion of the proper phase shift Q, at each element of the array.
If variable,  rather than fixed, phase shifters are used, the beam may be steered as the relative phase  between elements is changed (Fig.
8.2).
 282INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS facror.Grating lobescausedbyawidelyspacedarraymaytherefore beeliminated with .directive elements whichradiateJinleornoenergy inthedirections oftheundesired lobes.For example, whentheelement spacingd=2,.1"grating lobesoccurat0=±30°and±900in addition tothemainbeamat0=0°.Iftheindividual elements haveabeamwidth somewhat lessthan600,thegratinglobesofthearrayfactorwillbesuppressed.
Equation (8.6)isonlyanapproximation, whichmaybeseriously inadequate formany problems ofarraydesign.Itshouldbeusedwithcaution.Itignoresmutualcoupling, andit doesnottakeaccount ofthescattering ordiffraction ofradiation bytheadjacent array elements oroftheoutward-traveling-wave coupling.1214Theseeffectscausetheelement radiation patterntobedifferent whenlocated withinthearrayinthepresence oftheother elements thanwhenisolated infreespace.
Inordertoobtainanexactcomputation ofthearrayradiation pattern, thepatternofeach element mustbemeasured inthepresence ofalltheothers.Thearraypatternmaybefoundby summing thecontributions ofeachelement, takingintoaccount theproperamplitude and phase.
In atwo-dimensional, rectangular planararray,theradiation patternmaysometimes be writtenastheproductoftheradiation patterns inthetwoplaneswhichcontain theprincipal axesoftheantenna.Iftheradiation patterns inthetwoprincipal planesareGI(O~)andG2({).,), thetwo-dimensional antenna pattern is (8.7) Notethattheangles O~andOaarenotnecessarily theelevation andazimuth anglesnormally associated withradar.15.16Thenormalized radiation patternofauniformly illuminated rec­ tangular arrayis G(O0)=sin2[Nn(dj),) sinOa]sin2[Mn(dj),) sinO,·t ~'aN2sin2[n(dj),)sinOa]M2sin2[n(dj),)sin0,.](8.8) whereN=number ofradiating elements inVadimension withspacingdandM=numher in 0,.dimension.
Beamsteering.
Thebeamofanarrayantenna maybesteeredrapidlyinspacewithout moving largemechanical massesbyproperly varying thephaseofthesignalsappliedtoeachelement.
Consider anarrayofequallyspacedelements.
Thespacing between adjacent elementsisd,and thesignalsateachelement areassumed ofequalamplitude.
Ifthesamephaseisappliedtoall elements, therelatil'ephasedifference between adjacent elements iszeroandtheposition ofthe mainbeamwillbebroadside tothearrayatanangle0=O.Themainbeamwillpointina direction otherthanbroadside iftherelativephasedifference between elements isotherthan zero.Thedirection ofthemainbeamisatanangle00whenthephasedifference is ¢=2n(djA)sin00,Thephaseateachelement istherefore <Pc+m<p,wherem=0,I,2,..., (N-I),and<Pcisanyconstant phaseapplied toallelements.
Thenormalized radiation patternofthearraywhenthephasedifference between adjacent elements is<pisgivenby G(O)=sin2[Nn(d/l)(sin {)-sin00)] N2sin2[n(djA)(sin 0-sin00)] Themaximum oftheradiation patternoccurswhensin0=sin00, Equation (8.9)statesthatthemainbeamoftheantenna patternmaybepositioned toan angle00bytheinsertion oftheproperphaseshift<pateachelement ofthearray.Ifvariable, ratherthanfixed,phaseshiftersareused,thebeammaybesteeredastherelative phase between elements ischanged (Fig.8.2). lfli: 1:l I.('IRONI('AI 1.Y STEERFI) P1fASFI) ARRAY ANTENNA IN RADAR 283  -_.-2 Figure 8.2 Steering of an antenna beam with  variable phase shifters (parallel-fed array).
 IJsing an arpunlent similar to the nonscanning array described previously, grating lobes  ;tl1l'cilr ;it a11 ;111glc 0, wlic~lcvcr rllc dcllor~lirlator is zero, or wile11  li a grating lobe is perrliitted to appear at -90" when the main beam is steered to +90°, it is  found from the above that (1 = 112.
Thus the element spacing must not be larger than a  half wavelerlgth if the beam is to be steered over a wide angle without having undesirable  graling lobes appear.
Practical array antennas do not scan +90°.
If the scan is limited to  -!: 60".
Eq.
(8.10) states that the element spacing should be less than 0.54A.
Note that antenna  elernetlts used in arrays are gelierally comparable to a half wavelength in physical size.
 Change of beamwidth with steering angle.
The half-power beamwidth in the plane of scan  increases as the beam is scanned off the broadside direction.
The beamwidth is approximately  inversely proportional to cos 00, where 80 is the angle measured from the normal to the  anterlna.
This may be proved by assuming that the sine in the denominator of Eq.
(8.9) can be  replaced by its argument, so that the radiation pattern is of the form (sin2 u)/u2, where  11 = Nn(ri/A)(sin 0 - sin Oo) The (sin2 u)/u2 antenna pattern is reduced to half its maximum  value when rc = Lt_ 0.443~.
Denote by O + the angle corresponding to the half-power point when  0 > (I,, and 0- , the arlgle corresponding to the half-power point when 0 < Oo; that is, 0.
 corresponds to rc = -1-0.443~ and 0- to 11 = -0.443~ The sin 0 - sin 11, term in the expres-  sion for 11 car1 be writtetll '  sin 0 - sin Uo = sin (0 - 00) cos Oo - El - cos (0 - i)o)] sin Oo (8.11)  'Pllc second terrn on the right-hand side of Eq.
(8.1 1) can be neglected when Oo is small (beam  is near broadside), so that  sin 0 - sin O0 = sin (0 - 00) cos O0 (8.12)  Using the above approximatioi~, the two angles corresponding to the 3-dB points of the  arltenrla pattern are  0.4431  hl 0.443A 0, - 0 - sin-" - 0 - NdcosOO NdcosOO  - 0.4431 - 0.443A 0- - Oo = sin - ' .- .- --- - - ...
- Nri cos O0 Nti cos O0  Til£'EI.ITTRONICAI.LY STEERED PHASED ARRAYANTENNA INRADAR283 Figure8.2Sleering ofanantenna beamwith variable phaseshifters(parallel-fed array).
Usinganargument similartothenonscanning arraydescribed previously, gratinglobes appearatanangleOqwhcnever thcdcnominator iszero,orwhen n:~(sinOg-sinOu)=±lin: (H.lOa) IsinOg-sin00I=A(R.IOh) or +11-d IIagratinglobeispermitted toappearat-90°whenthemainbeamissteeredto+90°,itis foundfrollltheabovethatd=A/2.Thustheelement spacing mustnotbelargerthana halfwavelength ifthebeamistobesteeredoverawideanglewithout havingundesirable grating lobesappear.
Practical arrayantennas donotscan±90°.Ifthescanislimitedto -1.:60°.Eq.(H.IO)statesthattheelement spacing shouldbelessthan0.54,tNotethatantenna elements usedinarraysaregenerally comparable toahalfwavelength inphysical size.
Changeofbeamwidth withsteering angle.Thehalf-power beamwidth intheplaneofscan increases asthebeamisscanned offthebroadside direction.
Thebeamwidth isapproximately inversely proportional tocos00,where00istheanglemeasured fromthenormal tothe antenna.
Thismaybeprovedbyassuming thatthesineintiledenominator ofEq.(8.9)canbe replaced byitsargument, sothattheradiation pattern isoftheform(sin1u)/u1,where Ii=Nrr(d/A)(sin 0-sin(0),The(sin2u)/u2antenna pattern isreduced tohalfitsmaximum valuewhenIi=:+~0.443rr.Denote by0+theanglecorresponding tothehalf-power pointwhen (}>0u.and0_,thcanglecorresponding tothehalf-power pointwhen0<00;thatis,O.
corresponds to/I=+0.443rrand0_toII=-0.4431£.Thesin0-sin00termintheexpres­ sionforIIcanbewritten 17 sin0-sin00=sin(0-00)cos00-[1-cos(0-00))sin00 (8.11) Thesecondtcrmontheright-hand sideofEq.(8.11)canbeneglected when00issmall(beam isncarbroadside), sothat sin0-sin00~sin(0-(0)cos00 (8.12) Usingtheaboveapproximation, thetwoanglescorresponding tothe3-dBpointsofthe antenna patternare -0.443..1.0_-00=sin-I..-.---- Ndcos00-0.443..1.
~-----_._-,._-- Ndcos00 284 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  The half-power beamwidth is  0.8862 0,=0+ -0- z-- Nrl cos 6  Therefore, when the beam is positioned an angle O0 off broadside, the beamwidth in the plane  of scan increases as (cos Bo)- I.
The change in beamwidth with angle 0, as derived above is not  valid when the antenna beam is too far removed from broadside.
It certainly does not apply  when the energy is radiated in the endfire direction.
 Equation 8.13 applies for a uniform aperture illumination.
With a cosine-on-a-pedestal  aperture illumination of the form A, = a.
+ 2al cos 2nn/N, the beamwidth is1'  og 0'886c - [I + 0.636(2a lo,)']  Nrl cos O0  The parameter t~ in the aperture illumination represents the position of the element.
Since the  illumination is assumed symmetrical about the center element, the parameter t~ takes on values  of 11 = 0, + 1, + 2, .
.
.
, +_ (N - 1 )/2.
The range of interest is 0 I 2u, I uo which covers the span  from uniform iliuminations to a taper so severe that the illumination drops to zero at the ends  of the array.
(The array is assumed to extend a distance dl2 beyond each end element.)  The above applies to a linear array.
Similar results apply to a planar aperture;"." that is,  the beamwidth in the plane of the scan varies approximately inversely as cos 00, provided  certain assumptions are fulfilled.
 An interesting technique for graphically portraying the variation of the beam shape with  scan angle has been described by Von Aulo~k,'~ an example of which is shown in Fig.
8.3.
The  antenna radiation pattern is plotted in spherical coordinates as a function of the two direction  cosines, cos a, and cos a,, of the radius vector specifying the point of observation.
The angle 4  is measured from the cos a, axis, and 0 is measured from the axis perpendicular to the cos a,  and cos a, axes.
In Fig.
8.3,4 is taken to be a constant value of 90" and the beam is scanned in  Figure 8.3 Beamwidth and eccentricity of the scanned beam.
(From Von ~ulock'~, Co~irtesy Proc.
IRE.)  (8.13)284INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS Thehalf-power beamwidth is O-0-0"-~.~86A-B-+ - "-Nt/cosDo Therefore, whenthebeamispositioned anangleDootTbroadside, thebeamwidth intheplane ofscanincreases as(cosOorI.Thechangeinbeamwidth withangle00asderivedaboveisnot validwhentheantenna beamistoofarremoved frombroadside.
Itcertainly doesnotapply whentheenergyisradiated intheendfiredirection.
Equation 8.13appliesforauniform aperture- illumination.
Withacosine-on-a-pedcstal aperture illumination oftheformAn=ao+2alcos2rrnlN,thebeamwidth is111 0.886A[ ( )2]0B::::::--------1+0.636laIlaoNt!cos00(8.14) Theparameter nintheaperture illumination represents the position oftheelement.
Sincethe illumination isassumed symmetrical aboutthecenterelement, theparameter IItakesonvalues ofII=O.±1,±2,...,±(N-1)/2.Therangeofinterestis0::;2aI::;aowhichcoversthespan fromuniformilluminations toatapersoseverethattheillumination dropstozeroattheends ofthearray.(Thearrayisassumed toextendadistanced/2beyondeachendelement.) Theaboveappliestoalineararray.Similarresultsapplytoaplanaraperture; 17,111thatis, thebeamwidth intheplaneofthescanvariesapproximately inversely ascos00,provided certainassumptions arefulfilled.
Aninteresting technique forgraphically portraying thevariation ofthebeamshapewith scananglehasbeendescribed byVonAulock, 15anexample ofwhichisshowninFig.8.3.The antenna radiation patternisplottedinspherical coordinates asafunction ofthetwodirection cosines,cosaxandcosa}.,oftheradiusvectorspecifying thepointofobservation.
Theangle4> ismeasured fromthecosaxaxis,and0ismeasured fromtheaxisperpendicular tothecosax a:1dcosayaxes.InFig.8.3,4>istakentobeaconstant valueof900andthebeamisscanned in Figure8.3Beamwidth andeccentricity ofthescanned beam.(FromVonAuJock1S,Courtesy Proc.IRE.) tltc 0 coorililt;t~c.
At 0 7 0 (bc;t~l~ I)rooclside to lllc array) a syrl~~ttctrical pcticil I)c:trtt of  lialf-power width 11" is assumed.
The shape of the beam at the other angular positions is the  prc!jection of tlic circular I,earr~ shape ott the surface of the unit sphere.
It call be seer1 that as  the hcarn is scarlrled in tlie O direction, it broadens in that direction, but is constant in the 4  direction.
For 0 # 0, the bear11 shape is not symmetrical about the center of the beam, but is  eccentric.
I'hus the bean1 direction is slightly different from that computed by standard for-  r~ttllas.
In addition to the changes in ttie shape of the main beam, the sidelobes also change in  appearance arlci positiori.
 Series vs.
parallel feeds.
?'he relative phase shift between adjacent elements of the array must  be d, = 2n(tl/A) sin 0, in order to position the main beam of the radiation pattern at an angle  0,.
The necessary phase relationships between the elements may be obtained with either a  series-fetl or a pnrczllel-fetl arrangement.
In the series-fed arrangement, the energy may be  transmitted froni one end of the line (Fig.
8.4a), or it may be fed from the center out to each  end (Fig.
8.4h).
The adjacent elements are connected by a phase shifter with phase shift 4.
All  the phase shifters are identical and introduce the same amount of phase shift, which is less than  ZT~ radians.
In the series arrangement of Fig.
8.4~ where the signal is fed from one end, the  position of the beam will vary with frequency (Sec.
8.4).
Thus it will be more limited in  handwidtli than [nost array feeds.
The center-fed feed of Fig.
8.4h does not have this problem.
 11.1 the parallel-fed array of Fig.
8.2, the energy to be radiated is divided between the  elements by a power splitter.
When a series of power splitters are used to create a tree-like  str~lcture, as in Fig.
8.2, it is called a corporate feed, since it resembles (when turned upside  down) the organization chart of a corporation.
Equal lengths of line transmit the energy to  each element so that no unwanted phase differences are introduced by the lines themselves.
(If  the lines are not of equal length, a con~pensation in the phase shift must be made.) The proper  phase change for beat11 steering is introduced by the phase shifters in each of the lines feeding  the elements.
When the phase of the first element is taken as the reference, the phase shifts  required in the succeeding elements are 4, 24, 34, .
.
.
, (N 5 I)$.
 The maximum phase change required of each phase shifter in the parallel-fed array is  many times 2n radians.
Since phase shift is periodic with period 2n, it is possible in many  applications to use a phase shifter with a maximum of 2n radians.
However, if the pulse width  is short compared with the antenna response time (if the signal bandwidth is large compared  with the antenna bandwidth), the system response may be degraded.
For example, if the energy  Figure 8.4 Series arrangements for  applying phase relationships in an  array.
(a) fed from one end;  (b) center-fed.
 IIII'U.ITII{()NIUII.I.Y SITI;RED PIIASI'D ARRAY ANTENNA 1~RADAR285 the()coordinale.
At()=0(bealllhroadsitlc toIltcarray)asymlllctrical pcncil bCallIof half-power widthlJoisassumed.
Theshapeofthebeamattheotherangular positions isthe projection ofthecircular beamshapeonthesurfaceoftheunitsphere.Itcanbeseenthatas thehcarnisscanned intheVdirection, itbroadens inthatdirection, butisconstant inthe1> direction.
For()¥-O.thebeamshapeisnotsymmetrical aboutthecenterofthebeam,butis eccentric.
Thusthebeamdirection isslightly different fromthatcomputed bystandard for­ lIIulas.Inaddition tothechanges intheshapeofthemainbeam.thesidelobesalsochangein appearance andposition.
S{'riesl's.parallel feeds.Therelativephaseshiftbetween adjacent elements ofthearraymust he1>=2rr(cljA)sin00inordertoposition themainbeamoftheradiation patternatanangle (/0'Thenecessary phaserelationships between theelements maybeobtained witheithera series~recl oraparallel-fed arrangement.
Intheseries-fed arrangement, theenergymaybe transmitted fromoneendoftheline(Fig.8.4a),oritmaybefedfromthecenterouttoeach end(Fig.8.4h).Theadjac~nt elements areconnected byaphaseshifterwithphaseshift1>.All thephaseshiftersareidentical andintroduce thesameamountofphaseshift,whichislessthan 2rrraJians.
Intheseriesarrangement ofFig.8.4awherethesignalisfedfromoneend,the position ofthebeamwillvarywithfrequency (Sec.8.4).ThusitwiIlbemorelimitedin handwiJth thanmostarrayfeeJs.Thecenter-fed feedofFig.8.4bdoesnothavethisproblem.
Intheparallel-fed arrayofFig.8.2.theenergytoberadiated isdivided between the elements byapowersplitter.
Whenaseriesofpowersplitters areusedtocreateatree-like structure.
asinFig.8.2.itiscalledacorporate feed,sinceitresembles (whenturnedupside down)theorganization chartofacorporation.
Equallengthsoflinetransmit theenergyto eachelementsothatnounwanted phasedifferences areintroduced bythelinesthemselves.
(If thelinesarenotofequallength.acompensation inthephaseshiftmustbemade.)Theproper phasechangeforbeamsteering isintroduced bythephaseshiftersineachofthelinesfeeding theelements.
Whenthephaseofthefirstelement istakenasthereference, thephaseshifts required inthesucceeding elements are1>,21>,31>,...,(N~I)¢.
Themaximum phasechangerequired ofeachphaseshifterintheparallel-fed arrayis manytimes2rrradians.
Sincephaseshiftisperiodic withperiod2rr,itispossible inmany applications touseaphaseshifterwithamaximum of2rrradians.
However, ifthepulsewidth isshortcompared withtheantenna response time(ifthesignalbandwidth islargecompared withtheantenna bandwidth).
thesystemresponse maybedegraded.
Forexample, irtheenergy (al (b)Figure8.4Seriesarrangements for applying phaserelationships inan array.(0)fedfromoneend: (b)center-fed. were to arrive in a direction other than broadside, the entire array would not be excited  simultaneously.
The combined outputs from the parallel-fed elements will fail to coincide or  overlap, and the received pulse will be smeared.
This situation may be relieved by replacing the  2n modulo phase shifters with delay lines.
 A similar phenomenon occurs in the series-fed array when the energy is radiated or  received at or near the broadside direction.
If a short pulse is applied at one end of a series-fed  transmitting array, radiation of energy by the first element might be completed before the  remainder of the energy reaches the last element.
On reception, the effect is to smear or distort  the echo pulse.
It is possible to compensate for the delay in the series-fed array and avoid  distortion of the main beam when the signal spectrum is wide by the insertion of individual  delay lines of the proper length in series with the radiating elernent~.'~  In a series-fed array containing N phase shifters, the signal suffers the insertion loss of a  single phase shifter N times.
In a parallel-fed array the insertion loss of the phse shifter is  introduced effectively but once.
Hence the phase shifter in a series-fed array must be of lower  loss compared with that in a parallel-fed array.
If the series phase shifters are too lossy,  anlplifiers can be inserted in each element to compensate for the signal attenuation.
 Since each phase shifter in the series-fed linear array of Fig.
8.4~ has the same value of  phase shift, only a single control signal is needed to steer the beam.
The N-element parallel-fed  linear array similar to that of Fig.
8.2 requires a separate control signal for each phase shifter  or N - 1 total (one phase shifter is always zero).
A two-dimensional parallel-fed array of hl N  elements requires M + N - 2 separate control signals.
The two-dimensional series-feci array  requires but two control signals.
 8.3 PHASE SHIFTERS  The difference in phase 4 experienced by an electromagnetic wave of frequency f propagating  with a velocity r through a transmission line of length I is  4 = 27tf'll~ (8.15)  The velocity 1: of an electromagnetic wave is a function of the permeability 1, ancl the dielectric  constant ( of the medium in which it propagates.
Therefore, a change in phase can be had by a  change in the frequency;length of line, velocity of propagation, permeability, or dielectric  constant.
The use of frequency to effect a change of phase is a relatively simple technique for  electronically scanning a beam.
It was one of the first practical exatnples of electronic scanning  and has been widely employed.
It is discussed separately in the next section.
One of ttte nlore  popular forms of phase shifters is one that varies the physical length of line to obtain a change  in phase, especially when the lengths of line are quantized digitally.
Varying the velocity of  propagation by varying the permeability is the basis of ferrite phase shifters.
Gas discharge and  ferroelectric phase shifters are examples of devices that depend on changes in dielectric con-  stant to vary the velocity of propagation, and hence the phase.
The velocity of propagation  may also be varied in a more direct manner as in the Eagle, or delta-a, scanner where the  narrow wall of a waveguide is moved mechanically to produce a change in phase and a  scanning beam.20  Many phase-shifting devicesare reciprocal in that the phase change does not depend on  the direction of propagation.
Some important phase shifters, however, are nonreciprocal.
These  must have different control settings for reception and transmission.
A phase shifter should he  able to change its phase rapidly, be capable of handling high power, require control signals of  little power, be of low loss, light weight, small size, have long life, and be of reasonable cost.
 286INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS weretoarriveinadirection otherthanbroadside, theentirearraywouldnotbeexcited simultaneously.
Thecombined outputs fromtheparallel-fed elements willfailtocoincide or overlap, andthereceived pulsewillbesmeared.
Thissituation mayherelieved hyreplacing the 2rrmodulo phaseshifterswithdelaylines.
Asimilarphenomenon occursintheseries-fed arraywhentheenergyisradiated or received atornearthebroadside direction.Ifashortpulseisappliedatoneendofaseries-fed transmitting array,radiation ofenergybythefirstelement mightbecompleted beforethe remainder oftheenergyreachesthelastelement.
Onreception, theelTectistosmearordistort theechopulse.Itispossible tocompensate forthedelayintheseries-fed arrayandavoid distortion ofthemainbeamwhenthesignalspectrum iswidebytheinsertion ofindividual delaylinesoftheproperlengthinserieswiththeradiating elements.19 Inaseries-fed arraycontaining Nphaseshifters, thesignalsulTerstheinsertion lossofa singlephaseshifterNtimes.Inaparallel-fed arraytheinsertion lossofthepltdseshifteris introduced elTectively butonce.Hencethephaseshifterinaseries-fed arraymustbeoflower losscompared withthatinaparallel-fed array.Iftheseriespraseshiftersaretoolossy, amplifiers canbeinserted ineachelement tocompensate forthesignalattenuation.
Sinceeachphaseshifterintheseries-fed lineararrayofFig.8.4ahasthesamevalueof phaseshift,onlyasinglecontrolsignalisneededtosteerthebeam.TheN-element parallel-fed lineararraysimilartothatofFig.8.2requires aseparate controlsignalforeachphaseshifter orN-1total(onephaseshifterisalwayszero).Atwo-dimensional parallel-fed arrayofAIN elements requires M+N - 2separate controlsignals.Thetwo-dimensional series-fed array requires buttwocontrolsignals.
8.3PHASE SHIFTERS ThedilTerence inphase¢experienced byanelectromagnetic waveoffrequencyfpropagating withavelocity 1"through atransmission lineoflengthIis ¢=lrr/lll' (8.15) Thevelocity l'ofanelectromagnetic waveisafunction ofthepermeability )1andthedielectric constant (ofthemedium inwhichitpropagates.
Therefore, achangeinphasecanbehadbya changeinthefrequency, .lengthofline,velocity ofpropagation, permeability, ordielectric constant.
Theuseoffrequency toelTectachangeofphaseisarelatively simpletechnique for electronically scanning abeam.Itwasoneofthefirstpractical examples ofelectronic scanning andhasheenwidelyemployed.
Itisdiscussed separately inthenextsection.Oneofthemore popular formsofphaseshiftersisonethatvariesthephysical lengthoflinetoobtainachange inphase,especially whenthelengthsoflinearequantized digitally.
Varying thevelocity of propagation byvaryingthepermeability isthebasisofferritephaseshifters.Gasdischarge and ferroelectric phaseshiftersareexamples ofdevicesthatdependonchanges indielectric con­ stanttovarythevelocity ofpropagation, andhencethephase.Thevelocity ofpropagation may~lsobevariedinamoredirectmanner asintheEagle,ordelta-a,scanner wherethe narrow wallofawaveguide ismovedmechanically toproduce achange inphaseanda scanning beam.20 Manyphase-shifting devicesarereciprocal inthatthephasechangedoesnotdependon thedirection ofpropagation.
Someimportant phaseshifters, however, arenonreciprocal.
These musthavedilTerent controlsettingsforreception andtransmission.
Aphaseshiftershouldhe abletochangeitsphaserapidly, becapableofhandling highpower,requirecontrolsignalsof littlepower,beoflowloss,lightweight,smallsize,havelonglife,andbeofreasonable cost. The various phase sliifting tecliniques possess these properties in varying degree.
No one  device seems to be sufficieritly uriiversal to meet the requirements of all applications.
 Iri this text n device for obtaitiing ;t change of phase is called a pllase sl~ifier, but they have  also been kriowri ;IS l~/~r~\clr..\.
 I~igitally switc11etI pl~asc sl~iftcrs.
A chaligc it1 pliase car1 be obtained by utilizirig one of a  titrrtiI>er of lengtlis of tratisrriissioti lirie to approxirnate tlie desired value of phase.
?'he vario~is  Ictigtlis of liric 31-c iriscrtccl arid 1-etnovcd by Iiigli-speed electroriic switching.
Semiconductor  diodes arid ferrites are the devices coriirnonly employed in digital phase shifters.
 There are at least two methods for switching lengths of transmission lines.
In one, the  proper line lerigtli is selected from among many available lengths.
This has been called a  put.trllel-litie configuration.
In the other, the proper length of line is made up of the series  conibiriation of a relatively few selected lengths of line.
This is a series-line, or a casc.citlrt1.
 configuration.
Although the discrete nature of the digitally switched phase shifter means that  the exact value of required phase shift cannot be achieved without a quantization error, the  error can be made as small as desired.
(Even analog phase sliifters, which are continuously  i~ariahle.
cannot be corivetiietitly set to a precise value of phase without special care in calibra-  tion over the desired range of temperature and frequency.)  Figure 8.5 illustrates the parallel-line configuration of the digitally switched phase shifter  in which the desired length is obtained by means of a pair of one-by-N switches.
Each of tlie  boxes labeled S represents a SPST switch.
The N ports ofeach one-by-N switch are connected  to N lines of different lengths I ,, I*, .
.
.
, I,,,.
The number of lines depends on the degree of phase  quaritization that can be tolerated.
The number is limited by the quality of the switches, as  riieastlred by the diuerence between their impedance in the "off" and "on " positions.
With  many switches it1 parallel, the "off" impedance of each must be high if the combined im-  pedance is to be large corripared to tlie "on" impedance of a single switch.
A parallel-line  configuration with 16 lengths of line provides a phase quantization of 22.5" ( + 1 1.25"), assum-  ing the rrth line is of length tt,I/16.
A suitable form of switch is the semiconductor diode.
The  diodes attached to the ends of the particular line selected are operated with forward bias to  present a low impedance.
The remaining diodes attached to the unwanted lines are operated  with hack-bias to present a high impedance.
The switched lines can be any standard RF  tratisrriission line.
Stripline has been used successfully, especially at the lower microwave  frequencies.
An advantage of the parallel-line configuration is that the signal passes through  but two switches and, in principle, sliould have a lower insertion loss than the cascaded  digitally swltclied phase sliifter described below.
A disadvantage is the relatively large number  One-by-N switch  Figure 8.5 Digitally switched parallel-line phase shifter with N switchable lines.
 TilEFU:CTRONICAI.I.Y STEERED PHASED ARRAY ANTENNA INRADAR287 Thevarious phaseshifting lechniquespossess lheseproperties invarying degree.
Noone deviceseemstobesufficiently universal tomeettherequirements ofallapplications.
Inthistextadeviceforonlaining achangeofphaseiscalledaphasesh(fier, buttheyhave aIsobeenknownasl"lllscrs.
f)i~ilall~' switchro phaseshifters.
;\change inphasecanbeobtained byutilizing oneofa number oflengthsoftransmission linetoapproximate thedesiredvalueofphase.Thevarious lengthsoflineareinserted andrellloved byhigh-speed electronic switching.
Semiconductor diodesandferritesarcthedevicescomlllonly employed indigitalphaseshifters.
Thereareatleasttwomethods forswitching lengthsoftransmission lines.Inone,the properlinelengthisselected fromamongmanyavailable lengths.
Thishasbeencalleda parallel-li1Je configuration.
Intheother,theproperlengthoflineismadeupoftheseries combination ofarelatively fewselected lengthsofline.Thisisaseries-li1Je, oracascaded, configuration.
Although thediscrete natureofthedigitally switched phaseshiftermeansthat theexactvalueofrequired phaseshiftcannotbeachieved without aquantization error,the errorcanbemadeassmallasdesired.
(Evenanalogphaseshifters, whicharecontinuously variable.
cannotbeconveniently settoaprecisevalueofphasewithout specialcareincalibra­ tionoverthedesiredrangeoftemperature andfrequency.) Figure8.5illustrates theparallel-line configuration ofthedigitally switched phaseshifter inwhichthedesired lengthisobtained bymeansofapairofone-by-N switches.
Eachofthe boxeslabeledSrepresents aSPSTswitch.TheNportsofeachone-by-N switchareconnected toNIinesofdirferentlengthsI"12,...,IN.ThenumberofIinesdepends onthedegreeofphase quantization thatcanbetolerated.
Thenumber islimitedbythequalityoftheswitches, as measured bythedifference between theirimpedance inthe Hoff"and"on"positions.
With manyswitches inparallel,the"off"impedance ofeachmustbehighifthecombined im­ pedance istobelargecompared tothe"on"impedance ofasingleswitch.Aparallel-line configuration with16lengthsoflineprovides aphasequantization of22.5°(±11.25°),assum­ ingthe11thlineisoflength1J.A./16.Asuitable formofswitchisthesemiconductor diode.The diodesattached totheendsoftheparticular lineselected areoperated withforward biasto present alowimpedance.
Theremaining diodesattached totheunwanted linesareoperated withhack-hias topresent ahighimpedance.
Theswitched linescanbeanystandard RF transmission line.Stripline hasbeenusedsuccessfully, ~specially atthelowermicrowave frequencies.
Anadvantage oftheparallel-line configuration isthatthesignalpassesthrough buttwoswitches and,inprinciple, shouldhavealowerinsertion lossthanthecascaded digitally swHched phaseshifterdescribed below.Adisadvantage istherelatively largenumber Une-by-N SWitch One-by-N switch l,-?' (:k~'--­ ~'-----+ ---:...._------+-.....r- Figure8.5Digitally switched parallel-line phaseshifterwithNswitchable lines. 288 1NTRODUCTlON TO RADAR SYSTEMS  Figurc 8.6 Cascadcd four-hit tligitally  switched phase shifter with A/ 16 quanti~a-  tion.
Particular arrangement shown gives  135" of phase shift (i wavelength).
 of lines and switches required when it is necessary to ininimize the quanti~ation error.
The  parallel-line configuration has also been used when phase shifts greater than 2n radians are  needed, as in broadband devices which require true time delays rather than phase shift whictl is  limited to 21c radians.
.
J  The cascaded digitally switched phase shifter (Fig.
8.6) has seen more application than the  parallel-line configuration.
A cascaded digitally switched phase shifter with four phase bits  capable of switching in or out lengths of line equal to 1/16, 1/8, A/4, and 112 yields a phase shift  with a quantization of 1/16, just as the parallel line shifter with 16 lengths of line described  above.
The binary quantization of line lengths makes it convenient to apply digital techniqiies  for actuating the shifter.
 Figure 8.6 shows the schematic of a four-bit digital phase shifter consisting of four  cascaded modules.
Each module contains a switch that inserts either "zero" phase change or a  phase change of 36012" degrees, where n = 1,2,3,4.
When the upper two switches are open, the  lower two are closed, and vice versa.
Note that in the "zero" phase state, the phase shift is  generally not zero, but is some residual amount &.
Thus the two states provide a phase of 9,  and 4, + A$.
The difference A4 between the two states is the desired phase shift required of  the module.
 The arrangements of Figs.
8.5 and 8.6 lend then~selves to the use of semicondi~ctor diodes.
 Ferrite phase shifters are also operated digitally, but in a slightly different manner, as described  later.
 Diode phase shifters." 26.'55 The property of a semiconductor diode that is of interest in  microwave phase shifters is that its impedance can be varied with a change in bias control  voltage.
This allows the diode to act as a switch.
Phase shifters based on diode devices can be  of relatively high power and low loss, and can be switched rapidly from one phase state to  another.
They are relatively insensitive to changes in temperature, they can operate with low  control power, and are compact in size.
They lend themselves well to microwave integrated  circuit construction, and are capable of being used over the entire range of frequencies of  interest to radar although their losses are generally less and their power handling is generally  higher at the lower frequencies.
 There are three basic methods for employing semiconductor diodes in digital phase  shifters, depending on the circuit used to obtain an individual phase bit.
These are: (I) the  switched-line, (2) the hybrid-coupled, and (3) the loaded-line.
The switched line was shown in  Fig.
8.6.
Each phase bit consists of two lengths of line that provide the differential phase shift,  and two single-pole, double-throw switches utilizing four diodes.
 The hybrid-coupled phase bit, as shown in Fig.
8.7, uses a 3-dB hybrid junction with  balanced reflecting terminations connected to the coupled arms.
Two switches (diodes) control  the phase change.
The 3-dB hybrid has the property that a signal input at port 1 is divided  equally in power between ports 2 and 3.
No energy appears at port 4.
The diodes act to either  pass or reflect the signals.
When the impedance of the diodes is such as to pass the signals,  288INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS <>--<..
'0 >'-/16 Individual phasebit>'-/4,~, U >'/2Figure 8.6Cascadt:d four-hit digitally switched phaseshifterwithA/16quantiza­ tion.Particular arrangement showngives 135°ofphaseshift (~wavelength).
oflinesandswitches required whenitisnecessary tominimize thequantization error.The parallel-line configuration hasalsobeenusedwhenphaseshiftsgreaterthan2nradiansare needed,asinbroadband deviceswhichrequiretruetimedelaysratherthanphaseshiftwhichis limitedto2nradians.
" Thecascaded digitally switched phaseshifter(Fig.8.6)hasseenmoreapplication thanthe parallel-line configuration.
Acascaded digitally switched phaseshifterwithfourphasebits capableofswitching inoroutlengthsoflineequalto),/16,)./g,),/4,and)./2yieldsaphaseshift withaquantization of)'/16,justastheparallel lineshifterwith16lengthsoflinedescribed above.Thebinaryquantization oflinelengthsmakesitconvenient toapplydigitaltechniques foractuating theshifter.
Figure8.6showstheschematic ofafour-bit digital phase shifterconsisting offour cascaded modules.
Eachmodulecontains aswitchthatinsertseither"zero"phasechangeora phasechangeof360/2"degrees, wheren=1,2,3,4.
Whentheuppertwoswitches areopen,the lowertwoareclosed,andviceversa.Notethatinthe"zero"phasestate,thephaseshiftis generally notzero,butissomeresidualamount¢o.Thusthetwostatesprovideaphaseof¢o and¢o+tl¢.Thedifference tl¢between thetwostatesisthedesiredphaseshiftrequired of themodule.
Thearrangements ofFigs.8.5and8.6lendthemselves totheuseofsemiconductor diodes.
Ferritephaseshiftersarealsooperated digitally, butinaslightlydifferent manner, asdescrihed later.
Diodephaseshifters.2226.155Theproperty ofasemiconductor diodethatisofinterest in microwave phaseshifters isthatitsimpedance canbevariedwithachangeinbiascontrol voltage.
Thisallowsthediodetoactasaswitch.Phaseshiftersbasedondiodedevicescanbe ofrelatively highpowerandlowloss,andcanbeswitched rapidlyfromonephasestateto another.
Theyarerelatively insensitive tochanges intemperature, theycanoperatewithlow controlpower,andarecompact insize.Theylendthemselves welltomicrowave integrated circuitconstruction, andarecapable ofbeingusedovertheentirerangeoffrequenl:ies of interesttoradaralthough theirlossesaregenerally lessandtheirpowerhandlingisgenerally higheratthelowerfrequencies.
Therearethreebasicmethods foremploying semiconductor diodesindigitalphase shifters, depending onthecircuitusedtoobtainanindividual phasebit.Theseare:(I)the switched-line, (2)thehybrid-coupled, and(3)theloaded-line.
Theswitched linewasshownin Fig.8.6.Eachphasebitconsists oftwolengthsoflinethatprovide thedifferential phaseshift, andtwosingle-pole, double-throw switches utilizing fourdiodes.
Thehybrid-coupled phasebit,asshowninFig.8.7,usesa3-dBhybridjunction with balanced reflecting terminations connected tothecoupled arms.Twoswitches (diodes) control thephasechange.The3-dBhybridhastheproperty thatasignalinputatport1isdivided equallyinpowerbetween ports2and3.Noenergyappearsatport4.Thediodesacttoeither passorreflectthesignals.Whentheimpedance ofthediodesissuchastopassthesignals, Input output  hybrid  junction  1 SIIO~I c~rcuits Figure 8.7 Hybrid-coupled phase bit.
 tile sign:ils will be reflected by the short circuits located farther down the transmission lines.
 'I'llc sigrlals at ports 2 and 3, after reflection from either tlie diode switches or tlie s1101.t  circuits.
corrlbine at port 4.
None of the reflected energy appears at port 1.
The difference in  patti lerigtll with ttte diode switches open and closed is 61.
The two-way path dl is chosen to  corresporid to the desired increment of digitized phase shift.
An N-bit phase shifter can be  obtained by cascading N such hybrids.
 The loaded-line phase shifter, Fig.
8.8, consists of a transmission line periodically loaded  with spaced, switched impedances, or susceptances.
Diodes are used to switch between the two  states of susceptarlce.
The spacing between diodes is approximately one-quarter wavelength at  the operating frequency.
Adjacent quarter-wavelength-spaced loading-susceptances are equal  and take either of two values.
If the magnitude of the normalized susceptance is small, the  reflection from any pair of symmetrical susceptances can be made to cancel so that matched  transrnissiorl will result for either of the two susceptance conditions.
Each pair of diodes  spaced a quarter-wavelength apart produces an increment of the desired phase.
The number of  pairs that are cascaded determines the value of the transmission phase shift.
To achieve  tligh-power capacity, many such sections with small phase increments can be used so that  there are many diodes'to share the power.
The ability to operate with high power is the  advantage clairned for this type of diode phase shifter.
If the largest practical phase shift per  diode pair is 1/16, or 22.5", 32 diodes are required to shift the phase 360".
 1'he hybrid-coupled phase shifter generally has less loss than the other two, and uses the  Icast rluttihcr of diodcs.
It call \,c rnade to operate over a wide band.
The switched-line pllase  shifter uses rriore diodes than the other types and has an undesirable phase-frequency response  which can k corrected at the expense of a higher insertion loss.
This configuration is generally  restricted to true-time-delay circuits and to low-power, miniaturized phase shifters where loss  is not a rrlajor curlsideration.
For a four-bit phase shifter, covering 360°, the minimum number  of diodes needed in the periodically loaded line is 32, the switched line requires 16, and the  hybrid-coupled circuit needs only 8.
The theoretical peak power capability of the switched line  is twice that of the hybrid-coupled circuit since voltage doubling is produced by the reflection  A ;-$-I C4' 4- A ;ir,l-[ir140  Input Output  Figure 8.8 Periodically loaded-line phase shifter.
 TIlEELFCTRONICALLY STEEREO PHASED ARRAY ANTENNA INRADAR289 Input Output -0--.
--_ x3-dB hybrid junction j iii f:' Figure8.7Hybrid-coupled phasebit.
thesignalswillbereflected bytheshortcircuitslocatedfartherdownthetransmission lines.
Thesignalsatports2and3,afterreflection fromeitherthediodeswitches ortheshort circuits.
combine atport4.Noneofthereflected energyappears atport1.Thedifference in palhlengthwiththediodeswitches openandclosedisD./.Thetwo-way pathD./ischosen 10 correspond tothedesiredincrement ofdigitized phaseshift.AnN-bitphaseshiftercanbe obtained bycascading Nsuchhybrids.
Theloaded-line phaseshifter,Fig.8.8,consists ofatransmission lineperiodically loaded withspaced.switched impedances, orsusceptances.
Diodesareusedtoswitchbetween thetwo stalesofsusceptance.
Thespacing between diodesisapproximately one-quarter wavelength at theoperating frequency.
Adjacent quarter-wavelength-spaced loading-susceptances areequal andlakeeitheroftwovalues.Ifthemagnitude ofthenormalized susceptance issmall,the reflection fromanypairofsymmetrical susceptances canbemadetocancelsothatmatched transmission willresultforeitherofthetwosusceptance conditions.
Eachpairofdiodes spacedaquarter-wavelength apartproduces anincrement ofthedesiredphase.Thenumber of pairsthatarecascaded determines thevalueofthetransmission phaseshift.Toachieve high-power capacity, manysuchsections withsmallphaseincrements canbeusedsothat therearemanydiodes'tosharethepower.Theabilitytooperate withhighpoweristhe advantage claimed forthistypeofdiodephaseshifter.Ifthelargestpractical phaseshiftper diodepairis)/16,or22.5°,32diodesarerequired toshiftthephase360°.
Thehybrid-coupled phaseshiftergenerally haslesslossthantheothertwo,andusesthe leastnumberofdiodes.Itcanbemadetooperate overawideband.Theswitched-line phase shiflerusesmorediodesthantheothertypesandhasanundesirable phase-frequency response whichcantrecorrected attheexpense ofahigherinsertion loss.Thisconfiguration isgenerally restricted totrue-time-delay circuitsandtolow-power, miniaturized phaseshifterswhereloss isnotamajorconsideration.
Forafour-bitphaseshifter,covering 360°,theminimum number ofdiodesneededintheperiodically loadedlineis32,theswitched linerequires 16,andthe hybrid-coupled circuitneedsonly8.Thetheoretical peakpowercapability oftheswitched line istwicethatofthehybrid-coupled circuitsincevoltagedoubling isproduced bythereflection ,-~-If-~-:-~-I~t~__ 4'--.r---~---'--_~--<> Inpul Oulpul Susceptances Diode switches Figure8.8Periodically loaded-line phaseshifter. 290 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  in the hybrid circuit.
The switched-line phase shifter has the greatest insertion loss, but its loss  does not vary with the amount of phase shift as it does in the other two types of circuits.
 Diode phase shifters have been built in practically all transmission line media, including  waveguide, coax and stripline.
Microstrip is useful for medium-power devices because of the  ease of manufacture, circuit reproducibility and its reduced size, weight, and production costs.
 The diode chips may be mounted directly on the substrate without the parasitic reactances of  the diode packages.
A multiple-bit diode phase shifter need not be constructed with all of the  same types of phase bits.
The loaded-line circuit is often preferred for small phase increments  because of its compact size.
It is not as suitable for large phase steps because it is difficult to  match in both states under this condition.
For example, in one particular design of a four-bit  microstrip X-band phase shifter, using a sapphire substrate, it proved expedient to use the  loaded-line construction for the 22.5 and 45" bits, and to use the hybrid coupled circuit for the  90 and 180" bits to obtain minimum insertion loss with reasonable bandwidtjl and power  handling ~apability.~' The switching times of phase shifters utilizing PIN diodes can be as low  as 50 ns.
Typically, switching of the order of one microsecond is suitable for most applications.
 The PIN diode, Fig.
8.9, has been frequently used in high-power digital phase shifters.
It  consists of a thin slice of high-resistivity intrinsic semiconductor material sandwiched between  heavily doped low-resistivity P+ and N+ regions.
The intrinsic region acts as a slightly lossy  dielectric at microwave frequencies and the heavily doped regions are good conductors.
 When biased in the reverse (nonconducting) state, the PIN diode resembles a low-loss capaci-  tor.
It is essentially an insulator situated between two conductors and exhibits the paratlel-  plate capacitance determined by the dielectric of the intrinsic region.
At microwaves, the  small-signal equivalent circuit of the PIN diode may be represented as a series RC circuit with  the capacitance determined by the area, thickness, and dielectric constant of the intrinsic  region.
The capacitance is independent of the reverse-bias voltage.
The series resistance is  determined by the resistivity and geometry of the metallic-like P and N regions.
In the  forward-bias (conducting) state, when appreciable current is passed, the injection of holes and  electrons from the P and N regions respectively, creates an electron-hole plasma in what was  formerly the dielectric region.
The slightly lossy dielectric is changed to a fairly good condlic-  tor with the application of forward bias.
The capacitive component of the circuit disappears  and the equivalent circuit becomes a small resistance which decreases in value with increasing  forward current.
The resistance can vary from thousands of ohms at zero bias to a fraction of  intrinsic  region  conductrng  Forward state Reverse state  Junction  capacitance  Forward -bias  resistance  ~nductance Figure 8.9 PIN diodes and simplified equivalent Bock -bias  resistance circuits for forward and reverse states.
 290INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS inthehybridcircuit.Theswitched-line phaseshifterhasthegreatest insertion loss,butitsloss doesnotvarywiththeamount ofphaseshiftasitdoesintheothertwotypesofcircuits.
Diodephaseshiftershavebeenbuiltinpractically alltransmission linemedia,including waveguide, coaxandstripline.Microstrip isusefulformedium-power devicesbecauseofthe easeofmanufacture, circuitreproducibility anditsreduced size,weight,andproduction costs.
Thediodechipsmaybemounted directlyonthesubstrate without theparasitic reactances of thediodepackages.
Amultiple-bit diodephaseshifterneednotbeconstructed withallofthe sametypesofphasebits.Theloaded-line circuitisoftenpreferred forsmallphaseincrements because ofitscompact size.Itisnotassuitable forlargephasestepsbecause itisdifficult to matchinbothstatesunderthiscondition.
Forexample, inoneparticular designofafour-bit microstrip X-band phaseshifter,usingasapphire substrate, itprovedexpedient tousethe loaded-line construction forthe22.5and450bits,andtousethehybridcoupled circuitforthe 90and1800bitstoobtainminimum insertion losswithreasonable bandwid~p andpower handling capability.21 Theswitching timesofphaseshiftersutilizing PINdiodescanbeaslow as50ns.Typically, switching oftheorderofonemicrosecond issuitable formostapplications.
ThePINdiode,Fig.8.9,hasbeenfrequently usedinhigh-power digitalphaseshifters.It consists ofathinsliceofhigh-resistivity intrinsic semiconductor material sandwiched between heavilydopedlow-resistivity P+andN+regions.
Theintrinsic regionactsasaslightlylossy dielectric atmicrowave frequencies andtheheavilydopedregions aregoodconductors.
Whenbiasedinthereverse(nonconducting) state,thePINdioderesembles alow-loss capaci­ tor.Itisessentially aninsulator situated between twoconductors andexhibits theparallel­ platecapacitance determined bythedielectric oftheintrinsic region.Atmicrowaves, the small-signal equivalent circuitofthePINdiodemayberepresented asaseriesRCcircuitwith thecapacitance determined bythearea,thickness, anddielectric constant oftheintrinsic region.Thecapacitance isindependent ofthereverse-bias voltage.
Theseriesresistance is determined bytheresistivity andgeometry ofthemetallic-like PandNregions.
Inthe forward-bias (conducting) state,whenappreciable currentispassed,theinjection ofholesand electrons fromthePandNregionsrespectively, createsanelectron-hole plasmainwhatwas formerly thedielectric region.Theslightlylossydielectric ischanged toafairlygoodconduc­ torwiththeapplication offorward bias.Thecapacitive component ofthecircuitdisappears andtheequivalent circuitbecomes asmallresistance whichdecreases invaluewithincreasing forward current.Theresistance canvaryfromthousands ofohmsatzerobiastoafraction of + Intrln~iC{ regIOn conducting Forward stale Forward-bias resistance Package inductance}lntrinsiC region dielectric + Reverse state MJUnCliOn capacitance ~paCkage capacitance Back-bios resistanceFigure8.9PINdiodesandsimplified equivalent circuitsforforwardandreversestates. at1 ohm with tetis of triilliatnperes bias currerlt.
1-llus with forward bias the diode resembles a  low-value resistor.
If the diode is housed in a package, the parasitic elements introduced by the  package degrade the switching action and influence the voltage breakdown and thermal  characteristics.
 The variable capacitance senliconductor element, or rlaracror diode, also can be used as  the switch in a diode phase shifter.
It is capable of very rapid switching, of the order of a  nanosecond, but can handle only low power.
Since the capacitance of a varactor varies with  the applied negative bias voltage, it may be employed as an analog (continuously variable)  phase shifter using either the loaded line or the hybrid coupled configurations.
Power levels  are limited to a few nlilliwatts by the generation of harmonics and other nonlinear effects.
 Ferrimagnetic phase shifters.
Aferrite is a magnetizable metal-oxide insulator which contains  magnetic ions arranged to produce spontaneous magnetization while maintaining good dielec-  tric proper tie^.^' -29 In contrast to ferromagnetic metals, ferrites are insulators and have a high  resistivity which allows electronlagtietic waves to penetrate the material so that the magnetic  field component of the wave can interact with the magnetic moment of the ferrite.
This  iriteractior~ results in a change of the microwave permeability of the ferrite.
The term ferrirttag-  r~erisru was introduced to describe the novel magnetic properties of these materials that are  now known as ferrites.
 Ferrites have been derived principally from two basic metal-oxide families: the ferrimag-  netic spinels and the garnets.
Both have been used for microwave phase shifters.
A typical  spinel ferrite is NiFe,O, .
In addition to nickel, compositions of magnesium-manganese and  lithiurn have been used.
A common garnet is Y3Fe5012, yttrium iron garnet (YIG).
The  characteristics of materials suitable for microwave devices are given by Ince and Te~nrne.~'  The physics of propagation of electromagnetic energy in ferrites is not easy to describe in  simple The magnetic permeability of a ferrite is anisotropic (that is, it depends on the  direction), and must be represented by a complex tensor rather than a scalar.
For present  purposes, it suffices to state that a change in the applied d-c magnetic field produces a change  in the propagation properties because of a change in permeability, which results in a phase  shift.
 A ferrite phase shifter is a two-port device that permits variation of the phase shift between  input and output by changing the magnetic properties of the ferrite.
They may be analog or  digital with either reciprocal or nonreciprocal characteristics.
Several types of ferrite phase  shifters have been developed, but those that have been of interest in applications are the  Reggia-Speficer, toroidal latching, flux drive, and dual-mode phase shifters.
 Reggia-Spencer phase shifter.
This was one of the first ferrite phase shifters to be applied  successfully to radar.
It consists of a rod or a bar of ferrimagnetic material located at the center  of a section of waveguide.
A solenoid is wound around the waveguide to provide a longitudinal  magnetic field.
A change in phase is obtained by a change of the applied magnetic field that  results from a change of the current passing through the coil.
This is called an analog phase  shifter since a continuous phase change is obtained as a function of the current through the  solenoid.
It is a reciprocal device in that the phase shift is the same for both directions of  propagation.
When it was introduced, the Reggia-Spencer phase shifter had a higher figure of  rnerit (defined as the degrees of phase shift per dB of loss) than previous analog ferrite phase  shifters, and was more compact.
Since the rod of ferrite is located at the center of the guide out  of contact with the walls, there is no means for dissipation of heat other than by radiation.
This  lack of a convenient thermal path to dissipate heat limits its power handling capability.
 However, in one de~ign,~'-~* the heat transfer problem was overcome by having the axially  IIII'RITIRONI('AII.Y STHRI'D !'IIASED ARRAY ANTENNA INRADAR291 anohmwithtensofmilliamperes biascurrent.
Thuswithforward biasthedioderesembles a low-value resistor.Ifthediodeishousedinapackage, theparasitic elements introduced bythe package degrade theswitching actionandinfluence thevoltage breakdown andthermal characteristics.
Thevariable capacitance semiconductor element, or('aractor diode,alsocanbeusedas theswitchinadiodephaseshifter.Itiscapable ofveryrapidswitching, oftheorderofa nanosecond, butcanhandleonlylowpower.Sincethecapacitance ofavaractor varieswith theappliednegative biasvoltage, itmaybeemployed asananalog(continuously variable) phaseshifterusingeithertheloadedlineorthehybridcoupled configurations.
Powerlevels arelimitedtoafewmilliwatts bythegeneration ofharmonics andothernonlinear effects.
Ferrimagnetic phaseshifters.
Aferriteisamagnetizable metal-oxide insulator whichcontains magnetic ionsarranged toproduce spontaneous magnetization whilemaintaining gooddielec­ tricproperties.27-29Incontrast toferromagnetic metals,ferritesareinsulators andhaveahigh resistivity whichallowselectromagnetic wavestopenetrate thematerial sothatthemagnetic fieldcomponent ofthewavecaninteract withthemagnetic moment oftheferrite.This interactionresultsinachangeofthemicrowave permeability oftheferrite.ThetermJerrimag­ netismwasintroduced todescribe thenovelmagnetic properties ofthesematerials thatare nowknownasferrites.
Ferrites havebeenderivedprincipally fromtwobasicmetal-oxide families: theferrimag­ neticspinelsandthegarnets.
Bothhavebeenusedformicrowave phaseshifters.
Atypical spinelferriteisNiFe204' Inaddition tonickel,compositions ofmagnesium-manganese and lithiumhavebeenused.Acommon garnetisY3FeSOI2' yttrium irongarnet(YIG).The characteristics ofmaterials suitable formicrowave devicesaregivenbyInceandTemme.3o Thephysicsofpropagation ofelectromagnetic energyinferrilesisnoteasytodescribe in simpleterms.31Themagnetic permeability ofaferriteisanisotropic (thatis,itdepends onthe direction), andmustberepresented byacomplex tensorratherthanascalar.Forpresent purposes, itsufficestostatethatachangeintheapplieddocmagnetic fieldproduces achange inthepropagation properties becauseofachangeinpermeability, whichresultsinaphase shift.
Aferritephaseshifterisatwo-port devicethatpermitsvariation ofthephaseshiftbetween inputandoutputbychanging themagnetic properties oftheferrite.Theymaybeanalogor digitalwitheitherreciprocal ornonreciprocal characteristics.
Severaltypesofferritepha:;e shiftershavebeendeveloped, butthosethathavebeenofinterest inapplications arethe Reggia-Speftcer, toroidal latching, fluxdrive,anddual-mode phaseshifters.
Re~gia-Spencer phaseshifter.Thiswasoneofthefirstferritephaseshifterstobeapplied successfully toradar.Itconsistsofarodorabarofferrimagnetic material locatedatthecenter ofasectionofwaveguide.
Asolenoid iswoundaroundthewaveguide toprovidealongitudinal magnetic field.Achangeinphaseisobtained byachangeoftheappliedmagnetic fieldthat resultsfromachangeofthecurrentpassingthrough thecoil.Thisiscalledananalogphase shiftersinceacontinuous phasechangeisobtained asafunction ofthecurrentthrough the solenoid.
Itisareciprocal deviceinthatthephaseshiftisthesameforbothdirections of propagation.
Whenitwasintroduced, theReggia-Spencer phaseshifterhadahigherfigureof merit(defined asthedegreesofphaseshiftperdBofloss)thanprevious analogferritephase shifters, andwasmorecompact.
Sincetherodofferriteislocatedatthecenteroftheguideout ofcontactwiththewalls,thereisnomeansfordissipation ofheatotherthanbyradiation.
This lackofaconvenient thermal pathtodissipate heatlimitsitspowerhandling capability.
However, inonedesign,31.32theheattransfer problem wasovercome byhavingtheaxially 292 INTKOIIUCTION TO RAVAK SYSTEMS  located garnet bar directly cooled by a low-loss liquid dielectric that was allowed lo flow alotlg  the surface of the garnet material.
The flow was confined by completely encapsulating the  garnet in a teflon jacket.
Thus the cooling liquid was in direct contact with the garnet for  efficient transfer of dissipated heat.
Some of the highest power phase shifters have been  obtained with this design.
For example, a C-band phase shifter, operating over an 8 percent  bandwidth was capable of handling 100 kW of peak power at an average power of 600 W.
The  insertion loss was 0.9 dB with a maximum VSWR of 1.25.
However, it required 125 /rs to  switch the phase.
At a 300-Hz switching rate, 16 W of switching power was needed.
The phase  shifter was 2.4 by 2.1 by 8.2 inches in size and weighed less than 1.5 Ib.
 The relatively long time to switch the phase of the Reggia-Spencer phase shlfter from one  value to another has limited its application.
Switching times are measiired in hundreds of  n~icroseconds rather than a few microseconds as is common with other microwave phase  shifters.
The long time is due to the large inductance of the solenoid and by th%v fact that the  waveguide around which the solenoid is wrapped acts as a shorted turn.
The resulting eddy  currents generated by the shorted turn limit the speed with which the magnetic field can be  changed.
The shorted-turn effect may be minimized by a waveguide made of plastic which is  coated with a thin copper plating.
Sometimes a slit is cut in the side wall of the waveguide to  reduce the eddy currents.
Another factor that complicates operation is hysteresis which causcs  the value of permeability to differ for increasing and decreasing current.
To eliminate hyster-  esis errors a current pulse must be applied to the phase shifter solenoid to drive the ferrite to  (Drive wire)  (b)  Figure 8.10 (a) Single bit of a latching ferrite phase-shifter mounted in waveguide; (h) sketch of five-bit  latching ferrite phase-shifter.
(From Whicker and Jone.~,"~ corrrtrsy 1 EEE.)  292INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS locatedgarnetbardirectlycooledbyalow-lossliquiddielectric thatwasallowedtoflowalong thesurfaceofthegarnetmaterial.
Theflowwasconfined bycompletely encapsulating the garnetinateflonjacket.Thusthecoolingliquidwasindirectcontactwiththegarnetfor efficient transferofdissipated heat.Someofthehighestpowerphaseshiftershavebeen obtained withthisdesign.Forexample, aC-bandphaseshifter,operating overanSpercent bandwidth wascapableofhandling 100kWofpeakpoweratanaveragepowerof600W.The insertion losswas0.9dBwithamaximum VSWRof1.25.However, itrequired 125JISto switchthephase.Ata300-Hzswitching rate,16Wofswitching powerwasneeded.Thephase shifterwas2.4by2.1by8.2inchesinsizeandweighed lessthan1.5lb.
Therelatively longtimetoswitchthephaseoftheReggia-Spencer phaseshifterfromone valuetoanother haslimiteditsapplication.
Switching timesaremeasured inhundreds of microseconds ratherthanafewmicroseconds asiscommon withothermicrowave phase shifters.Thelongtimeisduetothelargeinductance ofthesolenoid andbyth.~factthatthe waveguide aroundwhichthesolenoid iswrapped actsasashortedturn.Theresulting eddy currents generated bytheshortedturnlimitthespeedwithwhichthemagnetic fieldcanbe changed.
Theshorted-turn effectmaybeminimized byawaveguide madeofplasticwhichis coatedwithathincopperplating.Sometimes aslitiscutinthesidewallofthewaveguide to reducetheeddycurrents.
Another factorthatcomplicates operation ishysteresis whichcauses thevalueofpermeability todifferforincreasing anddecreasing current.Toeliminate hyster­ esiserrorsacurrentpulsemustbeappliedtothephaseshiftersolenoid todrivetheferrite10 Ferrite tOrOid (a) Dielectric Dielectric matching spacers transformer Latching Ferrite conductor toroid (Drivewire) (b) Figure8.10(a)Singlebitofalatching ferritephase-shifter mounted inwaveguide; (b)skelchoffive-bit latching ferritephase-shifter.
(FromWhicker andJones, 156courtesy 1EEE.) 1.HF ELdECTRONICALLY STEERED PHASED ARRAY ANTENNA IN RADAR 293  saturatiorl before a new value of phase shift can be applied.
The phase shift of a ferrite device is  especially sensitive to temperature.
A change of 1°C might result in a 1" phase change.
Hence,  they usually must be operated in a temperature-controlled environment.
Although the Reggia-  Sperlcer phase stlifter tias beer1 successfully applied in operational radar and was one of the  first practical pli:~se stlifters sl~itilble for radar, in its present form it has been largely superseded  by other devices.
 1,atching ferrite phase ~hifters.~'." The use of a ferrite in the form of a toroid centered withill a  waveguide as iri Fig.
8.10, results ill a phase sliifter with a fast switching time and with less  drive power than required of a Reggia-Spencer device.
Furthermore, it is not as temperature  sensitive, and there is less of a problem caused by hysteresis in the ferrite.
The toroid ferrite  phase shifter.
although not perfect by any means, has been in the past a popular choice for  phased array application.
 Consider the hysteresis loop, or B-H curve, of Fig.
8.11.
This is a plot of the magnetization  (gauss) as a function of the applied magnetic field (oersted) for a toroid-shaped section of  ferrirnagnetic material.
The applied magnetic field is proportional to the current in the drive  wire which can be considered a solenoid with one turn.
When a sufficiently large current is  passed through the drive wire threading the center of the toroid, the magnetization is driven to  saturation.
When the current is reduced to zero, there exists a remanent magnetization B,.
If a  current of opposite polarity is passed through the drive wire, the ferrite is saturated with the  opposite polarity of rernanent magnetization.
Thus a toroidal ferrite may take on two values of  rnagneti7atior1, f B,, obtained by pulsing the drive wire with either a positive or negative  current pulse.
The difference in the two states of magnetization produces the differential phase  Figure 8.1 1 Hysteresis loop, or B-H curve, of a ferrite toroid.
 THEELECTRONICALLY STEERED PHASED ARRAY ANTENNA INRADAR293 saturation beforeanewvalueofphaseshiftcanbeapplied.
Thephaseshiftofaferritedeviceis especially sensitive totemperature.
AchangeofIOCmightresultina 1°phasechange.
Hence, theyusuallymustbeoperated inatemperature-controlled environment.
Although theReggia­ Spencer phaseshifterhasbeensuccessfully applied inoperational radarandwasoneofthe firstpractical phaseshifterssuitable forrauar,initspresentformithasbeenlargelysuperseded byotherdevices, Latchin~ ferritephaseshifters,'''·.o Theuseofaferriteintheformofatoroidcentered withina waveguide asinFig.X.l0.resultsinaphaseshifterwithafastswitching timeandwithless drivepowerthanrequired ofaReggia-Spencer device.Furthermore, itisnotastemperature sensitive, andthereislessofaproblem causedbyhysteresis intheferrite.Thetoroidferrite phaseshifter.although notperfectbyanymeans,hasbeeninthepastapopular choicefor phasedarrayapplication.
Consider thehysteresis loop,orB-Hcurve,ofFig.8.11.Thisisaplotofthemagnetization (gauss)asafunction oftheapplied magnetic field(oersted) foratoroid-shaped sectionof ferrimagnetic material.
Theapplied magnetic fieldisproportional tothecurrentinthedrive wirewhichcanbeconsidered asolenoid withoneturn.Whenasufficiently largecurrent is passedthrough thedrivewirethreading thecenterofthetoroid,themagnetization isdrivento saturation.
Whenthecurrent isreduced tozero.thereexistsaremanent magnetization B~.lfa currentofopposite polarity ispassedthrough thedrivewire,theferriteissaturated withthe opposite polarity ofremanent magnetization.
Thusatoroidal ferritemaytakeontwovaluesof magnetization, ±B~,obtained bypulsingthedrivewirewitheitherapositive ornegative currentpulse.Thedifference inthetwostatesofmagnetization produces thedifferential phase c 9o '" Saturation Remanent magnetization --"- t8, Appliedmagnetic field(H) -8, Figure8.11Hysteresis loop,orB-Hcurve.ofaferritetoroid. 294 1NTKOl)UC"FION TO KAI)AK SYSI'EMS  shift.
This is called a Irrrc-l~itl!j plicrse slrjfier.
Thi~s a single, short-clurat ion cirrrent pulse sets the  phase.
Continuous application of drive power is not neecled as in otllcr pllusc sllifters.
A  "square" hysteresis loop is desired for silch a phase shifter.
The scluareiicss is ~ileitsure~l by tlie  ratio of the remanent magnetization to the saturation magnetization, which with practical  ferrite materials might typically be about 0.7.
 The amount of differential phase shift depends on the ferrite material and the length of the  toroid.
A digital latching phase shifter is obtaineci by placing in cascade a niirnber of separate  toroids of varying length.
The lengths of each toroid are selected to provide a differential phase  shift of 180".
90".
45".
22.5".
and so forth.
depending on the number of bits reqi~ired.
A separate  pair of drive wires is used for each section of toroid.
Impedance matching is providecl at the  input and output toroids.
By filling the center slot of the toroid with high dielectric-constant  material a better figure of merit and lower switching power are obtained, but the peak power  capability is decreased.
The individual toroids are usually separated by thin ciielqctric spacers  to avoid magnetic interaction (Fig.
8:IOh).
The drive wire is oriented for minimum RF  coupling.
It is also important to have proper mechanical contact between the toroid and the  waveguide wall since an air gap can give rise to the generation of higher-orcier rnodes that cirri  result ill relatively large narrow-freqtrency-band, insertion-loss spikes.
C'areful a~tei~tion rnilst  be paid to eliminating these gaps without excessive mechanical pressure that could cause  magnetostrict ion which changes the magnetic properties of the n~aterial, especially if garnets  are used.
This type of latching phase shifter is also called a r~3irr-sltr0 ror~itltll pl~risc.
.\lrj/icr since  the n~ajor action is due to the two vertical branches of the toroids.
The function of the  horizontal branches is to complete the magnetic circuit.
 By introducing the applied magnetic field from within the waveguide via the single-turn  drive wire.
the shorted-turn efTect that limits the switching speed of 1111' Reggia-SPL'IICC~ PII;ISC  shifter is eliminated.
This permits switching times of the order of microsecollds.
Wticreas  hysteresis was a nuisance to be tolerated in the Reggia-Spencer device, the latching phase  shifter takes advantage of the hysteresis loop to produce the two discrete values of phase shift  without the need for continuoi~s drive power.
 The toroid phase shifter is tiotirc~ciproc.rr1 in that the phase shift depends on the direction of  propagation.
In most applications this inconvenience is usually accepted in order to achieve  the other advantages offered by the latching ferrite phase shifter.
When used for both transmit  and receive, the phase shift must be changed between the two modes of operation.
With  switchingspeeds of the order of microseconds, it is practical to reset the phase stlifters just after  transmission in order to receive.
They are then reset just before transmitting the next pulse.
 The phase shift for proper operation when propagating in the reverse direction is obtained by  simply reversing the polarity of the drive pulses.
This reverses the direction of magnetization of  the ferrite toroicl, which is eqiiiviilent to reversing Ihc direction of propi~gi~lioi~.
Nc)11rcci1)roci~I  phase shifters cannot be t~.cd in reflectarrays (Sec.
8.6).
since the electromagnetic energy must  travel in both directions.
Their use is also not practical in short-range radar or with high-duty  cycle wavefor~ns like those used in some pulse-doppler radars, since the switcltiiig het~cc~i tile  two states is too slow.
 The value of remanent magnetization is aflectect by temperature.
Telnperati~rc clla~igcs  may be due to microwave dissipation in the ferrite as well as ambient-temperati~re variations.
 Some materials are more temperature-sensitive than others, but the material cannot always be  selected on this basis alone.
Garnets are generally more temperature-stable and can handle  higher power than other ferrimagnetic materials.
A reduction in temperature sensitivity can  be obtained with a composite magnetic cir~uit~~,~' in which the microwave ferrimagnetic  material is internal to the waveguide, but a temperature-insensitive, magnetic-flux-limiting  ferrimagnetic material is external to the waveguide.
The latter limits and maintains the mag-  netic flux, and hence the phase shift, at an almost constant level over the stabilization range.
 29..INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS shift.Thisiscalledala/chillY pl/lls£>shift£>/".Thusasingle,short-duration current pulsesetsthe phase.Continuous application ofdrivepowerisnotneededasinotherphaseshifters.
A .,square" hysteresis loopisdesiredforsuchaphaseshifter.Thesquareness ismeasured hythe ratiooftheremanent magnetization tothesaturation magnetization, whichwithpractical ferritematerials mighttypically beabout0.7.
Theamount ofdifferential phaseshiftdepends ontheferritematerial andthelengthofthe toroid.Adigitallatching phaseshifterisobtained byplacing incascade anuinber ofseparate toroidsofvarying length.Thelengthsofeachtoroidareselected toprovide adifferential phase shiftofIgoo,90°,45°,22.5°,andsoforth,depending onthenumber ofbit"required.
Aseparate pairofdrivewiresisusedforeachsectionoftoroid.Impedance matching isprovided atthe inputandoutputtoroids.
Byfillingthecenterslotofthetoroidwithhighdielectric-constant material abetterfigureofmeritandlowerswitching powerareobtained, butthepeakpower capability isdecreased.
Theindividualtoroids areusuallyseparated bythin diet~ctric spacers toavoidmagnetic interaction (Fig.8:IOh).Thedrivewireisoriented forminimum RF coupling.
Itisalsoimportant tohavepropermechanical contact hetween thetoroidandthe waveguide wallsinceanairgapcangiverisetothegeneration ofhigher-order modesthatcan resultinrelatively largenarrow-frequency-band, insertion-loss spikes.('urdul attention musl bepaidtoeliminating thesegapswithout excessive mechanical pressure Ihatcouldcause magnetostriction whichchanges themagnetic properties ofthematerial, especially ifgarnets areused.Thistypeoflatching phaseshifterisalsocalleda/will-sla" /owit/all'hasL' shifiersince themajoractionisduetothetwovertical branches ofthetoroids.
Thefunction ofthe horizontal branches istocomplete themagnetic circuit.
Byintroducing theapplied magnetic fieldfromwithinthewaveguide viathesingle-turn drivewire.theshorted-turn effectthatlimitstheswitching speedoftheReggia-Spenca phase shifteriseliminated.
Thispermits switching timesoftheorderofmicroseconds.
Whereas hysteresis wasanuisance tobetolerated intheReggia-Spencer device,thelatching phase shiftertakesadvantage ofthehysteresis looptoproduce thetwodiscrete valuesofphaseshift without theneedforcontinuous drivepower.
ThetoroidphaseshifterislIollreciprocal inthatthephaseshiftdepends onthedirection of propagation.
Inmostapplications thisinconvenience isusuallyaccepted inordertoachieve theotheradvantages offeredbythelatching ferritephaseshifter.Whenusedforbothtransmit andreceive, thephaseshiftmustbechanged between thetwomodesofoperation.
With switching speedsoftheorderofmicroseconds, itispractical toresetthephaseshiftersjustafter transmission inordertoreceive.Theyarethenresetjustbeforetransmitting thenextpulse.
Thephaseshiftforproperoperation whenpropagating inthereversedirection isobtained by simplyreversing thepolarity ofthedrivepulses.Thisreverses thedirection ofmagnetization of thefcrritetoroid,whichisequivalent toreversing thedircction ofpropagalion.
NOIlrl:ciprocal phaseshifterscannotbell-;~dinreflectarrays (Sec.g.6),sincetheelectromagnetic energyll1ust travelinbothdirections.
Theiruseisalsonotpractical inshort-range radarorwithhigh-duty cyclewaveforms likethoseusedinsomepulse-doppler radars,sincctheswitching hetwecn the twostatesistooslow.
Thevalueofremanent magnetization isaffected bytemperature.
Tempcrature changes maybeduetomicrowave dissipation intheferriteaswellasambient-temperature variations.
Somematerials aremoretemperature-sensitive thanothers,butthematerial cannotalwaysbe selected onthisbasisalone.Garnets aregenerally moretemperature-stable andcanhandle higherpowerthanotherferrimagnetic materials.
Areduction intemperature sensitivity can beobtained withacomposite magnetic circuit3o.31inwhichthemicrowave ferrimagnetic material isinternal tothewaveguide, butatemperature-insensitive, magnetic-flux-limiting ferrimagnetic material isexternal tothewaveguide.
Thelatterlimitsandmaintains themag­ neticflux,andhencethephaseshift,atanalmostconstant leveloverthestabilization range. 1111.
I I I ( IKONl('Al I Y SII.1 RI.1) l'flASI:11 ARRAY ANII NNA IN RAlJAH 295  Flux driveJ4 The toroid, or twin-slab.
ferrite phase shifter may be operated in an analog  fasliiori t~y varying tlic crirrcnt of tlic drive pulse so as to provide different values of remanerit  rnagneti;l.atio~i.
.l'liis is called ,fltr.u dr.ir-c~.
It lias the further advantage of having reduced  temperature sensitivity.
Instead of using a number of individual toroids of different lengths in  cascade.
a single long section of toroid is used that is capable of providing the total differential  phase shift of 360".
The required digital phase increment is obtained by operating on a minor  hysteresis loop.
:is ill Fig.
8.12.
If R,(I), for example, were the rernanent magnetization needed  to produce a phase change of I 80" relative to the rernanent magnetization - B,, the aniplitude  and ~vidth of the driving pulse would be selected so as to rise up to point 1 on the hysteresis  curve.
When the current pulse decays to zero, the magnetization falls back to the remanent  valtre /?,(I) along tlie indicated curve.
The difference in phase between - B,(l) and the value  !I,( I) tlctcr~iii~ics tlic pliasc iticreriient.
Witli :I different value of current pulse, a different value  of rclii:ilictit 1ii;igrieti7.:ttio1i car1 be obtained and therefore a different phase shift.
In this  tri:iliricr.
tl~e ferrite toroici is basically ari analog device that can provide any phase increment.
 It acts as a digital pllase sliifter if the drive currents are digital.
A digital-to-analog conversion  is rcrlrlircd to transliite the digital control-signal generated by the array computer to a form  that car1 set tlic I1u.u-drive pliase sliifter.
*I'lic lengtli of the toroid is generally 111ade 15 to 20  percent greater thari normal to allow for some shrinkage of the total available increment of  rnagtietizatio~i due to telnperature changes.
Analysis shows that when the drive output irn-  pedance is srnall, the effect of temperature-caused variations in the increment of magnetization  will l>c s111:1Il.
 Ilual-niode ferrite phase shifters, There are sorne applications which require a reciprocal pliase  sliifter.
Ac t~leritioned previously the Reggia-Spencer phase shifter is reciprocal but has limita-  tions such as slow switching speed.
ternperattlre sensitivity, and a not particularly good figure  Figure 8.12 Hysteresis loop showing the  principle of flux drive.
where a single  ferrite toroid is excited by discrete  current pulses to produce digital phase-  shift increments from what is basically  an analog device.
 IIII'I'I.ITIRON1CAI.IY SIITRH) I'IIASI'D ARRAY ANTI'NNA INRADAR295 Fluxdrin>..'4Thetoroid.ortwin-slab, ferritcphaseshiftermaybeGperated inananalog fashionbyvaryingthccurrcntofthedrivepulsesoastoprovidedifferent valuesofremanent magnetization.
Thisiscalled(l/lxdril'(,.Ithasthefurtheradvantage ofhavingrcduced temperature sensitivity.
Insfeadofusinganumberofindividual toroidsofdifferent lengthsin cascade.
asinglelongsectionoftoroidisusedthatiscapableofproviding thetotaldifferential phaseshiftof360°.Therequired digitalphaseincrement isobtained byoperating onaminor hysteresis loop.asinFig.R.12.IfBr(I).forexample, weretheremancnt magnetization needed toproduce aphasechangcof1800relativetotheremanent magnetization -Br,theamplitude and\....idthofthedrivingpulsewouldbeselected soastoriseuptopointIonthehysteresis curve.Whenthecurrentpulsedecaysto zero,themagnetization fallsbacktotheremanent valueBr(I)alongtheindicated curve.Thedifference inphasebetween -Br(I)andthevalue nr(I)determines thephaseincrcment.
Withadiffcrcnt valueofcurrcntpulse,adifferent valuc ofrcmanentmagnetizationcanbcobtainedandtherefore adifferentphaseshift.Inthis manncr.
theferritetoroidishasically ananalogdevicethatcanprovideanyphaseincrement.
Itaelsasadigitalphaseshifterifthcdrivecurrents aredigital.Adigital-to-analog conversion isrequired totranslate thcdigitalcontrol-signal generated bythearraycomputer toaform thatcansetthenux-drive phaseshifter.Thelengthofthetoroidisgencrally madc15to20 pcrcentgreaterthannormaltoallowforsomeshrinkage ofthetotalavailable increment of magnetization duetotcmperature changes.
Analysis showsthatwhenthedriveoutputim­ pedancc issmall,theefTectoftemperature-caused variations intheincrement ofmagnetization willbesmall.
Dual-mode ferritephaseshifters.
Therearesomeapplications whichrequireareciprocal phase shifter.Asmentioned previously theRcggia-Spencer phaseshifterisreciprocal buthaslimita­ tiollssuch asslowswitching speed.temperature sensitivity, andanotparticularly goodfigurc cQ '0 ~ ~g.8,(I) ::> 8,(2) ----- --~ H' 3':Appliedmagnetic; H,field(H) 8,(3) -B,Figure8.12Hysteresis loopshowingthe principle offluxdrive.whereasingle ferritetoroidisexcited bydiscrete currentpulsestoproducedigitalphase­ shiftincrements fromwhatisbasically ananalogdevice. ulde ~\  Input Output  L~river terminals fixture b'igure 8.13 Dual-modr rrci-  procal phase sllifrcr configura-  tion.
(t'rottr i 111111  l'o~rrlg.
I"')  of merit.
A more suitable reciprocal device that overcomes the limitations of previous recipro-  cal ferrite phase shifters in the dual-n~ode phase shifter based on the principle of the Faraday  rOtor.2s.33.3s-37 It is competitive with the toroid phase shifter, especially at the higher niicro-  wave frequencies.
d  In the dual-mode phase shifter the linearly polarized signal in rectangular waveguide at  the left-hand port in Fig.
8.13 is converted to circi~lar polarization by a nonreciprocal circt~lar  polarizer (a ferrite quarter-wave plate).
In the Faraday rotator portion, the applied longitu-  dinal magnetic field rotates the circular polarization, imparting the desired phase shift.
The  circular polarization is converted to linear by a second nonreciprocal polarizer.
A signal  incident from the right is converted to circular polarization of the opposite sense by the  nonreciprocal quarter-wave plate.
However, since both the sense of polarization and  the direction of propagation are reversed, the phase shift for a signal traveling from right to left  is the same as that from left to right.
The ferrite rod of the Faraday rotator is rnetallizeci to  form a fully loaded waveguide and is accessible for heat sinking.
The magnetic circuit is  completed externally with a temperature-stable ferrite yoke.
Flux drive is generally used to  control the remanent magnetization.
 Thedual-mode phase shifter is of light weight and is capable of high average power.
It also  has a good figure ofmerit.
Its chief limitation relative to the nonreciprocal toroid phase shifter is  its longer switching time, being of the order of 10 to 20 its.
The switching speed is limited by the  shorted-turn effect of the thin metallic filni covering the ferrite roc!.
 Other ferrite phase shifters.
There have been other kincis of ferrite phase shiftcrs tlevelopetl  over the years based on different principles or on variations of those describctl above.
1  Althoilgh the above phase shifters were discussed primarily as waveguide devices, some of  tllern may he implenientect in coax, helical line, i~ncl stripline."  The ferrite Faraday rotator, which was mentioned above as being a part of the dual-mode  phase shifter, also has been applied as an electronic phase ~hifter.~~.~' It is the equivalent of the  mechanical Fox phase shiftere3' Other examples of phase shifters are a helical slow-wave  structure either surrounded by or surrounding a ferrite t~roid,~~.~' a transversely magnetized  slab of ferrite in rectangular ~aveguide,~~.~~ a bucking rotator phase sl~ifter,~~ circular polari-  zation between quarter-wave plates,44 a reciprocal, polarization-insensitive phase shifter for  reflect array^,^^ wideband phase ~hifters,"~ and phase shifters that operate at UHF." Ferrites  have also been used in continuous aperture scanning where a phase change is provided across  an aperture without subdividing it into separate elements.
In one experimental design," ten  discrete phase-shifter elements were replaced with a single ferrite-loaded aperture whose  properties were externally controlled to scan the beam radiated by a five-wavelength, X-band  antenna.
 Other electronic phase shifters.
In addition to the ferrite and diode devices, there have been  other techniques suggested for electronically varying the phase shift.
The traveling-wave tube  296INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS Waveguide,Nonrecipracal- Phas~- €I~ent-with7 palamers coilandyokes:; Figure8.13 Oual-mod~ reci­ procalphaseshifterconfigura­ tion.(From IVhickt'f (llld rOl/lliJ.
1tll) ofmerit.Amoresuitablereciprocal devicethatovercomes thelimitations ofprevious recipro­ calferritephaseshiftersinthedllal-mode phaseshifterbasedontheprinciple oftheFaraday rotor.25.33.35-37 Itiscompetitive withthetoroidphaseshifter,especially atthehighermicro- wavefrequencies.
,~ Inthedual-mode phaseshifterthelinearlypolarized signalinrectangular waveguide at theleft-hand portinFig.8.13isconverted tocircularpolarization byanonreciprocal circular polarizer (aferritequarter-wave plate).IntheFaraday rotatorportion, theappliedlongitu­ dinalmagnetic fieldrotatesthecircularpolarization, imparting thedesiredphaseshift.The circularpolarization isconverted tolinearbyasecondnonreciprocal polarizer.
Asignal incident fromtherightisconverted tocircular polarization oftheopposite sensebythe nonreciprocal quarter-wave plate.However, sinceboththesenseofpolarization and thedirection ofpropagation arereversed, thephaseshiftforasignaltraveling fromrighttoleft isthesameasthatfromlefttoright.TheferriterodoftheFaraday rotatorismetallized to formafullyloadedwaveguide andisaccessible forheatsinking.
Themagnetic circuitis completed externally withatemperature-stable ferriteyoke.Fluxdriveisgenerally usedto controltheremanent magnetization.
Thedual-mode phaseshifterisoflightweightandiscapableofhighaveragepowa.Italso hasagoodfigureofmerit.Itschieflimitation relativetothenonreciprocal toroidphaseshifteris itslongerswitching time,beingoftheorderofIOto20liS.Theswitching speedislimitedbythe shorted-turn effectofthethinmetallic filmcovering theferriterod.
Otherferritephaseshifters.
Therehavebeenotherkindsofferritephaseshiftersdcvelopt.:d overtheyearsbasedondifferent principles oronvariations ofthosedescriht.:d ahove.
Although theabovephaseshifterswerediscussed primarily aswaveguidc devices,somcof thcmmayheimplemented incoax,helicalline,andstriplinc.
JJ TheferriteFaraday rotator,whichwasmentioned aboveasbeingapartofthedual-modc phaseshifter,alsohasbeenappliedasanelectronic phaseshifter.33.3MItistheequivalent ofthe mechanical Foxphaseshifter.39Otherexamples of phase shiftersareahelicalslow-wave structure eithersurrounded byorsurrounding aferritetoroid,40.41 atransversely magnetized slahofferriteinrectangular waveguide,42.43 abuckingrotatorphaseshifter,"" circularpolari­ zationbetween quarter-wave plates,44 areciprocal, polarization-insensitive phaseshifterfor reftectarrays,45 wideband phaseshifters,46 andphaseshiftersthatoperateatUHF:nFerritcs havealsobeenusedincontinuous aperture scanning whereaphasechangeisprovided across anaperture withoutsubdividing itintoseparate elements.
Inoneexperimental design,4M ten discrete phase-shifter elements werereplaced withasingleferrite-loaded aperture whose properties wereexternally controlled toscanthebeamradiated byafive-wavelength, X-band antenna.
Otherelectronic phaseshifters.
Inaddition totheferriteanddiodedevices, therehavebeen othertechniques suggested forelectronically varyingthephaseshift.Thetraveling-wave tube 1111: 1:1 F<'l RONl('Al I Y ST1:I:RFI) Pf1ASED ARRAY ANTENNA IN RADAR 297  cat1 provitle a fast.
elcctroriicnlly co~itrollecl pliase shift by variation of tlie lielix voltage.50 The  phase shift is large enough to allow several taps on a single tube to control the phase of several  antenria elerncnts sir~~~~ltar~eoirsly.~' Gaseous discharge, or plasma, phase shifters are based on  the variation of the dielectric constant of the gaseous trlediurn as a function of the number of  free electrons, which depends on the current through the de~ice.~' 53 Although they can  liandle about I k W of power and cat1 be adapted to a wide range of frequencies, it is difficult to  obtain stable operating characteristics with long life in sealed-off tubes.
The switching proper-  ties of a ferrite circulator can also be used for constructing a digitally switched, nonreciprocal  pliase ~liifter.'~ It is not often used, however, because of its higher loss, lower peak power, and  liigtier cost as compared with digitally switched diode phase shifters.
Ferroelectric phase  shifters.
in which the dielectric of a ferroelectric material is a function of the applied electric  field.
are also possible.49 They seem better suited for VHF and UHF than for higher frequencies.
 F~lectroniechanical phase-shifting devices.
In addition to electronic phase shifters, electronie-  clianical devices for changing phase have been used in pliased-array radars, especially in the  early models.
Although electroniechanical shifters are not now widely used, they are described  here to illustrate the variety of devices that might be employed in array antennas.
 One of the earliest and simplest forms of electromechanical phase shifters is a transmis-  sion line whose length is varied n~echanically, as with a telescopic section.
This is called a litle  .$rretclrcr.
The telescoping section might be in the form of a " U", and the length of the line  changed in a manlier siniilar to that of a slide trombone.
The line stretcher is often imple-  niented it1 coaxial line.
A tnecliatiical line stretcher that gives niore phase shift for a given  arnoitnt of motion that1 a conventional line stretcher is the helical-line phase shifter due to  Stark.5'." The phase velocity on the helical transmission line is considerably less than tlie  velocity of light.
For this reason a given mechanical motion produces more phase change than  would a line stretcher in conventional transmission line.
Thus a shorter phase shifter can be  had.
which is especially advantageous at VHF or UHF frequencies.
The reduction in length is  essentially equal to the wind-up factor of the helix, which is the ratio of the circumference to  the pitch.
Wind-up factors niay range from 10 to 20 in practical designs.
 Both the coax and the helical line-stretchers are not well suited for the higher microwave  frequencies.
A waveguide device, suitable for the higher frequencies, that is analogous to the  line stretcher is the hybrid junction such as the magic T, short-slot hybrid coupler (sometimes  called the short-slot trombone phase shifter), or the equivalent in stri~line.~' A change in line  length, with a corresponding change in phase, is obtained in the magic T with adjustable short  circuits in thk' collinear The use of adjustable short circuits in the short-slot - hybrid is  somewhat more convenient to configure mechanically.
 Another electro~neclianical phase shifter which has been used in array radar is the  rotatitig-arm nieclianical phase sIii~ter.".~~+~~ It consists of a number of concentric transmis-  siori lilies.
E;icli line is a tliree-sided squiire trough with an insulated conductor passing down  the middle.
A moving arrrl makes contact with each circular assembly.
The arms are rotated to  prodilce a cotitiriuous arid utiiforni variation of phase across the elements of the array.
Wlien  the phase at one end of tlie concentric line is increasing, the phase at the other end is  decreasing.
Hence one line car1 supply the necessary phase variation to two elements, one on  either side of array center.
A total of N/2 concentric rings are required for a linear array of  N i- I elements.
 There are several methods for generating phase shift that utilize the properties of circular  polarization.
One of the first devices to employ circularly polarized waves propagating in  round waveguide was tlie Fox pliase sl~ifter.'~ This rotary-waveguide phase shifter was applied  in World War I1 by the Bell Telephone Laboratories in the FH MUSA, or Mk 8, scanning  TilEFI.ECTRONICAI.lY STEERED PHASED ARRAY ANTENNA INRADAR297 canprovide afast.electronically conlrolled phaseshiftbyvariation ofthehelixvollage.5oThe phaseshiftislargeenoughtoallowseveraltapsonasingletubetocontrolthephaseofseveral <lnlenna clements simultancously.
51Gaseous discharge.
orplasma.
phaseshiftersarebasedon thevariation ofthedielcctric constant ofthegaseous medium asafunction ofthenumberof freeelectrons, whichdepends onthecurrent through thedevice.5l53Although theycan handleaboutI kWofpowerandcanbeadapted toawiderangeoffrequcncies.
itisdifficultto obtainstableoperating characteristics withlonglifeinsealed-off tubes.Theswitching proper­ tiesofaferritecirculator canalsobeusedforconstructing adigitally switched, nonreciprocal phaseshifter.
54Itisnotoftenused,however, because ofitshigherloss,lowerpeakpower,and highercostascompared withdigitally switched diodephaseshifters.
Ferroelectric phase shifters.
inwhichthedielectric ofaferroelectric material isafunction oftheapplied electric field.arealsopossihle.49TheyseembettersuitedforVHFandUHFthanforhigherfrequencies.
Electromechanical phase-shifting delices.
Inaddition toelectronic phaseshifters, electrome­ chanical devicesforchanging phasehavebeenusedinphased-array radars,especially inthc earlymodels.
Although electromechanical shiftersarenotnowwidelyused,theyaredescribed heretoillustrate thevarietyofdevicesthatmightbeemployed inarrayantennas.
Oncoftheearliestandsimplest formsofelectromechanical phaseshifters isatransmis­ sionlinewhoselengthisvariedmechanically, aswithatelescopic section.Thisiscalledaline stretcher.
Thetelescoping sectionmightbeintheformofa"U",andthelengthoftheline changed inamanner similartothatofaslidetrombone.
Thelinestretcher isoftenimple­ mcnted incoaxial line.Amcchanical linestretcher thatgivesmorephaseshiftforagiven amount ofmotion thanaconventional linestretcher isthehelical-line phaseshifterdueto Stark.SU5Thephasevelocity onthehelicaltransmission lineisconsiderably lessthanthe velocity oflight.Forthisreasonagivenmechanical motionproduces morephasechangethan wouldalinestretcher inconventional transmission line.Thusashorterphaseshiftercanbe had.whichisespecially advantageous atVHForUHFfrequencies.
Thereduction inlengthis essentially equaltothewind-up factorofthehelix,whichistheratioofthecircumference to thepitch.Wind-up factorsmayrangefrom10to20inpractical designs.
Boththecoaxandthehelicalline-stretchers arenotwellsuitedforthehighermicrowave frequencies.
Awaveguide device,suitable forthehigherfrequencies, thatisanalogous tothe linestretcher isthehybridjunction suchasthemagicT,short-slot hybridcoupler (sometimes caliedtheshort-slot trombone phaseshifter),ortheequivalent instripline.51Achangeinline length,withacorresponding changeinphase,isobtained inthemagicTwithadjustable short circuits inthe'collinear arms.S6Theuseofadjustable shortcircuitsintheshort~lot hybridis somewhat moreconvenient toconfigure mechanically.
Another electromechanical phaseshifterwhichhasbeenusedinarrayradaristhe rotating-arm mechanical phaseshifter.
I1.57.58Itconsists ofanumber ofconcentric transmis­ sionlines.Eachlineisathree-sided squaretroughwithaninsulated conductor passingdown themiddle.Amovingarmmakescontactwitheachcircular assembly.
Thearmsarerotatedto produce acontinuous anduniform variation ofphaseacrosstheelements ofthearray.When thephaseatoneendoftheconcentric lineisincreasing, thephaseattheotherendis decreasing.
Henceonelinecansupplythenecessary phasevariation totwoelements, oneon eithersideofarraycenter.AtotalofNI2concentric ringsarerequired foralineararrayof N+1elements.
Thereareseveralmethods forgenerating phaseshiftthatutilizetheproperties ofcircular polarization.
Oneorthefirstdevices toemploy circularly polarized wavespropagating in roundwaveguide wastheFoxphaseshifter.39Thisrotary-waveguide phaseshifterwasapplied inWorldWarIIbytheBellTelephone Laboratories intheFHMUSA,orMk8,scanning radar.4.59 This was the first US radar to use a phased-array antenna with phase shifters to steer  the beam.
The 42-element S-band array scanned a + 9 degree sector at a rate of 10 per second.
 Related devices that obtain phase change by relative rotation of crossed dipoles in a circular  guide or cavity are described by Kummer.''  A different form of mechanical beam steering is used in an array with spiral antenna   element^.^^.^' The linearly polarized beam radiated by a flat, two-dimensional array of spirals  may be scanned by rotating the individual spiral antenna elements.
One degree of mechanical  rotation corresponds to a phase change of one electrical degree.
No additional phase-shifting  devices are required.
An array of spiral elements makes a simple scanning antenna.
It is  primarily useful in those applications where a broadband element is required and the power is  not too high.
The entire assembly, including the spiral radiators and feed networks, but  possibly excluding the rotary joint, can be manufactured with printed circuit techniques.
 Helical radiating elements have also been used in arrays to obtain phase shift$ by rotat ion of  the elements.62  A change in phase in the waveguide transmission may be obtained by mechanically  changing the dimensions of the g~ide.~'.~~ One such device that has been applied to practical  radars is the Eagle scanner, or delta-a scanner.
The latter term is descriptive of the fact that the  velocity of propagation, and therefore the phase, of a signal propagated through a waveguide  depends on the width of the guide, or its "a" dimension.
This phase shifting technique has  been used for GCA (ground control approach) radars to mechanically scan fan beams in  azimuth and elevation.
 Mechanically actuated phase shifters are, of course, not capable of being actuated as  rapidly as electronic devices, nor are they as flexible in being able to select any random value of  phase.
It is possible, however, with several electromechanical devices to scan a beam over its  coverage at rates as fast as 10 times per second (0.1 s switching time), which is sufficiently rapid  for many applications.
 A change in frequency of an electromagnetic signal propagating along a transmission line  produces a change in phase, as was indicated by Eq.
(8.15).
This provides a relatively simple  means for obtaining electronic phase shift.
Although parallel feeding of a frequency-scan array  is possible, it is usually simpler to employ series feeding, as in Fig.
8.14.
Since the attenuation  in the transmission line connecting adjacent elements is small compared with that of conven-  tional phase shifters, the series-fed arrangement can be used in frequency-scan arrays without  excessive loss.
 Direction of h/mQin  Radiating elements  Input  Terminot ion  Figure 8 14 Series-fed, frequency-scan linear array.
 298INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS radar.4.59ThiswasthefirstUSradartouseaphased-array antenna withphaseshifterstosteer thebeam.The42-element S-bandarrayscanned a±9degreesectoratarateof10persecond.
Relateddevicesthatobtainphasechangebyrelativerotation ofcrosseddipolesinacircular guideorcavityaredescribed byKummer.
51 Adifferent formofmechanical beamsteering isusedinanarraywithspiralantenna elements.60.61Thelinearlypolarized beamradiated byaflat,two-dimensional arrayofspirals maybescanned byrotating theindividual spiralantenna elements.
Onedegreeofmechanical rotation corresponds toaphasechangeofoneelectrical degree.Noadditional phase-shifting devicesarerequired.
Anarrayofspiralelements makesasimplescanning antenna.Itis primarily wiefulinthoseapplications whereabroadband element isrequired andthepoweris nottoohigh.Theentireassembly, including thespiralradiators andfeednetworks, but possibly excluding therotaryjoint,canbemanufactured withprintedcircuittechniques.
Helicalradiating elements havealsobeenusedinarraystoobtainphase shift~byrotation of theelements.62 Achangeinphaseinthewaveguide transmission maybeobtained bymechanically changing thedimensions oftheguide.2o,59Onesuchdevicethathasbeenappliedtopractical radarsistheEaglescanner, ordelta-ascanner.
Thelattertermisdescriptive ofthefactthatthe velocityofpropagation, andtherefore thephase,ofasignalpropagated through awaveguide depends onthewidthoftheguide,orits"a"dimension.
Thisphaseshiftingtechnique has beenusedforGCA(ground controlapproach) radarstomechanically scanfanbeamsin azimuth andelevation.
Mechanically actuated phaseshiftersare,ofcourse,notcapable ofbeingactuated as rapidlyaselectronic devices,noraretheyasflexibleinbeingabletoselectanyrandom valueof phase.Itispossible, however, withseveralelectromechanical devicestoscanabeamoverits coverage atratesasfastas10timespersecond(0.1sswitching time),whichissufficiently rapid formanyapplications.
\,,~~FREQUENCY-SCAN ARRAYS63-65 Achangeinfrequency ofanelectromagnetic signalpropagating alongatransmission line produces achangeinphase,aswasindicated byEq.(8.15).Thisprovides arelatively simple meansforobtaining electronic phaseshift.Although parallelfeedingofafrequency-scan array ispossible, itisusuallysimplertoemployseriesfeeding,asinFig.8.14.Sincetheattenuation inthetransmission lineconnecting adjacent elements issmallcompared withthatofconven­ tionalphaseshifters,theseries-fed arrangement canbeusedinfrequency-scan arrayswithout excessive loss.
Input Snokefeed/elements Figure8.14Series-fed, frequency-scan lineararray. The phase difference between two adjacent elements in the series fed arra) of Fig.
8.14 is  where f = frequency of the electromagnetic signal  1 = length of line connecting adjacent elements (generally greater than the distance  between elenients)  1% - vclocity of propng;~tioti it1 the transnlissiot~ line  R = wavelengtli  For coriveriience of analysis, the velocity of propagation is taken to be equal to c, the velocity  of light.
Ttiis is applicable to coaxial lines or similar structures which propagate the TEM mode.
 If [tie bean1 is to point in a direction 00, the phase difference between elements should be  2n(tl/A) sin OO.
in a frequency-scan array it is usually necessary to add an integral numbe~of-  277 radians of relative phase difference.
This permits a given scan angle to be obtained with a  smaller frequency change.
Denote by the integer rrt the nugber of 21c radians added.
By equating  this ptiase difference to the phase shift obtained from a line of length I, as given by Eq.
(8.16),  we have  277(1l/A) sin U0 + 2nrr1 = 21cl/A (8.17~)  When the beam points broadside, (00 = 0), Eq.
(8.176) yields m = [/Ao, where A, is defined as  the wavelength corresponding to the beam position at broadside.
The corresponding  frequency is denoted fo, and the direction of beam pointing becomes  If the beam is steered over the limits + 0, the wavelength excursion AA is given by  1 AA sin 8, = 2d A.
 Thus there is a tradeoff between the wavelength excursion and the length of line connecting the  elements.
Figure 8.15 is a plot of the beam direction as a function of the frequency for various  values of thef'wrap-up fador Ud, as given by Eq.
(8.18).
Note that the beam position is not  symnletrical with frequency.
To scan the beam +45" about broadside requires a bandwidth of  almost 30 percent with a wrap-up factor of 5, and 7 percent for a wrap-up factor of 20.
 (Percentage bandwidth = 100 Afg0 .)  A frequency-scan radar requires a considerable portion of the available band of a radarJo \ -  be devoted to beam steering.
Although this is a simple method of electronic steering, it does  not usually allow the frequency band to be used for other purposes, such as for high range-  resolution or for frequency agility.
\ \  If too short a pulse (too wide a signal bandwidth) is used in the frequency-scan array, the  pattern will be distorted.
There are two equivalent methods for viewing this limitation.
From  the frequency domain point of view, each spectral component of frequency corresponds to a  different pointing direction.
If the signal contains widely spaced frequency components the  beam will be spread over a considerable angular region rather than confined to a beamwidth  as determined from diffraction theory.
Alternatively, from the time delay point of view, a  narrow pulse impressed at the input of the series-fed array of Fig.
8.14, requires a finite time to  THEELECTRONICALLY STEERED PHASED ARRAY ANTENNA INRADAR299 Thephasedifference between twoadjacent elements intheseriesfedarra)ofFig.8.14is cjJ=2rcfl/u=2rcl/A (8.16) wheref=frequency oftheelectromagnetic signal i=lengthoflineconnecting adjacent elements (generally greaterthanthedistance between elements) f'=-::velocity ofpropagation inthetransmission line ).=wavelength Forconvenience ofanalysis, thevelocity ofpropagation istakentobeequaltoc,thevelocity oflight.Thisisapplicable tocoaxiallinesorsimilarstructures whichpropagate theTEMmode.
Ifthebeamistopointinadirection 00,thephasedifference between elements shouldbe 2rc(d/A)sin00,Inafrequency-scan arrayitisusuallynecessary toaddanintegr1!ln!Hl1.9.~,!:-~ 2rcradiansofrelativephasedifference.
Thispermitsagivenscanangletobeobtained witha smallerfrequency change.Denotebytheinteger 111thenl!!Jlberof2nradiansadded.Byequating thisphasedifference tothephaseshiftobtained fromalineoflengthi,asgivenbyEq.(8.16), wehave ' or2rc{d/A)sin00+2rcm=2nl/A.
.
inA.I sm00= ---;r+d(8.17a) (8.17b) Whenthebeampointsbroadside, (Oo=0),Eq.(8.17b)yieldsm=I/Ao,whereA.oisdefinedas thewavelength corresponding tothebeamposition atbroadside.
Thecorresponding frequency isdenotedfo,andthedirection ofbeampointing becomes sin00=~(1-t)=~(1 -;) Ifthebeamissteeredoverthelimits±0\thewavelength excursion ~A.isgivenby(8.18) (8.19) Thusthereisatradeoff between thewavelength excursion andthelengthoflineconnecting the elements.
Figure8.I5isaplotofthebeamdirection asafunction ofthefrequency forvarious valuesofthe~'wrap-up fqcto,'l/d, asgivenbyEq.(8.18).Notethatthebeamposition isnot symmetrical withfrequency.
Toscanthebeam±45°aboutbroadside requires abandwidth of almost30percent withawrap-up factorof5,and7percent forawrap-up factorof20.
(Percentage bandwidth =100~f/fo.) Afrequency-scan radarrequires aconsiderable portionoftheavailable bandofaradart,o~"""'~ bedevoted tobeamsteering.
Although thisisasimplemethod ofelectronic steenng, itdoes notusuallyallowthefrequency bandtobeusedforotherpurposes, suchasforhighrange­ resolution orforfrequencyagility.\· IftooshortapulseQoowideasignalbandwidth)·is usedinthefrequency-scan array,the patternwillbedistorted.
Therearetwoequivalent methods forviewing thislimitation.
From thefrequency domain pointofview,eachspectral component offrequency corresponds toa different pointing direction.
Ifthesignalcontains widelyspacedfrequency components the beamwillbespreadoveraconsiderable angular regionratherthanconfined toabeamwidth asdetermined fromdiffraction theory.Alternatively, fromthetimedelaypointofview,a narrowpulseimpressed attheinputoftheseries-fed arrayofFig.8.14,requires afinitetimeto Figure 8.15 Scan angle 0, versus frequency.
.fo corresponds to 0, = 0.
Dashed curve gives onsct of grating  lobe for tl = 0.5A0; dot-dash curve for d = 0.6A0.
 travel down the transmission line.
The finite time implies a finite bandwidth.
The greater the  wrap-up factor, the less the frequency band required to steer the beam over a given angle;  however, the longer it will take to fill the array and the less will be the bandwidth that the array  can support.
For example, if the array antenna had an - aperture of 5 m and if the wrap-up -  factor were 15, it would take 0.25 ~ts to fill the array.
The pulse width should be long compared  to this time if distortion is not to result.
 A frequency-scan radar can radiate undesirable grating lobes, .just as citn any other array,  if rhc: electrical spacing between elements is too large.
From Eq.
(8.10h), the relationship  between the angle 0, at which the first grating lobe appears, and the angle O,, to which th: main  beam is steered, is given by  Isin 0, - sin 0,) = Alri (8.20)  If we assume that the grating lobe can be tolerated if it is located at 90°, then  I 1 + sin Ool I A/d (8.2 1 )  The limiting scan angle for the appearance of grating lobes is shown by the dashed curves in  Fig.
8.15 for the two cases d = 0.5A0 and 0.61,.
The onset of the grating lobe can set a limit to  the maximum angle of scan.
The appearance of grating lobes is not symmetrical about 0, = 0.
 If, for example, the element spacing were 0.5A0 and l/d = 15, the beam can be scanned from  0, = 0 to 6, = 62".
(This assumes the lowest frequency is determined by the condition that the  element spacing be not less than one-half wavelength.) With d = 0.6A0, the beam can be  scanned from - 48" to + 36" without the appearance of grating lobes, for l/d = 15.
 300INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS Lid= 1 110 105 -20° - -80°70° 60°- -'!! 0" --- C 0 C 0 U (J)30°_.
20° Limilfor-50°6 d=0,6A t~ --60°o95 ----------------- .._----------------.--.-,-,-,---..---,--,.--,--,---,----y-,- Figure8.15Scanangle00versusfrequency ..focorresponds to00=0_Dashedcurvegivesonsetofgrating lobeford=0.5Ao;dot-dash curveford=0.6Ao.
traveldownthetransmission line.Thefinitetimeimpliesafinitebandwidth.
Thegreaterthe wrap-up factor,thelessthefrequency bandrequired tosteerthebeamoveragivenangle; however, thelongeritwilltaketofillthearrayandthelesswillbethebandwidth thatthearray cansupport.
Forexample, ifthearrayantenna hadanaperture of5 mandifthewrap-up- factorwere15,itwouldtake0.25liStofillthearray.Thepulsewidthshouldbelongcompared tothistimeifdistortion isnottoresult.
Afrequency-scan radarcanradiateundesirahle gratinglobes,justascananyotherarray.
iftheelectrical spacing between elements istoolarge.FromEq.(8.10h), therelationship between theangleOgatwhichthefirstgratingloheappears, andtheangleOntowhich th~main beamissteered, isgivenby IsinOg-sin00I=Aid Ifweassumethatthegratinglobecanbetolerated ifitislocatedat±90°,then 11+sin00I:s:;Aid(8.20) (8.21) Thelimiting scananglefortheappearance ofgratinglobesisshownbythedashedcurvesin Fig.8.15forthetwocasesd=0.5Aoand0.6Ao.Theonsetofthegratinglobecanselalimitto themaximum angleofscan.Theappearance ofgratinglobesisnotsymmetrical about00=O.
If,forexample, theelement spacing were0.5Aoandlid=15,thebeamcanbescanned from 00=0to00=62°.(Thisassumes thelowestfrequency isdetermined bythecondition thatthe element spacing benotlessthanone-half wavelength.) Withd=0.6Ao,thebeamcanbe scanned from-48°to+36°without theappearance ofgratinglobes,forlid=15. 1111: I:I 1:C.I RONIC'AI I Y SIEEREI) PtIASED ARRAY ANTENNA IN RADAR 301  It is possible for a frequericy-sca11 array to etnploy different frequericies to radiate over the  qarne angular region, assunling that the antenna feed and elements are sufficiently  broadband.64 This can be seen from an examination of Eq.
(8.176).
The factor rir in this  equation can take on any integer value.
As the frequency is changed, one beam after another  it ill appear and disappear, each beam corresponding to a different value of 111.
Only one beam  :it a time will be radiated if the grating lobe relation of Eq.
(8.2 1) is satisfied; else multiple  beams, or grating lobes, will appear.
It can be shown that if an array radiates at a particular  angle corresponding to a value m in Eq.
(8.17b) when the frequency isf, then for some other  \alile itr, a beam will be radiated at the same angle when the frequency is f, = (t~, /rrr)f.
 ('orlsider, for example an array with spacing d = 0.6Ro and l/d = 15.
This corresponds to  IU = Illo = 9.
From Fig.
8.15 it can be seen that the array will scan over the region + 30" as the  frequency is varied from 0.968Jo to 1.035f0, wherefo is the frequency corresponding to the  broadside position of the beam.
As the frequency is increased, the factor n1 = 10 applies and  the same arigular region is scanned as the frequency varies from 1.075f0 to 1.
149fo.
For m = 1 1,  e correspotlding frequency range is from i.l83/b to 1.264f0.
The ability to radiate frorn tfie  nie array over more than one frequency region is of advantage when mutual interference  I~etweeti radars is of concern.
It can also be of ilrlportance for niilitary applications in wliicli  frequency diversity is desired.
 Eqiiatioti (8.18) assumed a transtnission line whose velocity of propagation was that of  the velocity of light.
It is more usual, however, for transmission lines in a frequency-scan array  to have a velocity of propagation which varies with frequency; i.e., they are dispersive.
A  waveguide is an example of a dispersive line.
The velocity vs.
frequency characteristic of such  transnlission lines can be used to advantage to provide' more frequency sensitivity; that is, a  snialler wrap-up factor can be obtained for a given scan angle and frequency excursion.
 A sketch of a folded waveguide for exciting an array of slotted waveguides is shown in  Fig.
8.16.
This type of feed is known as a snake feed, serpentine, or sinuous feed.
Other  slow-wave transmission lines can be used for the feed, including helical wa~eguide~~.'~ and  corrugated waveguide." The configuration of Fig.
8.16 can be used to scan a pencil beam in  elevation, with mechanical rotation providing the azimuth scan.
The AN/SPS-48, Fig.
8.17, is  such an example.
It is a frequency-scan radar used on many U.S.
Navy ships for the  measurement of the elevation and azimuth of aircraft targets.
It is sometimes called a 30 radar,  *ith range being the third coordinate, in addition to the two angles.
The AN/SPS-48 radiates  multiple freqiiericies so as to generate simultaneous multiple beams to permit a higher scan  rate than would be possible with a single bearn.
Since the range to the target is less as the  6,  Snake  feed  I - C  Figure 8.16 Planar-array frequency scan antenna  consisting of a folded-wavelength delay-line feeding  a set of linear waveguides that are so oriented  that radiating slots in the narrow wall of the guide  lie in the plane of the antenna.63  IIII'FLITTRONICAI.I.Y STEERED PHASED ARRAY ANTENNA INRADAR301 IIispossiblc forafrcqucncy-scan array10cmploydifferent frequencies toradiateoverthe sameangular region.
assuming thattheantenna·feedand elements aresufficiently broadband.64Thiscanbeseenfromanexamination ofEq.(8.17b).
Thefactor 111inthis equation cantakeonanyintegervalue.Asthefrequency ischanged.
onebeamafteranother willappearanddisappear.
eachbeamcorresponding toadifferent valueofm.Onlyonebeam atatimewillberadiated ifthegratingloberelation ofEq.(8.21)issatisfied; else-multiple beams,orgratinglobes,willappear.Itcanbeshownthatifanarrayradiates ataparticular anglecorresponding toavalueminEq.(8.17b)whenthefrequency isf,thenforsomeother value 111(abeamwil.1beradiated atthesameanglewhenthefrequency isI!=(ml/m)! Consider.
forexample anarraywithspacingd=0.6A.oandlid=15.Thiscorresponds to m=IIAo=9.FromFig.8.15itcanbeseenthatthearraywillscanovertheregion±300asthe frequency isvariedfrom0.968/0to1.035/0.
where10isthefrequency corresponding tothe hroadside position ofthebeam.Asthefrequency isincreased, thefactor 111=10appliesand Ihesameangular regionisscanned asthefrequency variesfrom1.075/0to1.149/0'Form=II, \hecorresponding frequency rangeisfrom1.183/0to1.264/0'Theabilitytoradiatefromthe ';Hlllearrayovermorethanonefrequency regionisofadvantage whenmutualinterference bctwccnradarsisofconcern.Itcanalsobeofimportance formilitary applications inwhich frequency diversity isdesired.
Equation (8.18)assumed atransmission linewhosevelocity ofpropagation wasthatof thevelocity oflight.Itismoreusual.however, fortransmission linesinafrequency-scan array tohaveavelocity ofpropagation whichvarieswithfrequency; i.e.,theyaredispersive.
A waveguide isanexample ofadispersive line.Thevelocity vs.frequency characteristic ofsuch transmission linescanbeusedtoadvantage toprovide' morefrequency sensitivity; thatis,a smaller wrap-up factorcanbeobtained foragivenscanangleandfrequency excursion.
Asketchofafoldedwaveguide forexciting anarrayofslottedwaveguides isshownin rig.8.16.Thistypeoffeedisknownasasnakefeed,serpentine, orsinuous feed.Other slow-wave transmission linescanbeusedforthefeed,including helicalwaveguide69•70and corrugated waveguide.71Theconfiguration ofFig.8.16canbeusedtoscanapencilbeamin elevation, withmechanical rotation providing theazimuth scan.TheAN/SPS-48, Fig.8.17.is suchanexample.
Itisafrequency-scan radarusedonmanyU.S.Navyshipsforthe {lleaSUrement oftheelevation andazimuth ofaircrafttargets.Itissometimes calleda3Dradar.
withrangebeingthethirdcoordinate, inaddition tothetwoangles.TheAN/SPS-48 radiates multiple frequencies soastogenerate simultaneous multiple beamstopermitahigherscan ratethanwouldbepossible withasinglebeam.Sincetherangetothetargetislessasthe ~.
Snoke feed I Figure8.16Planar-array frequency scanantenna consisting ofafolded-wavelength delay-line feeding asetoflinearwaveguides thataresooriented thatradiating slotsinthenarrowwalloftheguide lieintheplaneoftheantenna.63 302 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  Figure 8.17 AN/SPS-48 frequency-scan radar antenna.
 elevation angle increases, the transmitted power is decreased as the elevation angle is in-  creased.
(This is sometimes called power progruu~r,~ing.) In a shipboard application, the eleva-  tion scanning control can be used to electronically stabilize the beam position to compensate  for ship's motion.
 In a normal frequency-scan radar, the beam dwells at each angular resolut~on cell (beam-  width) for one or more pulse repetition intervals.
Another method for utilizing the frequency  domain to scan an angular region is to radiate a single frequency-modulated pulse with a  modulation-band wide enough to scan the beam over the entire angular region.
Thus, over the  duration of a single pulse, the antenna beam scans all angles.
This is sometimes called ,ritl~irr-  pulse frequency ~cannin~.~~.'~~ (The term within-pulse scanning has been applied to other  methods of scanning, as described in Sec.
8.7.) The transmitted waveform is similar to the  frequency-modulated pulse compression waveform (chirp) discussed in Sec.
11.5.
The carrier  frequencies of any echo pulses returned to the radar will be determined by the elevation angle  of the targets.
The receiver employs a bank of filters, each tuned to a different carrier frequency  which in turn corresponds to a different angle.
This is analogous to the output of a beam-  fornling matrix, as in Sec.
8.7.
The number of filters depends on the antenna beamwidth and  302INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS Figure8.17AN/SPS-48 frequency-scan radarantenna.
elevation angleincreases, thetransmitted powerisdecreased astheelevation angleisin­ creased.
(Thisissometimes calledpowerprogramming.) Inashipboard application, theeleva­ tionscanning controlcanbe usedtoelectronically stabilize thebeamposition tocompensate forship'smotion.
Inanormalfrequency-scan radar,thebeamdwellsateachangular resolution cell(beam­ width)foroneormorepulserepetition intervals.
Another method forutilizing thefrequency domain toscananangular regionistoradiateasinglefrequency-modulated pulsewitha modulation-band wideenoughtoscanthebeamovertheentireangular region.Thus,overthe duration ofasinglepulse,theantenna beamscansallangles.Thisissometimes cal.ledwithin­ pulsefrequency scanning.
66.122(Thetermwithin-pulse scanning hasbeenapplied toother methods ofscanning, asdescribed inSec.8.7.)Thetransmitted waveform issimilartothe frequency-modulated pulsecompression waveform (chirp)discussed inSec.11.5.Thecarrier frequencies ofanyechopulsesreturned totheradarwillbedetermined bytheelevation angle ofthetargets.Thereceiver employs abankoffilters,eachtunedtoadifferent carrierfrequency whichinturncorresponds toadifferent angle.Thisisanalogous totheoutputofabeam­ forming matrix,asinSec.8.7.Thenumber offiltersdepends ontheantenna beamwidth and 1 IlF FI.1:C.I RONI(.AI.I.k' SI'I.ERE1) Pf IASED ARRAY ANTENNA IN RADAR 303  tlie tot;iI aripuliir covcr;tpc.
.l'lic haridwitltli A/;, of these filters is deterrninetl by the freqirency  c1i;irige tieeded to cciiri 111c aritcr~ria bciiril orle beariiwrdtli, tI1iit is  t~ticre 0, = hcar~iwiclt ti it rid 1) = ~ipertirrc cliriiension.
Substituting Eq.
(8.18) irito tlie itl~ove  gives  f cos 00  AffJ = ,,h (l/d)(b/; j  .Tlie tirne r,, for the signal to transit tlie snake feed from one end to the other is equal to  (lltl)(l)/c.).
'I'hus, in the vicinity of broadside (0, 2: O), the bandwidth available for pulse corn-  pression is AfR 1 Ilf,).
The frequency-modulated signal occupying a band equal to llr, can be  cor~iprecsetl in a pulse cornpression filter to produce a narrow pulse at the output of the filter.
 -1'tiis theti is one nietliod for combining frequency scan with pulse compression, where the  angular resolution depends on the antenna beamwidth and the range resolution depends on  the group time delay r,.
 Ttie frequency-scan technique is well suited to scanning a beam or a number of beams in a  single angle coordinate.
It is possible to use the frequency domain to produce a TV (raster)  type of scan in two orthogonal atigular coordinates by employing an array of slightly disper-  sive arrays fed frorn a single highly dispersive array.
(The single snake line in this case is rrluch  loriger electrically than the snake lines feeding a linear array.) The single snake line passes  through several modes in traversing the frequency band.
It has been said that a 90 by 20"  sector [night be possible using a 30 percent frequency band.67 One of the disadvantages of this  form of two-dimensional frequency-scan array is that it requires a wide band and is very  limited in signal bandwidth, triuch more so than the array which steers in one dimension only.
 Another method for eniploying frequency scan in a planar array is to use the frequency  change to steer in one coordinate and phase shifters to steer in the other.68 This is sometimes  called a phnse-/reqrte~tc.\.
clrra\, (Fig.
8.18) in contrast to a phase-pltase array which uses phase  stlifters to steer in both angular coordinates.
The antenna may be considered as a number of  frequency-scan arrays placed side by side.
In an N by M element planar array there might be a  separate snake feed for each of the N rows to obtain frequency steering in one coordinate, and  one phase shher for each of the M columns to achieve steering in the orthogonal plane.
 Changing the frequency of a signal propagating through a length of transmission line is  a convenient method for obtaining a phase shift, but it is not always desirable to operate a  radar with a changing frequency.
A phase shifting technique that uses a frequency change, but  which then converts back to a constant frequency, is the Huggins phase shifter shown in  Fig.
8.19.
A signal of frequency f,, whose phase is to be shifted an amount 4, is mixed with a  sigrial from a variable frequency oscillator fc in the first mixer.
The output of the variable-  freqirency oscillator /, is also passed through a delay line with a time delay r.
The output of the  delay line is a signal of freque11cy.f~ with a phase shift 4 = 2nfc r.
This phase-shifted signal and  the output of the first ri~ixer are then heterodyned in the second mixer.
If the sum frequency is  selected froin the first tiiixer, the difference frequency is selected from the second mixer.
The  result is a signal with the same frequency as the input f,, but with the phase shift 4.
Because  mixers are employed, this type of' phase shifter operates at low power.
It is convenient to  implement at IF, although it is also possible to employ the principle at RF.
A tapped delay  Tllf.rUTTRONICAl.l.Y STEERED PHASED ARRAYANTENNA INRADARJOJ thetotalangular coverage.
Thehandwidth t\f~,ofthesefiltersisdetermined bythefrequency changeneededtoscantheantcnna bcamonebealllwidth, thatis .til" elfA Nil=dOoOR=dOoD(X.22) \\herc (//1=heamwidth and/)=aperture dimension.
Substituting Eq.(X.18)intotheabove gIves fcos00 t1fn=.f~(tjd)(Djc)(8.13) ThetimeIIIforthesignaltotransitthesnakefeedfromoneendtotheotherisequalto (l/d)(D/c).
Thus,inthevicinityofbroadside (00~0),thebandwidth available forpulsecom­ pression isDIn~\/1[).Thefrequency-modulated signaloccupying abandequaltoIIIDcanbe compressed inapulsecompression filtertoproduce anarrowpulseattheoutputofthefilter.
Thisthenisonemethod forcombining frequency scanwithpulsecompression, wherethe angularresolution depends ontheantenna beamwidth andtherangeresolution depends on thegrouptimedelayID' Thefrequency-scan technique iswellsuitedtoscanning abeamoranumberofbeamsina singleanglecoordinate.
Itispossible tousethefrequency domain toproduce aTV(raster) typeofscanintwoorthogonal angularcoordinates byemploying anarrayofslightlydisper­ sivearraysfedfromasinglehighlydispersive array.(Thesinglesnakelineinthiscaseismuch longerelectrically thanthesnakelinesfeedingalineararray.)Thesinglesnakelinepasses through severalmodesintraversing thefrequency band.Ithasbeensaidthata90by20° sectormightbepossible usinga30percentfrequency band.67Oneofthedisadvantages ofthis formoftwo-dimensional frequency-scan arrayisthatitrequire~ awidebandandisvery limitedinsignalbandwidth, muchmoresothanthearraywhichsteersinonedimension only.
Another method foremploying frequency scaninaplanararrayistousethefrequency changetosteerinonecoordinate andphaseshifterstosteerintheother.68Thisissometimes calledarhase-freqrtellcr array(Fig.8.18)incontrast toaphase-phase arraywhichusesphase shifterstosteerinbothangular coordinates.
Theantenna maybeconsidered asanumber of frequency-scan arraysplacedsidebyside.InanNbyMelement planararraytheremightbea separate snakefeedforeachoftheNrowstoobtainfrequency steering inonecoordinate, andi'onephaseshifterforeachoftheMcolumns toachievesteering intheorthogonal plane.
Changing thefrequency ofasignalpropagating through alengthoftransmission lineis aconvenient method forobtaining aphaseshirt,butitisnotalwaysdesirable tooperate a radarwithachanging frequency.
Aphaseshifting technique thatusesafrequency change, but whichthenconverts backtoaconstant frequency, istheHuggins phaseshiftershownin Fig.8.19.Asignaloffrequency fa,whosephaseistobeshiftedanamount¢'ismixedwitha signalfromavariable frequency oscillator feinthefirstmixer.Theoutputofthevariable­ frequency oscillatorfc isalsopassedthrough adelaylinewithatimedelayr.Theoutputofthe delaylineisasignaloffrequency Iewithaphaseshift¢=2nfer.Thisphase-shifted signaland theoutputofthefirstmixerarethenheterodyned inthesecondmixer.Ifthesumfrequency is selected fromthefirstmixer,thedifference frequency isselected fromthesecondmixer.The resultisasignalwiththesamefrequency astheinputfo, butwiththephaseshift¢.Because mixersareemployed, thistypeofphaseshifteroperates atlowpower.Itisconvenient to implement atIF,although itisalsopossible toemploy theprinciple atRF.Atappeddelay 304 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  Vorioble i  Figure 8.18 Volumetric scanning of a planar array using frequency scan in one coordinate and phase-shift  scan in the other.
frequency -1  signol 7.7  -  Figure 8.19 Schematic representation of the t-luggins '/  phase shifter.
n  f~ _  Figure 8.20 Huggins phase shift-  o 6 o ing applied to a linear array feed.
I I 2d  mixer  Fixed  frequency fQ Mixer Delay line j \7  f0L++ 1st  mixer v7  fotfc _  I oscillator  fc  1  Variable f, frequency  oscillator  Mixer Mixer Mixer  1 1 .
rf \ f\ f\  304INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS -IDelo,Ii"II1 IJ Variable frequency signal Figure8.18Volumetric scanning ofaplanararrayusingfrequency scaninonecoordinate andphase-shift scanintheother.
fa 1slfa+fc2d(aL¢ mixer mixer Delay TfcL¢ fcFigure8.19Schematic representation oftheHuggins phaseshifter.
Fixed fo fo+fefrequency Mixer Delayline oscillator fe Variable fefrequency oscillator Figure8.20Huggins phaseshift­ ingappliedtoalineararrayfeed. I 11E lil.FC1 RONI('AI.1.Y SFFERED t'llASED ARRAY ANTENNA IN RADAR 305  line, as illustrated in Fig.
8.20, can be utilized to obtain a series fed array.
Two of these in a  rnixer-matrix array can provide steering in two angular coordinates.
One delay line at  frequency f, might be used to obtain ttie elevation steering and a second line at frequency,f2  might obtain the azimuth steering.
The output ofthe mixer at each element is taken at the sun1  frequency.
J', +f2, to give the required phase shifts for two-dimensional beam steering.
 8.5 A HRAY ELE:ILIEN'I'S~~.~"  Airnost ally type of r;idiatirig a~iterinn elenierit can be considered for use in an array antenna.
 !jetailed descriptions of the various radiators used for arrays may be found in the standard  texts on antennas and will riot be discussed here.
It should be cautioned, however, that the  properties of a radiating element in an array can differ significantly from its properties wt~en in  free space.
For example, the radiation resistance of an infinitely thin, half-wave dipole in free  space is 73 ohms, but in an infinite array with lialf-wavelength element spacing and a back screen  ofquarter-wave separation it is 153 ohms when the beam is broadside.
The impedance will also  vary with scan angle.
For a finite array the properties vary with location of the element within  the array.
In some arrays, dummy elements are placed on the periphery so as to provide tlie  eleriients near the edge with an environment more like those located in the interior.
 Although there have been many different kinds of radiators used in phased arrays, the  dipole, the open-ended waveguide, and the slotted waveguide probably have been employed  rnore than others.
In addition to the conventional dipole, the dipole with its arms bent back  (like an arrowhead) has been used for wide-angle coverage, the thick dipole has been used for  reducing mutual coupling arid for broad bandwidth (a dipole with a director rod also reduces  rnutual coupling), crossed dipoles are employed for operation with dual orthogonal polariza-  tion.
arid printed-circuit dipoles for simplification of fabrication.
The dipole is always used  over a reflectirig ground plane, or its equivalent, in order to confine the main beatn'radiation to  the forward direction.
 Slots cut into the walls of a waveguide are similar in many respects to the dipole since the  lot is the Babinet equivalent of the dipole.
A slot array is generally easier to construct at the  tiiglier microwave frequencies than an array of dipoles.
Although the slots may be in either  the broad or the narrow wall of the waveguide, the narrow wall is generally preferred (edge  slots) so that,ttie waveguides may be stacked sufficiently close to obtain wide-angle scan  without grating lobes.
The waveguide slot array antenna is more suited for one-dimensiorial  scanning than scanning in two coordinates.
This type of construction is also suitable for  r~iectiariically rotating antennas.
Figure 8.17 (AN/SPS-48) shows a stack of slotted waveguides  for forming a bearn that is frequency-scanned in elevation.
The slotted guides forming the rows  of the antenna are so~netimes called sticks.
The power coupled out of the guide by the slot is a  function of the angle at which the slot is cut.
When half-wavelength-spaced slots are fed in a  series fashion, the field inside the guide changes phase by 180" between elements.
The phases of  every other slot therefore must be reversed to cause the radiated energy to be in phase.
This is  accomplished in a slotted waveguide by altering the direction of tilts of adjacent elements.
In a  dipole array, the phase is reversed by reversing every other dipole.
 Open-ended waveguides are another popular form of array radiator.
They are a natural  cxtetision of the waveguide sections in which the phase shifters are placed.
Their performance  can be calculated or measured in a simple phased-array ~imulator,'~.'~ and good perforn~ance  can be obtained with a well-designed radiator.
The waveguide might be loaded with dielectric  to reduce its physical size in order to fit the element within the required space.
Ridge-loaded  TilEELECTRONICALLY STEERED PHASED ARRAY ANTENNA INRADAR305 line,asillustrated inFig.8.20,canbeutilizedtoobtainaseriesfedarray.Twooftheseina mixer-matrix arraycanprovide steering intwoangular coordinates.
Onedelaylineat frequencyIImightbeusedtoobtaintheelevation steering andasecondlineatfrequencY/2 mightobtaintheazimuth steering.
Theoutputofthemixerateachelement istakenatthesum frequency.II+12,togivetherequired phaseshiftsfortwo-dimensional beamsteering.
R.5ARRAY ELEl\lENTS7R.7'l Almostanytypeofradiating antenna element canbeconsidered foruseinanarrayantenna.
Detailed descriptions ofthevarious radiators usedforarraysmaybefoundinthestandard textsonantennas andwillnotbediscussed here.Itshouldbecautioned, however, thatthe properties ofaradiating element inanarraycandiffersignificantly fromitsproperties whenin freespace.Forexample, theradiation resistance ofaninfinitely thin,half-wave dipoleinfree spaceis73ohms,butinaninfinitearraywithhalf-wavelength elementspacingandabackscreen ofquarter-wave separation itis153ohmswhenthebeamisbroadside.
Theimpedance willalso varywithscanangle.Forafinitearraytheproperties varywithlocation oftheelement within thearray.Insomearrays,dummy elements areplacedontheperiphery soastoprovide the elements neartheedgewithanenvironment morelikethoselocatedintheinterior.
Although therehavebeenmanydifferent kindsofradiators usedinphasedarrays,the dipole,theopen-ended waveguide, andtheslottedwaveguide probably havebeenemployed morethanothers.Inaddition totheconventional dipole,thedipolewithitsarmsbentback (likeanarrowhead) hasbeenusedforwide-angle coverage, thethickdipolehasbeenusedfor reducing mutualcoupling andforbroadbandwidth (adipolewithadirector rodalsoreduces mutualcoupling), crosseddipolesareemployed foroperation withdualorthogonal polariza­ tion.andprinted-circuit dipoles forsimplification offabrication.
Thedipoleisalwaysused overarenecting groundplane,oritsequivalent, inordertoconfinethemainbeam'radiation to theforward direction.
Slotscutintothewallsofawaveguide aresimilarinmanyrespectstothedipolesincethe slotistheBabinet equivalent ofthedipole.Aslotarrayisgenerally easiertoconstruct atthe highermicrowave frequencies thananarrayofdipoles.
Although theslotsmaybeineither thebroadorthenarrowwallofthewavegu'ide, thenarrowwallisgenerally preferred (edge slots)sothat~.thewaveguides maybestacked sufficiently closetoobtainwide-angle scan without gratinglobes.Thewaveguide slotarrayantenna ismoresuitedforone-dimensional scanning thanscanning intwocoordinates.
Thistypeofconstruction isalsosuitable for mechanically rotating antennas.
Figure8.17(ANjSPS-48) showsastackofslottedwaveguides forforming abeamthatisfrequency-scanned inelevation.
Theslottedguidesforming therows oftheantenna aresometimes calledsticks.Thepowercoupled outoftheguidebytheslotisa function oftheangleatwhichtheslotiscut.Whenhalf-wavelength-spaced slotsarefedina seriesfashion, thefieldinsidetheguidechanges phaseby1800between elements.
Thephasesof everyotherslottherefore mustbereversed tocausetheradiated energytobeinphase.Thisis accomplished inaslottedwaveguide byaltering thedirection oftiltsofadjacent elements.
Ina dipolearray,thephaseisreversed byreversing everyotherdipole.
Open-ended waveguides areanother popular formofarrayradiator.
Theyareanatural extension ofthewaveguide sections inwhichthephaseshiftersareplaced.Theirperformance canbecalculated ormeasured inasimplephased-array simulator, 72.73andgoodperformance canbeobtained withawell-designed radiator.
Thewaveguide mightbeloadedwithdielectric toreduceitsphysical sizeinordertofittheelement withintherequired space.Ridge-loaded waveguide may be used for the same purpose.
If wide-angle scan is not required, the open-  ended waveguides may be flared to form a horn with greater directivity.
An array of open-  ended waveguides quite often will be covered with a thin, flat sheet of dielectric to serve as a  means for better matching the array to free space, as well as to act as a radome to protect the  array from the weather.
 Other radiators that have been used in phased arrays include microstrip antennas,160  polyrods, helices, spirals, and log-periodic elements.
Radiating elements are generally of low  gain, as is consistent with the broad-beamwidth needed for wide-angle scan and the narrow  spacing to avoid grating lobes.
More directive elements can he used when the scanning of the  beam need not be over a wide angle.
The more directive the element, the fewer that are needed  to fill a given aperture.
 Another important consideration'in the selection of an antenna element and the design of  an array, is the mutual coupling between the radiating elements.
When the field intensity  pattern of an array antenna was .considered previously [Eq.
(8.3)) it was assumed that the  elemental radiators were independent of one another.
In practice this is only an approxima-  rir)ll.
Electroniagnetic radiation doesn't always respect such an assul~lption.
C'irrretlt ill orle  element will affect the phase and amplitude of the currents in neighboring elements.
In a  planar array, the current at a particular element might be influenced significantly by a rela-  tively large number of its neighbors (perhaps from 20 to 100).
Since the phases and amplitudes  of the currents at each of the elements change with the scan angle, the effects of mutual  coupling also change with scan angle and complicate the problem of computing and compen-  sating coupling effects.
Mutual coupling, therefore, causes the actual radiation pattern to differ  from that which would be predicted from an array of independent radiators.
Thus to achieve  the benefits from full control of the aperture illumination of a phased array, mutual coupling  among the elements must be properly taken into account.
 Most analyses of mutual coupling are concerned with the change in impedance at the  input to the It is important to know how the impedance changes in order to  properly match the impedance of the transmitter and the receiver to the radiator.
The effects  of diffraction of energy by neighboring elements should also be considered as a mutual  coupling problem.
This is especially noted with end-fire elements (such as polyrods or log-  periodic antennas) which are spaced close enough to couple or diffract energy.
The effect of  mutual coupling on the input impedance with such elements is usually small.
However, the  ciistiirbance to the aperture illumination can be quite large and can result in significant  differences from the pattern computed by ignoring such effects.
 8.6 FEEDS FOR  If a single transmitter and receiver are utilized in a phased array, there must be some form of  network to connect the single port of the transmitter and/or the single port of the receiver to  each of the antenna elements.
The power divider used to connect the array elements to the  single port is called an array feed.
Several examples of such networks for linear arrays where  shown in Figs.
8.2 and 8.4.
For a planar array the problem is more complicated.
The problem  in combining the outputs of N ports into one port, or vice versa, is to do so with minimum loss.
 It is not always appreciated that loss in the array feed is equivalent to a loss in antenna power  gain.
 There are at least three basic.concepts for feeding an array.
The constrained~feed utilizes  waveguide or other microwave transmission lines along with couplers, junctions, or other  power distribution devices.
.Thelspace feed distributes the energy to a lens array or a  306INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS waveguide maybeusedforthesamepurpose.Ifwide-angle scanisnotrequired, theopen­ endedwaveguides maybeflaredtoformahornwithgreaterdirectivity.
Anarrayofopen­ endedwaveguides quiteoftenwillbecovered withathin,flatsheetofdielectric toserveasa meansforbettermatching thearraytofreespace,aswellastoactasaradome toprotectthe arrayfromtheweather.
Otherradiators thathavebeenusedinphasedarraysincludemicrostrip antennas,160 polyrods, helices,spirals,andlog-periodic elements.
Radiating elements aregenerally oflow gain,asisconsistent withthebroad-beamwidth neededforwide-angle scanandthenarrow sracingtoavoidgratinglobes.Moredirective elements canhelIsedwhenthescanning ofthe heamneednotbeoverawideangle.Themoredirective theelement, thefewerthatareneeded tofillagivenaperture.
Another important consideration· intheselection ofanantenna elementandthedesignof anarray,isthemutualcoupling between theradiating elements.
Whenthelfieldintensity patternofanarrayantenna was.considered previously [Eq.(8.3)]itwasassumed thatthe elemental radiators wereindependent ofoneanother.
Inpractice thisisonlyanapproxima­ tion.Electromagnetic radiation doesn'talwaysrespectsllchanassumption.
Current inone clement willaffectthephaseandamplitude ofthecurrents inneighboring elements.
Ina planararray.thecurrentataparticular element mightbeinfluenced significantly byarela­ tivelylargenumberofitsneighbors (perhaps from20to100).Sincethephasesandamplitudes ofthecurrents ateachoftheelements changewiththescanangle,theeffectsofmutual coupling alsochangewithscanangleandcomplicate theproblem ofcomputing andcompen­ satingcoupling effects.Mutualcoupling, therefore, causestheactualradiation patterntodiffer fromthatwhichWOUld.bepredicted fromanarrayofindependent radiators.
Thustoachieve thebenefits fromfullcontroloftheaperture illumination ofaphasedarray,mutualcoupling amongtheelements mustbeproperly takenintoaccount.
Mostanalyses ofmutualcoupling areconcerned withthechangeinimpedance atthe inputtotheelement.74-77Itisimportant toknowhowtheimpedance changes inorderto properly matchtheimpedance ofthetransmitter andthereceiver totheradiator.
Theeffects ofdiffraction ofenergybyneighboring elements shouldalsobeconsidered asamutual coupling problem.
Thisisespecially notedwithend-fire elements (suchaspolyrods orlog­ periodic antennas) whicharespacedcloseenoughtocoupleordiffractenergy.Theeffectof mutualcoupling ontheinputimpedance withsuchelements isusuallysmall.However, the disturbance totheaperture illumination canbequitelargeandcanresultinsignificant differences fromthepatterncomputed byignoring sucheffects.
8.6FEEDS FORARRAYS20.81-84 Ifasingletransmitter andreceiver areutilizedinaphasedarray,theremustbesomeformof network toconnect thesingleportofthetransmitter and/orthesingleportofthereceiver to eachoftheantenna elements.
Thepowerdividerusedtoconnect thearrayelements tothe singleportiscalledanarrayfeed.Severalexamples ofsuchnetworks forlineararrayswhere showninFigs.8.2and8.4.Foraplanararraytheproblem ismorecomplicated.
Theproblem incombining theoutputsofNportsintooneport,orviceversa,istodosowithminimum loss.
Itisnotalwaysappreciated thatlossinthearrayfeedisequivalent toalossinantenna power gam.
Thereareatleastthreebasic'concepts forfeedinganarray.Theconsrrainedfeed utilizes waveguide orothermicrowave transmission linesalongwithcouplers, junctions, orother powerdistribution devices.
1TheIspacefeeddistributes theenergytoalensarrayora IIIF I:I I (.IRONI('AI I Y SIFFRI:I> I'lIASFI> ARRAY ANTFNNA IN RADAR 307  f;ig~rrc.
8.21 Planar array wit11 pl~nse-sllift volu~netric scan in two angular coordinates.
 reflectarray in a manner analogous to a point-feed illuminating a lens or reflector antenna.
The  rti~.c~l/c~l pl~re ,/i~etl uses the pri~lciples of microwave structures to provide efficient power  clivisiorl.
It is, ill some respects, a cross between the constrained feed and the space feed.
 Constrained feed.
Figure 8.2 1 shows a two-dimensional-scanning array which is sometimes  known as a parallel-.ieriesfeeti.
Each element has its own phase shifter.
A separate command  must be computed by the beam-steering computer and distributed to each phase shifter.
The  power distribution to the columns is by parallel feed.
The power in each column is shown  being distributed by a series feed to the vertical elements.
If this were a parallel feed it would be  called a pcirailel-pa,.allel.f>ed.
(Series feeds are shown here so as not to overly complicate the  figure.
Series-pnrallel or series-sereirs arrangements are also possible.) All the elements which  lie in the same colurnn utilize the same phase shift to steer the beam in azimuth.
Likewise all  the elements which lie in the same row utilize the same phase shift to steer the beam in  elevation.
The phase shift at the rr~t~th element therefore is the sum of the phases required at the  r?rtti colunin for steering in azimuth and at the 11th row for steering in elevation.
This summa-  tion can be m6de at the computer and distributed to the MN elements of the array.
Alterna-  tively.
A1 + N control signals can be transmitted to the array if an adder is provided at each  phase shifter to corrlbirie the azimuth and elevation phases.
 In the sct.io.5-seric.~ ,feet/ each of the M columns of an M by N array utilizes a series  arrangenlent to produce steering in one coordinate (say elevation).
A separate series-feed is  used to provide the proper phase to each column to steer in the orthogonal coordinate  (azimuth).
A total of M + 1 series feeds are used.
The computation of the phase-shifter com-  mands is simplified since the azimuth and elevation phases are not added in the computer.
 Instead, the phase shifters of a single feed provide the azimuth steering while the M feeds at  each colunln provide the elevation steering.
In the series-series planar array all series phase  shifters in the elevation plane take the same value and all series phase shifters in the azimuth  plane take the same value.
Thus only two control signals are required.
The steering commands  are simplified at the expense of M - 1 additi.onal phase shifters and the added loss of a series  arrangement.
 When separate power amplifiers are used at each element in a transmitting array or  IIII'FIITTRONICAUY srHRFD P"ASfD ARRAY ANTI'NNA INRADARJfl7 --~---.--------' FigureRo21Planararraywithphase-shift volumetric scanintwoangular coordinates.
rellectarray inamanneranalogous toapoint-feed illuminating alensorreflector antenna.
The rel/'lIlIci plalefeedusestheprinciples ofmicrowave structures toprovide efficient power division.
Itis.insomerespects, acrossbetween theconstrained feedandthespacefeed.
Constrained feed.Figure8.21showsatwo-dimensional-scanning arraywhichissometimes knownasaparallel-series feed.Eachelement hasitsownphaseshifter.Aseparate command mustbecomputed bythebeam-steering computer anddistributed toeachphaseshifter.The powerdistribution tothecolumns isbyparallel feed.Thepowerineachcolumn isshown beingdistributed byaseriesfeedtotheverticalelements.Ifthiswereaparallelfeeditwouldbe calledaparallel-parallel feed.(Seriesfeedsareshownheresoasnottooverlycomplicate the figure.Series-parallel orseries-series arrangements arealsopossible.) Alltheelements which lieinthesamecolumn utilizethesamephaseshifttosteerthebeaminazimuth.
Likewise all theelements whichlieinthesamerowutilizethesamephaseshifttosteerthebeamin elevation.
Thephaseshiftatthe"'11thelement therefore isthesumofthephasesrequired atthe "'thcolumn forsteering inazimuth andatthe11throwforsteering inelevation.
Thissumma­ tioncanbem~deatthecomputer anddistributed totheMNelements ofthearray.Alterna­ tively,At+Ncontrolsignalscanbetransmitted tothearrayifanadderisprovided ateach phaseshiftertocombine theazimuth andelevation phases.
Intheseries-series feedeachoftheMcolumns ofanMbyNarrayutilizesaseries arrangement toproduce sleering inonecoordinate (sayelevation).
Aseparate series-feed is lIsedtoprovide theproperphasetoeachcolumn tosteerintheorthogonal coordinate (azimuth).
AtotalofM+Iseriesfeedsareused.Thecomputation ofthephase-shifter com­ mandsissimplified sincetheazimuth andelevation phasesarenotaddedinthecomputer.
Instead, thephaseshiftersofasinglefeedprovide theazimuth steering whiletheMfeedsat eachcolumn provide theelevation steering.
Intheseries-series planararrayallseriesphase shiftersintheelevation planetakethesamevalueandallseriesphaseshiftersintheazimuth planetakethesamevalue.Thusonlytwocontrolsignalsarerequired.
Thesteeringcommands aresimplified attheexpense ofM - Iadditi.onal phaseshiftersandtheaddedlossofaseries arrangement.
Whenseparate poweramplifiers areusedateachelement inatransmitting arrayor separate receivers are at each element in a receiving array, series-feed arrays are attractive  since their inherent loss is at low-power levels and is made up by the amplifiers.
One method  for producing low-power-level beam steering is to use a single series-fed array at frequencyj',  to provide the azimuth phases 4,.
At each element the signal is heterodyned in a mixer with  the signal from a single series-fed array at frequency f, to provide the elevation phase 4,.
The  sum signal at frequency f, + f2 is used as the carrier frequency.
It has the proper phase 4, + 9,  at each element to steer in the two directions.
The mixer would be followed by a power  amplifier if a transmitter, or it might be used .to obtain the local oscillator frequency if a  receiver.
Only M + N - 2 phase shifters are required, but the mixer and power amplifier  required at each element adds to the complication.
This is sometimes called a ~,ii.xrr-~tiurrix  Jrrrl.
 A convenient met hod for achieving two-dimensional scanning is to use frequency scan in  one angular coordinate and phase shifters to scan in the orthogonal angular coordinate, as was  diagrammed in Fig.
8.18.
This is an example of a parallel-series feed.
It may be considered as a  number of frequency-scanned linear arrays placed side by side.
 When the power splitters are four-port hybrid junctions, or the equivalent, the feed is said  to be r?latcherl.
Theoretically there are no spurious signals generated by internal reflections in a  matched feed.
It is not always convenient, however, to use four-port junctions.
Three-port tee  junctions are sometimes used for economic reasons to provide the power splitting, but the  network is not theoretically matched.
Internal reflections due to misn~atch in the feed can  appear as spurious sidelobes in the radiation pattern."  Space feeds.
There are two basic types of space feeds depending on whether they are analogous  to a lens or to a reflector.
The lens array, Fig.
8.22, is fed from a primary feed just as a lens  antenna.
An array of antenna elements collects the radiated energy and passes it through the  phase shifters which provide a correction for the spherical wavefront, as well as a linear phast:  shift across the aperture to steer the beam in angle.
Another set of elements on the opposite  side of the structure radiate the beam into space.
The primary pattern of the feeti illuminating  the space-fed array provides a natural amplitude taper.
Spillover radiation from the feed,  however, can result in higher sidelobes than from an array with a conventional constrained  feed.
The space-fed array can readily generate a cluster of multiple beams, as for  non no pulse  angle measurement, by use of multiple horns or a multimode feed, rather than with a com-  plicated feed network as in the conventional array.
 There are two sets of radiators in the lens array requiring matching (the front and the  back), thus increasing the matching problem and the potential for lower efficiency.
The feed  .- ..
- - .
-.
-  I I  Primary I I feed I  I I  Figure 8.22 Principle of lens array.
 308INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS separate receivers areateachelement inareceiving array,series-feed arraysareattractive sincetheirinherent lossisatlow-power levelsandismadeupbytheamplifiers.
Onemethod forproducing low-power-Ievel beamsteering istouseasingleseries-fed arrayatfrequencyI, toprovide theazimuth phasescPn.Ateachelement thesignalisheterodyned inamixerwith thesignalfromasingleseries-fed arrayatfrequency f2toprovidetheelevation phasecPm.The sumsignalatfrequency f,+f2isusedasthecarrierfrequency.
IthastheproperphasecPm+¢n ateachelement tosteerinthetwodirections.
Themixerwouldbefollowed byapower amplifier ifatransmitter, oritmightbeused.toobtainthelocaloicillator frequency ifa receiver.
OnlyM+N-2phaseshiftersarerequired, butthemixerandpoweramplitler required ateachelement addstothecomplication.
Thisissometimes calledamixer-mairix feed.
Aconvenient method forachieving two-dimensional scanning istolisefrequency scanin oneangularcoordinate andphaseshifterstoscanintheorthogonal angularcoordinate, aswas diagrammed inFig.8.18.Thisisanexample ofaparallel-series feed.Itmaybeconsidered asa number offrequency-scanned lineararraysplacedsidebyside.
Whenthepowersplitters arefour-port hybridjunctions, ortheequivalent, thefeedissaid tobematched.
Theoretically therearenospurious signalsgenerated byinternal reflections ina matched feed.Itisnotalwaysconvenient, however, tousefour-port junctions.
Three-port tee junctions aresometimes usedforeconomic reasons toprovide thepowersplitting, hutthe network isnottheoretically matched.
Internal reflections duetomismatch inthefeedcan appearasspurious sidelobes intheradiation pattern.so Spacefeeds.Therearetwobasictypesofspacefeedsdepending onwhether theyareanalogous toalensortoareflector.
Thelensarray,fig.8.22,isfedfromaprimary feedjustasalens antenna.
Anarrayofantenna elements collects theradiated energyandpassesitthrough the phaseshifterswhichprovide acorrection forthespherical wavefront, aswellasalinearphase shiftacrosstheaperture tosteerthebeaminangle.Another setofelements ontheopposite sideofthestructure radiatethebeamintospace.Theprimary patternofthefeedillliminating thespace-fed arrayprovides anaturalamplitude taper.Spillover radiation fromthefeed, however, canresultinhighersidelobesthanfromanarraywithaconventional constrained feed.Thespace-fed arraycanreadilygenerate aclusterofmultiple beams,asformonopulse anglemeasurement, byuseofmultiple hornsoramultimode feed,ratherthanwithacom­ plicated feednetwork asintheconventional array.
Therearetwosetsofradiators inthelensarrayrequiring matching (thefrontandthe back),thusincreasing thematching problem andthepotential forlowerefficiency.
Thefeed ~~~>-------%-< ;~ ~Array ;~~~menl--EA-----.--~-- ----------- I I Primary I feed : I I :,r.;---i-- Phase~ shifter >---f?J-< Figure8.22Principle oflensarray. IIlf: I:! f:('I.RONI('Al.I.Y S'I'f~f:KI:I) PIIASEO ARRAY ANTENNA IN KAI)AR ,309  1 I  Arrny ; I Phase  ~IP~IIP~I~ , ( ] str~fler -> -&---I  >---*- Figure 8.23 Reflectarray.
 [nay be placed off-axis to avoid reflections from the back face of the lens, if desired.
It is  powihle in a lens array to reduce rhe riunlber of phase shifters by "thinning" the number of  output radiators.
7'his is acconlplished by combining pairs of input elements and feeding the  out put of each pair to a single-phase shifter and radiating element.
The thinned elements are  near the outer portion of the antenna rather than at the center so as to produce a density taper  (Sec.
8.10).
This procedure, while reducing the number of phase shifters, generally results in  lower gain and higher far-out sidelobes than would be produced by an amplitude taper.
 A space-fed reflectarray with an offset feed is shown in Fig.
8.23.
The energy enters the  antenna elements, passes through the phase shifters, is reflected, and again passes back  through the phase shifters to be radiated.
Like the lens array, the phase shifters apply a linear  pllase distributioti for beam steering and a correction for the curvature of the primary wave-  front from the horn.
Because the energy passes through the phase shifters twice, they need only  half the phase-shift capability of a lens array or a conventional array; i.e., 180" of one-way  j>ll:~se shift is adequate, rather than 360".
The pliase shifters, however, must be reciprocal.
As  ~vith tl,e lens array, multiple bearns can be generated with additional feed horns.
 The lens array allows more freedom than the reflectarray in designing the feed assembly  since there is no aperture blocking, but the back surface of the reflectarray makes it easier to  provide the phase shifter control and drive assemblies, structural members, and heat removal.
 Space-fed arrays are gerlerally cheaper than conventional arrays because of the omission of  the transmission-line feed networks and the use of a single transmitter and receiver rather than  a distributed transnlitter and receiver at each element.
A space-fed array may be simpler that;  an array with a constrained feed, but a sacrifice is made in the control of the aperture  il1urnination"and in the maximum power capability of the array.
Thus the ability to radiate  large power by using a trans~nitter at each element is lost in this configuration.
 Parallel-plate feeds.
A folded pillbox antenna (Fig.
8.24), a parallel-plate horn, or other simi-  lar ~nicrowave device can be used to provide the power distribution to the antenna elements.
 These are rec~ctir-e feed systems.
They are basically used with a linear array and would have to  be stacked to feed a planar array.
 Subarrays.
It is sometimes convenient to divide an array into subarrays.
For example, the  AN/SPY-I AEGIS array utilizes 32 transmitting and 68 receiving subarrays of different   size^.^' One reason for dividing the transrriitting array into subarrays is to provide a dis-  tributed transmitter.
In the AEGIS array a separate high-power amplifier feeds each of the 32  transtnitting subarrays.
It is also possible to give identical phase-steering commands tosir~lilar  ele~nents in each subarray, thus allowing simplification of the beam-steering unit and of the  interface cabling between the array and the beam-steering unit.
The term subarray has also  been applied to the array feed networks for producing sum and difference radiation  pattern^.'^  IIII:FlITTRONICtd,IY STlTRFD PIIASFD ARRAY ANTENNA INRADAR309 (Jr"nory !pedReflection Phase 'ihi!ler Figure8.23Reflectarray.
maybeplacedofT-axis 10avoidreflections fromthebackfaceofthelens,ifdesired.Itis possible inalensarray10reducethenumberofphaseshiftersby"thinning" thenumberof outputradiators.
Thisisaccomplished bycombining pairsofinputelements andfeedingthe outputofeachpairtoasingle-phase shifterandradiating element.
Thethinnedelements are neartheouterportionoftheantennaratherthanatthecentersoastoproduceadensitytaper (Sec.R.10).Thisprocedure, whilereducing thenumberofphaseshifters,generally resultsin lowergainandhigherfar-outsidelobes thanwouldbeproduced byanamplitude taper.
Aspace-fed reRectarray withanoffsetfeedisshowninFig.8.23.Theenergyentersthe antenna elements, passesthrough thephaseshifters, isreRected, andagainpassesback throughthephaseshifterstoberadiated.
Likethelensarray,thephaseshiftersapplyalinear phasedistribution forbeamsteeringandacorrection forthecurvature oftheprimarywave­ frontfromthehort1.Becausetheenergypassesthroughthephaseshifterstwice,theyneedonly halfthephase-shift capability ofalensarrayoraconventional array;i.e.,180°ofone-way phaseshiftisadequate, ratherthan360°.Thephaseshifters,however, mustbereciprocal.
As withtLelensarray,multiple beamscanbegenerated withadditional feedhorns.
Thelensarrayallowsmorefreedom thanthereRectarray indesigning thefeedassembly sincethereisnoaperture blocking, butthebacksurfaceofthereRectarray makesiteasierto providethephaseshiftercontrolanddriveassemblies, structural members, andheatremoval.
Space-fed arraysaregenerally cheaperthanconventional arraysbecauseoftheomission of thetransmission-line feednetworks andtheuseofasingletransmitter andreceiverratherthan adistributed transmitter andreceiverateachelement.
Aspace-fed arraymaybesimplerthan anarraywithaconstrained feed,butasacrifice ismadeinthecontroloftheaperture illumination~'and inthemaximum powercapability ofthearray.Thustheabilitytoradiate largepowerbyusingatransmitter ateachelement islostinthisconfiguration.
Parallel-plate feeds.Afoldedpillboxantenna(Fig.8.24),aparallel-plate horn,orothersimi­ larmicrowave devicecanbeusedtoprovidethepowerdistribution totheantennaelements.
Thesearereac(il'efeedsystems.
Theyarebasically usedwithalineararrayandwouldhaveto bestackedtofeedaplanararray.
Subarra)'s.
Itissometimes convenient todivideanarrayintosubarrays.
Forexample, the AN/SPY-I AEGISarrayutilizes32transmitting and68receiving subarrays ofdifferent sizes.R1Onereasonfordividing thetransmitting arrayintosubarrays istoprovideadis­ tributed transmitter.
IntheAEGISarrayaseparate high-power amplifier feedseachofthe32 Iransmitting subarrays.
IIisalsopossible 10giveidenlical phase-sleering commands 10similar elements ineachsubarray, thusallowing simplification ofthebeam-steering unitandofthe interface cablingbetween thearrayandthebeam-steering unit.Thetermsubarray hasalso beenappliedtothearrayfeednetworks forproducing sumanddifference radiation patterns.52 310 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  * Rad~ated - energy  -Input  (0) Phose sh~fters  1;igure 8.24 Example of a pillbox antenna (shown in (a)) used as a fwd for an array (b).
(.-lfit,r Kic~~~r~~li.~~l)  <", ', 8.7 SIMULTANEOUS MULTIPLE BEAMS FROM ARRAY ANTENNAS \  One of the properties of the phased array is the ability to generate multiple independent beam:  simultaneously from a single aperture.
In principle, an N-element array can generate N  independent beams.
Multiple beams allow parallel operation and a higher data rate than can  be achieved from a single beam.
The multiple beams may be fixed in space, steered indepen-  dently, or steered as a group (as in monopulse angle measurement).
The multiple beams might  be generated on transmit as well as receive.
It is convenient in some applications to generate  the multiple beams on receive only and transmit with a wide radiation pattern encompassing  the total coverage of the multiple receiving beams.
The ability to form many beams is usually  easier on reception than transmission.
This is not necessarily a disadvantage since it is a useful  method of operating an array in many applications.
 The simple linear array which generates a single beam can be converted to a multiple-  beam antenna by attaching additional phase shifters to the output of each element.
Each beam  to be formed requires one additional phase shifter, as shown in Fig.
8.25.
The simple array in  this figure is shown with but three elements, each with three sets of phase shifters.
One set of  phase shifters produces a beam directed broadside to the array (0 = 0).
Another set of three  phase shifters generates a beam in the 8 = +00 direction.
The angle O0 is determined by the  relationship Oo = sin- '(A4A/2ntl), where A+ is the phase difference inserted between adjacent  elements.
Amplifiers may be placed between the individual antenna elements and the beam-  forming (phase-shifting) networks to amplify the incoming signal and compensate for any  losses in the beam-forming networks.
The output of each amplifier is subdivided in to a nurnber  of independent signals which are individually processed as if they'were from separate receivers.
 Postamplification beam forming.
When receiving beams are formed in networks placed after  the RF amplifiers, as in Fig.
8.25, the antenna is sometimes called a po.stattiplijcatiori heuw  fort?tirly urray, abbreviated PABFA.
A separate transmitting antenna may be used to illumin-  ate the volume covered by the multiple receiving beams or, alternatively, it is possible to  transmit multiple beams identical to the multiple receiving beams, using the radiating elements  of the same array antenna.
Note that if the multiple transmitting beams are contiguous and at  the same frequency, the composite transmitted pattern is similar to the pattern from a single  beam encompassing the same angular region.
 The receiving beam-forming network may be at IF or RF.
Tapped delay lines have been a  310INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS Radiating elements I------~t- InputPickuphorns--- Pillbox used as array , feed /- L ~"---~Radiated energy Feed..-IF------ ~L:t=;==':r -Input./ i" I', ( (: I I I \ \ \ (a) (b) Figure8.24Example ofapillboxantenna(shownin(a))usedasafl:cdforanarray(b).(~1i('rRicanJi.1td) (\8.7SIMULTANEOUS MULTIPLE BEAMS FROM ARRAY ANTENNAS "- Oneoftheproperties ofthephasedarrayistheabilitytogenerate multiple independent beam:..
simultaneously fromasingleaperture.
Inprinciple, anN-element arraycangenerate N independent beams.Multiple beamsallowparalleloperation andahigherdataratethancan beachieved fromasinglebeam.Themultiple beamsmaybefixedinspace,steeredindepen­ dently,orsteeredasagroup(asinmonopulse anglemeasurement), Themultiple beamsmight begenerated ontransmit aswellasreceive.Itisconvenient insomeapplications togenerate themultiple beamsonreceiveonlyandtransmit withawideradiation patternencompassing thetotalcoverage ofthemultiple receiving beams.Theabilitytoformmanybeamsisusually easieronreception thantransmission.
Thisisnotnecessarily adisadvantage sinceitisausefuI methodofoperating anarrayinmanyapplications.
Thesimplelineararraywhichgenerates asinglebeamcanbeconverted toamultiple­ beamantenna byattaching additional phaseshifterstotheoutputofeachelement.
Eachbeam tobeformedrequires oneadditional phaseshifter,asshowninFig,8.25.Thesimplearrayin thisfigureisshownwithbutthreeelements, eachwiththreesetsofphaseshifters.Onesetof phaseshiftersproduces abeamdirected broadside tothearray(0=0).Another setofthree phaseshiftersgenerates abeaminthe0=+00direction.
Theangle00isdetermined bythe relationship 00=sin-1(1i¢)'/2rrd).
whereIi¢isthephasedifference inserted between adjacent elements.
Amplifiers maybeplacedbetween theindividual antenna elements andthebeam­ forming (phase-shifting) networks toamplify theincoming signalandcompensate forany lossesinthebeam-forming networks.
Theoutputofeachamplifier issubdivided intoanumber ofindependent signalswhichareindividually processed asiftheywerefromseparate receivers.
Postamplificalion beamforming.
Whenreceiving beamsareformedinnetworks placedafter theRFamplifiers, asinFig.8.25,theantenna issometimes calledapostamp/ijicatiotl heam­ forming array,abbreviated PABFA.Aseparate transmitting antenna maybeusedtoillumin­ atethevolume covered bythemultiple receiving beamsor,altern'atively, itispossible to transmit multiple beamsidentical tothemultiple receiving beams,usingtheradiating elements ofthesamearrayantenna.
Notethatifthemultiple transmitting beamsarecontiguous andat thesamefrequency, thecomposite transmitted patternissimilartothepatternfromasingle beamencompassing thesameangular region.
Thereceiving beam-forming network maybeatIForRF.Tappeddelaylineshavebeena I I lfi lil.l:('l K0NI~'AI.I.Y Sfli1iRI:l) PlfASEU ARRAY ANTENNA IN RADAK 31 1  Amplifier Q  111  Beom Beom Beam  No.
3 N0.2 No.
1  Figure 8.25 Si~nultaneous postan~plifier heani formation.
4, = constant phase; I$, - $,I = IA+l =  1 ?rr(d/;.) sin O0 1.
 convenient rnetliod fvr obtaining multiple beams at IF.
Beam-forming at IF is possible since  phase is preserted duririg frequeticy translation frotri RF to IF (except for the constant phase  qliift introduced by the cotiiri~ori local oscillator).
 Blass beam-forming array.'-he RF beam-forming principle shown in ~1~.
8.26 has been  used in tile ~SHR-I.
a one-of-a-kind developme~ital height-finder radar built for the Federal  Aviation Agency.
Waveguide transniission lines were arranged to serve as the delay lines.
 Energy was tapped from each waveguide at the appropriate points by directional couplers to  form bearns at various elevation angles.
Considerable waveguide was used in this design.
To  prodtrce the 333 iridependent beams, the Blass height finder employed 30 miles of S-band  waveguide.
 Butler beam-forming array." loo Another RF beam-forming device is the parallel network  attributed to Butler, and independently discovered by Shelton.
This is a lossless network which  utilires 3-dB directional couplers, or hybrid junctions, along with fixed phased shifters, to forni  N contiguous beanis from an N-element array, where N is an integer that is expressed as some  power of 2, that is, N = 2P.
The 3-dB directional coupler is a four-port junction which has the  property that a signal fed into one port will divide equally (in power) between the other two  ports and no power will appear in the fourth port.
A 90" phase difference is introduced  between the two equally divided signals.
Similarly, a signal introduced into the fourth port will  TIll'I'I.ITTRONICALLY STI'I'RI'D PHASEU ARRAY ANTENNA INRADAR3tt ------.._-------------, BeamBeamBeam No.3 NO.2No.1 Figure8.25Simultaneous postarnplifier heamformation.
rPo=constant phase;IrPI-rPoI=I~rPI '2rr(d/I.) sin°0I.
comenient method forobtaining multiple beamsatIF.Beam-forming atIFispossible since phaseispreserved duringfrequency translation fromRFtoIF(exceptfortheconstant phase shiftintroduced bythecommon localoscillator).
Blassbeam-forming arra~·.
R5TheRFbeam-forming principle showninFig.8.26hasbeen usedinthcAt~)lIR_t.aonc-of-a-kind dcvelopmental height-finder radarbuiltfortheFederal Aviation Agency.
Waveguide transmission lineswerearranged toserveasthedelaylines.
Energywastappedfromeachwaveguide attheappropriate pointsbydirectional couplers to formbeamsatvariouselevation angles.Considerable waveguide wasusedinthisdesign.To produce the333independent beams,theBlassheightfinderemployed 30milesofS-band waveguide.
Butlerbeam-forming array.Rfi 100Another RFbeam-forming deviceistheparallel network attributed toButler.andindependently discovered byShelton.
Thisisalosslessnetwork which utilizes3-dBdirectional couplers.
orhybridjunctions.
alongwithfixedphasedshifters.toform Ncontiguous beamsfromanN-element array,whereNisanintegerthatisexpressed assome powerof2.thatis.N=2P•The3-dBdirectional coupler isafour-port junction whichhasthe property thatasignalfedintooneportwilldivideequally(inpower)between theothertwo portsandnopowerwillappear inthefourthport.A90°phasedifference isintroduced hetween thetwoequallydividedsignals.Similarly, asignalintroduced intothefourthportwill 312 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  Crossed -line  directional coupler 'h  Figure 8.26 RF beam-forniing 11s111g  tapped dransnlission lines.
 divide its power equally between the same two ports witti a 90" relative phase tlrUerence, arid  no power will appear in the first port.
The relative phase difference in this case is of opposite  sign compared to the phase difference resulting from 'a signal introduced into the tirst port.
 Consider a simple two-element array with half-wavelength spacing, connected to the two  ports of a 3-dB directional coupler as shown in Fig.
8.27.
If a signal is inserted in port No.
1.
 the 90" phase shift that results between the signals in ports 2 and 3 will produce a beam  oriented in a direction 30" to the right of the array normal.
A signal in port No.
4 results it)  t I  1 ,  0,  1VD ,@  lv/oo Figure 8.27 3-dB directional coupler generating two beams  R~ght beom Left beam from a two-element array.
 312INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS Crossed -line directional coupler ~ '- '-(l) (l) > > Q..)..- WNu u (l) Q) a::: a:::'­ Q) > '(ijr0 u Q) a:::L (l) > .~<:j (l) a:::L (l) > (l)l[)u (l) a::: Figure8.26RFh.:am-forming lIsing tappedtransmission lin.:s.
divideitspowerequally between thesametwoportswitha90°relative phasedifferencl:, and nopowerwillappearinthefirstport.Therelative p~asedifference inthiscaseisofopposite signcompared tothephasedifference resulting fromasignalintroduced intothefirstport.
Consider asimpletwo-element arraywithhalf-wavelength spacing, connected tothetwo portsofa3-dBdirectional coupler asshowninFig.8.27.Ifasignalisinserted inportNo.1.
the90°phaseshiftthatresultsbetween thesignalsinports2and3willproduce abeam oriented inadirection 30°totherightofthearraynormal.
AsignalinportNo.4rl:sultsill 0.70lv(st 0.101V/900 CD CD lV1St RighIbeam0.101vdD" 0.101V&:- G) o 1V& LeftbeamFigure8.273-dBdirectional couplergenerating twobeams fromatwo-element array. ;I pliasc clist~il~trtioti tlii~t produccs a I~ca~ri 30" to tlic left of tlic array rior~nal.
Tlii~s this  sirnple two-elenlent array with a single 3-dB coupler produces two irldepericle~lt bea111s.
 The two-element array is a trivial exarriple of the Butler beam-forming antenna.
Figure  8.28 illustrates the circuit of a11 eight-clcrner~t array t1i:it generates eight incleperldent beams.
It  utilizes 12 directional couplers and eight fixed phase shifters.
The Butler niatrix has 2" inputs  and 2" outputs.
Modificatio~is of the Butler array to any number of elements have been  suggested, but the resulting beatn-forming network is not necessarily 10ssless.~~~~~ The number  of tlirectional couplers or hybrids required for an N element array is equal to (N/2) log, N,  and tlie nu~riber of fixed phase sllifters is (N/2)(log2 N - I).
 'The Butler beam-forr~iing network is theoretically lossless; i.e., no power is intentionally  discipated in ter~ninatiorls.
?'here will always be a finite insertion loss, however, due to the  inherent losses in the directional couplers, phase shifters, and transmission lines that make up  the network.
A 16-elernerlt tietwork at 900 MHz, for example, had an insertion loss of0.74 dB.
 practically all of which was due to the strip transmission line used in the constr~ction.~' In a  lossless, passive antenna radiating rnultiple beams from a common aperture it has been shown8*  that tlie radiation pattern arid the crossover level of adjacent beams cannot be specified  indeperidently.
With uniform illurnination, as iti the Butler array, the crossover level is 3.9 dB  helow the peak.
'l'liis is indepelident of the beam position, elerrient spacing, arid wavelength.
 Arilenna Elements  1R 4L 3R 2L 2R 3L 4R 1L  Figure 8.28 Eight-element Butler bearn-forming matrix.
 IIII'Fll'CllHlNICAl.l.Y SIFI'RI'I> "liASI'D ARRAY ANTENNA INRADAR.113 aphascdistrihlJlion tllatproduces aheam.10010tileleftoftilearraynormal.
Thusthis simpletwo-element arraywilhasingle3-uBcouplerproduces Iwoinuependent beams.
Thetwo-element arrayisatrivialexample oftheButlerbeam-forming antenna.
Figure H.2Hillustrates thccircuitofancight-clcmcnt arraythatgcneratcs eiglltindcpendent beams.It utilizes12directional couplers andeightfixedphaseshifters.TheButlermatrixhas2"inputs and2"outputs.
Modifications oftheButlerarraytoanynumber ofelements havebeen suggested, buttheresulting beam-forming network isnotnecessarily lossless.
88.97Thenumber ofdirectional couplers orhybridsrequired foranNelementarrayisequalto(NI2)log2N, andthenumber offixedphaseshiftersis(NI2)(log 2N-I).
TheButlerbeam-forming network istheoretically lossless; i.e.,nopowerisintentionally dissipated interminations.
Therewillalwaysbeafiniteinsertion loss,however, duetothe inherent lossesinthedirectional couplers, phaseshifters,andtransmission linesthatmakeup thenetwork.
/\16-element network at900MHz,forexample, hadaninsertion lossof0.74dB, practically allofwhichwasduetothestriptransmission lineusedintheconstruction.87Ina lossless.passiveantennaradiating multiple beamsfromacommon aperture ithasbeenshown88 thattheradiation patternandthecrossover levelofadjacent beamscannotbespecified independently.
Withuniform illumination, asintheButlerarray,thecrossover levelis3.9dB hclowthepeak.Tllisisindependent ofthebeamposition, element spacing, andwavelength.
1 '1.Antenna 3 4 0.....Elemen!s 5 6 7 8 DIrectional ......--couplers 1R4L 3R2L-225° 2R3L-67.5° 4RlL Figure8.28Eight-element Butlerbeam-forming matrix. 314 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  The low crossover level of the Butler array is one of its disadvantages.
If a lossless network  could be achieved with a cosine illumination so as to reduce the sidelobe levels compared to  those obtained with a uniform illumination, the crossover level would be even worse (a level of  -9.5 dB).
 By combining the output beams of the networks with additional circuitry, the Butler  beam-forming network can be modified to obtain aperture illuminations that result in lower  sidelobes than available with uniform illumination.
The beamwidth is widened, the gain  lowered, and the network is no longer theoretically lossless.
The addition of two adjacent  beanis of a Butler array, with the proper phase correction, resi~lts in an array wi~h a cosine  illumination.
The crossover is lower than the lossless network, but the first sidelobe is - 23 dB  instead of - 13.2 dB.
 There is no theoretical limit to the bandwidth of a Butler array except for the bandwidth  associated with the hardware making up the network, which can be greater thdn 30 percent.
 They have even been constructed with bandwidths of several octaves." Operating over too  wide a band, however, changes the beamwidth, shifts the location of the beams, and can  introdiice grating lobes just as with any other array antenna.
 The complexity of the Butler beamforming network increases with the number of ele-  ments.
A 64-element network, for example, requires 192 directional couplers and 160 fixed-  phase shifters.
The construction of a large Butler network requires a large number of  cross-over connections in the transmission lines.
These can present practical difficulties in the  fabrication of the microwave printed circuits used to make up the device.z6 Many beams also  require many parallel receivers, an added complexity.
For these reasons, Butler beam-forming  networks with large numbers of elements are not the general rule.
 It is possible to construct planar arrays with Butler networks.
A 2P by 2q element array (p,  q are integers) requires 2P + 29 networks to achieve 2P+q beams.
Other methods of using Butler  tietworks in planar arrays are possible.
Shelt~n,~' for example, describes a technique for  generating multiple beams in hexagonal planar arrays with triangular spacing.
 The Butler networks in this section were assumed to use 3-dB directional coiiplers with a  90" phase difference between the two equal outputs.
Hybrid junctions can also be used.
These  produce a 180" phase difference between the two output signals and require a slightly different  design procedure.
loo  It is of interest to note the relation of the Butler network to the Fast Fourier Transform  (FFT).
As stated previously, the radiated field of an antenna is related to the illuniination  across the aperture by the Fourier transform.
Shelt~n~~ has pointed out that the flow diagram  of the FFT is basically similar to the diagram of the Butler network.
Thus the Butler network  is a manifestation of the FFT.
The antenna equivalent of the conventional Fourier transform is  the Blass beam-forming network illustrated by Fig.
8.26.
The Blass network required N~  couplers for N inputs and N outputs, while the conventional Fourier transform also requires  NZ computations for an N-point transform.
The Butler network utilizes (N/2) log, N junc-  tions, just as the FFT uses (N/2) logz N computations for an N-point transform.
 Within-pulse scanning.'''- lo4 If an antenna beam is scanned sequentially tl~rough its angular  coverage, one position at a time, it illuminates all directions just as does a multiple-beam  array.
If the beam is scanned rapidly enough, however, it will have the effect of seeing " almost  simultaneously" in all directions.
The scan rate of the beam must be greater than the radar  signal-bandwidth to preserve the information contained in the received signal.
The entire scan  is covered within a single pulse.
Hence, the name within-pulse scanning.
This is a method for  achieving the equivalent of a multiple-beam array.
 There have been at least two different variations of within-pulse scanning which have  314INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS Thelowcrossover leveloftheButlerarrayisoneofitsdisadvantages.
Ifalosslessnetwork couldbeachieved withacosineillumination soastoreducethesidelobelevelscompared to thoseobtained withauniformillumination, thecrossover levelwouldbeevenworse(alevelof -9.5dB).
Bycombining theoutputbeamsofthenetworks withadditional circuitry, theButler beam-forming network canbemodified toobtainaperture illuminations thatresultinlower siJelobes thanavailable withuniform illumination.
Thebeamwidth iswidened, thegain lowered, andthenetwork isnolongertheoretically lossless.Theaddition oftwoadjacent beamsofaButlerarray,withtheproperphasecorrection, resultsinanarraywithacosine illumination.
Thecrossover islowerthanthelosslessnetwork, butthefirstsidelobe is-23dB insteadof-13.2dB.
Thereisnotheoretical limittothebandwidth ofaButlerarrayexceptforthebandwidth associated withthehardware makingupthenetwork, whichcanbegreaterthan30percent.
Theyhaveevenbeenconstructed withbandwidths ofseveraloctaves.94Operating overtoo wideaband,however, changes thebeamwidth, shiftsthelocation ofthebeams,andcan introduce gratinglobesjustaswithanyotherarrayantenna.
Thecomplexity oftheButlerbeamforming network increases withthenumberofele­ ments.A64-element network, forexample, requires 192directional couplers and160fixed­ phaseshifters.
Theconstruction ofalargeButlernetwork requires alargenumber of cross-over connections inthetransmission lines.Thesecanpresentpractical difficulties inthe fabrication ofthemicrowave printedcircuitsusedtomakeupthedevice.20Manybeamsalso requiremanyparallelreceivers, anaddedcomplexity.
Forthesereasons,Butlerbeam-forming networks withlargenumbers ofelements arenotthegeneralrule.
hispossibletoconstruct planararrayswithButlernetworks.
A2Pby2qelementarray(p, qareintegers) requires2P+2qnetworks toachieve2P+qbeams.Othermethods ofusingButler networks inplanararraysarepossible.
Shelton,91 forexample, describes atechnique for generating multiple beamsinhexagonal planararrayswithtriangular spacing.
fheButlernetworks inthissectionwereassumed touse3-dBdirectional couplers witha 900phasedifference between thetwoequaloutputs.
Hybridjunctions canalsobeused.These produce a1800phasedifference betweenthetwooutputsignalsandrequireaslightlydifferent designprocedure.IOO ItisofinteresttonotetherelationoftheButlernetwork totheFastFourierTransform (FFT).Asstatedpreviously, theradiated fieldofanantenna isrelatedtotheillumination acrosstheaperture bytheFouriertransform.
Shelton93haspointedoutthattheflowdiagram oftheFFTisbasically similartothediagram oftheButlernetwork.
ThustheButlernetwork isamanifestation oftheFFT.Theantennaequivalent oftheconventional Fouriertransform is theBlassbeam-forming network illustrated byFig.8.26.TheBlassnetwork required N2 couplers forNinputs and Noutputs, whiletheconventional Fouriertransform alsorequires N2computations foranN-point transform.
TheButlernetwork utilizes(NI2)log2Njunc­ tions,justastheFFTuses(NI2)log2Ncomputations foranN-point transform.
Within-pulse scanning.101-I04 Ifanantenna beamisscannedsequentially through itsangular coverage, oneposition atatime,itilluminates alldirections justasdoesamultiple-beam array.Ifthebeamisscanned rapidlyenough,however, itwillhavetheeffectofseeing..almost simultaneously" inalldirections.
Thescanrateofthebeammustbegreaterthantheradar signal-bandwidth topreserve theinformation contained inthereceivedsignal.Theentirescan iscoveredwithinasinglepulse.Hence,thenamewithin-pulse scanning.
Thisisamethodfor achieving theequivalent ofamultiple-beam array.
Therehavebeenatleasttwodifferent variations ofwithin-pulse scanning whichhave TIlE t:l.l:('7'RONI('AI.I.Y STEERED PIIASED ARRAY ANTENNA IN RADAR 315  been demonstrated experimentally.
Both are more suited for electronic scanning in one angu-  lar coordinate than for two-angle-coordinate electronic scanning.
Thus they are of interest for  determining elevatioti angle in 3D radar.
111 one niettl~d,"~ a frequency-scan beani is rapidly  swept tlirollgti tile angular regiorl of interest, and the received signal is passed through a bank  of r~iatctietl filters, eacl~ lilrcr corresponding to a different angular direction.
This was men-  tioned in Sec.
8.4.
 The other is a receive-only ntethod that uses a receiving array with rnixers and local  oscill:~tors (Lor;), arrarigecl so as to provide N separate receiving beams fixed in space  (Fig.
8.29).
Each r~iixer is supplied with a different LO frequency.
'The trarismitting antenna  provides a single bearn illurniriating the coverage of the N receiving beams.
As described in  Sec.
8.2, in order to generate a beam at some angle 00, there must be a relative phase difference  between atljacetit elements equal to 4 = 2n(d/A) sin OO.
If the left-hand element of an N-  elcinent linear array is taken as the reference, then the phase shifters at the other elenien ts must  lrave vai\ies of +, 24, .
.
.
, (N - I)$.
If the beam is scanned as a function of time.
these phase  stlifts also change as a function of time.
A constant rate of change of phase with time is  equivalent to a constant frequency.
Thus a frequency difference at adjacent elements results in  a sca~lning beani.
If tlie LOs in the mixers of Fig.
8.29 differ in frequency by f,, the beam  rcpctitively scans its coverage at a rate ofJ,.
That is, the antenna beam occupies all possible  scan positions during the scan time I([%.
Another way of looking at this is to note that if the  relative phase between adjacent elements of an array is changed by 2n radians, the radiation  par tern will assume all possible scan positions.
If the 271 radians is changed in a time llf, , then the  rate of change of phase is 2nL.
Thus the linear phase change can be accomplished if  the frequency difference between the LOs at the mixers of adjacent elements is j;.
 By multiplying the summed output of all the element mixers with a periodic sampling  train of narrow gating pulses, a particular portion of space is observed.
Changing the relative  time phase between the sampling pulse train and the array output results in observing a  different angular direction.
Thus the beam can be steered by varying the time phase of the  control Randposs filler  Figure 8.29 Within-pulse scanning using frequency-multiplexed linear array.
This implementation  been called MOSAR.
(Frotn Jolt~rsc~rr '" Co~rrtesy Proc.
I EEE.) has  TIll'EI.ECTRONICAI.I.Y STEERED PHASED ARRAY ANTENNA INRADAR315 heendemonstrated experimentally.
Botharemoresuitedforelectronic scanning inoneangu­ larcoordinate thanfortwo-angle-coordinate electronic scanning.
Thustheyareofinterestfor determining elevalion angleinJDradar.Inonemethod,66 afrequency-scan beamisrapidly sweplthrough Iheangular regionofinterest, andthereceived signalispassedthrough abank ofmatched filters,eachfillercorresponding toadilTerent angular direction.
Thiswasmen­ IionedinSec.RA.
Theotherisareceive-only method thatusesareceiving arraywithmixersandlocal oscillalors (LOs),arranged soastoprovideNseparate receiving beamsfixedinspace (Fig.R.29).Eachmixerissupplied withadifferent LOfrequency.
Thetransmitting antenna provides asinglebeamilluminating thecoverage oftheNreceiving beams.Asdescribed in Sec.R.2.inordertogenerate abeamatsomeangle00,theremustbearelativephasedilTerence hetween adjacent elements equalto¢=21t(dIA.}sin00,Iftheleft-hand element ofanN­ element lineararrayistakenasthereference, thenthephaseshiftersattheotherelements must havevaluesofcp,2cp•...,(N-I)¢.Ifthebeamisscanned asafunction oftime,thesephase shiftsalsochange asafunction oftime.Aconstant rateofchangeofphasewithtimeis equivalent toaconstant frequency.
Thusafrequency difference atadjacent elements resultsin ascanning heam.IftheLOsinthemixersofFig.8.29differinfrequency by!"thebeam repetitively scansitscoverage atarateof!,.Thatis,theantenna beamoccupies allpossible scanpositions duringthescantime1/.(,.Another wayoflooking atthisistonotethatifthe relative phasebetween adjacent elements ofanarrayischanged by21tradians, theradiation patternwillassumeallpossible scanpositions.
Ifthe21tradiansischanged inatimeIlfs'thenthe raleofchange ofphaseis2rr.f.,.Thusthelinearphasechange canbeaccomplished if thefrequency difference between theLOsatthemixersofadjacent elements isIs' Bymultiplying thesummed outputofalltheelement mixerswithaperiodic sampling trainofnarrowgatingpulses,aparticular portionofspaceisobserved.
Changing therelative timephasebetween thesampling pulsetrainandthearrayoutputresultsinobserving a different angular direction.
Thusthebeamcanbesteeredbyvarying thetimephaseofthe HOlldp055 fdlp, BW"NIsMulflple~erI------ lcr';i1,-.'s ~(, :;h(-,7+---,(,----+---r--1 ~:N-l ClI,+Tis -I, ·0·'---------,-t---' '---------' I Reomwidth control'1(5 t I I Rpom steeringN-lY1,-2Is .~ Figure8.29Within-pulse scanning usingrrequency-multiplexed lineararray.Thisimplementation has beencalledMOSAR.
(From J()ll1l.~o,,'Uj Courtesy Proc.1EEE.) sirtnplitlg signal.
By providing more than one sampling signal, multiple sirnultaneoi~s beanis  can be generated which can either be fixed or independently steered.
 The local oscillator signals of Fig.
8.29 are derived coherently by  nixing the two frequen-  cies,f', and ,I, and filtering the desired mixer products f, + ,If,, 11 = 1.2, .
.
.
, N.
The frequency f,,  which is the rate at which the far field is sampled, must be greater than the total signal  bandwidth if the modulation envelope of the radar pulses is to be preserved.
The outputs froni  the elements must be limited to a bandwidth B before adding them all together, if noise overlap  is to be avoided.
The required bandwidth of the summed signal channel is Nl,, which must be  made greater than NB.
This can be quite large (perhaps several gigahertz in some radars) and  can represent a limitation on the implementation of the technique.
 The various beam positions can be obtained by sampling the output at the proper time.
In  Fig.
8.29 one beam sampling channel is illustrated.
The sampling signal S, is a train of short  pulses at a repetition rate fs which can be time-phased to gate the scanning signal k;, according  to the desired beam direction.
The beam-steering phase is indicated by a in the figure.
If r is  variithle.
the beam is steerable.
The generation of multiple fixed beams or a nun~ber of  inclependent steerable beams requires a duplication of the sampling pulse generators anti  sampling mixers.
 Other beam-forming methods.
Several nonarray techniques using reflectors or lenses have  been considered for the generation of multiple beams.
The Luneburg lens and the torus  reflector with multiple feeds as described in Chap.
7 are examples.
A radar with a reflector  antenna designed to generate a cluster of many beams has been sometimes called a pirlc~rsllioti  radar.
 In one example of a developmental radar that generated multiple beams, a spherical  transmitting antenna was surrounded by three spherical Luneburg-lens receiving antennas,  each covering a one-third sector of space.'0s The transmitting antenna was a spherical phased  array of several thousand elements, with only a fraction of these energized at any one time to  form a directive beam.
Each energized array ele'ment was driven from a separate power  amplifier.
which obtained its properly phased input signal from a Li~neburg lens.
This lens  functioned as a low-power RF analog beamformingdevice for the spherical array.
Such a 1~11s is  sometimes called a ~~or~lpl~ritlg lens.
The beam position of the spherical array was selected by  switching the proper elements of the Luneburg beam-forming lens to the elznlents of the trans-  mit array.
Each of the three Luneburg-lens receive antennas in the radar system coi~ld generate a  cluster of three beams pointing in the direction of the transmit beam.
The angle of arrival was  exirscietl by comparison of the amplitudes of the signals in the three-beam cluster.
Beam  switclling was performed separately from beam forming on both transmit and receive.
This  example ofa radar based on multiple-beam-forming is a system that is probably more conlplex  tha~l would he needed now to accomplish the same radar mission.
 Another approach to multiple-beam antennas utilized a planar lens array fed by a con-  stri~ined lens consisting of two connected hemispherical surfr~ces and a henlisplleric~~l feerl  surface.82 The details of this antenna will not be described here.
Its advatltagc is that it has truc  time delay, allowing a wide instantaneous bandwidth.
 The ~ubis"~ antenna, which uses a parallel-plate lens, and the Bo~tlace'~' antenna,  which is a form of lens array, are also capable of RF beam forming.
As mentioned, the  Li~neburg lens can be used as a beam-forming network to form multiple beams in conjunction  with a circular or spherical array,lo8 or the lens can be used directly to generate multiple  beams.
Since the Luneburg lens is not generally capable of high power, it is primarily a  receiving antenna.
For transniission, it can act at low power as an analog computer for the  high-power spherical lens.
 316INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS sampling signal.Byproviding morethanonesampling signal,multiple simultaneous beams canbegenerated whichcaneitherbefixedorindependently steered.
Thelocaloscillator signalsofFig.8.29arederivedcoherently bymixingthetwofrequen­ ciesIIand.l~andfiIteringthedesiredmixerproductsI,+nis'n=I,2,...,N.ThefrequencyIS! whichistherateatwhichthefarfieldissampled, mustbegreaterthanthetotalsignal bandwidth ifthemodu.lation envelope oftheradarpulsesistobepreserved.
Theoutputsfrom theelements mustbelimitedtoabandwidth Bbeforeaddingthemalltogether, ifnoiseoverlap istobeavoided.
Therequired bandwidth ofthesummed signalchannel isNf"whichmustbe madegreaterthanNB.Thiscanbequitelarge(perhaps severalgigahertz insomeradars)and canrepresent alimitation ontheimplementation ofthetechnique.
Thevariousbeampositions canbeobtained bysampling theoutputatthepropertime.In Fig.8.29onebeamsampling channel isillustrated.
Thesampling signalSaisatrainofshort pulsesatarepetition rateiswhichcanbetime-phased togatethescanning signal61:according tothedesiredbeamdirection.
Thebeam-steering phaseisindicated byexinthefigure.Ifais variable.
thebeamissteerable.
Thegeneration ofmultiple fixedbeamsoranumber of independent steerable beamsrequires aduplication ofthesampling pulsegenerators and sampling mixers.
Otherbeam-forming methods.
Severalnonarray techniques usingreflectors orlenseshave beenconsidered forthegeneration ofmultiple beams.TheLuneburg lensandthetorus reflector withmultiple feedsasdescribed inChap.7areexamples.
Aradarwithareflector antennadesigned togenerate aclusterofmanybeamshasbeensometimes calledapincllshion radar.
Inoneexample ofadevelopmental radarthatgenerated multiple beams.aspherical transmitting antenna wassurrounded bythreespherical Luneburg-lens receiving antennas, eachcovering aone-third sectorofspace.'05Thetransmitting antennawasaspherical phased arrayofseveralthousand elements.
withonlyafractionoftheseenergized atanyone timeto formadirective beam.Eachenergized arraye\e'ment wasdrivenfromaseparate power amplifier.
whichobtained i'tsproperly phasedinputsignalfromaLuneburg lens.Thislens functioned asalow-power RFanalog beam~formingdevice forthespherical array.Suchalensis sometimes calledacO/llpl/ting lens.Thebeamposition ofthespherical arraywasselected by switching theproperelements oftheLuneburg beam-forming [enstotheelements ofthetrans­ mitarray.EachofthethreeLuneburg-Iens receiveantennas intheradarsystemcouldgenerate a clusterofthreebeamspointing inthedirection ofthetransmit beam.Theangleofarrivalwas extracted bycomparison oftheamplitudes ofthesignalsinthethree-beam cluster.Beam switching wasperformed separately frombeamforming onbothtransmit andreceive.This example ofaradarbasedonmultiple-beam-forming isasystemthatisprobably morecomplex Ihanwouldbeneedednowtoaccomplish thesameradarmission.
Another approach tomultiple-beam antennas utilizedaplanarlensarrayfedbyacon­ straincd lensconsisting oftwoconnected hemispherical surfaces andahemispherical feed surface.lizThedetailsofthisantennawillnotbedescribed herc.Itsadvantage islhatithaslrlle timedelay,allowing awideinstantaneous bandwidth.
TheMubis,06 antenna, whichusesaparallel-plate lens,andtheBootlace107antenna, whichisaformoflensarray,arealsocapable ofRFbeamforming.
Asmentioned, the Luneburg lenscanbeusedasabeam-forming network toformmultiple beamsinconjunction withacircularorspherical array,108 orthelenscanbeuseddirectlytogenerate multiple beams.SincetheLuneburg lensisnotgenerally capable ofhighpower,itisprimarily a receiving antenna.
Fortransmission, itcanaclatlowpowerasananalogcomputer forlhe high-power spherical lens...,;? In principle, riiultiple receiving beams can be generated utilizing the Fast Fourier Trans-  form (FFT) proce~sor."~ If the output of each receiving element is sampled at the Nyquist  rate and if tlie sampled voltages are converted to a digital number, the FFT processor may be  used to generate ~iiultiple beams digitally, just as the Butler beam-forming array generates  then1 in analog fashion.
Ttius the antenna beams are generated by computation.
Its practical  inipleliieritation rcqi~ires coriverting RF or IF signals at each elernent to digital numbers.
 S!$tent considerations.
Orie of the attractive features claimed for a multiple-beam-forming  arrav is that it does away with phase shifters.
These are replaced, however, by multiple  receivers, one for each beam.
This can represent an expensive trade.
If instead of one receiver  per bean).
only one or a few receivers are time-shared over the total coverage, some form of  stvitcliing is required.
If the requiretiients for switching speed and flexibility are similar to those  of a corivelitiori;tI clcctr oriic;illy stcered pliased-array radar, the problem of switching a  receiker betweell ports of tile bearii-forming array may be as difficult as that of providing the  pliitse shifting ill a corlventiorlal array radar.'''  111 principle, a surveillance radar with a fixed transmitting beam of width 0, and a number  N of fixed, narrow receiving beanis of width 0, covering the same volume (NO, = 0,).
has  perfortilance equivalent to a radar with a single scanning transmit-receive beam of width 0,.
 provided the comparison is made on a similar basis and the received signals are processed in  the optiniunl mariner in each case.
The transmit antenna gain in the multiple-beam system is  11Ntll that of tlie scanning single-beam system.
The reduction of transmit antenna gain in a  rilultiple-bear11 radar is co~iipensatcd, flowever, in the ideal case by the increased nuniber of  hits available for integration.
The gain of the transmitting antenna in the multiple-bean1  syster~i is 0,/0, = 1/N that ol the transtnitting gain of the scanning-beam antenna.
Thus the  signal- to-noise ratio per pulse of the tnultiple-beam radar is less than the signal-to-noise ratio  of !he scanning-beam radar.
If these N pulses are integrated without loss as in a perfect  predetection integrator, the total signal-to-noise ratio in the multiple-beam radar just conipen-  sates for the lesser transmit gain.
Thus the multiple-beam radar and the scanning-beam radar  have equivalent detection capability, provided the data rates are the same and integration is  without loss.
Data rate is defined here as the revisit time in a scanning-beam radar, and in a  r~iultiple-bean1 radar it is the time over which the total number of pulses are integrated.
In  practice.
postdetection iritegration is usually employed and there will be a finite integration  loss.
It1 such a case the scanning-beam system will have an advantage over the multiple-beam  sysleni.
C  111 a niultiple-beam system which uses a broad transmitting beam to illuminate the region  covered by the coritiguous receiving beanis, the benefit of the two-way sidelobe levels that is  characteristic of a conventiorlal scanning radar antenna is not obtained.
Thus it is usually  desirable to suppress the sidelobes of the multiple receiving beams more than usual in order to  reduce the likelihood of echoes from large targets being received via the one-way sidelobes.
 Multiple-beam array antennas with a large number of simultaneous beams have not seen  wide application, probably because of the complexity of such systems.
They have, however,  had application in 3D mechanically rotating air-surveillance radars which employ a small  number of contiguous beams stacked in elevation to provide the elevation coordinate.
 In some applications, the effect of multiple, independent beams can be obtained with a  single-beam phased-array radar which is capable of flexible and rapid beam steering.
For  example, a sequential burst of pulses can be transmitted at the beginning of the transmission,  with each pulse radiated in a different direction.
This requires rapidly switching phase shifters  to steer the beam between pulses.
It also requires an application where a short minimum range  is not important since reception cannot take place during the transmission of the burst of  Till'I:.I.ITIHONH"AI.I.Y STI'ERED "liASI'D ARRAY ANTENNA INRADAR317 Inprinciple, multiple receiving beamscanbegenerated utilizing theFastFourierTrans­ form(FFT)processor.
I59Iftheoutputbf eachreceiving element issampled attheNyquist rateandifthesampled voltages areconverted toadigitalnumber, theFFTprocessor maybe usedtogenerate multiple beamsdigitally, justastheButlerbeam-forming arraygenerates theminanalogfashion.
Thustheantenna beamsaregenerated bycomputation.
Itspractical implementation rcquires convcrting RForIFsignalsateachelement todigitalnumbers.
S)stcmconsiderations.
Oneoftheattractive features claimed foramultiple-beam-forming arrayisthatitdocsawaywithphaseshifters.
Thesearereplaced, however, bymultiple receivers.
oneforeachbeam.Thiscanrepresent anexpensive trade.Ifinsteadofonereceiver perbeam.onlyoneorafewreceivers aretime-shared overthetotalcoverage, someformor switchingisrequired.rftherequirements forswitching speedandflexibilityaresimilartothose ofaconventional electronically steered phased-array radar,theproblem ofswitching a receiver between portsofthebeam-forIlling arraymaybeasdifficult asthatofproviding the phaseshifting inaconventional arrayradar.los Inprinciple, asurveillance radarwithafixedtransmitting beamofwidth0/andanumber Noffixed,narrow receiving beamsofwidthOrcovering thesamevolume(NOr=0,),has performance equivalent toaradarwithasinglescanning transmit-receive beamofwidthOr' provided thecomparison ismadeonasimilarbasisandthereceived signalsareprocessed in theoptimum manner ineachcase.Thetransmit antenna gaininthemultiple-beam systemis IINththatofthescanning single-beam system.Thereduction oftransmit antenna gainina multiple-beam radariscompensated, however, intheidealcasebytheincreased number of hitsavailable forintegration.
Thegainofthetransmitting antenna inthemultiple-beam systemisOrlO,=IINthatofthetransmitting gainofthescanning-beam antenna.
Thusthe signal-to-noise ratioperpulseofthemultiple-beam radarislessthanthesignal-to-noise ratio ofthescanning-beam radar.IftheseNpulsesareintegrated without lossasinaperfect predetection integrator, thetotalsignal-to-noise ratiointhemultiple-beam radarjustcompen­ satesforthelessertransmit gain.Thusthemultiple-beam ffidarandthescanning-beam radar haveequivalent detection capability, provided thedataratesarethesameandintegration is without loss.Datarateisdefinedhereastherevisittimeinascanning-beam radar,andina multiple-beam radaritisthetimeoverwhichthetotalnumber ofpulsesareintegrated.
In practice, postdetection integration isusuallyemployed andtherewillbeafiniteintegration loss.Insuchacasethescanning-beam systemwillhaveanadvantage overthemultiple-beam system.
(' In amultiple-beam systemwhichusesabroadtransmitting beamtoilluminate theregion covered bythecontiguous receiving beams,thebenefitofthetwo-way sidelobelevelsthatis characteristic ofaconventional scanning radarantenna isnotobtained.
Thusitisusually desirable tosuppress thesidelobes ofthemultiple receiving beamsmorethanusualinorderto reducethelikelihood ofechoesfromlargetargetsbeingreceived viatheone-way sidelobes.
Multiple-beam arrayantennas withalargenumber ofsimultaneous beamshavenotseen wideapplication, probably because ofthecomplexity ofsuchsystems.
Theyhave,however, hadapplication in3Dmechanically rotating air-surveillance radarswhichemploy asmall number ofcontiguous beamsstacked inelevation toprovide theelevation coordinate.
Insomeapplications, theeffectofmultiple, independent beamscanbeobtained witha single-beam phased-array radarwhichiscapable offlexibleandrapidbeamsteering.
For example, asequential burstofpulsescanbetransmitted atthebeginning ofthetransmission, witheachpulseradiated inadifferent direction.
Thisrequires rapidlyswitching phaseshifters tosteerthebeambetween pulses.Italsorequires anapplication whereashortminimum range isnotimportant sincereception cannottakeplaceduringthetransmission oftheburstof pulses.
Thus this approach would be suitable for radars whose targets are at long range, such  as satellite surveillance or BMD (Ballistic Missile Defense).
On reception, a separate receive  beam must be generated for each direction of transmission.
In a surveillance application this  could require the complication of some sort of beam-forming.
In a tracking phased-array  radar, however, a single time-shared receive beam can be used simultaneously to track many  targets at different angular directions.
Since the targets are under track, their approximate  ranges are known so that a beam need be formed in the proper direction only during the time  that a target echo is expected.
In this manner, several targets can be held in track during the  interpulse period, provided the phase shifters can switch sufficiently rapidly and a control  computer is available to take advantage of the inherent flexibility of the array.
 8.8 RANDOM ERRORS IN ARRAYS  In the analysis of the effects of reflector-antenna errors in Sec.
7.8 only the phase error was  considered.
In an array, however, other factors may enter to cause distortion of the radiation '.
.
 pattern.
These include errors in the amplitude as well as the phase of the current at the  individual elements of the array, missing or inoperative elements, rotation or translation of an  element from its correct position, and variations in the individual element patterns.
These  errors can result in a decrease in gain, increase in the sidelobes, and a shift in the location of the  main beam.
 Since it is not always possible to know the exact nature of the errors that might be  encountered in a specific antenna, the properties of the antenna must be described in statistical  terms.
That is, the average, or expected, value of the radiation pattern of an ensemble of  antennas of similar type can be computed based on the statistics of the random errors.
The  statistical description of the antenna properties cannot be applied to any particular antenna,  but applies to the collection of similar antennas whose errors are specified by the same  statistical parameters.
 The ensemble average power pattern'of a uniform array of M by N isotropic elements  arranged on a rectangular grid with equal spacing between elements can be expressed as1''  where P, = probability of an element being operative (or the fraction of the elements that  remain working)  6 = phase error (described by a gaussian probability density function)  I .fo(U, 4))' = no-error power pattern  A = amplitude error  i,, = no-error current at the mnth element  Thus the effect of random errors is to produce an average power pattern that is the superposi-  tion of two terms, similar to Eq.
(7.31) for the continuous aperture.
The first term represents  the no-error power pattern multiplied by the square of the fraction of elements remaining and  by a factor proportional to the phase error.
The other term depends on both the amplitude  error and the phase error as well as the fraction of elements remaining operative.
It also  depends on the aperture illumination, as given by the currents i,, .
Note that this second term  is independent of the angular coordinates 8, #.
It can be thought of as a "statistical omnidirec-  tional" pattern.
It causes the far-out sidelobes'to differ in the presence of error as compared to  the no-error pattern.
(The no-error pattern sidelobes generally drop off rapidly with increasing  318INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS pulses.Thusthisapproach wouldbesuitable forradarswhosetargetsareatlongrange,such assatellite surveillance orBMD (Ballistic MissileDefense).
Onreception, aseparate receive beammustbegenerated foreachdirection oftransmission.
Inasurveillance application this couldrequirethecomplication ofsomesortofbeam-forming.
Inatracking phased-array radar,however, asingletime-shared receivebeamcanbeusedsimultaneously totrackmany targetsatdifferent angular directions.
Sincethetargetsareundertrack,theirapproximate rangesareknownsothatabeamneedbeformedintheproperdirection onlyduringthetime thatatargetechoisexpected.
Inthismanner, severaltargetscanbeheldintrackduringthe interpulse period,provided thephaseshifterscanswitchsufficiently rapidlyandacontrol computer isavailable totakeadvantage oftheinherent flexibility ofthearray.
8.8RANDOM ERRORS INARRAYS Intheanalysis oftheeffectsofreflector-antenna errorsinSec.7.8onlythephaseerrorwas considered.
Inanarray,however, otherfactorsmayentertocausedistortion oftheradiation pattern.
Theseincludeerrorsintheamplitude aswellasthephaseofthecurrentatthe individual elements ofthearray,missingorinoperative elements, rotationortranslation ofan element fromitscorrectposition, andvariations intheindividual element patterns.
These errorscanresultinadecrease ingain,increase inthesidelobes, andashiftinthelocation ofthe mainbeam.
Sinceitisnotalwayspossible toknowtheexactnatureoftheerrorsthatmightbe encountered inaspecificantenna, theproperties oftheantenna mustbedescribed instatistical terms.Thatis,theaverage, orexpected, valueoftheradiation patternofanensemble of antennas ofsimilartypecanbecomputed basedonthestatistics oftherandom errors.The statistical description oftheantenna properties cannotbeappliedtoanyparticular antenna, butappliestothecollection ofsimilarantennas whoseerrorsarespecified bythesame statistical parameters.
Theensemble average powerpattern;ofauniform arrayofMbyNisotropic elements arranged onarectangular gridwithequalspacing between elements canbeexpressed as109 MN If(B,4»12=P;e-,p Ifo(B,4»12+[(1+!!2)P~-P;e-J2J2:2:i;'n m=1n=1(8.24) wherePI!=probability ofanelement beingoperative (orthefraction ofthedements that remainworking) (j=phaseerror(described byagaussian probability densityfunction) 1.10(0,4>W=no-error powerpattern !!=amplitude error .
imn=no-error currentatthemnthelement Thustheeffectofrandom errorsistoproduce anaveragepowerpatternthatisthesuperposi­ tionuftwoterms,similartoEq.(7.31)forthecontinuous aperture.
Thefirsttermrepresents theno-error powerpatternmultiplied bythesquareofthefractionofelements remaining and byafactorproportional tothephaseerror.'Theothertermdepends onboththeamplitude errorandthephaseerroraswellasthefraction ofelements remaining operative.
Italso depends ontheaperture illumination, asgivenbythecurrentsimn•Notethatthissecondterm isindependent oftheangularcoordinates 8,c/J.Itcanbethoughtofasa..statistical omnidirec­ tional"pattern.Itcausesthefar-outsidelobes'to differinthepresen~ oferrorascompared to theno-error pattern.(Theno-error patternsidelobes generally dropoffrapidlywithincreasing 1111' 1.1 I.C.1 RONI('AI I Y SIFI:RI:I> I'IIASEL) ARRAY ANTENNA IN RADAR 319  angle from broatlsitlc; tllereforc, beyotld sollle angle the radiation pattern will be donlitlatetl  by the error-produced sidelobes.) *The shape of the main beam and the near-in sidelobes are  relatively unamected by errors, although their magnitudes are modified.
Note that the factor P,  can also be used to evaluate the effect of random thinning of array antennas.
 For P, = I and srnall errors.
the normalized pattern, obtained from Eq.
(8.24) by dividing  by the value of I Jb(0, 0) 1'.
is  The second tern1 of this expression indicates that the larger the number of elements, the  srnaller will be the statistical sidelobe level.
The main-beam intensity, being coherent, increases  as the square of the number ofelements, whereas the sidelobes due to errors, being incohererit.
 increases only directly with the number of elements.
The gain of a broadside array of isotropic  elernen ts is approximately  (Note that wllell imn = corlstallt.
(;, = MN.) l'hen the nornlalized pattern of Eq.
(8.25) can be  expressed as  The greater the gain of the antenna, the less the relative effect of the errors on the sidelobes.
 Bv substituting the radiation intensity of Eq.
(8.24) into the definition of gain (or directi-  vity) of Eq.
(7.3) it can be shown that  Note that the relative reduction in gain is independent of the number ofelements and depends  only on the fraction of elements that are operative and the mean square value of the errors.
 When P, = 1 and A = 0, the expression is, for small-phase errors, similar to that of Eq.
(7.30)  for the confinuous aperture.
 In addition to raising the sidelobe level, random phase and amplitude errors in the  aperture distribution cause an error it1 the position of the main beam.
Rondinelli"' has sliown  that for a uniform amplitude distribution across an M by M square array, the statistical rms  bear11 poillting error is  where 0 = rrns value of normalized error current assuming Rayleigh distributed errors  k = 2n/A  ti, = element spacing  M = nurnber of elenients along one dimension of square array  The phase angle is assumed uniformly distributed.
Equation (8.29) indicates an error of  0.22 x radian (-0.001") for a 100-by-100-element uniformly illuminated array with a  beamwidth of approximately lo when a = 0.4.
 Till'I'UTTRONICAU.Y SITFRI'D PIIASED ARRAY ANTENNA INRADAR319 anglefromhroadside; therefore, heyondsomeangletheradiation pattern willbedominated bytheerror-produced sidelobes.) Theshapeofthemainbeamandthenear-in sidelobes are relatively unaffected byerrors,although theirmagnitudes aremodified.
NotethatthefactorP" canalsobeusedtoevaluate theeffectofrandom thinning ofarrayantennas.
ForPe=Iandsmallerrors,thenormalized pattern, obtained fromEq.(8.24)bydividing bythevalueof1.t~(O,0)12,is (8.25) Thesecond termofthisexpression indicates thatthelargerthenumber ofelements, the smaller willbethestatistical sidelobe level.Themain-beam intensity, beingcoherent, increases asthesquareofthenumber ofelements, whereas thesidelobes duetoerrors,beingincoherent, increases onlydirectly withthenumber ofelements.
Thegainofabroadside arrayofisotropic elements isapproximately Go= m n(8.26) (Notethatwhenimn=constant, Go=MN.)Thenthenormalized patternofEq.(8.25)canhe expressed as (8.27) (8.28)Thegreaterthegainoftheantenna, thelesstherelative effectoftheerrorsonthesidelobes.
Bvsubstituting theradiation intensity ofEq.(8.24)intothedefinition ofgain(ordirecti­ vity)ofEq.(7.3)itcanbeshownthat p..
p..
GIGo=(I+~i~)~xpr=:51)==:T+'3i'+'Z l Notethattherelativereduction ingainisindependent ofthenumberofelements anddepends onlyonthefraction ofelements thatareoperative andthemeansquarevalueoftheerrors.
Whenp..=Iandt1=0,theexpression is,forsmall-phase errors,similartothatofEq.(7.30) forthecontinuous aperture.
Inaddition toraisingthesidelobe level,random phaseandamplitude errorsinthe aperture distribution causeanerrorintheposition ofthemainbeam.Rondinelli 110hasshown thatforauniform amplitude distribution acrossanMbyMsquarearray,thestatistical rms heampointing erroris (8.29) where (j=rmsvalueofnormalized errorcurrentassuming Rayleigh distributed errors k=2rr/).
de=element spacing M=number ofelements alongonedimension ofsquarearray Thephaseangleisassumed uniformly distributed.
Equation (8.29)indicates anerrorof 0.22x10-4radian(-0.001°) foralOO-by-lOO-element uniformly illuminated arraywitha beamwidth ofapproximately 1°when (J=0.4. Leichter's analysis1 ' of beam-poin ting errors was performed for a continuous line  source, but may be applied to a linear array.
Both uniform distributions and modified Taylor  distributions were considered.
The amplitude and phase distributions were described by the  gaussian distribution and were assumed independent of one another.
An example of Leichter's  results for a uniform amplitude distribution is shown in Fig.
8.30.
 Several conclusions may be derived from the various stitdies of errors described above  and from Sec.
7.8.
For array antennas the following seem to apply:  1.
The larger the number of elements (MN) it1 the array, the stnaller will be the sptrriolis  radiation for a given error tolerance and a given design sidelobe level.
In other words, lower  sidelobes are more likely to be achieved with larger antennas.
This comes about because the  intensity of the main beam increases as the square of the number of elements (AIN)~, while  the spurious radiation increases only linearly since it represents the incoherenl'addition of  many contributions."  2.
The rise in the sidelobe level diie to random errors is independent of the beam scan  angle.' lo  3.
The lower the design sidelobe level, the greater will be the rise in the sidelobes, assumtng a  given antenna size and a given error t~lerance."~  4.
In a two-dimensional array, the most serious random error is in the translational position  of the dipole elements.
Of secondary importance are the errors in the currents applied to the  elements.
The angular position of the dipole elements is relatively unimportant.
l3  The following conclusions apply to the continuous antenna:  1.
According to R~tze,''~ the spurious sidelobe radiation is proportional to the mean square  error, just as in the discrete array, and in addition is proportional to the square of the  correlation interval measured in wavelengths.
Bates' " defines his correlation interval dif-  ferently from Ruze and obtains a first-power dependence for this reason.
 2.
If errors are unavoidable in a reflecting antenna surface.
they should be kept small in extent;  that is, for the same mechanical tolerance, the antenna with the smaller correlation interval  Figure 8.30 Plot of a, versus O/O,, where a, is the rms  phase error such that the pointing error will be In the  interval (-0, 0) with a probability p(0) for arrays with  ,412 spacing; solid curves apply for p(O) = 0.95; dashed  (3 0.02 0 04 0.06 0.08 0.10 clrrvcs apply for 140) = 0.99: 0, - anglc to the lirst 111111;  %I D = antenna length.
(Courtesy Hlrglles Aircrufi Co.)  320INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS Leichter's analysis IIIofbeam-pointing errorswasperformed foracontinuous line source,butmaybeappliedtoalineararray.Bothuniform distributions andmodified Taylor distributions wereconsidered.
Theamplitude andphasedistributions weredescribed bythe gaussian distribution andwereassumed independent ofoneanother.
Anexample ofLeichter's resultsforauniform amplitude distribution isshowninFig.8.30.
Severalconclusions maybederivedfromthevariousstudiesoferrorsdescribed above andfromSec.7.8.Forarrayantennas thefollowing seemtoapply: I.Thelargerthenumber ofelements (MN)intilearray.thesmallerwillhethespurious radiation foragivenerrortolerance andagivendesignsidelobelevel.Inotherwords.lower sidelobes aremorelikelytobeachieved withlargerantennas.
Thiscomesaboutbecausethe intensity ofthemainbeamincreases asthesquareofthenumberofelements (ft.'!N)l,while thespurious radiation increases onlylinearlysinceitrepresents theincoherent-addition of manycontributions.lll ')TheriseinthesideJobe levelduetorandom errorsisindependent oftheheamscan angle.llo 3.Thelowerthedesignsidelobe level,thegreaterwillbetheriseinthesidelobes, assuming a givenantenna sizeandagivenerrortolerance.113 4.Inatwo-dimensional array,themostseriousrandomerrorisinthetranslational position ofthedipoleelements.
Ofsecondary importance aretheerrorsinthecurrents appliedtothe elements.
Theangular position ofthedipoleelements isrelatively unimporlanl.I13 Thefollowing conclusions applytothecontinuous antenna: 1.According toRuze,lll thespurious sidelobe radiation isproporlional tothemeansquare error,justasinthediscrete array,andinaddition isproportional tothesquareofthe correlationintervalmeasured inwavelengths.
Bates114defineshiscorrelationintervaldif­ ferentlyfromRuzeandobtainsafirst-power dependence forthisreason.
2.Iferrorsareunavoidable inareflecting antennasurface.theyshouldbekeptsmallinextent'; thatis,forthesamemechanical tolerance, theantenna withthesmallercorrelation interval Figure8.30Plotof(Jbversus0/0"where (Jbistherms phaseerrorsuchthatthepointing errorwillheinthe interval(-0,0) withaprobability p(O)forarrayswith A/2spacing; solidcurvesapplyforp(O)=0.95;dashed 0.10curvesapplyforI'((J)=0.99;O.=angletothefirstl1ull; D=antenna length.(Courtesy HugJlesAircraftCo.)f:::/001.0 0.8- 0.4- ~.i~li I~~,I:C..I.KONICAI-I.Y si I:I:~II;~) PIIASI.:I) AKKAY AN'IIINNA IN KALIAK 321  (rouglier surface) will give lower sidelobes than an antenna with a larger correlatioti inter-  val.
An error stretching most of the length-of the antenna is likely to have a worse effect than  a localized bump or dent of ~nuch greater aniplitude.
Therefore small disturbances such as  screws and rivets on the surface of the reflector will have little effect on the antenna  radi;~tiori pattern.
 3.
,411 iricrcasc ill fr-crltlc~icy i~icrcascs t,otli tlic pli;~se errors a~icl tlie corrclalio~i i~itel.vi~l ill  tertiis of wavelerlgtlis.
-1'1iereft7re tlie gain of a constant-area antenna does riot increase ;is  r:~pitlly ;IS rllc square of tlic frcclilcricy.
For reflectors of cqilal gain (saliie ciinlitctcr it1  w:ivelerigtlis) Eel.
(7.32) shows that the relative sidelobe level causccl by errors will increase  -;IS [tic foilrtll power of (lie freqilency, or 12 d~/octave.'  ,411 i~iiportant co~iclusion is that the details of the radiation pattern, especially in the  region outside tlie ~iiairi beam, are more likely to be determined by the accuracy witti which tlie  antenna is constructed than by the manner in which the aperture is illuminated.
Thus  the tiiecltatiical crlginecr aiid the skilled tuacllitiist and tccllnician are just as i~i~portarit as  the :lntentia tiesigner in realizing the desired radiation pattern.
 Effects of phase shifter quantizatior~.R2.1 '" The discrete value of phase shift that results from  tlie use of qua~itized phase shifters introduces an "error" in the desired aperture illumination.
 Phase quantization can cause a loss in antenna gain, an increase in the rms sidelobe level, the  generation of spurious sidelobes, and a shift in the pointing of the main beam.
The effect of  quantized phase shifters on the radiation pattern is similar to the effect of random errors.
 The gain of an array antenna with a mean square phase error 8' in its aperture illumina-  tion is approximately  - -  wlicrc (;,, = no-error gain.
This follows fr'om Eq.
(8.28) with P, = 1.
AZ = 0, and fi2 small.
For  :I quanti7ed pliase sliifter consisting of B bits, the phase error 5 is described by a uniforni  probability density function extending over an interval &7~/2~.
From Sec 2.4 the mean square  pliac error for tlie unifortii probability density function is 6' = ~'/3(2~').
Substituting into  Eq.
(8.30).
the loss of gain is found to be 1.0 dB for a two-bit phase shifter, 0.23 dB for a  three-bit phase shifter, and 0.06 dB for four bits.
On the basis of the loss in gain, a three- or  four-bi t phase shifter should be satisfactory for most applications.
 Phase quantization errors also result in an increase in the rms sidelobe level and in the  peak sidelobe level.
With the assumptiotis that (1) the energy lost by the reduction in main  beam gain shows up as an increase in the rrns sidelobe level, (2) the element gain is the same for  the riiain bear11 and the sidelobes (within the region of space scanned by the array), (3) an  allowance of one dB for the reduction in gain due to the aperture illumination, and (4) one dB  for scanning degradation, then the sidelobe level due to the quantization can be expressed as  d' rms sidelobe level 2: --- -- 22B~  where N = total riurnber of elenien ts in the array.
For an array with four thousand elements, a  three-hit pliase shifter will give rriis sitieiobes better ttian 47 dB below the main beani, and a  four-bit phase sllifter gives 53 dl3 sidelobes.
Thus three or four bits sllould be sufficie~lt for  tilost large arrays.
except where very low sidelobes are desired.
 Allhougll the above assutned a rand'ln distributiori of phase error across the aperture for  coriiputation of the rms sidelobe level, the actual phase distribution with quantized phase  stlifters is likely to he periodic.
The periodic nature of the quaritized phase will give rise to  TilEFLHTRUNICALI.Y STEERED PIIASI:I) ARRAY ANTENNA INRADAR321 (rougher surface) willgivelowersidelobesthananantenna withalargercorrelation inter­ val.Anerrorstretchingmostofthe lengthoftheantenna islikelytohaveaworseeffectthan alocalized bumpordentofmuchgreateramplItude.
Therefore smalldisturbances suchas screwsandrivetsonthesurface oftherellector willhavelittleeffectontheantenna radiation pattern.
3.;\nincreaseillfrcqucncy incrcases boththephaseerrorsandthecorrelation interval in termsofwavelengths.
Therefore thegainofaconstant-area antenna doesnotincrease as rapidly asthesquareofthe frequcncy.
Forrenectors ofequalgain(samediamcter in wavelengths) Fq.(7.32)showsthattherelativesidelobelevelcausedbyerrorswillincrease ';ISthefourthpowerofthefrequency, or12dB/octave.
I12 ;\nimportant conclusion isthatthedetailsoftheradiation pattern, especially inthe regionoutsidethemainbeam,aremorelikelytobedetermined bytheaccuracy withwhichthe antenna isconstructed thanbythemanner inwhichtheaperture isilluminated.
Thus themcchanical cngineer andtheskilledmachinist andtechnician arejustasimportant as theantenna designer inrealizing thedesiredradiation pattern.
Effectsofphaseshifterquantization.R2.115 Thediscrete valueofphaseshiftthatresultsfrolll theuseofquantized phaseshiftersintroduces an"error" inthedesiredaperture illumination.
Phasequantization cancausealossinantenna gain,anincrease inthermssidelobe level,the generation ofspurious sidelobes, andashiftinthepointing ofthemainbeam.Theeffectof quantized phaseshiftersontheradiation pattern issimilartotheeffectofrandom errors.
Thegainofanarrayantenna withameansquarephaseerrorb2initsaperture illumina­ tionisapproximately (8.30) (8.31)whereGn=no-error gain.Thisfollowsfr'omEq.(8.28)withPe=L~2=O.and(j2small.For aquantized phaseshifterconsisting ofBbits,thephaseerror(jisdescribed byauniform probahility densityfunction extending overaninterval±rr/2R.FromSec2.4themeansquare phaseerrorfortheuniform probability density function is~2=rr2j3(22B).Substituting into Eq.PUO),thelossofgainisfoundtobe1.0dBforatwo-bit phaseshifter,0.23dBfora three-bit phaseshifter.and0.06dBforfourbits.Onthebasisofthelossingain,athree-or four-bit phaseshiftershouldbesatisfactory formostapplications.
Phasequantization errorsalsoresultinanincrease inthermssidelobelevelandinthe peaksidelobe level.Withtheassumptions that(1)theenergylostbythereduction inmain heamgainshowsupasanincrease inthermssidelobe level,(2)theelement gainisthesamefor themainheamandthesidelobes(withintheregionofspacescanned bythearray),(3)an allowance ofonedBforthereduction ingainduetotheaperture illumination.
and(4)onedB forscanning degradation.
thenthesidelobe levelduetothequantization canbeexpressed as rmssidelobe level~-li-­2 N \vhereN=totalnumberofelements inthearray.Foranarraywithfourthousand elements.
a three-hit phnseshifterwillgiverrnssidelobes betterthan47dBbelowthemainbeam.anda four-hit phaseshiftergives53dBsidelobes.
Thusthreeorfourbitsshouldbesufficient for mostlargearrays.exceptwhereverylowsidelobes aredesired.
;\lthough theaboveassumed arandl'1l1 distribution ofphaseerroracrosstheaperture for computation ofthermssidelobe level,theactualphasedistribution withquantized phase shifters islikelytoheperiodic.
Theperiodic natureofthequantized phasewillgiveriseto spurious quanrizatiorl lobes, similar to grating lobes.
The peak-quantization lobe relative to the  main beam, when the phase error has a triangular repetitive distribution is  I Peak quantization lobe = 22B  This applies when the main beam points close to broadside and there are many radiating  elements within the quantized phase period.
The position of the quantization lobe in this case  is  sin 0, = (I -- 2B) (lo (U.33)  where O0 = angle to which main beam is steered.
Equation (8.32) is an optimistic estimate for  the peak lobe.
The greatest phase quantization lobe is said to occur when the element spacing  is exactly one-half the phase quantization period or an exact odd multiple there~f.~~~"~ With  an element spacing of one-half wavelength, the quantization lobe will appear at sin 0, 2  sin 0, - I, with a value of  n2 1 cos 0, Peak quantization lobe cr - - - -- -  4 22B cos oo  The peak sidelobes due to the phase quantization can be significant, and attempts should  be made to reduce them if their presence is objectionable.
One method for reducing the peak  lobe is to randomize the phase quantization.
A constant phase shift can he inserted in the path  to each element, with a value that differs from element to element by amounts that are  unrelated to the bit size.
This added phase shift is then subtracted in the command sent to the  phase shifter.
With an optical-fed array, such as the reflectarray or the lens array, decorrela-  tion of the phase quantization is inherent in the array construction.
In this case, the reduction  in peak quantization lobes is said to be equivalent to adding one bit to the phase shifters in a  100-element array, 2 bits in a 1000-element array, and 3 bits in a 5000-element array.
 The maximum pointing error due to quantization, is'15  where 0, is the beamwidth.
A four-bit phase shifter, for example would give AOo/O, = 0.049.
 Small steering increments are possible with quantized phase shifters.
For example, a linear  array of 100 elements can be steered in increments of about 0.01 beamwidth with 3-bit phase  shifters."  8.9 COMPUTER CONTROL OF PHASED-ARRAY RADAR - ' '  A computer is a necessary part of a phased-array radar.
It is vital in applications where  flexible, multifunction operations are desired, as in satellite surveillance, air defense systems,  ballistic missile defense, and multifunction airborne radar.
The computer permits the inherent  flexibility of an array to be exploited by efficiently controlling the radar and scheduling its  operations.
However, the cost of achieving this capability is not insignificant and has been one  of the major factors in making the array radar expensive.
 The computer is needed in a phased-array radar to provide beam-steering comn~urlds for  the individual phase shifters; signal management by determining the type of waveform, the  number of observations, data rate, power, and frequency; the corresponding signal processitry  and dutu processing in accordance with the mode of operation; outputs of l~rocessrd Juta to  322INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS· spurious quantizatioll lobes,similartogratinglobes.Thepeak-quantization loberelativetothe mainbeam,whenthephaseerrorhasatriangular repetitive distribution is .
.
I b IPeakquantization 0e=-in2 Thisapplieswhenthemainbeampointsclosetobroadside andtherearemanyradiating elements withinthequantized phaseperiod.Theposition ofthequantization lobeinthiscase IS (K33) (8.34) (8.35)where00=angletowhichmainbeamissteered.Equation (8.32)isanoptimistic estimate for thepeaklobe.Thegreatestphasequantization lobeissaidtooccurwhentheelementspacing isexactlyone-half thephasequantization periodoranexactoddmultiple thereqf.
Hl.115With anelement spacingofone-half wavelength, thequantization lobewillappearatsin01~ sin00-I,withavalueof Pk..Ibn:2Icos()IeaquantIzatIOn 0e~-------- -4 228cos00 Thepeaksidelobes duetothephasequantization canbesignificant, andattempts should bemadetoreducethemiftheirpresence isobjectionable.
Onemethodforreducing thepeak lobeistorandomize thephasequantization.
Aconstant phaseshiftcanbeinsertedinthepath toeachelement, withavaluethatdiffersfromelement toelement byamounts thatare unrelated tothebitsize.Thisaddedphaseshiftisthensubtracted inthecommand senttothe phaseshifter.Withanoptical-fed array,suchasthereflectarray orthelensarray,decorrda­ tionofthephasequantization isinherent inthearrayconstruction.
Inthiscase,thereduction inpeakquantization lobesissaidtobeequivalent toaddingonebittothephaseshiftersina loo-element array,2bitsinalOoo-element array,and3bitsina5000-element array.
Themaximum pointing errorduetoquantization, is115 n:I 1:100/08="42-8 where 0Bisthebeamwidth.
Afour-bitphaseshifter,forexample wouldgive1:100/OB=0.049.
Smallsteering increments arepossible withquantized phaseshifters.Forexample, alinear arrayof100elements canbesteeredinincrements ofabout0.01beamwidth with3-bitphase shifters.82 8.9COMPUTER CONTROL OFPHASED-ARRAY RADARl16.121 Acomputer isanecessary partofaphased-array radar.Itisvitalinapplications where flexible,multifunction operations aredesired,asinsatellitesurveillance, airdefensesystems, ballisticmissiledefense,andmultifunction airborne radar.Thecomputer permitstheinherent flexibility ofanarraytobeexploited byefficiently controlling theradarandscheduling its operations.
However, thecostofachieving thiscapability isnotinsignificant andhasbeenone ofthemajorfactorsinmakingthearrayradarexpensive.
Thecomputer isneededinaphased-array radartoprovide hearn-steering commands for theindividual phaseshifters; signalmanagement bydetermining thetypeofwavdorm, the numberofobservations, datarate,power,andfrequency; thecorresponding signalprocessillg anddataprocessing inaccordance withthemodeofoperation; outputsofprocessed dawto TttE EI.EC'I RON1CALI.Y SrEEREU PHASED ARRAY ANTENNA IN RADAR 323  users.
including tlie gerieratiorl of displays; " holrsekeepi~~g " functions of performance monitor-  ing.
fault location, data recording arid simulations; and the e.uecitrille nraiiagement of the radar  by assigning priorities to the various tasks and how tliey should be performed so as to achieve  a corilprotnise betweer1 tlie required radar actions and the resources available in the radar  and cornputer.
111 addition, tlie computer provides the means whereby an operator can niani~ally  intcr act with tlie radar  Beam-steering computer.
Although a single general-purpose cornputer can be used to perform  all ttie computatiotis and control required for a phased-array radar, it is often desirable to  utilize a separate, special-purpose computer for beam steering.
This can be an integral part of  the radar hardware so as to rnininiize the problem of communicating the large number of  phase-shifter orders.
71'tie general-purpose radar-control cotnputer provides the beam-steering  cornputer with the desired elevatiori angle and azimuth angle.
The beamsteering computer  tratislates this into cornniatids necessary for each phase shifter.
In some array designs with  frequency-dependent phase shifters, tlie frequency also must be supplied to the beam-steering  cotiiputer along with the two angles.
 In sonie cases the generation arid distribution of a large number of individual phase-  shifter commands (one for each element) might be economically prohibitive.
In devising  computation algorithms and computer hardware, advantage can be taken of the fact that the  phase shift $,, required at the rr~r~th element of a rectangular-spaced array can be separated by  row atid coli~t~in since JI,, = r,r$, + , where r~t.
II are integers corresponding to ttie ntth row  and rrth colutnn, ~, is the phase difference needed between adjacent rows to steer the beam in  elevation.
and (I, is the phase dilference between adjacent columns needed to steer in azimuth.
 This is so~iletirrles called row/colunin steering.
BaughlZ1 describes a "non-time-critical"  row/column beam-steering computer that represents a minimum equipment approach that  takes frorn 10 to 20 rns to generate the phase-shifter commands.
He also describes a "time-  critical " design, which requires sonie form of adding device per element, that reduces the time  to 50 to 100 ~ts.
The better the hardware the less can be the computation time.
 The use of subarrays usually simplifies the problem of the beam-steering computer.
 Instead of requiring a coninland for each of the elements of the array, the subarray steering  requires only p + q pliase shifter commands per pointing angle, where p is the number of  elernents in the subarray and q is the number of subarrays in the array.
However, with q  identical subarrays of p elements each, the tolerance on the individual phase shifters must  usually be ketter than with a similar conventional array of pq elements since with subarrays  the errors across the entire aperture are no longer independent.
 Array radar system functions.
An array radar is sometimes required to perform more than one  function with the same equipment.
The problem with a multifunction array is to utilize  effectively the resource of time and ttie resource of radar energy.
The computer allows the radar  to utilize its resources elfectively by scheduling the execution of the various functions so as  to perform the more important tasks first.
 A multifunction array radar rnight be called upon to perform the following tasks:  Search of a specified volurne of space at a specified rate, and the detection of targets.
 Track itritiatiotl, or transition to track, after a new detection is established.
 7'rc~c.h r~rc~ir~terrc~r~~.e, or track update, by acquiring new data and consolidating it with existing  tracks.
 User sert-ices, whereby the specific information desired by the user is acquired, such as obtain-  ing a satellite ephemeris or the solution of a fire-control problem.
 THEELECTRONICALLY STEERED PHASED ARRAY ANTENNA INRADAR323 IIsers.including thegeneration ofdisplays;" hOllsekeepillg" functions ofperformance monitor­ ing.faultlocation, datarecording andsimulations; andtheexeclltive mallagemellt oftheradar byassigning priorities tothevarioustasksandhowtheyshouldbeperformed soastoachieve acompromise between therequired radaractionsandtheresources available intheradar andcomputer.
rnaddition, thecomputer provides themeanswhereby anoperator canmanually interact withtheradar, Beam-steering computer.
Although asinglegeneral-purpose computer canbeusedtoperform allthecomputations andcontrol required foraphased-array radar,itisoftendesirable to utilizeaseparate, special-purpose computer forbeamsteering.
Thiscanbeanintegral partof theradarhardware soastominimize theproblem ofcommunicating thelargenumber of phase-shifter orders.Thegeneral-purpose radar-control computer provides thebeam-steering computer withthedesiredelevation angleandazimuth angle.Thebeam-steering computer translates Ihisintocommands necessary foreachphaseshifter.Insomearraydesigns with frequency-dependent phaseshifters, thefrequency alsomustbesupplied tothebeam-steering computer alongwiththetwoangles.
Insomecasesthegeneration anddistribution ofalargenumber ofindividual phase­ shiftercommands (oneforeachelement) mightbeeconomically prohibitive.
Indevising computation algorithms andcomputer hardware, advantage canbetakenofthefactthatthe phaseshillt/Jm"required attheIIIllthelementofarectangular-spaced arraycanbeseparated by rowandcolumnsinceVIm"=lIIt/Jr+Ilt/Jx'whereIll.IIareintegerscorresponding totheIIIthrow andIllhcolumn, t/J},isthephasedifference neededbetween adjacent rowstosteerthebeamin elevation.
andt/Jxisthephasedifference between adjacent columns neededtosteerinazimuth: Thisissometimes calledrow/column steering.
Baugh 121describes a..non-time-critical" row/column beam-steering computer thatrepresents aminimum equipment approach that takesfrom10to20mstogenerate thephase-shifter commands.
Healsodescribes a"time­ critical" design,whichrequires someformofaddingdeviceperelement, thatreducesthetime to50to100I1S.Thebetterthehardware thelesscanbethecomputation time.
Theuseofsubarrays usually simplifies theproblem ofthebeam-steering computer.
Insteadofrequiring acommand foreachoftheelements ofthearray,thesubarray steering requires onlyp+qphaseshiftercommands perpointing angle,wherepisthenumber of elements inthesubarray andqisthenumber ofsubarrays inthearray.However, withq identical subarrays ofpelements each,thetolerance ontheindividual phaseshifters must usuallybebetterIhanwithasimilarconventional arrayofpqelements sincewithsubarrays , theerrorsacrosstheentireaperture arenolongerindependent.
Ana)"radarslstemfunctions.
Anarrayradarissometimes required toperform morethanone function withthesameequipment.
Theproblem withamultifunction arrayistoutilize effectively theresource oftimeandtheresource ofradarenergy.Thecomputer allowstheradar toutilizeitsresources effectively byscheduling theexecution ofthevarious functions soas toperform themoreimportant tasksfirst.
Amultifunction arrayradarmightbecalledupontoperform thefollowing tasks: Searchofaspecified volumeofspaceataspecified rate,andthedetection oftargets.
Trackillitiatioll, ortransition totrack.afteranewdetection isestablished.
TrackIIICl;llte'IllIlCl'.
ortrackupdate.byacquiring newdataandconsolidating itwithexisting tracks.
Userserrices, whereby thespecificinformation desiredbytheuserisacquired, suchasobtain­ ingasatellite ephemeris orthesolution ofafire-control problem. 324 1NTRODUC.TION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  In each of these, the proper radar waveform must be selected along with the corresponding  receiver processing.
This is known as radar sigual ,rta,tugenlent and is an important function of  the computer.
In the AN/FPS-85 satellite-surveillance radar, for example, seven different radar  waveforms were available for performing the target detection and tracking mission as sl~own  in Table 8.1 .' '%n eighth waveform was used for alignment of the transmitter and recelver  mod 11 les.
 The .wc~rc,/~ ~triil tlt.trction function requires that the conlputer generate the angular coor-  d~nates of the region to be searched, the type of transmitted waveform to be used, the length of  the dwell period, and the time assigned for the execution of the dwell by the radar.
Since tht:  radar is performing tracking and other functions as well as search, conflicts in scheduling the  radar or the processor might arise.
Tracking functions are often more critical of time than  search, and would have a higher priority in the event of a scheduling conflict.
When search  must be interrupted for a higher-priority task, the computer program must be designed to do  so with minimum disruption.
In scheduling the varioi~s riltlar functions, the computer rnilst  insure that the average-power limits of the radar transmitter are not exceeded.
 The flexibility of a phased-array radar allows more freedom in the selection of a tletection  criterion.
For example, after initial crossing of the detection threshold, the radar beam can be  returned to the same direction sooner than it would in normal search in order to verify that a  target was indeed detected and that the threshold crossing was not a false alarm due to noise.
 This ~.rrlficoatiotl plrlst.
can be of greater power and/or of longer duration to increase the  probability of detection.
The two-step process of (I) initial detection and (2) verification 13  sometimes called .\rylrerlrial tletection.
Because of the availability of a verification pulse, the  power transmitted by the normal search-pulse can be less than if the detection decision had to  be made on the basis of only a sipgle observation.
 There ib always a limit to the infortnation that can be proccssecl by any general-pi~rpobc  radar control conlputer.
The process of initiating and maintaining track can be very cfe~nantl-  Table 8.1 Waveforms used in AN!FPS-85 satellite stlrveillance radar1 ''  Name Description Primary function  1.
Search chirp pulse  7.
Search simple pulse  3.
Track chirp pulse  4.
Track simple pulse  5.
Coherent extended  range track  6.
Coherent intermedi-  ate tfoppler  7.
C'otiererit precision  range  8.
Array calibration  waveform 40-pulse burst of 125-  11s pulses; burst dur-  ation 1 s  40-pulse burst of 25-11s  pulses; burst dura-  tion 0.2 s  40-pulse burst of 5-11s  pulses, stepped fre-  quency; burst dura-  tion 1.2 ms  60 11s Long-range search and  track acquisition  Short-range search and  track acquisition  Long-range track  Short-range track and  short-range SLBM  search  Extended-range track  and signature  Intermediate doppler  and signature  Precision-range  tracking  Transmitter and re-  ceiver nlodi~le cali-  bration  324INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS Ineachofthese,theproperradarwaveform mustbeselected alongwiththecorresponding receiverprocessing.
Thisisknownasradarsignalmanagement andisanimportant function of thecomputer.
IntheAN/FPS-85 satellite-surveillance radar,forexample, sevendifferent radar waveforms wereavailable forperforming thetargetdetection andtracking missionasshown inTable8.1.118Aneighthwaveform wasllsedforalignment ofthetransmitter andreceiver modules.
Thesearchallddetectioll function requires thatthecomputer generate theangularcoor­ dinatesoftheregiontobesearched, the typeoftransmitted waveform tobeused,thelengthof thedwellperiod,andthetimeassigned fortheexecution ofthedwellbytheradar.Sincethe radarisperforming tracking andotherfunctions aswellassearch,conflicts inscheduling the radarortheprocessor mightarise.Tracking functions areoftenmorecriticaloftimethan search.andwouldhaveahigherpriority intheeventofascheduling conflict.
Whensearch mustbeinterrupted forahigher-priority task,thecomputer program mustbed.esigned todo sowithminimum disruption.
Inscheduling thevariousradarfunctions, thecomputer must insurethattheaverage-power limitsoftheradartransmitter arenotexceeded.
TheIlexibility ofaphased-array radarallowsmorefreedom intheselection ofadetection criterion.
Forexample, afterinitialcrossing ofthedetection threshold, theradarbeamcanbe returned tothesame direction soonerthanitwouldinnormalsearchinordertoverifythata targetwasindeeddetected andthatthethreshold crossing wasnotafalsealarmduetonoise.
Thisl'er({icatioll plIlsecanbeofgreaterpowerand/oroflongerduration toincrease the probability ofdetection.
Thetwo-step processof(I)initialdetection and(2)verification is sometimes calledseqllelltial detectioll.
Because oftheavailability ofaverification pulse,the powertransmitted bythenormalsearch-pulse canbelessthanifthedetection decision hadto bemadeonthebasisofonlyasipgleobservation.
Thereisalwaysalimittotheinformation thatcanheprocessed byanygeneral-purpose radarcontrolcomputer.
Theprocessofinitiating andmaintaining trackcanheverydemand- Table8.1Waveforms usedinAN/FPS-85 satellite surveillance radar I1M 5.Cohcrent extended 40-pulse burstof125- rangetrack /ISpulses;burstdur- ationI s O.Cohcrent intermedi- 40-pulse burstof25-/'ls atedoppler pulses;burstdura- tion0.2s 7.Cohcrent precision 40-pulse burstof5-/ls range pulses,steppedfre- quency;burstdura- tion1.2ms 8.Arraycalibration 60/ls waveformNamc I.Searchchirppulse 1Searchsimplepulse l.Trackchirppulse 4.TracksimplepulseDescription 250Jls,FM 10/IS 250/IS,FM IpsPrimary function Long-range searchand trackacquisition Short-range searchand trackacquisition Long-range track Short-range trackand short-range SLBM search Extended-range lrack andsignature Intermediate doppler andsignature Precision-range tracking Transmitter andre­ ceivermodulecali­ bration T11E iI'l.li(~~TKONI('AI.1.Y STf:ERF:I> I'IIASED ARRAY ANTENNA IN RADAR 325  ing oli the conlputer resources, herice it is necessary to exclude information that is of no  iriterest to the systeni.
Such unwanted iriforniation may be from clutter, interference, or  ian~riling.
Iii principle, the computer can be progranirned to recognize and reject these un-  \v;~riteri signiils.
but tl~is is nri irielficier~t rliettioci for elitiiiriating the~ii.
It is niore convenierit to  eliriiir~i~te theni iri the ratl:ir sigr~itl-processor by either analog hiilk-processi~~y or its special-  ~~rrr.~~osc tligiti~l cclrriv;~lcrit.
St1c11 sipr~:~l ~~roccssirig ir~cltrcles ~natctletl filterit~g, cloppler (M-1'1)  filtcri~~g.
l~oI:~ri~:~tio~l fil~cri~~g, i111(i ;r(l;~ptive video tl~restioldirig.
 l:.i*c~i if i11I IIIIIV;IIIIC~~ ~CICC~~OIIS :IIC eliriiiii;lted, tlicse are two additional ~~soblcr~ls tllat  c;rt~ Ic;~tl to ;I ~>rolif~t-i~~ic~r~ of dctcctiot~s allti 1,lacc bi~rden on tlic coti~pritcr.: (I) ~nirltil~lc  clctectiol~s of riew t;ir.gets i11lrl (2) retlctcctior~s ololci targets.
If these are riot recogriized as srtcli.
 the computer will nttenipt to correlate them with existing tracks and initiate new tracks, which  car1 tic up the cor~iprrter capacity needlessly.
Multiple detections of the same target can occur  iri ;tdjiicent I>eali~ positio~is if the echo sigt~al is of more than ~narginal strength.
If the bean1  scarls a utlifort~i pattern.
iis it would if it were generated by a conventional meclia~iically  scanned antenna, extraneous hits frorn adjacent beam positions can be readily recognized as  such.
Ari operator viewing a I'f'l woulcl have no problem.
However, in a flexible phased-array  radar, the sciinriirig of the beat11 positions niight riot be uniform.
The likelihood of overdetec-  tion of a target will depend on how the volirme is scanned.
To avoid this problem the detection  tiecision rliight have to be delayed until the neighboring beam positions have been scanned.
 After a detection decision is made it must be correlated against existing tracks to determine  lvhether it is a new target or an existing target already in track.
This is an important aspect of  the detection process since the initiation of a track after a new target is detected requires a  setlirence of radar dwells that can consume the resources of the radar and the computer.
 .flit rrcic,k-irliricitior~ process after a new detection has been established is a demanding one.
 The radar riiust observe the target a significant number of times within a modest time interval  to cli~ickly establish the target's direction of travel and speed.
 .l'lle rrc1c.k-rrltrir~tertc~rtc~e function deterriiines when new observations should be nlade on  existing tracks in order to update the entries in the track file: Track maintenance not only  establishes when tile next radar observation must be made, but takes the steps necessary to  obtain it.
In perforniing this function it is often convenient to obtain the target position  estiniate in radar coordinates.
Radar errors can be readily handled in this coordinate system.
If  the target is an aircraft, its position can then be converted into cartesian coordinates for  srlloot hirig arid extrapolation of its trajectdry.
A constant-velocity target flying a straight line,  nonradial course would have radial acceleration in the spherical coordinates of the radar,  which is avdided with cartesian coordinates.
 Figure 8.3 I.
from Weinsto~k,'~~ is an example of the timing of events that must occur in  radar trans~nission and reception.
The bottom figure shows the timing of the radar transmis-  sions.
While the radar is still receiving echoes from the (N - 1)st dwell, a block of command  words is conirnunicated to the radar for control of the Nth dwell and the beam-steering  cornputer calculates the phase-shifter orders needed.for the next transmission.
After the time of  the ~naximum range return lias elapsed, the phase shifters can be set for the next transmission.
 At this tirne.
the signal processor can be set to accommodate the next dwell.
If the array  antenna erriploys nonreciprocal phase shifters, the co~nplen~entary phase distribution needed  for reception is set just after the transmission of the pulse.
While the system is being set for the  l~cxt t rii~~s~~iissiot~, the data receiveti fro111 tlie last transmission can be loaded illto buffer  storage for transfer to the radar corilrol conlputer.
'l'hus, during the Nth sequence of dwell  cxecutioris, the retrirns frotn the (N - 1)st sequence are processed and commands are gen-  erated for tlie (N + l)st sequence.
 'Tinie and radar power (or energy) are two resources that must be properly handled in a  TilEFI.ITTRONICAU,Y STEERED PIIASED ARRAY ANTENNA INRADAR325 ingonthecomputer resources, henceitisnecessary toexclude information thatisofno interest tothesystem, Suchunwanted information maybefromclutter, interference, or jamming, Inprinciple.
thecomputer canbeprogrammed torecognize andrejecttheseun­ wantedsignals.
hutthisisanindficient method foreliminating them.Itismoreconvenient to eliminate themintheradarsignal-processor hyeitheranaloghlilk-rrocessillY oritsspecial­ plllpose digitalcquivalenl.
Suchsignalprocessing includes matched llitering, doppler(MTI) fillering.
polarilatioll liltering, andadaptive videothresholding, F\'ellifallunwanted detections areeliminated, therearctwoadditional problems that cankadtoaproliferation ofdetections alldplaceahmdenonthecomputer: (I)multiple detections ofnewtargclsand(2)redetections ofoldtargets.Ifthesearcnotrecognized assuch, thecomputer willattempt tocorrelate themwithexisting tracksandinitiatenewtracks,which cantieupthecomputer capacity needlessly.
Multiple detections ofthesametargetcanoccur inadjacent beampositions iftheechosignalisofmorethanmarginal strength.Ifthebeam scansaulliform pattern, asitwouldifitweregenerated byaconventional mechanically scanned antenna, extraneous hitsfromadjacent beampositions canbereadilyrecognized as such.Alloperator viewing aPPlwouldhavenoproblem.
However, inaflexiblephased-array radar.thescanning oftheheampositions mightnotbeuniform.
Thelikelihood ofoverdetec­ tionofatargetwilldependonhowthevolumeisscanned.
Toavoidthisproblem thedetection decision mighthavetobedelayed untiltheneighboring beampositions havebeenscanned.
Afteradetection decision ismadeitmustbecorrelated againstexisting trackstodetermine whether itisanewtargetoranexisting targetalready intrack.Thisisanimportant aspectof thedetection process sincetheinitiation ofatrackafteranewtargetisdetected requires a sequence ofradardwellsthatcanconsume theresources oftheradarandthecomputer.
Thetrack-illitiatioll processafteranewdetection hasbeenestablished isademanding one.
Theradarmustobserve thetargetasignificant number oftimeswithinamodesttimeinterval toquickIyestahlish thetarget'sdirection oftravelandspeed.
TI'etrack-/llaillte/lll/lce function determines whennewobservations shouldbemadeon existing tracksinordertoupdatetheentriesinthetrackfile'.Trackmaintenance notonly establishes whenthenextradarobservation mustbemade,buttakesthestepsnecessary to obtainit.Inperforming thisfunction itisoftenconvenient toobtainthetargetposition estimate inradarcoordinates.
Radarerrorscanbereadilyhandled inthiscoordinate system.If thetargetisanaircraft, itsposition can.then be converted intocartesian coordinates for smoothing andextrapolation ofitstrajectory.
Aconstant~velocity targetflyingastraight line, nonradial coursewouldhaveradialacceleration inthespherical coordinates oftheradar, whichisav~ided withcartesian coordinates.
Figure8.31,fromWeinstock, 120isanexample ofthetimingofeventsthatmustoccurin radartransmission andreception.
Thebottomfigureshowsthetimingoftheradartransmis­ sions.Whiletheradarisstillreceiving echoesfromthe(N-l)stdwell,ablockofcommand wordsiscommunicated totheradarforcontrol oftheNthdwellandthebeam-steering computer calculates thephase-shifter ordersneededforthenexttransmission.
Afterthetimeof themaximum rangereturnhaselapsed, thephaseshifterscanbesetforthenexttransmission.
Atthistime.thesignalprocessor canbesettoaccommodate thenextdwell.Ifthearray antenna employs nonreciprocal phaseshifters, thecomplementary phasedistribution needed forreceptionissetjustafterthetransmission ofthepulse.Whilethesystemisbeingsetforthe nexttransmission, thedatareceived fromthelasttransmission canbeloadedintobuffer storage fortransfer totheradarcontrolcomputer.
Thus,duringtheNthsequence ofdwell executions, thereturnsfromthe(N-l)stsequence areprocessed andcommands aregen­ cratedforthc(N+I)stsequence.
Timcandradarpower(orenergy)aretworesources thatmustbeproperly handled ina Tronsm~ss~on of T(onsrn~ss~on of  comrnond doto to dolo-dwell(N-1)  rodor for dwell N  Phose shlflers Rooor returrl  bl~lfl21 I>  MOX range "'I1- '0'' Cornrnund  Dolo dwell (N - 1) fro(n dwelt dolo for  Commond I routed, I 1' I (N-1) I I dwell (N + 1)  Comrnun~cal~ons dolo - I '41 ;I' I I  buffer I I ly [ Is full .
1  m~lted Max~rnurn ,  range -- /  t , I ?  I I I  sw~lched for  Beorn lronsm~l  P steer~ng , --- r ?  Dwell (N- 1) C__r_-J  Figure 8.31 Reprcsentativ~.
command/rcsponsc scqucncc.
(('orr~.ft,s~ RC.4.
111(..) -  computer-controlled multifunction radar.
The various functions to be perfor~rled must be  efficiently prioritized so as not to exceed either resource.
In search.
the maximum rang2  of interest strongly affects the time resource.
In tracking, the target range does not usually limit  the time resource since the range is known and the dwell interval can be adjusted accordingly.
 The power transmitted by the radar will depend on the type of function it is to perform as well  as the target maximum range and possibly the past behavior of the target.
Thus the radar  resource of time is affected inore by the long-range targets, and the radar power is more  affected by the tactical function.
 The data processor, as well as the radar.
can cause the system to run ot~t of available time.
 The time required to process each target dwell as well as the amount of computer memory  needed per target is usually independent of the target range.
Thus the satilration limit of the  computer will be reached if it is given too many data points per unit time.
This is more likely to  occur with short-range t;\r.gets since they generally require a higller data rate than long-range  targets.
 In order to maintain maximum effectiveness ofthe radar and its computer when overloiicl-  ing occurs, some sort of priority system is required.
Tasks which are not as time critical should  be deferred so that high-priority tasks can be accomplished.
Table 8.2 is an example of  a priority structure for a tactical air defense system in which the radar performs search  and automatic tracking, as well as support missile engagements.12' There are eight categories  of priority, from the dedicated mode with the highest priority, to the standard testing and  dummy operations (or time wasters) with the lowest priority.
There is more than one  similar function within each category which can be treated either on a first-in--first-out  basis or by giving further priority ordering.
Note that the subcategories of the "0" priority  also appear in lower-priority categories.
--+ - '.r Phose sh~flers  set for  receive -  dwell N Phase sh~f ler  orders - ! computer 1,  colculotes '-.
 phose orders  for dwell N  326INTlWIHJCTION TORADAR SYSHMS CommonJ datafor .dwell(N+1) CommunICationsRadarreturn bulfer I:, Mo.range ful'-data dwell(N-1) fromdwellData (N-l) I Command I routed,,: I / I ~~J~~lr-.iJ~.
_~~-,l_"-,i__-,"_-,!_I'_CJ-Dr---I'-r--'L Phoseshlfler orders -Tmnsmlsslan of command data10 radartordwellN Beam stee(lng~ - computer -----~ calculates ~~""- phoseorders fordwellNTransmission of dala-dwell(N-1) Phoseshrflers sWitched for transmitI' Phoseshifters selfor ..recelve- dwellN- Radar Iransmll/receive operationTransmitted ..pulseMaXimum range ..: Dwell(N-ll OwellN Figure8.31Representative command/response sequence.
(('ol/rles.\' RC·L111(,) computer-controlled multifunction radar.Thevarious functions tobeperformed mustbe efficiently prioritized soasnottoexceedeitherresource.
Insearch,themaximum range ofintereststrongly affectsthetimeresource.
Intracking, thetargetrangedoesnotusuallylimit thetimeresource sincetherangeisknownandthedwellinterval canbeadjusted accordingly.
Thepowertransmitted bytheradarwilldependonthetypeoffunction itistoperform aswell asthetargetmaximum rangeandpossibly thepastbehavior ofthetarget.Thustheradar resource oftimeisaffected morebythelong-range targets, andtheradarpowerismore affected bythetacticalfunction.
Thedataprocessor, aswellastheradar,cancausethesystemtorunoutofavailable tllne.
Thetimerequired toprocesseachtargetdwellaswellastheamount ofcomputer memory neededpertargetisusuallyindependent ofthetargetrange.Thusthesaturation limitofthe computer willbereached ifitisgiventoomanydatapointsperunittime.Thisismorelikelyto occurwithshort-range targetssincetheygenerally requireahigherdataratethanlong-range targets.
Inordertomaintain maximum effectiveness oftheradaranditscomputer whcnoverload­ ingoccurs,somesortofprioritysystemisrequired.
Taskswhicharenotastimecriticalshould bedeferred sothathigh-priority taskscanbeaccomplished.
Table8.2isanexample of apriority structure foratactical airdefense systeminwhichtheradarperforms search andautomatic tracking, aswellassupport missileengagements.
121Thereareeightcategories ofpriority, fromthededicated modewiththehighestpriority, tothestandard testingand dummy operations (ortimewasters) withthelowestpriority.
Thereismorethanone similarfunction withineachcategory whichcanbetreated eitheronafirst-in··first-out basisorbygivingfurtherpriority ordering.
Notethatthesubcategorics ofthe"0"priority alsoappearinlower-priority categories. 1 IIF I:I I:<.I RONI('AI 1.Y STFFRFV PHASEL) ARRAY ANTENNA IN RADAR 327  Table 8.2 Exarnple of priorities for a tactical systeni12 '  0 Dedicated niode  Burnthrough Previo~isly scheduled events  Target definition > that capture radar for  Special test ) long periods of time  1 Engnpenietlts  Engaged hostile  Own missile  I'rccng;~gcd host i lc  2 Tinlc-critical  High-priority transition  High-priority confirmation  Clorizon search  1 Spcci;~l rcclticct  Ilurt~ll~rot~gl~  Target definition  Spcci;11 <c:111<  'l';~rget acquisitiori  4 lligh-priority tracks  Confirrned hostile  Assumed hostile  Unevaluated  Controlled friendly  Confirmation  Track transition  5 Low-priority track  Assumed friendly  Confirmed friendly  6 Above-horizon search  All coverages  Special test  7 Simulation.
diagnostics.
and dummies  Table courtesy RCA.
Inc.
 The coriiputer riiust be capable of responding to the immediate demands of high-priority  tasks with061 throwing away the results of partially completed lower-priority tasks.
The r.xucrc-  lircl proyrclrtl must recognize the presence of a high-priority task and initiate it properly.
There  are two methods for interleaving high and low priorities.
The first is preemption of control by a  Iiigiier-priority task as soon as it arises.
The interrupted task is put aside in such a way that it  can be resutiied when time permits.
The second method, rinle slicir~g, breaks all lower-priority  tasks into nor~preemptable segments.
These segments must be short enough to avoid excessive  delays in the transfer of control to the time-critical tasks.
 The phased-array radar and its computer controller saturate differently.
Long-range  dwells are detnatiding of radar execution time, but since they generally involve a low data rate  they are not particularly demanding of data processing time.
On the other hand, high data rate  tracking of short-range targets is not as dernandi~ig of radar execution time as for long-range  targets.
but the data-processing capability becomes the lin~jting factor.
The handling of a large  number of short-range targets in track can drive the processor to full utilization and require  that search operatiofis, which have lower priority than track, be reduced.
Thus the mechanism  by which the system saturates depends on the nature of the target situation.
 TI/I'FUTTRONICAI.I.Y STF.F.RFD PI/ASH) ARRAY ANTFNNA INRADAR327 Table8.2Example ofpriorities foratacticalsystem 121 Previously scheduled events lhatcaptureradarfor longperiodsoflimeDedicalcd mode Burnthrough Targetdefinilion Speciallest Engagcll1cnts Engagedhostilc Ownmissile Preengagedhostile 2Time-crilical High-priorily transition High-priority confirmal ion Horizonsearcho SpecialreqIIl'st BlIrtllhrollgh Targeldefinition Specialscans TargelaCljllisition 4High-priority tracks ConfirmedhostiIe Assumed hostile Unevaluated Controlled friendly Confirmation Tracktransition 5Low-priority lrack Assumed friendly Confirmed friendly Above-horizon search AIIcoverages Specialtest 7Simulation.
diagnoslics.
anddummies Tablecourtesy RCA.Inc.
Thecomputer mustbecapableofresponding totheimmediate demands ofhigh-priority taskswitho'utthrowing awaytheresultsofpartially completed lower-priority tasks.TheexeclI­ tireprogram mustrecognize thepresence ofahigh-priority taskandinitiateitproperly.
There aretwomethods forinterleaving highandlowpriorities.
Thefirstispreemption ofcontrolbya higher-priority taskassoonasitarises.Theinterrupted taskisputasideinsuchawaythatit canberesumed whentimepermits.
Thesecondmethod, timeslicing,breaksalllower-priority tasksintononpreemptable segments.
Thesesegments mustbeshortenoughtoavoidexcessive delaysinthetransferofcontroltothetime-critical tasks.
Thephased-array radaranditscomputer controller saturate differently.
Long-range dwellsaredemanding ofradarexecution time,butsincetheygenerally involvealowdatarate theyarenotparticularly demanding ofdataprocessing time.Ontheotherhand,highdatarate trackingofshort-range targetsisnotasdemanding ofradarexecution timeasforlong-range targets.butthedata-processing capability becomes thelim.itingfactor.Thehandling ofalarge numberofshort-range targetsintrackcandrivetheprocessor tofullutilization andrequire thatsearchoperations, whichhavelowerprioritythantrack,bereduced.
Thusthemechanism bywhichthesystemsaturates depends onthenatureofthetargetsituation. The AN/FPS-85 is a large UHF phased-array radar located at Eglin Air Force Rase,  Florida which was designed for the detection and tracking of earth-orbiting objects  a satellite^)."^ It was one of the first major applications of a coniputer-controlled multifilnc-  tion phased-array radar.
The system computer consists of two IRM System 3601651 central  processors, each with 13 1,072 thirty-two-bit words of core memory and a basic atitf time of  14 11s.
There are digital devices that provide the interface between the system computer and the  radar equipment, digital and analog signal processors, monitoring and controls, and eqiiip-  ment for space object identification.
The programs for the computer total over 1,250,000 words  of storage.
About 60 percent of this large number of worils consists oftlecis~o~l tiiblcs to locittc  fa~llts when compared to expected outputs.
 The cost of the corr~pirter hiirdware and software of ii ni~iltifiinction radar system ciin 1~ a  significant fraction of the total system cost.
Compilter system design ~niist be integral wit11 that  of the radar hardware itself.
The development of the software can be an especially.~iemanding  task that cannot be considered minor.
 8.10 OTHER ARRAY TOPICS  Hemispherical coverage.' 23 " 25 A single planar phased-array antenna might typically provide  coverage of an angular sector + 45" from the array normal; Ilowever, it is possible to achieve a  scan coverage of *6O0 or greater.
The amount of scan depends on the loss of gain, the arnoiint  of beam broadening, and the rise in sidelobes that can be tolerated.
The freqirency range ovcr  which the antenna must operate and the VSWR that can be accepted also determine how far  the beam can be scanned.
With a scan capability of ?6O0, a minimum of three planar apzr-  tiires, or faces, are required to cover the hemisphere.
But when other factors are considered,  more than three faces are usually desired.
The greater the number of faces, the less will be the  loss in gain, beam broadening, VSWR variation, polarization change, and the niirnber of  elements per face.
Other factors which must be considered in selecting the optimum ~liinlber of  faces are the number of transmitters and receivers, the complexity of the control of the array,  and the total cost.
 Table 8.3 summarizes the properties of N array faces to give hemispherical coverage at a  single frequency.123 In the 5- and 6-face arrays, one face is normal to the zenith, which explains  why the tilt angle is less for these two cases.
Each array of a 4-face array, for example, would  scan + 55".
To minimize the loss in gain, each face would be tilted back an angle of 35.3" from  the vertical.
Elements are arranged in an equilateral triangular pattern with element separa-  Table 8.3 Properties of hemispherical coverage arrays'23  Number of faces 3 4  Maximum scan angle 63.4" 54.7"  Tilt angle 26.6" .
35.3"  Element spacing (wavelengths) 0.628 0.69 1  Maximum power reflected 14% 7%  Maximum beam broadening 2.2 1.75  Maximum gain reduction (dB) 4.1 2.8  Relative total number of elements:  1.
Equal gain at max scan ' 1.22 1.00  2.
Equal beamwidth at max scan 1.45 1.00  3.
Equal average-gain over scan 1.05 1 .OO  4.
Equal average-beamwidth over scan 1.15 1.00  328INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS TheAN/FPS-85 isalargeUHFphased-array radarlocatedatEglinAirForceBase, Florida whichwasdesigned forthedetection andtracking ofearlh~orbitingobjects (satellites).118 Itwasoneofthefirstmajorapplications ofacomputer-controlled multifunc­ tionphased-array radar.Thesystemcomputer consists oftwoIBMSystem 360/651 central processors, eachwith131,072 thirty-two-bit wordsofcorememory andabasicaddtimeof 14lis.Therearcdigitaldevicesthatprovide theinterface between thesystemcomputer andthe radarequipment, digitalandanalogsignalprocessors, monitoring andcontrols, andequip­ mentforspaceobjectidentification.
Theprograms forthecomputer totalover1,250,000 words ofstorage.
About60percentofthislargenumber ofwordsconsists ofdecisioll tabkstolocale faultswhencompared toexpected outputs.
Thecostofthecomputer hardware andsoftware ofamultifunction radarsystemcanhea significant fraction ofthetotalsyslemcost.Compuler syslemdesignmustbeintegral withthat oftheradarhardware itself.Thedevelopment ofthesoftware canbeanespeciallY-flcmanding taskthatcannotbeconsidered minor.
8.10OTHER ARRAY TOPICS Hemispherical coverage.123·125Asingleplanarphased-array antenna mighttypically provide coverage ofanangularsector±45°fromthearraynormal; however, itispossible toachievea scancoverage of±60°orgreater.Theamount ofscandepends onthelossofgain,theamount ofbeambroadening, andtheriseinsidelobes thatcanbetolerated.
Thefrequency rangeover whichtheantenna mustoperate andtheVSWRthatcanbeaccepted alsodetermine howfar thebeamcanbescanned.
Withascancapability of±60°,aminimum ofthreeplanaraper­ tures,orfaces,arerequired tocoverthehemisphere.
Butwhenotherfactorsareconsidered, morethanthreefacesareusuallydesired.
Thegreaterthenumber offaces,thelesswillbethe lossingain,beambroadening, VSWRvariation, polarization change, andthenumha of elements perface.Otherfactorswhichmustbeconsidered inselecting theoptimum Ilumber of facesarethenumberoftransmitters andreceivers, thecomplexity ofthecontrolofthearray, andthetotalcost.
Table8.3summarizes theproperties ofNarrayfacestogivehemispherical coverage ata singlefrequency.123 Inthe5-and6-facearrays,onefaceisnormaltothezenith,whichexplains whythetiltangleislessforthesetwocases.Eacharrayofa4-facearray,forexample, would scan±55°.Tominimize thelossingain,eachfacewouldbetiltedbackanangleof35.3°from thevertical.
Elements arearranged inanequilateral triangular pattern withelement separa- Table8.3Properties ofhemispherical coverage arrays 123 Numberoffaces 3 4 5 6 Maximum scanangle 63.4° 54.r 47.1° 4O.r Tiltangle 26.6° .35.3° 15.5° 20.4° Element spacing(wavelengths) 0.628 0.691 0.679 0.700 Maximum powerreflected 14% 7% 4% 20//0 Maximum beambroadening 2.2 1.75 1.47 1.32 Maximum gainreduction (dB) 4.1 2.8 1.9 1.3 Relative totalnumberorelements: 1.Equalgainatmaxscan '1.22 1.00 1.05 1.04 2.Equalbeamwidth atmaxscan 1.45 1.00 0.92 0.84 3.Equalaverage-gain overscan 1.05 1.00 1.17 1.24 4.Equalaverage-beamwidth overscan 1.15 1.00 1.09 1.11 tion of 0.691 wavelengtlis.
Assunling an array matched at broadside, resistive mismatch off  broadside results in 7 percent of-the power reflected at the maximum scan angle.
The beam-  witlt h at the niaxi~iiutn scan angle is 1.75 tilnes that of the broadside beamwidth.
The reduction  in gain is 2.8 rlB.
wliicli includes the effect of 7 percent rtlisrnatch as well as the effect of beat11  broaderiirig.
I'lie rnore faces that are used, the greater can be the element spacing before the  oiisct of grating lohes.
If it is required that the gains at the maximum scan angle be the sanie.
it  is \CCII ill rlie I;IIIIC II~;II tlic 4-f;~ce ;IrI;ly requires the fewest eler~ie~its.
However, if tlie healii-  widtli~ at tile ~naxiriiurrl scan are to be the sanie, the 6-filce array requires the fewest total  riilriiher of eletnents.
When tlie criterion is to maintain either the average gain or the average  he;~~~lwidtti tlie s;~nic otrer (lie scan, the 4-face array yields the minimum total number- of  elements.
 These results apply to a ground-based array.
If the array is on a ship, the lower limit of the  elevation scan angle rnust be less than 0" to allow for the roll and pitch of the ship.
(A value of  - 20' rnigltt be a typical requirement.) The optirnurn tilt angle of the array would be different  than if the lower lirnit were 0".
In one e~arnple'~~ a tilt angle of 27" is taken for a 4-face array  covering from +90 to - 20" in elevation, instead of the 35.3" of Table 8.3.
The reduction in  gain is 4.3 dB at tlie maximurn scan angle instead of 2.8 dB.
 Donle antenna.Iz6 A novel approach to obtaining hemispherical coverage is the dome  antenna depicted in Fig.
8.32.
A planar array of conventional design with variable phase  sliifrers is shown situ:lterl below r\ he~iiispllerical lens with fixed phase shifts.
The lens, with its  fixed pilase shifts, alters the phase front of the field radiated by the planar array to cause a  change in tlie direction of propagation.
The dome acts as an RF analog to an optical prisrn  that changes the scan angle of the planar array by a factor K(0).
For example, a constant value  of K = 1.5 extends the coverage of a & 60" planar array to +90°.
The loss of gain varies in this  case from about 3.8 dB to 5.4 dB over the region of coverage.
The dome need not be a  hemisphere but can be shaped to favor particular regions of space.
The dome can consist of  dielectric-loaded circular waveguides inserted into holes drilled in the hemispherical shell.
An  experimental model at C band had a combined mismatch and insertion loss of about 0.8 dB.
 I'he dome might also be fabricated from radome-like material using a honeycomb skin with  liglltweigtit printed-circuit phase shifts glued to the inner surface.
 In a converitional phased array, a Linear phase gradient is applied across the aperture to  steer the bearn.
However, a nonlinear phase distribution is required across the planar array of  the dome antenna.
The beamwidth can vary on the order of 4 to 1 over the entire scan range of  the dome ahtenna.
Furthermore, the bean1 might not be as narrow on the horizon as might be  obtained with a convelitional antenna configuration of equivalent aperture.
As with any array  Len5 w~lh F~xed  .--  / Planor feed array Figure 8.32 Dome antenna for achieving  Vortoble phase controls hemispherical coverage.
(Courtes)~ IEEE.)  THEELECTRONICALLY STEERED PHASED ARRAY ANTENNA INRADAR329 tionof0,69\wavelengths.
Assuming anarraymatched atbroadside, resistive mismatch off broadside resultsin7percent-of-the powerreflected atthemaximum scanangle.Thebeam­ widthatthemaximum scanangleis1.75timesthatofthebroadside beamwidth.
Thereduction ingainis2.RdUowhichincludes theeffectof7percentmismatch aswellastheeffectofbeam broadening.
Themorefacesthatareused,thegreatercanbetheelement spacing beforethe onsetofgratinglohes.Ifitisrequired thatthegainsatthemaximum scananglebethesame.it issccninthetablethatthe4-facearrayrequires thefewestclements.
However, ifthebeam­ widthsatthemaximum scanaretobethesame,the6-facearrayrequires thefewestlotal number ofelements.
Whenthecriterion istomaintain eithertheaverage gainortheaverage healllwidlh thesallleoverthescan,the4-facearrayyieldstheminimum totalnumber of elements.
Theseresultsapplytoaground-based array.Hthearrayisonaship,thelowerlimitofthe elevation scananglemustbelessthan0°toallowfortherollandpitchoftheship.(Avalueof -200mightbeatypicalrequirement.) Theoptimum tiltangleofthearraywouldbedifferent thanifthelowerlimitwere0°.Inoneexample 125atiltangleof27°istakenfora4-facearray covering from+90to-20°inelevation, insteadofthe35.3°ofTable8.3.Thereduction ill gainis4.3dBatthemaximum scanangleinsteadof2.8dB.
Domeantenna.126129Anovelapproach toobtaining hemispherical coverage isthedome antenna depicted inFig.8.32.Aplanararrayofconventional designwithvariable phase shiftersisshownsituated belowahemispherical lenswithfixedphaseshifts.Thelens,withits fixedphaseshifts.altersthephasefrontofthefleldradiated bytheplanararraytocausea changeinthedirection ofpropagation.
ThedomeactsasanRFanalogtoanopticalprism thatchanges thescanangleoftheplanararraybyafactorK(O).Forexample, aconstant value ofK=1.5extends thecoverage ofa±60°planararrayto±90°.Thelossofgainvariesinthis casefromabout3.8dBto5.4dBovertheregionofcoverage.
Thedomeneednotbea hemisphere butcanbeshapedtofavorparticular regionsofspace.Thedomecanconsistof dielectric-loaded circular waveguides inserted intoholesdrilledinthehemispherical shell.An experimental modelatCbandhadacombined mismatch andinsertion lossofabout0.8dB.
Thedomemightalsobefabricated fromradome-like material usingahoneycomb skinwith lightweight printed-circuit phaseshiftsgluedtotheinnersurface.
Inaconventional phasedarray,alinearphasegradient isappliedacrosstheaperture t,o steerthebeam.However.
anonlinear phasedistribution isrequired acrosstheplanararrayof thedomeantenna.
Thebeamwidth canvaryontheorderof4tolovertheentirescanrangeof thedomeafitenna.
Furthermore.
thebeammightnotbeasnarrowonthehorizon asmightbe obtained withaconventional antenna configuration ofequivalent aperture.
Aswithanyarray Variable phosecanlrolsFigure8.32Domeantenna forachieving hemispherical coverage.
(Courtesy IEEE.) 330 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  arranged on the surface of a sphere, the plane of polarization changes with the scan angle.
 With circular polarization, however, there is no change with scan.
 A conventional array with four faces can track four times the number of targets as a dome  antenna (which operates with a single planar array for I~en~ispherical coverage), assurning thc  traffic is distributed uniformly.
The average power required for the planar array of the dome  antenna is approximately the sum of the average powers required for each of the individual  arrays, assuming comparable performance.
 It has been claimed that the dome antenna is of less cost than four arrays of conventional  design covering the same volume.
However, any comparison of this technique with conven-  tional antennas must be done on the basis of the entire radar system and its intended applica-  tion, not just the antenna.
The required transmitter power, the loss in antenna galn, change of  beamwidth, complexity of computer control, traffic handling, polarization change, and total  system cost must all be considered when evaluating the relative merits of such gntennas for a  particular application.
 Conformal arrays.130 13' One of the desires of the radar systems engineer is to be able to  place array elements anywhere on an arbitrary surface and achieve a directive beam, with good  sidelobes and efficiency, which can be conveniently scanned electronically.
An array of radiat-  ing elements arranged along the nose of an aircraft, on the wing, or the fuselage would thus be  an attractive option for the systems designer.
Such an array, which conforms to the geometry  of a nonplanar surface, is called a conformal array.
 In principle, the elements of an array located on any nonplanar surface can be made to  radiate a beam in some given direction by applying the proper phase, amplitude, and polariza-  tion at each element.
In practice, however, it is difficult to control the beamshape and obtain  low sidelobes from an arbitrary surface, especially if the beam is electronically scanned.
 Furthermore, the mechanisms for feeding the elements and steering the beam of a conformal  array, as well as the generation of the phase-shifter commands, are generally more complicated  than those of a planar array.
Although it is desired that conformal arrays be applicable to any  surface, the complications that arise when dealing with a general nonplanar surface have  restricted its consideration to relatively simple shapes, such as the cylinder, cone, ogive, and  sphere.
Even these shapes present difficulties in analysis and equipment implen~entation, and  in realizing antennas competitive with the planar array.
 The cylinder, which is probably the simplest form of nonplanar array, has a geometry  suitable for antennas that scan 360" in azimuth.
The scanning beam of a cylindrical anienna  does not change its shape and broaden when steered, as does a scanning beam from a planar  array.
Beam steering in a circularly symmetric array can be accommodated by comniutating  or rotating the aperture distribution.
Since the elements on the side of the cylindrical array  opposite from the direction of propagation do not contribute energy in the desired direction,  they are not excited.
Unlike the planar array, the circular symmetry ensures that mutual  coupling between elements is always the same as the beam scans in azimuth.
 The truncated cone has similar properties to the cylindrical array, and might be utilized  instead of the cylinder when the beam is to be scanned in elevation as well as azimuth.
The  conical surface as a radiating structure for a conformal array is also of interest since ~nlsbilcs  are sometimes of this shape.
 The ogive, which is the type of surface found on the nose of some aircraft, bears a  resemblance to the cone.
A conformal array arranged on the aircraft nose would allow wide  coverage, provide a good aerodynamic shape, eliminate the distortion of the pattern of a  mechanically scanned antenna caused by the conventional nose-radome, and would permit  larger antenna apertures than the conventional nose-antenna configuration.
The hemispheri-  330INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS arranged onthesurfaceofasphere,theplaneofpolarization changes with the scanangle.
Withcircular polarization, however; thereisnochangewithscan.
Aconventional arraywithfourfacescantrackfourtimesthenumber oftargetsasadome antenna (whichoperates withasingleplanararrayforhemispherical coverage), assuming the trafficisdistributed uniformly.
Theaverage powerrequired fortheplanararrayofthedome antenna isapproximately thesumoftheaverage powersrequired foreachoftheindividual arrays,assuming comparable performance.
Ithasbeenclaimed thatthedomeantenna isoflesscostthanfourarraysofconventional designcovering thesamevolume.
However, anycomparison ofthistechnique withconven­ tionalantennas mustbedoneonthebasisoftheentireradarsystemanditsintended applica­ tion,notjusttheantenna.
Therequired transmitter power,thelossinantenna gain.changeof beamwidth, complexity ofcomputer control, traffichandling, polarization change,andtotal systemcostmustallbeconsidered whenevaluating therelativemeritsofsuchtJntennas fora particular application.
Conformal arrays.130 135Oneofthedesiresoftheradarsystems engineer istobeableto placearrayelements anywhere onanarbitrary surfaceandachieveadirective beam,withgood sidelobes andefficiency, whichcanbeconveniently scanned electronically.
Anarrayofradiat­ ingelements arranged alongthenoseofanaircraft,onthewing,orthefuselage wouldthusbe anattractive optionforthesystems designer.
Suchanarray,whichconforms tothegeometry ofanonplanarsurface, iscalledaconformal array.
Inprinciple, theelements ofanarraylocatedonanynonplanar surfacecanbemadeto radiateabeaminsomegivendirection byapplying theproperphase,amplitude, andpolariza­ tionateachelement.
Inpractice, however, itisdifficulttocontrolthebeamshape andobtain lowsidelobes fromanarbitrary surface, especially ifthebeamiselectronically scanned.
Furthermore, themechanisms forfeedingtheelements andsteering thebeamofaconformal array,aswellasthegeneration ofthephase-shifter commands, aregenerally morecomplicated thanthoseofaplanararray.Although itisdesiredthatconformal arraysbeapplicable toany surface, thecomplications thatarisewhendealing withageneralnonplanar surface have restricted itsconsideration torelatively simpleshapes,suchasthecylinder, cone,ogive,and sphere.Eventheseshapespresentdifficulties inanalysis andequipment implementation, and inrealizing antennas competitive withtheplanararray.
Thecylinder, whichisprobably thesimplest formofnonplanararray,hasageometry suitable forantennas thatscan3600inazimuth.
Thescanning beamofacylindrical anienna doesnotchangeitsshapeandbroaden whensteered, asdoesascanning beamfromaplanar array.Beamsteering inacircularly symmetric arraycanbeaccommodated bycommutating orrotating theaperture distribution.
Sincetheelements onthesideofthecylindrical array opposite fromthedirection ofpropagation donotcontribute energyinthedesireddirection, theyarenotexcited.
Unliketheplanararray,thecircular symmetry ensures thatmutual coupling between elements isalwaysthesameasthebeamscansinazimuth.
Thetruncated conehassimilarproperties tothecylindrical array,andmightbeutilized insteadofthecylinder whenthebeamistobescanned inelevation aswellasazimuth.
The conicalsurfaceasaradiating structure foraconformal arrayisalsoofinterestsincemissiles aresometimes ofthisshape.
Theogive,whichisthetypeofsurfacefoundonthenoseofsomeaircraft, bearsa resemblance tothecone.Aconformal arrayarranged ontheaircraftnosewouldallowwide coverage, provide agoodaerodynamic shape,eliminate thedistortion ofthepatternofa mechanically scanned antenna causedbytheconventional nose-radome, andwouldpermit largerantenna apertures thantheconventional nose-antenna configuration.
Thehemispheri- 1 l1E FI.I:<'1.RONICAI.I Y STfiFREI) PkIASEI3 ARRAY ANTENNA IN RADAR 331  cal array also attracts atteritiori when hetliispherical coverage is desired.
In principle.
the  patter11 is independent of beat11 direction.
 Most of the work on confornial arrays has been with the cylinder.
Even though it niay be  a rclat~vely si~iiplc sliape coriipared to the others tner~tioned above or to the generaliled  noriplanar surface, the properties of the cylindrical array are not as suitable in general as those  of the planar array.
In a cylindrical array, the radiation pattern cannot be separated into ari  elenierit factor arid an array factor as in planar array theory.
Each element points in a different  tiircct iori Tliuq cotlll~r~tatiotls of patterris rnust include both element and array together  Ariotller dillicul~y is t11i11 tllc phase ac well as tlie magnitude of the elenierit pattern varies with  positiorl As a result of the cylirldrical geometry, the radiation pattern is only partially separ-  ;~l~lc ill <p;~tt;~l ~oor(Iirl;~f~s.
(It ci111 I)c co~~si~ierecl ;IS tlie procfuct of a ring-array patlcrti ;111cl n  liriear-array pat tcrr~.) 'I lie aziniu t li pattern of a vertical cylindrical array changes with both  a7i11iuth arid elevatiori as tlie bearn is scar~ned in elevation.
The far-out sidelobes of a cylindri-  cal array are gcrierally large arid broad ill angle, as conipared to those of a planar array.
?'lie  design of efficient feed networks.
the phase and amplitude control devices, distributed trans-  niitter and/or receiver niodules, and the control algorithms and logic are other probleni areas.
 Similar problerns occur with other conformal-array shapes.
In particular the conical  shape car1 presetit a serious polarization problem since the polarization varies with the direc-  t~on of propagation.
Another problem is that the radiating elements can see different environ-  ments depending on their location on the cone.
The pattern of the conical array cannot be  separated into elevation and azimuth patterns.
 Conformal arrays would have application for flush-mounted airborne radar antennas,  especially on conical and ogive surfaces.
The cylinder, truncated cone, and the hemisphere are  possible antenna shapes for shipboard or surface applications.
Such conformal arrays have  been considered for radar but they do not appear suitable for general application.
They have  also been examined for IFF and air traffic control interrogation antennas.' 32  A serious cornpetitor to the cylindrical array is a number of planar arrays arranged to  approximate the cylinder.
This is a much simpler system and is quite practical.
(If necessary it  can be surrounded by a cylindrical radome.) The change of beam shape with scan angle can be  minimized, if desired, by radiating cooperatively from more than one planar face.
As the beam  is scanned off broadside, sotne of the transmitter power can be diverted to the face adjacent to  the direction of scar1 to radiate energy in the same direction.lJ5 The broadening of the bean1  due to the foreshortening of the planar aperture is compensated by the cooperative use of the  adjacent planar aperture.
 f'  Unequally spaced arrays.'36 '39 Most array antennas have equal spacings between adjacent  elements.
Unequal spacings have sometimes been considered in order to obtain a given beam-  width with considerably fewer elements than an equally spaced array, or to approximate a  desired pattern without the need for an amplitude-tapered aperture illumination.
Since the  n~ininiuni element spacing is about one-half wavelength, unequally spaced arrays generally  have fewer elenients than equally spaced arrays of the same size aperture.
For this reason they  are also called tlri~trred arrays.
 The design of a thinned array consists of selecting the diameter of the aperture to give the  desired beamwidth, selecting the number of elements to give the desired gain (gain is directly  proportional to the number of elements), and arranging the elements to achieve some desirable  property of the sidelobes, such as minimizing the peak sidelobe or approximating some desired  radiation pattern.
There have been many methods proposed in the literature for determining  the elerrlent spacings (or locations within the aperture) of such arrays.
Only two will be  mentioned here: dynamic prograrnrning and density tapering.
 1I1EFI.ITTRONIrAI.IY STEFRED PHASED ARRAY ANTENNA INRADAR331 calarrayalsoattracts attention whenhemispherical coverage isdesired.
Inprinciple.
the pattern isindependent ofbeamdirection.
Mostoftheworkonconformal arrayshasbeenwiththecylinder.
Eventhoughitmaybe arelatively simpleshapecompared totheothersmentioned aboveortothegeneralized nonplanarsurface.
theproperties ofthecylindrical arrayarenotassuitable ingeneralasthose oftheplanararray.Inacylindrical array,theradiation patterncannotbeseparated intoan element factorandanarrayfactorasinplanararraytheory.Eachelement pointsinadifferent direction.Thuscomputations ofpatterns mustinclude bothelement andarraytogether.
Another difficulty isthatthephaseaswellasthemagnitude oftheelement patternvaricswith position.
Asaresultofthecylindrical geometry, theradiation pattern isonlypartially separ­ ahleinspatialcOOldinates.
(IIcanheconsidered astheproduct ofaring-array patternanda lincar-array pattern.) TIleazimuth patternofavertical cylindrical arraychanges withboth azimuth andel~vation asthebeamisscanned inelevation.
Thefar-outsidelobes ofacylindri­ calarrayaregenerally largeandbroadinangle,ascompared tothoseofaplanararray.The designofertkient feednetworks, thephaseandamplitude controldevices, distributed trans­ mitterand/orreceiver modules, andthecontrolalgorithms andlogicareotherproblem areas.
Similar problems occurwithotherconformal-array shapes.
Inparticular theconical shapecanpresentaseriouspolarization problem sincethepolarization varieswiththedirec­ tionofpropagation.
Another problem isthattheradiating elements canseedifferent environ­ mentsdepending ontheirlocation onthecone.Thepatternoftheconicalarraycannotbe separated intoelevation andazimuth patterns.
Conformal arrayswouldhaveapplication forflush-mounted airborne radarantennas, especially onconicalandogivesurfaces.
Thecylinder, truncated cone,andthehemisphere are.
possible antenna shapesforshipboard orsurfaceapplications.
Suchconformal arrayshave beenconsidered forradarbuttheydonotappearsuitable forgeneralapplication.
Theyhave alsobeenexamined forIFFandairtrafficcontrolinterrogation antennas.132 Aseriouscompetitor tothecylindrical arrayisanumber ofplanararraysarranged to approximate thecylinder.
Thisisamuchsimplersystemandisquitepractical.
(Ifnecessary it canbesurrounded byacylindrical radome.) Thechangeofbeamshapewithscananglecanbe minimized.
ifdesired.
byradiating cooperatively frommorethanoneplanarface.Asthebeam isscanned offbroadside, someofthetransmitter powercanbediverted tothefaceadjacent to thedirection ofscantoradiateenergyinthesamedirection.135Thebroadening ofthebeam duetotheforeshortening oftheplanaraperture iscompensated bythecooperative useofthe adjacent planaraperture.
f~ Unequally spacedarra)'s.1 36139Mostarrayantennas haveequalspacings between adjacent elements.
Unequal spacings havesometimes beenconsidered inordertoobtainagivenbeam­ widthwithconsiderably fewerelements thananequallyspacedarray,ortoapproximate a desiredpattern without theneedforanamplitude-tapered aperture illumination.
Sincethe minimum element spacing isaboutone-half wavelength, unequally spacedarraysgenerally havefewerelements thanequallyspacedarraysofthesamesizeaperture.
Forthisreasonthey arealsocalledt/tin1ledarrays.
Thedesignofathinnedarrayconsistsofselecting thediameter oftheaperture togivethe desiredbeamwidth, selecting thenumberofelements togivethedesiredgain(gainisdirectly proportional tothenumber ofelements), andarranging theelements toachievesomedesirable property ofthesidelobes, suchasminimizing thepeaksidelobeorapproximating somedesired radiation pattern.
Therehavebeenmanymethods proposed intheliterature fordetermining theelement spacings (orlocations withintheaperture) ofsucharrays.Onlytwowillbe mentioned here:dynamic programming anddensitytapering. 332 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  One approach is to try all possible element locations with the given nunlber of elenlents  and select that arrangement which produces the best result.
This technique, called rotul  c~t~~rrt~rrtlriort, is generally impractical because of the large number of possible soli~tions that  would need to be examined.
An equivalent result, with less con~putation, is to apply ~lj~t~(~ttii~  proyrar)lnlirtg, a method for determining the optimum solution to a multistage problem by  optimizing each stage of the problem on the basis of the input to that stage.
As applied to  arrays, the various stages of dynamic programming involve the selection of the spacings of  each element or pair of symmetrically placed elements.
The application of dynamic program-  ming has been successfully applied to the design of one dimensional (linear) unequally spaced  array.
Although the computations requireti are far less than for total enumeration, there is a  practical limit to the number of elements in the array that can be treated by this method.
 The other technique, rlensirj~ raper, is applicable to the design of either linear arrays or to  large planar arrays.
Consider a uniform grid of possible element locations withequal spacing.
 The aperture illunlination function that would nornlally be considered for a conventional  antenna is used as the model for determining the density of equal-amplitude elements.
That is,  tile dcnsity of equal-amplitude elements is made to upproximate the ciesircct aperture illuniina-  tion.
The choice of element locations to achieve the desired density distribution may be n~acte  on either a statistical basis or deterministically.
One possible application of density taper is in  a transmitting array where it is desired to radiate equal power fronl each element, but where  the high peak-sidelobe of the uniform illi~mination is not acceptable.
Although lower peak-  sidelobes can be obtained in this manner, the far-out sidelobes are generally considerably  greater than if the same illumination function were used to establish an amplitude taper with  an equally spaced array.
 The unequally spaced array has seen only limited application, primarily because its  advantages do not usually outweigh its disadvantages.
The reduction in gain and the increases  in sidelobes that are a consequence of thinning the elements are usually not desirable in most  radar applications.
 The purpose of unequal element spacing in a highly thinned array is to eliminate the  grating lobes that would appear if equal element spacings of large value were used.
Grating  lobes are not necessarily undesirable, since the energy contained in the grating lobes can be  used to detect targets.
However, if this energy is distributed in the sidelobes by employing  uncqual spacings, it is wasted.
The disadvantage with detecting targets in the grating lobes is  thiit the angle measurement can be ambiguous.
There are methods, however, for resolving  these ambig~ities."~  Instead of thinning elements, the number of phase shifters can be thinned.'" That is,  some of the phase shifters in the array can be useci to adjust the phase of more than one  element, so that the number of phase shifters is less than the number of elements.
A 50 percent  saving in the total number of phase shifters might be.had.
Thinning in this manner also gives  rise to phase errors which cause a deterioration in the radiation pattern.
 Adaptive  antenna^.'^^-^'' An adaptive antenna senses the received signals incident across its  aperture and adjusts the phase and amplitude of the aperture illumination to achieve some  dzsired performance, such as maximizing the received signal-to-noise ratio.
The noise may be  either internal receiver noise or external noise, as from jammers.
Clutter echoes or interference  from other electromagnetic radiations can also be minimized by adaptive antennas.
Adaptive  antenna techniques can automatically compensate for mechanical or electrical errors in an  antenna by sensing the errors and applying corrective signals,149 and can compensate for  failed elements, radome effects, and blockage of the aperture from nearby structures.
Much of  the interest in adaptive antennas has been to reduce the effects of noise jamming in the antenna  332INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS Oneapproach istotryallpossibleelementlocations withthegivennumberofelements andselectthatarrangement whichproduces thebestresult.Thistechnique, calledlOtal l'lllllller(lIio/l, isgenerally impractical becauseofthelargenumberofpossible solutions that wouldneedtobeexamined.
Anequivalent result,withlesscomputation, istoapplydYllllmic programming, amethodfordetermining theoptimum solution toamultistage problem by optimizing eachstageoftheproblem onthebasisoftheinputtothatstage.Asappliedto arrays,thevariousstagesofdynamic programming involvetheselection ofthespacings of eachelementorpairofsymmetrically placedelements.
Theapplication ofdynamic program­ minghasbeensuccessfully appliedtothedesignofonedimensional (linear)unequally spaced array.Although thecomputations required arefarlessthanfortotalenumeration, thereisa practical limittothenumberofelements inthearraythatcanbetreatedbythismethod.
Theothertechnique, densitytaper,isapplicable tothedesignofeitherlineararraysorto largeplanararrays.Consider auniformgridofpossibleelementlocations with~qual spacing.
Theaperture illumination function thatwouldnormally beconsidered foraconventional antenna isusedasthemodelfordetermining thedensityofequal-amplitude elements.
Thatis, thedensityofequal-amplitude elements ismadetoapproximate thedesiredaperture illumina- ,.; tion.Thechoiceofelementlocations toachievethedesireddensitydistribution maybemade oneitherastatistical basisordeterministically.
Onepossibleapplication ofdensitytaperisin atransmitting arraywhereitisdesiredtoradiateequalpowerfromeachelement, butwhere thehighpeak-sidelobe oftheuniform illumination isnotacceptable.
Although lowerpeak­ sidclobes canbeobtained inthismanner, thefar-outsidelobes aregenerally considerably greaterthanifthesameillumination function wereusedtoestablish anamplitude taperwith anequallyspacedarray.
Theunequally spacedarrayhasseenonlylimitedapplication, primarily because its advantages donotusuallyoutweigh itsdisadvantages.
Thereduction ingainandtheincreases insidelobes thatareaconsequence ofthinning theelements areusuallynotdesirable inmost radarapplications.
Thepurpose ofunequal elementspacing inahighlythinnedarrayistoeliminate the gratinglobesthatwouldappearifequalelementspacings oflargevaluewereused.Grating lobesarenotnecessarily undesirable, sincetheenergycontained inthegratinglobescanbe usedtodetecttargets.However, ifthisenergyisdistributed inthesidelobes byemploying unequalspacings, itiswasted.Thedisadvantage withdetecting targetsinthegratinglobesis thattheanglemeasurement canbeambiguous.
Therearemethods, however, forresolving theseambiguities.l-l-O Insteadofthinning elements, thenumberofphaseshifterscanbethinned.I-l-1Thatis.
someofthephaseshiftersinthearraycanbeusedtoadjustthephase of morethanone element, sothatthenumberofphaseshiftersislessthanthenumberofelements.
A50percent savinginthetotalnumber ofphaseshiftersmightbe·had.Thinning inthismanneralsogives risetophaseerrorswhichcauseadeterioration intheradiation pattern.
Adaptive antennas.142-151 Anadaptive antennasensesthereceivedsignalsincidentacrossits aperture andadjuststhephaseandamplitude oftheaperture illumination toachievesome desiredperformance, suchasmaximizing thereceivedsignal-to-noise ratio.Thenoisemaybe eitherinternalreceivernoiseorexternalnoise,asfromjammers.
Clutterechoesorinterference fromotherelectromagnetic radiations canalsobeminimized byadaptive antennas.
Adaptive antenna techniques canautomatically compensate formechanical orelectrical errorsinan antenna bysensingtheerrorsandapplying corrective signals,149 andcancompensate for failedclements, radomeeffects,andblockage oftheaperture fromnearbystructures.
Muchof theinterestinadaptive antennas hasbeentoreducetheeffectsofnoisejamming intheantenna 1.111: 1.1 I:('I~RONI(.AI 1.Y Sf1:I:RI:I) I'I1ASED ARRAY ANTENNA IN RADAR 333  sidelobes.
The ideal adaptive antenna acts automatically to adjust itself as a matched  (spatial) filter by reducing the sidelobes in the direction of the unwanted signals.
Adaptive  arltenrlas require some a priori knowledge of the desired signal, such as its direction,  waveform, or stat istical properties.
 If all the elements of an adaptive phased-array antenna have a separate adaptive control  loop, it is called a $tlly ariaprirlr array.
The adaption process is based on the application of  some criterion such as the minimization of the mean-square error or the maximization of the  signal-to-noise ratio.
In arrays with a large number of adaptive elements the time required for  the array to converge to the desired aperttlre illurtiitlation can be relatively long.
The conver-  gence time can be reduced at the cost of hardware complexity.
The complexity of the adaptive  rilccllariizatiorl and the speed of colivergence limit the practical utility of the large adaptive  array.
The fewer the adjustable elements the more practical is the adaptive array.
 One potential application of adaptive array antennas is for airborne surveillance radai.
 In additiori to the reduction of jamming noise which enter the airborne surveillance radar,  it is important to reduce the clutter that enters via the radar antenna sidelobes.
The detection  of target$ fro111 ;trl airborne platforrn places severe demands on radar design in order to reduce  or elirnirlate clutter that enters the radar receiver via the main beam.
This is done ill a  conventional AMTI radar by signal processing (filtering) as described in Sec.
4.1 1.
However,  clutter that enters the radar receiver via the antenna sidelobes has doppler frequencies that  canriot be rejected by conventional filtering, since targets of interest can have the same doppler  as the sidelobe clutter.
An adaptive array antenna can place nulls in the direction of sidelobe  clutter by using the sidelobe clutter itself as the signal to be cancelled.
This is accomplished by  separating the sidelobe clutter from the main-beam clutter by doppler filtering.
The filtered  signal adaptively adjusts the aperture illumination to minimize the sidelobes in those direc-  tions from which clutter appears.
 The col~ererir sitielobe cnttceler (Sec.
14.5) is a form of adaptive antenna that uses a small  rlurnber of auxiliary elerrients to adaptively place nulls in the direction of external noise  sources.
It is art exaniple of a successful application of the principles of the adaptive antenna  that utilizes only a relatively few number of adaptive elements.
The fully adaptive array of  large size is, in theory, capable of nulling a larger region of space than a system with but a  relatively few adaptive elements, as in the sidelobe canceler.
However, the added complexity  and lorlger convergerlce time that accompanies the greater degrees of freedom of the large,  fully adaptive array has been a burden that is difficult to justify on a cost-effective basis for  general application.
 The objeL(tive of the usual adaptive antenna or the coherent sidelobe canceler is to adjust  the sidelobe levels to minimize the effects of noise or other unwanted signals.
If the radar  application allows the use of antennas with extremely low sidelobes, the same result will be  achieved as with the adaptive antenna.
In general, the extremely low sidelobe antenna can be a  better solution, if the desired low sidelobe levels can be achieved and maintained economically.
 In principle, the automatic tracking radar discussed in Chap.
5 is another example of an  adaptive antenna.
The aperture illumination is sensed by a conical scan or monopulse feed and  the antenna is repositioned to maintain the signal-to-noise ratio a maximum.
 'I'riangular arrangement of ele~nents.'~~ 154 If the elements of a planar array are arranged in a  pattern of equilateral triangles rather than squares, a savings can be had in the total number of  elements needed.
This assumes that the number of elements in an array is determined by the  requirerrient that no spurious beams (grating lobes) appear in the radiation pattern.
The  reduction in the number of elements depends on the solid angle over which the main beam is  positioned.
For example, if the beam is to be scanned anywhere within a cone defined by a  Till'I'I.I'CTRONICAI.I.Y STEERED ""ASED ARRAY ANTENNA INRADARJJJ sidelobes.
Theidealadaptive antenna actsautomatically toadjustitselfasamatched (spatial) filterbyreducing thesidelobes inthedirection oftheunwanted signals.
Adaptive antennas require someaprioriknowledge ofthedesired signal,suchasitsdirection, waveform, orstatistical properties.
Ifalltheelements ofanadaptive phased-array antenna haveaseparate adaptive control loop,itiscalleda,/iil/yadaptil'e array.Theadaption process isbasedontheapplication of somecriterion suchastheminimization ofthemean-square errororthemaximization ofthe signal-to-noise ratio.[narrayswithalargenumber ofadaptive elements thetimerequired for thearraytoconverge tothedesiredaperture illumination canberelatively long.Theconver­ gencetimecanbereduced atthecostofhardware complexity.
Thecomplexity oftheadaptive mechanization andthespeedofconvergence limitthepractical utilityofthelargeadaptive array.Thefewertheadjustable elements themorepractical istheadaptive array.
Onepotential application ofadaptive a'rrayantennas isforairborne surveillance radal.
Inaddition tothereduction ofjamming noisewhichentertheairborne surveillance radar, itisimportant toreducetheclutterthatentersviatheradarantenna sidelobes.
Thedetection oftargetsfromanairhorne platform placesseveredemands onradardesigninordertoreduce oreliminate clutterthatenterstheradarreceiver viathemainbeam.Thisisdoneina conventional AMTIradarbysignalprocessing (filtering) asdescribed inSec.4.11.However, c1ullerthatenterstheradarreceiver viatheantenna sidelobes hasdoppler frequencies that cannotberejected byconventional filtering, sincetargetsofinterestcanhavethesamedoppler asthesidelobeclutter.Anadaptive arrayantenna canplacenullsinthedirection ofsidelobe clutterbyusingthesidelobe clutteritselfasthesignaltobecancelled.
Thisisaccomplished by separating thesidelobeclutterfromthemain-beam clutterbydoppler filtering.
Thefiltered signaladaptively adjuststheaperture illumination tominimize thesidelobes inthosedirec­ tionsfromwhichclutterappears.
Thecoherelitside/vhecallce/er (Sec.14.5)isaformofadaptive antenna thatusesasmall number ofauxiliary elements toadaptively placenullsinthedirection ofexternal noise sources, Itisanexample ofasuccessful application oftheprinciples oftheadaptive antenna thatutilizesonlyarelatively fewnumber ofadaptive elements.
Thefullyadaptive arrayof largesizeis,intheory,capable ofnullingalargerregionofspacethanasystemwithbuta relatively fewadaptive elements, asinthesidelobe canceler.
However, theaddedcomplexity andlongerconvergence timethataccompanies thegreaterdegreesoffreedom ofthelarge, fullyadaptive arrayhasbeenaburdenthatisdifficult tojustifyonacost-effective basisfor generalapplication.
Theobje~tive oftheusualadaptive antenna orthecoherent sidelobe canceler istoadjust thesidelobelevelstominimize theeffectsofnoiseorotherunwanted signals.Iftheradar application allowstheuseofantennas withextremely lowsidelobes, thesameresultwillbe achieved aswiththeadaptive antenna.
Ingeneral, theextremely lowsidelobe antenna canbea bettersolution, ifthedesiredlowsidelobe levelscanbeachieved andmaintained economically.
Inprinciple, theautomatic tracking radardiscussed inChap.5isanother example ofan adaptive antenna.
Theaperture illumination issensedbyaconicalscanormonopulse feedand theantenna isrepositioned tomaintain thesignal-to-noise ratioamaximum.
Triangular arrangement ofelements.
I52.154Iftheelements ofaplanararrayarearranged ina patternofequilateral triangles ratherthansquares, asavingscanbehadinthetotalnumberof elements needed.
Thisassumes thatthenumber ofelements inanarrayisdetermined bythe requirement thatnospurious beams(grating lobes)appearintheradiation pattern.
The reduction inthenumberofelements depends onthesolidangleoverwhichthemainbeamis positioned.
Forexample, ifthebeamistobescanned anywhere withinaconedefinedbya 334 INTRODLJCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  half-angle of 45", the number of elements required with triangular spacing is 13.4 percent less  than with square spacing.
In this case.
the altitude of the equilateral triangle in the triangularly  arranged array is equal to the element spacing of the squarely arranged array.
If instead, the  main beam is positioned not within a cone, but over a "pyramidal" region, the reduction is  less.
The amount of reduction is only 9.2 percent in covering a + 45 by + 45" "square" angular  region, and 7.7 percent for a +45 by +25 region.
The smaller the angular region, the less the  saving.
One caution in the use of triangular spacings is that, compared to square spacings, it is  more likely to produce high sidelobes in some portions of space.
This is due to the phase  quantization that results from digital phase shifters.Is4 For most applications, however, tllese  quantization lobes do not limit the system performance significantly.
 Limited-scan arrays.
The scan angle of a conventional array antenna might typically rangc  from k45" to perhaps &60° in both angle coordinates.
If the required scaa angle can be  limited to a much smaller angular region the number of radiating elements and the number of  phase shifters can be reduced.
This can result in a simpler and cheaper phased-array radar  than the conventional array that must scan a wide angle in two orthogonal coordinates.
 Although the conventional phased-array radar has not seen extensive application because of  its high cost and complexity, the limited-scan array has had significant application because it is  more competitive in both performance and cost to mechanical scanning antennas.
Applica-  tions for limited-scan arrays in radar have included the one-dimensional electronic scan of 3D  radars (Sec.
14.4), aircraft landing or ground-control approach (GCA) radars,''' and hostile-  weapon-location radars.
' s'  8.11 APPLICATIONS OF THE ARRAY IN RADAR  The phased-array antenna has been of considerable interest to the radar systems engineer  because its properties are different from those of other microwave antennas.
The array antenna  takes several forms:  Mechnt~ically scanned array.
The array antenna in this configuration is used to form a fixed  beam that is scanned by mechanical motion of the entire antenna.
No electronic beam-  steering is employed.
This is an economical approach to air-surveillance radars at the  lower radar frequencies, such as VHF.
It is also employed at higher frequencies when a  precise aperture illumination is required, as to obtain extremely low sidelobes.
At the  lower frequencies, the array might be a collection of dipoles or Yagis, and at the higher  frequencies the array might consist of slotted waveguides.
 Lir~ear array wirh frequency scan., The frequency-scanned, linear array feeding a parabolic  cylinder or a planar array of slotted waveguides has seen wide application as a 313  air-surveillance radar.
In this application, a pencil beam is scanned in elevation by use of  frequency and scanned in azimuth by mechanical rotation of the entire antenna.
 Lirlrar arrajl wirh phase scan.
Electronic phase steering, instead of frequency scanning, in the  3D air-sur,veillance radar is generally more expensive, but allows the use of the frequency  domain for purposes other than beam steering.
The linear array configuration is also used  to generate multiple, contiguous fixed beams (stacked beams) for 3D radar.
Another  application is to use either phase- or frequency-steering in a stationary linear array to  steer the beam in one angular coordinate, as for the GCA radar.
 Phuse-frequencp planar array, .A two-dimensional (planar) phased array can utilize frequency  scanning to steer the beam in one angular coordinate and phase shifters to steer in the  334INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS half-angle of45°,thenumber ofelements required withtriangular spacing is13.4percentless thanwithsquarespacing.
Inthiscase-thealtitudeoftheequilateral triangleinthetriangularly arranged arrayisequaltotheelement spacingofthesquarely arranged array.Ifinstead, the mainbeamispositioned notwithinacone,butovera..pyramidal" region,thereduction is less.Theamountofreduction isonly9.2percentincovering a ±45by±45°"square" angular region,and7.7percentfora±45by±25region.Thesmallertheangular region,thelessthe saving.Onecautionintheuseoftriangular spacings isthat,compared tosquarespacings, itis morelikelytoproduce highsidelobes insomeportions ofspace.Thisisduetothephase quantization thatresultsfromdigitalphaseshifters.'54 Formostapplications, however, these quantization lobesdonotlimitthesystemperformance significantly.
Limited-scan arrays.Thescanangleofaconventional arrayantenna mighttypically range from±45°toperhaps ±60°inbothanglecoordinates.
Iftherequired sca~anglecanbe limitedtoamuchsmallerangular regionthenumberofradiating elements andthenumberof phaseshifterscanbereduced.
Thiscanresultinasimplerandcheaper phased-array radar thantheconventional arraythatmustscanawideangleintwoorthogonal coordinates.
Although theconventional phased-array radarhasnotseenextensive application because of itshighcostandcomplexity, thelimited-scan arrayhashadsignificant application because itis morecompetitive inbothperformance andcosttomechanical scanning antennas.
Applica­ tionsforlimited-scan arraysinradarhaveincluded theone-dimensional electronic scanof3D radars(Sec.14.4),aircraftlandingorground-control approach (GCA)radars,'57andhostile­ weapon-location radars.' 58 8.11APPLICATIONS OFTHEARRAY INRADAR Thephased-array antenna hasbeenofconsiderable interest totheradarsystems engineer because itsproperties aredifferent fromthoseofothermicrowave antennas.
Thearrayantenna takesseveralforms:.
Mechanically scanne(1 array.Thearrayantenna inthisconfiguration isusedtoformafixed beamthatisscanned bymechanical motionofthe·entireantenna.
Noelectronic beam­ steering isemployed.
Thisisaneconomical approach toair-surveillance radarsatthe lowerradarfrequencies, suchasVHF.Itisalsoemployed athigherfrequencies whena preciseaperture illumination isrequired, astoobtainextremely lowsidelobes.
Atthe lowerfrequencies, thearraymightbeacollection ofdipolesorYagis,andatthehigher frequencies thearraymightconsistofslottedwaveguides.
Lineararraywithfrequency scan,.Thefrequency-scanned, lineararrayfeedingaparabolic cylinder oraplanararrayof.slotted.waveguides hasseenwideapplication asa3D air-surveillance radar.Inthisapplication, apencilbeamisscanned inelevation byuseof frequency andscanned inazimuth :bymechanical rotation oftheentireantenna.
Lineararraywithphasescan.,Electronic phasesteering, insteadoffrequency scanning, inthe 3Dair-sur,veillance radarisgenerally moreexpensive, butallowstheuseofthefrequency domain forpurposes otherthanbeamsteering.
Thelineararrayconfiguration isalsoused togenerate multiple, contiguous fixedbeams(stacked beams)for3Dradar.Another application istouseeitherphase-orfrequency-steering inastationary lineararrayto steerthebeaminoneangularcoordinate, asfortheGCAradar.
Phase{reqllency planararray..Atwo-dimensional (planar) phasedarraycanutilizefrequency scanning tosteerthebeaminoneangularcoordinate andphaseshifterstosteerinthe 'Itlf! f:.l.liC'l'RONIC.AI,LY S'1'f:IiRlii) I'ItASI!U ARRAY ANTENNA IN RADAR 335  orthogonal coordinate.
Tliis approach is generally easier than using phase sliifters to  scan in both coordinates, but as with any frequency-scanned array the use of the  freqlrency dornain for other purposes is limited when frequency is employed for  bealii-steeririg.
 I'htrse-pltc~qe plarrirr c~r.rer\~.
'I'he planar array which utilizes phase shifting to steer the bean1 iri  two orttiogotial coorditiatcs is the type of array that is ofrnajor interest for radar applica-  tion because of its inherent versatility.
Its application, however, has been limited by its  rcl:ilively llipli coqt.
'l'lic pliasc-phase array is what is generally implied when the term  elrc~~r~o~tic~c~llr .\reclrctl phctseel clr.rirJ1 is used.
 The phased array antenna has seen application in radar for such purposes as aircraft  sirrveillatice fro111 on board sflip (AN/SPS-33), satellite surveillance (AN/FPS-85).
ballistic  rriissile defense (PAR, MSR), air defense (AN/SPY-1 and Patriot), aircraft landing systeriis  (AN/TPN-19 and AN/TPS-32), mortar (AN/TPQ-36) and artillery (AN/TPQ-37) location.
 tracking of ballistic tnissiles (Cobra Dane), and airborne bomber radar (EAR).
 There have been many developmental array radars built in the United States, including  ESAR.
ZMAR, MAR, Typhon, Hapdar, ADAR, MERA, RASSR, and others.
Although mucli  effort and funds have been expended, except for limited-scan arrays there has been no large  serial production of such radars comparable to the serial production of radars with mechan-  ically rotating reflector antennas.
 8.12 ADVANTAGES AND LIMITATIONS  The array antenna has several unique characteristics that make it a candidate for considera-  tion in radar application.
However, the attractive features of the array antenna are sometimes  nullified by several serious disadvantages.
 The array antenna has the following desirable characteristics not generally enjoyed by  other antenna types:  I~terrialrss, rupitl hearrt-steerirtg.
The beam from an array can be scanned, or switched from one  position to another, in a time limited only by the switching speed of the phase shifters.
 Typically, the beam can be switched in several microseconds, but it can be considerably  shorter if desired.
 Multiple, indepettder~t beants.
A single aperture can generate many simultaneous independent  beams.
Alternatively, the same effect can be obtained by rapidly switching a single beam  through a sequence of positions.
 Poterttial for large peak andlor average power.
If necessary, each element of the array can be fed  by a separate high-power transmitter with the combining of the outputs made in "space "  to obtain a total power greater than can be obtained from a single transmitter.
 Control of the radiation pattern.
A particular radiation pattern may be more readily obtained  with the array than with other microwave antennas since the amplitude and phase of each  array element may be individually controlled.
Thus, radiation patterns with extremely  low sidelobes or with a shaped main beam may be achieved.
Separate monopulse sum and  difTerence patterns, each with its own optimum shape, are also possible.
 Gracefitl degrcldariort.
The distributed nature of the array means that it can fail gradually  rather than all at once (catastrophically).
 Cont~errier~t aperture shape.
The shape of the array permits flush mounting and it can be  hardened to resist blast.
 Till:FI.!'CIRONICALLY STEI'RFD PHASFD ARRAY ANTENNA INRADAR335 orthogonal coordinate.
Thisapproach isgenerally easierthanusingphaseshiftersto scaninbothcoordinates, butaswithanyfrequency-scanned arraytheuseofthe frequency domain forotherpurposes islimited whenfrequency isemployed for heaIll-steeri11g.
Phase-phase plQ/l£lralTa.\'.Theplanararraywhichutilizesphaseshiftingtosteerthebeamin twoorthogonal coordinates isthetypeofarraythatisofmajorinterestforradarapplica­ tionbecause ofitsinherent versatility.
Itsapplication, however, hasbeenlimitedbyits relatively highcost.Thephase-phase arrayiswhatisgenerally implied whentheterlll elec(nJllicall.l' s(eeret!"hasedarrayisused.
Thephasedarrayantenna hasseenapplication inradarforsuchpurposes asaircraft surveillance fromonboardship(AN/SPS-33), satellite surveillance (AN/FPS-85), ballistic missiledefense (PAR,MSR),airdefense(AN/SPY-! andPatriot), aircraft landing systems (AN/TPN-!9 andAN/TPS-32), mortar(AN/TPQ-36) andartillery (AN/TPQ-37) location.
tracking ofballistic missiles(CobraDane),andairborne bomber radar(EAR).
Therehavebeenmanydevelopmental arrayradarsbuiltintheUnitedStates,including ESAR,ZMAR, MAR,Typhon, Hapdar, ADAR,MERA, RASSR, andothers.Although much effortandfundshavebeenexpended, exceptforlimited-scan arraystherehasbeennolarge serialproduction ofsuchradarscomparable totheserialproduction ofradarswithmechan­ icallyrotating reflector antennas.
8.12ADVANTAGES ANDLiMITATIONS Thearrayantenna hasseveraluniquecharacteristics thatmakeitacandidate forconsidera­ tioninradarapplication.
However, theattractive featuresofthearrayantenna aresometimes nullified byseveralseriousdisadvantages.
Thearrayantenna hasthefollowing desirable characteristics notgenerally enjoyed by otherantenna types: [lIertialess, rapidneam-steerillg.
Thebeamfromanarraycanbescanned, orswitched fromone position toanother, inatimelimitedonlybytheswitching speedofthephaseshifters.
Typically, thebeamcanbeswitched inseveralmicroseconds, butitcanbeconsiderably shorterifdesired.
Multiple, indepelldent beams.Asingleaperture cangenerate manysimultaneous independen t beams.Alternatively, thesameeffectcanbeobtained byrapidlyswitching asinglebeam through asequence ofpositions.
Potetttialfor largepeakand/oraveragepower.Ifnecessary, eachelementofthearraycanbefed byaseparate high-power transmitter withthecombining oftheoutputsmadein"space..
toobtainatotalpowergreaterthancanbeobtained fromasingletransmitter.
Controloftlteradiation pattern.
Aparticular radiation patternmaybemorereadilyobtained withthearraythanwithothermicrowave antennas sincetheamplitude andphaseofeach arrayelement maybeindividually controlled.
Thus,radiation patterns withextremely lowsidelobesorwithashapedmainbeammaybeachieved.
Separate monopulse sumand difference patterns, eachwithitsownoptimum shape,arealsopossible.
Graceflll degradation.
Thedistributed natureofthearraymeansthatitcanfailgradually ratherthanallatonce(catastrophically).
Cortl'e,Jient aperwre shape.Theshapeofthearraypermits flushmounting anditcanbe hardened toresistblast. 336 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  Elrctronic beam stabilization.
The ability to steer the beam electronically can be used to  stabilize the beam direction when the radar is on a platform, such as a ship or aircraft,  that is subject to roll.
pitch, or yaw.
 The above attributes of an array antenna offer the radar systems engineer additional  flexibility in attempting to meet the requirements of radar applications.
Some conlments  should be made, however, about the practical utility of these characteristics.
These attributes  are obtained for a price, so that they should only be considered when warranted.
it is not  obvious that they are always absolutely essential for the success of a particular application.
 For example, it is certainly true that a mechanically scanned reflector antenna cannot  switch a beam from one direction to another as fast as can a phased-array antenna.
However,  it is seldom, if ever, that the operational requirements do not permit the system designer to  configure a system to do an equic:alent job with a mechanically scanned antahna.
 An N-element array can, in principle, generate N independent beams.
However, in prac-  tice it is seldom required that a radar generate more than a few simultaneous beams (perhaps  no more than a dozen), since the complexity of the array radar increases with increasing  number of beams.
 Although the array has the potential for radiating large power, it is seldom that an array is  required to radiate more power than can be radiated by other antenna types or to litilizr: a  total power which cannot possibly be generated by current high-power microwave tube tech-  nology that feeds a single transnlission line.
 Conventional microwave antenn.as cannot generate radiation patterns with sidelobes as  low as can be obtained by an array antenna, especially a nonscanning array.
However, when a  planar array is electronically scanned, the change of mutual coupling that accoinpanies it  change in beam position makes the maintenance of low sidelobes more difficult.
 If an array has some margin in performance to permit graceful degradation, it is likely  that this margin will be eliminated during the procurement process if the cost of the radar  escalates.
Even if the radar is delivered with margin for graceful degradation, it is likely that  after some time in operation it will always be at the degraded level because of a desire to keep  maintenance costs to a minimum.
Another problem is to know when graceful degradation has  gone too far and maintenance is needed.
 The full testing of an array radar system is often more complicated than with conven-  tional radar systems.
Also, the incorporation of IFF can be more complicated than with  rotating antennas.
 Although the above are limitations to the phased array in radar, they are probably not  sufficiently serious to restrict its greater use.
However, the major limiratioa that has limited the  widespread use of the conventional phased array in radar is its high cost, which is due in large  part to its co~nplexity.
The software for the computer system that is needed to utilize tllc  inherent flexibility of the array radar also contributes significantly to the system cost and  con~plexity.
 One of the factors that is often misleading is the usual picture of an array as a singlr:  radiating face of relatively modest size.
A single array antenna can scan but a limited sector;  t-45" in each plane is perhaps typical.
Four or more faces might therefore be necessary for -  hemispherical coverage.
However, the usual photograph or drawing of a phased-array radar  seldom reveals the amount of electronic equipment behind the array face that is required to  make it a useful radar.
 Another of the advantages sometimes claimed for an array radar is that it is capable of  performing more than one function simultaneously; for example, it can do surveillance of a  volume as well as track individual targets.
The multifunction attribute of an array radar has  336INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS Electronic beamstabilization.
Theabilitytosteerthebeamelectronically canbeused10 stabilize thebeam-direction whentheradarisonaplatform, suchasashiporaircraft, thatissubjecttoroll,pitch,oryaw.
Theaboveattributes ofanarrayantenna offertheradarsystems engineer additional flexibility inattempting tomeettherequirements ofradarapplications.
Somecomments shouldbemade,however, aboutthepractical utilityofthesecharacteristics.
Theseattributes areobtained foraprice,sothattheyshouldonlybeconsidered whenwarranted.
Itisnot obvious thattheyarealwaysabsolutely essential forthesuccessofaparticular application.
Forexample, itiscertainly truethatamechanically scanned reflector antenna cannot switchabeamfromonedirection toanother asfastascanaphased-array antenna.
However, itisseldom, ifever,thattheoperational requirements donotpermitthesystemdesigner to configure asystemtodoanequivalent jobwithamechanically scanned antenna.
AnN-element arraycan,inprinciple, generate Nindependent beams.However, inprac­ ticeitisseldomrequired thataradargenerate morethanafewsimullaneous beams(perhaps nomorethanadozen), sincethecomplexity ofthearrayradarincreases withincreasing numberofbeams.
Although thearrayhasthepotential forradiating largepower,itisseldomthatanarrayis required toradiatemorepowerthancanberadiated byotherantenna typesortoutilizea totalpowerwhichcannotpossibly begenerated bycurrenthigh-power microwave tubetech­ nologythatfeedsasingletransmission line.
Conventional microwave antenn.as cannotgenerate radiation pallerns withsidelobes as lowascanbeobtaineq byanarrayantenna, especially anonscanning array.However, whena planararrayiselectronically scanned, thechangeofmutualcoupling thataccompanies a changeinbeamposition makesthemaintenance oflowsidelobes moredifficult.
Ifanarrayhassomemargininperformance topermitgraceful degradation, itislikely thatthismarginwillbeeliminated duringtheprocurement process ifthecostoftheradar escalates.
Eveniftheradarisdelivered withmarginforgraceful degradation, itislikelythat aftersometimeinoperation itwillalwaysbeatthedegraded levelbecauseofadesiretokeep maintenance coststoaminimum.
Another problem istoknowwhengraceful degradation has gonetoofarandmaintenance isneeded.
Thefulltestingofanarrayradarsystemisoftenmorecomplicated thanwithconven­ tionalradarsystems.
Also,theincorporation ofIFFcanbemorecomplicated thanwith rotating antennas.
Although theabovearelimitations tothephased arr~yinradar,theyareprobably not sufficiently serioustorestrictitsgreateruse.However, themajorlimitation thathaslimitedthe widespread useoftheconventional phasedarrayinradarisitshighcost,whichisdueinlarge parttoitscomplexity.
Thesoftware forthecomputer systemthatisneededtoutilizethe inherent flexibility ofthearrayradaralsocontributes significantly tothesystemcostand complexity.
Oneofthefactorsthatisoftenmisleading istheusualpictureofanarrayasasingle radiatingfaceofrelatively modestsize.Asinglearrayantenna canscanbutalimitedsector; ±45°ineachplaneisperhaps typical.Fourormorefacesmighttherefore benecessary for hemispherical coverage.
However, theusualphotograph ordrawing ofaphased-array radar seldomrevealstheamount ofelectronic equipment behindthearrayfacethatisrequired to makeitausefulradar.
Another oftheadvantages sometimes claimed foranarrayradaristhatitiscapableof performing morethanonefunction simultaneously; forexample, itcandosurveillance ofa volumeaswellastrackindividual targets.Themultifunction attribute ofanarrayradarhas TtlE EI.FCTRONICA1.I.Y STFERftL) PHASED ARRAY ANTENNA IN KALIAK 337  been of considerable interest, but it can also be a serious liability in some applications.
7'111:  .preferred frequency for a ground-based aircraft surveillance radar is at the lower portion of the  ~~iicrowave region (UHF or L band).
The major factors of importance that favor the lower  frequencies for surveillance radar are ttie large average power and the large antenna aperture.
 both of which are easier to obtain at the lower frequencies.
Also, a good MTI is easier to  ;icliicve aricl the efl'ects olweatlier are less at these frequencies.
The preferred frequencv range  for an aircraft-tracking radar is the upper portion of the niicrowave band (C' or X bands) sitice  it is easier to obtain the wide bandwidths and narrow beamwidths for precision target tracking  than at the lower frequencies.
TIlils tracking radars differ significantly from surveiilaticc  ratiars.
When a single radar is to perforii~ both surveillance and tracking, a single frequency  sotiiculicrc it1 tlic tiiitlrllc of tlic riiicrowiivc I>ii~iil riii~st be sclccted as ;i cotiiproriiise (S haritl.
or  ~'crti;~ps (' or I, bands).
'I'lie coriipro~iiise frequency rnight thus be higher than would be desirctl  for- ~ci11.cli ii~id I~)wcr tIi;111 tlc~irctl for trackitig.
The rcsi~lt is that a single-frcqitc~icy, ~niiltifrrric-  tion radar riliglit not be as efficient as separate radars operating at separate frequencies, cacli  optitiiized to fi~lfill a single, dedicated fiinctioti.
It is co~iceivable in sonie circun~stances that  two ri~tl;irs, oric optiti~izcd lor sirrvcill;ir~cc :111d tlic other for track, will perfor111 better, hc less  costly.
and take less total space than a single niultifunction radar.
 The caution regarding the drawbacks of a niultifunction radar is especially true of aircraft-  surveillance radar.
However, if the particular application is such that the optimum frequency  for search is the same as that for tracking, it is more likely that a tnultifunction array radar  \vnuld have merit over separate radars.
Such seems to be the case for satellite surveillance  where the same frequency (UHF) seerris desirable for both search and track, as in the  ANIFPS-85.
 The unique characteristics of an array antenna offer the radar systems designer capabili-  ties not available with other techniques.
As with any other device, the array will see ~nqjor  applicatioti when it can perforni sorne radar function cheaper than any other antenna type or  when it can do something not practical by other means.
 REFERENCES  1.
Southworlh, G.
C.: "1-orty Years of Radio Research." Gordon and Breach, New York, lc)02.
 pp.
98 - 100.
 2.
Wiln\ott+ R.
M.: ilistory of the Directional Antenna in the Standard Broadcast Band for the  Purpose of Protecting Service Area of Distant Stations, IRE Trarrs., vol.
PGBTS-7, pp.
I- 55.
 Februar)..
1957.
 3.
Friis.
H.
T., and C.
B.
Feldman: A Multiple Unit Steerable Antenna for Short-Wave Reception.
Ucrll  S!.c.
TPCII.
J..
VOI.
16, pp.
337-419, July, 1937.
 4.
Skolnik.
M.
1.: Survey of Phased Array Accomplishments and Requirements for Navy Ships,  " I'hased Array Antennas," A.
A.
Oliner and G.
H.
Knittel (eds.), Artech House.
Inc..
1972, pp.
15 20.
 5.
Ridenour.
L.
N.: " Radar- System Engineering," McGraw-Hill Book Co., New York.
1947,  pp.
2 19..295.
 6.
Snlith, R.
A,: "Aerials for Metre and Decimetre Wave-Lengths," Cambridge Universit~ Press.
 London.
1949.
 7.
Price.
A,: "Instri~ments of Darkness." Charles Scribner's Sons.
New York.
1977.
 8.
Kraus.
J.
D.: "Antennas." McGraw-Hill Book Co..
New York, 1950.
 9.
SchelkunofT.
S.
A.: A.
Mathematical Theory of Linear Arrays, Bell Systen~ Tech.
.I..
vol.
27.
 pp.
80-107.
January.
1943.
 10.
SchelkunofT, S.
A..
and H.
T.
Friis: "Antennas, Theory and Practice," John Wiley & Sons.
Inc..
Ncw  York, 1952.
 11.
Srnirh.
R.
A,: "Aerials for Metre arid Decimefre Wave-lengths," Cambridge University Press.
 London.
1949.
 TIfEELECTRONICALLY STEERED PHASED ARRAY ANTENNA INRADAR337 beenofconsiderable interest, butitcanalsobeaseriousliability insomeapplications.
The preferred frequency foraground-based aircraftsurveillance radarisatthelower portionofthe microwave region(UHForLband).Themajorfactorsofimportance thatfavorthelower frequencies forsurveillance radararethelargeaverage powerandthelargeantenna aperture.
hathofwhichareeasiertoobtainatthelowerfrequencies.
Also,agoodMTIiseasier10 achicvc andtheeffectsofwcather arclessatthesefrequencies.
Thepreferred frequency range foranaircraft-tracking radaristheupperportionofthemicrowave band(CorXbands)since itiseasiertoobtainthewidebandwidths andnarrowbeamwidths forprecision targettracKing thanatthelowerfrequencies.
Thustracking radarsdiffersignificanlly fromsurveillancc radars.Whenasingleradaristoperform hothsurveillance andtracking.
asinglefrequency sOll1cwhcre inthcmiddIeofIhcmicrowave bandmustheselected asacompromisc (Shand.or pcrhapsCorLhands).Thecompromise frequency mightthusbehigherthanwouldbcdesired forsearcltandlowerthandesiredfortracking.
Thcresll1tisthatasingle-frequency, multifunc­ tionradarmightnotbcasefficient asseparate radarsoperating atseparate frequcncies, each optimizcd tofulfillasingle,dedicated function.Itisconceivable insomecircumstances that Iworadars,oncoptimizcd forsurvcillalH:e andthcotherfortrack,willpcrform beller,beless COSIly,andtakclesstotalspacethanasinglemultifunction radar.
Thecautionregarding thedrawbacks ofamultifunction radarisespecially trueofaircraft­ sUiveillance radar.However, iftheparticular application issuchthattheoptimum frequency forsearchisthesameasthatfortracking, itismorelikelythatamultifunction arrayfi.ldar wouldhavemeritoverseparate radars.Suchseemstobethecaseforsatellite surveillance wherethesamefrequency (UHF)seemsdesirable forbothsearchandtrack,asinthe AN/FPS-85.
Theuniquecharacteristics ofanarrayantenna offertheradarsystems designer capabili­ tiesnotavailable withothertechniques.
Aswithanyotherdevice,thearraywillseemajor application whenitcanperform someradarfunction cheaper thananyotherantenna typeor whenitcandosomething nOlpractical byothermeans.
REFERENCES I.Southworth, G.c.:"Forty YearsofRadioResearch," Gordon andBreach.
NewYork,1%2.
pp.98-100.
2.Wilmotty.
R.M.:History oftheDirectional Antenna intheStandard Broadcast Bandforthe Purpose ofProtecting Service AreaofDistant Stations, IRETrailS.,vol.PGBTS-7, pp.5155.
Februar)·.
1957.
J.Friis.H.T.,andC.B.Feldman: AMultiple' UnitSteerable Antenna forShort-Wave Receptil 1n.l3cll Sys.Tech.J..vol.16,pp.337-419, July,1937.
4.Skolnik, M.I.:SurveyofPhased ArrayAccomplishments andRequirements forNavyShips, "PhasedArrayAntennas," A.A.OlinerandG.H.Knittel(eds.),ArtechHouse,Inc..1972,pp.1520.
5.Ridenour.
L.N.:"Radar' System Engineering," McGraw-Hill BookCo.,NewYork.1947, pp.219295.
6.Smith,R.A.:"Aerials forMetreandDecimetre Wave-Lengths," Cambridge University Press.
London.
J949.
7.Price.A.:"Instruments ofDarkness," Charles Scribner's Sons,NewYork,1977.
8.Kraus,J.D.:"Antennas:' McGraw-Hili BookCo.,NewYork,1950.
9.Schelkunoff, S.A.:A.Mathematical Theory ofLinearArrays, BellSystemTech../..vol.22.
pr.80-107,January.
1943.
10.Schelkunoff, S.A.,andH.T.Friis:"Antennas, TheoryandPractice," JohnWiley&Sons,Inc.,New York,1952.
II.Smith, R.A.:"Aerials forMetreandDecimetre Wave-lengths," Cambridge University Press.
London.
1949. 12.
Hansen, R.
C.: " Microwave Scanning Antennas, Volume 11," Academic Press, New York, 1966.
 13.
Hines, J.
N..
V.
H.
Rumsey, and T.
E.
Tice: On the Design of Arrays, Proc.
IRE, vol.
42.
 pp.
1262 - 1267, August, 1954.
 14.
Amitay, N., V.
Galindo, and C.
P.
Wu: "Theory and Analysis of Phased Array Antennas," Wiley-  Interscience, New York, 1972.
 15.
Von Aulock, W.
H.: Properties of Phased Arrays, Proc.
IRE, vol.
48, pp.
171 5.- 1727, October, 1960.
 16.
Ogg, F.
C., Jr.: Steerable Array Radars, IRE Trans., vol.
MIL-5, pp.
80-94, April, 1961.
 17.
Bickrnore, R.
W.: A Note on the Effective Aperture of Electrically Scanned ~rra~s, IRE Trans.,  vol.
AP-6, pp.
194- 196, April, 1958.
 18.
Elliott, R.
S.: The Theory of Antenna Arrays, " Microwave Scanning Antennas, vol.
[I," R.
C.
Hansen  (ed.), Academic Press.
New York, N.Y., 1966, chap.
I.
 19.
Davies.
D.
E.
N.: Radar Systems with Electronic Sector Scanning, J.
Brir.
IRE, vol.
18, pp.
709-713,  December, 1958.
 30.
Kumlner, W.
H.: Feeding and Phase Scanning, "Microwave Scanning Antennas, vol.
Ill," R.
C.
 Hansen (ed.), Academic Press, New York, 1966, chap.
1.
 31.
Craig, C.
W.
and H.
K.
Horn: A Low-Loss Microstrip X-band Diode Phase Shifter, 1974 Gollertrnlenr  Microcircuir App1ic.arion.s Conference Digest of Papers, pp.
58-59, June, 1974.
 23.
Hines, M.
E.: Fundamental Limitations in RF Switching and Phase Shifting Using Semiconductor  Diodes, Prois.
IEEE, vol.
52, pp.
697-708, June, 1964.
 23.
White, J.
F.: Review of Semiconductor Microwave Phase Shifters.
).'roc..
IEEE, vo1.
56,  pp.
1924- 193 1, November, 1968.
 24.
Temme, D.
H.: Diode and Ferrite Phaser Technology, " Phased Array Antennas," A.
A.
Oliner and  G.
H.
Knittel (eds.), Artech House, Inc., Dedham; Mass., 1972, pp.
212-218.
 25.
Ince, W.
J.: Recent Advances in Diode and Ferrite Phaser Technology for Phased Array Radars,  pt.
I, Microwuiw J., vol.
15, pp.
36-46, Sept., 1972; pt.
11, Microwa~~r J., voi.
15, pp.
31--36, October,  1972.
 26.
Stark, L.: Microwave Theory of Phased-Array Antennas-A Review, Proc.
IEEE, vol.
63.
 pp.
166 1- 1701, December, 1974.
 27.
Dionne, G.
F.: A Review of Ferrites for Microwave Application, Proc.
IEEE, vol.
63, pp.
777-789,  May, 1975.
 28.
Von Aulock, W.
H..
and C.
E.
Fay: "Linear Ferrite Devices for Microwave Application." Academic  Press.
New York, 1968.
 29.
Clarricoats, P.
J.
B.: " Microwave Ferrites," John Wiley and Sons, New York, 1961.
 30.
Ince, W.
J., and D.
H.
Temme: Phasers and Time Delay Elements.
Adt~nncc~s in hlic.ro~~art~s, vol.
4.
 Academic Press, New York, 1969.
 3 1.
Stark, L., R.
W.
Burns, and W.
P.
Clark: Phase Shifters lor Arrays, chap.
I:! of Ratltrr Mtrt~rlhoorC, M.
I.
 Skolnik (ed.), McGraw-Hill Book Co., New York, 1970.
 37.
Clark, W.
I).: A High Power Phase Shifter for Phased-Array Systems.
Ilit'E 7'rtrtr\., vol.
MTT-13,  pp.
785-788, November, 1965.
 33.
Whicker.
L.
R.
(ed.): "Ferrite Control Components, vol.
2.
Ferrite Phasers and Ferrite MIC' Corn-  ponents," Artech House, Inc., Dedham, Mass., 1974.
 (A collection of reprints of papers covering toroidal waveguide phase shifters, dual-mode phase  shifters.
Reggia-Spencer phase shifters, other novel ferrite phaser configurations, and ferrite rnicro-  wave integrated components.)  34.
DiBartolo, J., W.
J.
Ince, and D.
H.
Temme: A Solid State "Flux-I)rive" Fontrol Circuit for  Latching-Ferrite-Phaser Applications, Mic.rowtrre J., vol.
15, pp.
59-64, September, 1972.
 35.
Whicker, L.: Selecting Ferrite Phasers for Phased Arrays, Micro\\~ti~.es, vol.
I I, pp.
44-48, August,  1972.
 36.
Boyd.
C'.
R., Jr.: A Dual-Mode Latching Reciprocal Ferrite Phase Shifter.
IEEE Truns.,  vol.
MTT- 18, pp.
1 1 19- 1 124, December, 1970.
 37.
Boyd.
C.
R., Jr.: Comments on the Design and Manufacture of Dual-Mode Reciprocal Latching  Ferrite Phase Shifters, lEEE Trans., val.
MTT-22, pp.
593-601, June, 1974.
 38.
Fox, G.
A., S.
E.
Miller, and M.
T.
Weiss: Behavior and Application of Ferrites in the Microwave  Region, Bell Sysrrm Tech.
J., vol.
34, pp.
5-103, January, 1955.
 39.
Fox, A.
G.: An Adjustable Wave-guide Phase Changer, Proc.
IRE, vol.
35, pp.
1489- 1498.
Decem-  ber.
1947.
 40.
Seckelmann, R.: Phase-Shift Characteristics of Helical Phase Sllifters, lEEE Truns, vol.
MTT-14,  pp.
24.28, January, 1966.
 41.
Boxer, A.
S., S.
Hershenov, and E.
F.
Landry: A High-Power Coaxial Ferrite Phase Shifter, IRE  Trans, vol.
MTT-9, p.
577, November, 1961.
 338INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS 12.Hansen, R.c.:"Microwave Scanning Antennas, Volume II,"Academic Press,NewYork,1966.
13.Hines,J.N.,V.H.Rumsey, andT.E.Tice:OntheDesignofArrays,Proc.IRE,vol.42, pp.J262-1267,August, 1954.
14.Amitay, N.,V.Galindo, andCP.Wu:"Theory andAnalysis ofPhasedArrayAntennas," Wiley- lnterscience, NewYork,1972.
15.VonAulock, W.H.:Properties ofPhasedArrays,Proc,IRE,vol.48,pp.1715·1727, Octoher, 1960.
16.Ogg,F.C,Jr.:Steerable ArrayRadars,IRETrans.,vol.MIL-5,pp.~O·94,April,1961.
17.Bickmore, R.W.:ANoteontheEffective Aperture ofElectrically Scanned Arrays, JRETrans., vol.AP-6,pp.194-196, April,1958.
/8.Elliott,R.S;:TheTheoryofAntenna Arrays," Microwave Scanning Antennas, vol.If,"R.CHansen (ed.),Academic Press,NewYork,N.Y.,1966,chap.I.
19.Davies,D.E.N.:RadarSystemswithElectronic SectorScanning, J.Brit.JRE,vol.18,pp.709-713, December, 1958.
20.Kummer, W.H.:Feeding andPhaseScanning, "Miaowave Scanning Antennas, vol.III,"R.C.
Hansen(ed.),Academic Press,NewYork,1966,chap.I.
21.Craig,C.W.andH.K.Hom:ALow-Loss Microstrip X-bandDiodePhaseShifter,1.74GOI'emment Microcircuit Applications Conference DigestofPapers,pp.58-59,June,1974.
22.Hines,M.E.:Fundamental Limitations inRFSwitching andPhaseShiftingUsingSemiconductor Diodes,Proc,IEEE,vol.52,pp.697-708, June,1964.
23.White,J.F.:Review ofSemiconductor Microwave PhaseShifters, Pruc./fEE,vol.56, pp.1924-1931, November, 1968.
24.Temme, D.H.:DiodeandFerritePnaserTechnology, "Phased ArrayAntennas," A.
A.Olinerand G.H.Knittel(eds.),ArtechHouse,Inc.,Dedham; Mass.,1972,pp.212-218.
25.lnee,W.J.:RecentAdvances inDiodeandFerritePhaserTechnology forPhasedArrayRadars., pt.l,Microwalle J.,vol.15,pp.36-46,Sept.,1972;pt.Il,Microwal'e J.,vol.15,pp.31-36,October, 1972.
26.Stark,L.:Microwave Theory ofPhased-Array Antennas-A Review, Proc.IEEE,vol.62, pp.1661-1701, December, 1974.
27.Dionne,G.F.:AReviewofFerritesforMicrowave Application, Proc.JEEE,vol.63,pp.777-789, May,1975.
28.VonAulock,W.H..andCE.Fay:"LinearFerriteDevicesforMicrowave Application." Academic Press,NewYork,1968.
29.Clarricoats, P.J.8.:"Microwave Ferrites," JohnWileyandSons,NewYork,1961.
30.Ince,W.J.,andD.H.Temme: PhasersandTimeDelayElements.
AdI'QlJCt's illMicroll'£Ires.
vol.4.
Academic Press,NewYork,1969.
31.Stark,L.,R.W.Burns,andW.P.Clark:PhaseShiftersforArrays,chap.12ofRadarHandhook, M.I.
Skolnik(ed.),McGraw-Hili BookCo.,NewYork,1970.
32.Clark,W.P.:AHighPowerPhaseShifterforPhased-Array Systems.nEETr£lll\..vol.MTT-I3, pp.785-788, November, 1965.
33.Whicker, L.R.(ed.):"Ferrite ControlComponents, vol.2,FerritePhasersandFerrileMICCom­ ponents," ArtechHouse,Inc.,Dedham, Mass.,1974.
(Acollection ofreprints ofpap'erscovering toroidal waveguide phase shifters, dual-mode phase shifters,Reggia-Spencer phaseshifters,othernovelferritephaserconfigurations, andferritemicro­ waveintegrated components.) 34.DiBartolo, J.,W.J.Ince,andD,H.Temme: ASolidState"Flux-Drive" ~'ol\trol Cin;uitfor Latching-Ferrite-Phaser Applications, Microware J.,vol.15,pp.59-64,September, 1972.
35.Whicker, L.:Selecting FerritePhasersforPhasedArrays,Micrv\\'ares, vol.11,pp.44-48,August, 1972.
36.Boyd.C.R.,Jr.:ADual-Mode Latching Reciprocal FerritePhaseShifter, IEEETrt.m\., vol.MTT-18, pp.1119-1124, December, 1970.
37.Boyd,CR.,Jr.:Comments ontheDesignandManufacture ofDual-Mode Reciprocal Latching FerritePhaseShifters,JEEETram.,vol.MTT-22, pp.593-60I,June,1974.
3H.Fox,G.A.,S.E.Miller,andM.T.Weiss:Behavior andApplication ofFerrites intheMicrowave Region,BellSystemTech.J.,vol.34,pp.5-103,January, 1955.
39.Fox,A.G.:AnAdjustable Wave-guide PhaseChanger, Proc.IRE.vol.35,pp.1489-1498, Decem­ ber.1947.
40.Seckelmann, R.:Phase-Shift Characteristics ofHelicalPhaseShifters, IEEETrans,vol.MTT-14, pp.24·28,January, 1966.
41.Boxer,A.S.,S.Hershenov, andE.F.Landry: AHigh-Power Coaxial FerritePhaseShifter,IRE TrailS,vol.MIT-9,p.577,November, 1961. 1111.
1.1 I ( IRONl('A1 I Y Sll~l~l~I~l~ I~IIASI~I~ ARRAY ANI'ICNNA IN RAl)Al< 339  42.
Sakiotis, N.
(j..
arid ti.
N.
Cliait: 1;errites at Microwaves, Proc.
IRE, vol.
41, pp.
87-93.
Janlriiry.
 1953.
 43.
Lax, B..
K.
J.
Button.
and L.
M.
Roth: Ferrite Phase Shifters in Rectangular Waveguide.
J.
~pl~lic'tl  I'l~j.sic.s, vol.
25.
pp.
1413- 142 1, Noveliiber.
1954.
 44.
Scharfnian, ti.: Three New Ferrite Phase Shifters, Proc.
IRE, vol.
44, pp.
1456-1459, October, 1956.
 45.
Monaghan, S.
R..
and M.
C.
Mohr: Polarization Insensitive Phase Shifter for Use in Phased Array  Antennas.
hfic.ro\c*c~r.e J., vol.
12, pp.
75--80, December, 1969.
 46.
Qucrido, 11.
J..
J.
Frank, and T.
Chestori: Wide Band Phase Shifters, IEEE Trans, vol.
AP-15.
p.
300.
 March.
1967.
 47.
Johnson.
C.
M.: Ferrite Phase Shifter for the UHF Region, IRE Trans, vol.
MTT-7, pp.
27-31,  January.
1959.
 48.
Sterri.
E., and (i.
N.
l'sandoulas: Ferroscan: Toward Continuous-Aperture Scanning, IEEE Trtrrr.~.
 vol.
AP-23.
pp.
15-20.
January, 1975.
 49.
Cohn.
M., and A.
F.
Eikenberg: Ferroelectric Phase Shifters for VHF and UHF, IRE Tram,  ~ol.
MTT- 10, pp.
536-548, November, 1962.
 50.
Senf, 11.
R.: Electro~iic Antenna Scanning, Proc.
Natl.
Conf.
on Aeronaut.
Elecrronics (Dayton.
Ohio).
 1958.
pp.
407-4 1 1.
 5 I.
Kummer, W.
H.: Feeding and Phase Scanning, chap.
1 in "Microwave Scanning Antennas, vol.
111,"  R.
C'.
flansen (ed.), Academic Press, New York, 1966.
 52.
Alday.
J.
R.: Microwave Plastna Beam Sweeping Array, IRE Trans, vol.
AP-10, pp.
96-97, January,  1962.
 53.
Pringle.
[I.
H., and E.
M.
Bradley: Some New Microwave Control Valves Employing the Negative  Glow Discharge.
J.
Elecrrott., (London), vo!.
1, pp.
389-404, 1956.
 54.
Retts, F., D.
ti.
Ternme.
and J.
A.
Weiss: A Switchable Circulator: S-band; Stripline; Remanent; 15  Kilowatts; 10 Microseconds; Temperature Stable, IEEE Trarrs., vol.
MTT-14, pp.
665-669, Decern-  her.
1966.
 55.
Stark.
L.: A Helical Line Scanner for Beam Steering a Linear Array, IRE Trans..
vol.
AP-5.
 pp.
21 1--216.
April, 1957.
 56.
kked, R.
H.: Modified Magic Tee Phase Shifter, IRE Trans., no.
PGAP-1, pp.
126-134, February,  1952.
 57.
Barrett.
R.
M.
: Electronic Scanning: Past and Future, Electrortic Scarlrtirtg S!9~npo.sitort.
Apr.
29 -30,  May 1, 19 58, AFCRC-TR-58- 145(1), ASTl A Document 152409.
 58.
Bacon, G.
E.: Variable-elevation-beam Aerial Systems for 1$ Metres, J.
IEE, vol.
93, pt.
IllA,  pp.
539-544, 1946.
 59.
Iiarvey.
G.
G.: Report of Conference on Rapid Scanning, MIT Radiation Lab.
Repr.
54-27.
June 15.
 1942.
ASTIA AT1 46616.
 60.
Kaiser.
J.
A,: Spiral Antennas Applied to Scanning Arrays, Elecrronic Scanning S~~nrposiurtt, Apt.
 29-30.
May 1, 1958, AFCRC-TR-58-145(I), ASTIA Document 152409.
 61.
Rrown.
R.
M., Jr., and R.
C.
Dodson: Parasitic Spiral Arrays, IRE Intern.
COIIV.
Recortl, vol.
8, pt.
I,  pp.
5 1 -66.
1960.
 62.
Waterman.
A.
T..
Jr.: A Rapid Beam Swinging Experiment in Transhorizon Propagation, IRE  Trans..
vql.
AP-6, pp.
338-340, October, 1958.
 63.
Hammer.
1.
W.: Frequency-scanned Arrays, chap.
13 of "Radar Handbook." M.
I.
Skolnik (ed.),  McGraw-Hill Book Co..
N.Y..
1970.
 64.
Begovich.
N.
A.: Frequency Scanning, chap.
2 of "Microwave Scanning Antennas.
Vol.
111," R.
C'.
 Hansen (ed.).
Academic Press, N.Y..
1966.
 65.
Radford, hl.
F.: Frequency Scanning Aerials, Elecfronic Engineerirtg, vol.
36, pp.
222-226, April,  1964.
 66.
Milne, K.: The Cornbination of Pulse Compression with Frequency Scanning for Three-Dimensional  Radars, Radio Electrortic Engr., vol.
28, pp.
89-106, Aug., 1964.
 67.
('roney, J.: Doubly Dispersive Frequency Scanning Antenna, Microwave J., vol.
6, pp.
76-80, July,  1963.
 68.
Loughren.
A.
V.: System for Space-Scanning with a Radiated Beam of Wave Signals, U.S.
Patent  No.
2.409.944, issued Oct.
22, 1946.
 69.
Croney, J..
and J.
R.
Mark: Design of a Volumetric Frequency Scanning Antenna, Proceedings  Elrrop~arr Microwar%e Conference, Sept.
8- 12, 1969, IEE Conference Publication No.
58, pp.
148- 15 1.
 70.
Okubo, G.
H.: Helix Frequency Scanning Feed, Microwaoe J., vol.
8, pp.
39-44, December.
1965.
 7 1.
Dewey.
R.: Corrugated Waveguide Frequency Scanning Aerials, Proceedings International Con/er-  price on Radar-Present arrd Ftrtrrre, Oct.
23-25, 1973, IEE Conference Publication no.
105.
 pp.
100- 105.
 IIII'FlN'IRONICAI.I.Y SII'I'RI'D P/IASED ARRAY ANTENNA INRADARJJ9 42,Sakiotis.
N,U,.andII.N,Chait:FerritesatMicrowaves, Proc.IRE.vol.41,pp.87-93.January.
1953.
43.Lax.B..K.J.Button.andL.M.Roth:FerritePhaseShiftersinRectangular Waveguide.
J.Applied 1'i1l'sics.
vol.25.pp.1413-1421.November.
1954.
44.Scharfman, H.:ThreeNewFerritePhaseShiners.
Proc.IRE, vol.44.pp.1456-1459.
October.
1956.
45.Monaghan.
S.R..andM.C.Mohr:Polarization Insensitive PhaseShinerforUseinPhasedArray Antennas.
Miuol\'Cll'e J..vol.12,pp.75--80.December, 1969.
46.Querido.
H.J..J.Frank.andT.Cheston: WideBandPhaseShirters.IEEE Trans.vol.AP-15.p.300.
March.1967.
47.Johnson.
C.M.:FerritePhaseShifterfortheUHFRegion,IRETrans,vol.MTT-7.
pp.27-31.
January.
1959.
48.Stern.E..andG.N.Tsandoulas: Ferroscan: Toward Continuous-Aperture Scanning, IEEETral/s.
vol.AP-23.pp.15-20.January.
1975.
49.Cohn.M..andA.F.Eikenberg: Ferroelectric PhaseShifters forVHFandUHF,IRETral/s.
\01.MTT-IO, pp.536-548.
November, 1962.
50.Senf.H.R.:Electronic Antenna Scanning, Proc.Natl.Conf.onAeronaut.
Electronics (Dayton.
Ohio).
1958.pp.407-411.
51.Kummer.
W.H.:FeedingandPhaseScanning, chap.Iin"Microwave Scanning Antennas, vol.III," R.C.Hansen(ed.).Academic Press.NewYork,1966.
52.Alday.J.R.:Microwave PlasmaBeamSweeping Array,IRETrans,vol.AP-IO.pp.96-97,January.
1962.
53.Pringle.D.H..andE.M.Bradley: SomeNewMicrowave Control ValvesEmploying theNegative GlowDischarge.
J.Electroll., (London).
vo!.1,pp.389-404, 1956.
54.Betts.F..D.H.Temme.andJ.A.Weiss:ASwitchable Circulator: S-band;Stripline; Remanent; 15 Kilowatts; 10Microseconds; Temperature Stable,IEEETrans.•vol.MTT-14, pp.665-669, Decem­ her.1966.
55.Stark.L.:AHelicalLineScanner forBeamSteering aLinearArray,IRETrans.,vol.AP-5.
pp.211-216.
April.1957.
56.Reed.R.H.:Modified MagicTeePhaseShifter,IRETrans.,no.PGAP-I, pp.126-134.
February, 1952.
57.Barrett.
R.M.:Electronic Scanning: PastandFuture,Electronic Scanning Symposium.
Apr.29-30.
MayI.1958.AFCRC-TR-58-145(1).
ASTIADocument 152409.
58.Bacon.G.E.:Variable-elevation-beam AerialSystems for11Metres,J.lEE,vol.93.pI.iliA, pp.539-544.
1946.
59.Harvey.G.G.:ReportofConference onRapidScanning, MITRadiation Lab.Repc.54-27.June15.
1943.ASTIAAT!46616.
60.Kaiser.J.A.:SpiralAntennas Applied toScanning Arrays.Electronic Scanning Symposium, Apr.
29-30.May1.1958.AFCRC-TR-58-145(1), ASTIADocument 152409.
61.Brown.
R.M..Jr..andR.C.Dodson: Parasitic SpiralArrays,IREIntern.COIll·.Record,vol.8,pt.I.
pp.51-66.1960.
62.Waterman.
A.T..Jr.:ARapidBeamSwinging Experiment inTranshorizon Propagation, IRE Trans.•V'QI.AP-6.pp.338-340.
October, 1958.
63.Hammer.
I.W.:Frequency-scanned Arrays,chap.13of"RadarHandbook." M.I.Skolnik (ed.), McGraw-Hili BookCo..N.Y..1970.
64.Bego....ich.N.A.:Frequency Scanning.
chap.2of"Microwave Scanning Antennas.
Vol.III,"R.C.
Hansen(ed.).Academic Press,N.Y..1966.
65.Radford.
M.F.:Frequency Scanning Aerials,Electronic Engineering.
vol.36,pp.222-226, April, 1964.
66.Milne.K.:TheCombination ofPulseCompression withFrequency Scanning forThree-Dimensional Radars.RadioElectronic Engr.,vol.28,pp.89-106,Aug.,1964.
67.Croney.
1.:DoublyDispersive Frequency Scanning Antenna, MicrowQl'e J.,vol.6,pp.76-80,July.
1963.
68.Loughren.
A.V.:SystemforSpace-Scanning withaRadiated BeamofWaveSignals,U.S.Patent No.2.409.944, issuedOct.22,1946.
69.Croney, 1..and1.R.Mark:DesignofaVolumetric Frequency Scanning Antenna, Proceedings European MicrowQl'e Conference, Sept.8-12,1969,IEEConference Publication No.58,pp.148-151.
70.Okubo.
G.H.:HelixFrequency Scanning Feed,Microwave J.,vol.8,pp.39-44,December, 1965.
71.Dewey,R.:Corrugated Waveguide Frequency Scanning Aerials,Proceedings International Confer­ enceonRadar-Present andFuture,Oct.23-25.1973,lEEConference Publication no.105.
pp.100-105. 340 INTKODIJCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  77.
Wheeler, H.
A,: A Systematic Approach to the Design of a Hadia~or Element for a Phased-Array  Antenna, Proc.
I EEE, vol.
56, -pp.
1940- 195 1, Novelnber, 1968.
 7.3.
Wheeler, H.
A.: A Survey of the Simulator Technique for Designing a Radiating Element in a  Phased-Array Antenna, "Phased Array Antennas, Proceedings of the 1970 Phased Array Antenna  Symposium," Artech House, Inc., Dedham, Massachusetts, 1972, pp.
132- 148.
 74.
Carter, P.
S., Jr.: Mutual Impedance Effects in Large Beam Scanning Arrays, IRE Truti.~., vol.
AI'-8,  pp.
276-285.
May, 1960.
 75.
Edelberg, S., and A.
A.
Oliner: Mutual Coupling in Large Arrays: pt.
I, Slot ~rra~s, IRE Trutis.,  vol.
AP-8, pp.
286-297, May, 1960; pt.
11, Compensation EKects, pp.
360-367, July, 1960.
 76.
Oliner, A.
A,, and R.
G.
Malech: Radiating Elements and Mutual Coupling, "Microwave Scar~rlir~g  Antennas, vol.
11," R.
C.
Hansen (ed.), Academic Press, N.Y., 1966, chap.
2.
 77.
Oliner, A.
A.,and R.
G.
Malech: Mutual Coupling in Infinite Scanning Arrays, "Microwave Scanning  Antennas, vol.
11," R.
C.
Hansen (ed.), Academic Press, N.Y., 1966, chap.
3.
 78.
Stark, L.: Comparison of Array Element Types, "Phased Array Antennas, Proceedings of the 1970  Phased Array Antenna Symposium," Artech House, Inc., Dedhanl, Mass., 1972, pp.
51-67.
 79.
Kriittel, G.
H.: Design of Radiating ~lements for Large Planar Arrays: ~ccom~lishthents and Re-  maining Challenges, Micro,\+ul.e J., vol.
15, pp.
27-34, September, 1972.
 80.
Kurtz.
L.
A., and R.
S.
Elliott: Systematic Errors Caused by the Scanning of Antenna Arrays: Phase  Shifters in the Branch Lines, IRE Tratis., vol.
AP-4, pp.
619-627, October, 1956.
 81.
Scudder, R.
M..
and W.
H.
Sheppard: AN/SPY-I Phased-Array Antenna, Micro,val*e J..
vol.
17,  pp.
5 1-55, May, 1974.
 82.
Cheston, T.
C..
and J.
Frank: Array Antennas, chap.
I I of Rarlor Mutitlhook, M.
I.
Skolnik (ed.),  McCraw-Hill Book Co., New York, 1970.
 83.
Hill, R.
T.: Phased Array Feed Systems.
A Survey, " Phased Array Antennas, Proceedings of the 1970  Phased Array Antenna Symposi~~m," A.
A.
Oliner and G.
H.
Knittel (eds.), Artech House, Dedham.
 Mass., 1972, pp.
197-2 1 1.
 84.
Odlum, W.
J.: Selection of a Phased Array Antenna for Radar Applications, I EEE Truns, vol.
AES-3,  no.
6 (Supplemerit), pp.
226-235, November, 1967.
 85.
Rlass.
J.: Multidirectional Antenna-A New Approach to Stacked Beams, 1960 IRE ltir~~rtiariotiul  Cotiretlriot~ Recorrl, pi.
I, pp.
48-50.
 Hh.
Shelton, J.
P., and K.
S.
Kelleher: Multiple Beanis from Linear Arrays, IRE Trcrtls., voi.
AP-9,  pp.
154- 161, Mirch, 1961.
 87.
Delaney, W.
P.: An RF Multiple Beam-Forming Technique.
IRE Tvrrtis..
vol.
MIL-6.
pp.
179- 186.
 April, iir62.
 HX.
White, W.
D.: Pattern Lin~itations in Multiple-Ream Antennas, IR t: 'l.rrrri.~..
vol.
A1'- 10, pp.
430 436,  July.
1962.
 89.
Moody.
H.
J.: The Systematic Design of the Butler Matrix.
lEEE TIIJIIS..
vol.
AP-I I.
pp.
786-788.
 Nov., 1964.
 90.
Butler, J.
L.: Digital, Matrix, and Intermediate-Frequency Scanning, chap.
3 of" Microwave Scan-  ning Antennas, vol.
Ill," R.
C.
Hansen (ed.), Academic Press, New York, 1966, pp.
217-288.
 9 1.
Shelton, J.
P.: Multibeam Planar Arrays, Proc.
I EEE, vol.
56, pp.
18 18-2 1, November, 1968.
 92.
Nester.
W.
H.: The Fast Fourier Transform and the Butler Matrix.
I EEE Trat~s..
vol.
AP- 16, p.
360,  May, 1968.
 03.
Sl~eltoa, J.
W.: Fast Fourier Transform and Butler Matrices.
Pror..
IliEE, vol.
56, p.
350, March,  1968.
 94.
Withers, M.
J.: Frequency Insensitive Phase-Shift Networks and their use in a Wide-Bandwidt h  Butler Matrix, Elecrronics Letters, vol.
5, No.
20, pp.
416- 198, Oct.
2, 1969.
 95.
Chow, P.
E.
K., and D.
E.
N.
Davies: Wide Band.width Butler Matrix, Eircrrot~ics Lrrrers, vol.
3,  pp.
252-253, June, 1967.
 96.
Shelton, J.
P.: Reduced Sidelobes for Butler-Matrix-Fed Linear Arrays, IEEE Trans., vol.
AP-17,  pp.
645-47, September, 1969.
 97.
Foster, H.
E., and R.
E.
Hiatt: Butler Network Extension to Any Number of Antenna Ports, IEEE  Trutis., vol.
A P- 18, pp.
8 18-820, November, 1970.
 98.
Cheston, T.
C., and J.
Frank: Array Antennas, chap.
11 of" Radar Handbook," M.
I.
Skolnik (ed.),  McGraw-Hill Book Co., New York, 1970, sec.
11.9.
 99.
Sheleg, B.: Butler Submatrix Feed Systems for Antenna Arrays, IEEE Trans., vol.
AP-21, pp.
228-9,  March, 1973.
 100.
tlering, K.
H.: The Design of Hybrid Multiple Beam Forming Networks, " Phased Array Antennas,"  A.
A.
Oliner and G.
H.
Knittel (eds.), Artech House, Inc., Dedham, Mass., 1972, pp.
240-242.
 101.
Cottony, H.
V., and A.
C.
Wilson: A High-Resolution Rapid-Scan Antenna, J.
Res.
Natl.
Bur.
Std.,  vol.
65D, pp.
101-1 10, 1961.
 340I0<TRODUCT10N TORADAR SYSTEMS 72.Wheeler, H.A.:ASystematic Approach totheDesignofaRadialOr Element foraPhased-Array Antenna, Proc.IEEE,voL56,·pp.1940-1951, November, 196~.
7.1.Wheeler, H.A.:ASurveyoftheSimulator Technique forDesigning aRadiating Element ina Phased-Array Antenna, ..PhasedArrayAntennas, Proceedings ofthe1970PhasedArrayAntenna Symposium," ArtechHouse,Inc.,Dedham, Massachusetts, 1972,pr.13214X.
74.Carter,P.S.,Jr.:MutualImpedance EffectsinLargeBeamScanning Arrays,IRETrans.,vol.AP-ll, pp.276-285.
May,1960.
75.Edelberg, 5.,andA.
A.Oliner: MutualCoupling inLargeArrays: pI.I,SlotArrays,IRETrailS., vol.AP-~,pp.2H6-297, May,1960;pI.II,Compensation Effects, pp.360-367, July,1960.
76.Oliner,A.A.,andR.G.Malech: Radiating Elements andMutual Coupling, "Microwave Scanning Antennas, vol.II,"R.CHansen (ed.),Academic Press,N.Y.,1966,chap.2.
77.Oliner,A.A.,andR.G.Malech: MutualCoupling inInfiniteScanning Arrays,..Microwave Scanning Antennas, vol.II,"R.CHansen (ed.),Academic Press,N.Y.,1966,chap.3.
7X.Stark,L.:Comparison ofArrayElement Types,..PhasedArrayAntennas, Proceedings ofthe1970 PhasedArrayAntenna Symposium," ArtechHouse,Inc.,Dedham, Mass.,1972,pp.51-67.
79.Knittel, G.H.:DesignofRadiating Elements forLargePlanarArrays: Accomplishthents andRe­ maining Challenges, Microwa/'e J.,vol.15,pp.27-34,September, 1972.
gO.Kurtz.L.A.,andR.S.Elliott:Systematic ErrorsCaused bytheScanning ofAntenna Arrays: Phase Shifters intheBranch Lines,IRETrailS.,vol.AP-4,pp.619-627, October, 1956.
81.Scudder, R.M.,andW.H.Sheppard: AN/SPY-I Phased-Array Antenna, MicrolVal'e J.,vol.17, pr.51-55,May,1974.
~Q.Cheston, T.C,andJ.Frank:ArrayAntennas, chap.IIofRadarHalldbook, M.I.Skolnik (ed.).
McGraw-Hili BookCo.,NewYork,1970.
83.Hill,R.T.:PhasedArrayFeedSystems, ASurvey," PhasedArrayAntennas, Proceedings ofthe197() PhasedArrayAntenna Symposium," A.A.OlinerandG.H.Knittel(eds.),ArtechHouse,Dedham.
Mass.,1972,pp.197-211.
84.OdIum, W.J.:Selection ofaPhasedArrayAntenna forRadarApplications, IEEETrailS,vol.AES-3.
no.6(SupplemerH), pp.226-235, November, 1967.
85.Blass,J.:Multidirectional Antenna-A NewApproach toStacked Beams,1960IREItIlematiOll£l1 COllrellfioll Record, pI.I,pp.48-50.
86.Shelton, J.P.,andK.S.Kelleher: Multiple BeamsfromLinearArrays,IRETraIlS.,vol.AP-9.
pp.154-161, March, 1961.
87.Delaney.
W.P.:AnRFMultiple Beam-Forming Technique, IRETI'(//IS.,vol.MIL-6.
pp.179-186.
April.i'j62.
l'l'.White.W.D.:PatternLimitations inMultiple-Beam Antennas, IRETraIlS..vol.AP-IO,pp.430436.
July,1962.
X9.Moody, H.1.:TheSystematic DesignoftheButlerMatrix,IEEETrailS.,vol.ApolI.pp.7H6..7HH.
Nov..1964.
90.Butler,1.L.:Digital.
Matrix, andIntermediate-Frequency Scanning, chap.3of"Microwave Scan­ ningAntennas.
vol.III,"R.CHansen (ed.),Academic Press,NewYork,1966,pp.217-288.
l)l.Shelton, J.P.:Multibeam PlanarArrays,Pro£'.IEEE,vol.56,pp.1818-21, November, 1%8.
92.Nester,W.H.:TheFastFourierTransform andtheButlerMatrix,IEEETrailS.•vol.AP-16,p.360.
May.1968.
93.Shelton, J.W.:FastFourier Transform andBUllerMatrices, Pro£'.IEEE,vol.56,p.350.MardI.
1968.
94.Withers, M.J.:Frequency Insensitive Phase-Shift Networks andtheiruseinaWide-Bandwidth ButlerMatrix,Electronics Le((ers,vol.5,No.20,pp.416-198, Ocl.2.1969.
95.Chow,P.E.K.,andD.E.N.Davies: WideBandwidth ButlerMatrix,Electrollics Le((ers, vol.3, pp.252-253, June,1967.
96.Shelton, J.P.:Reduced Sidelobes forButler-Matrix-Fed LinearArrays,IEEETram.•vol.AP-17, pp.645-47, September, 1969.
97.Foster,H.E.,andR.E.Hiatt:ButlerNetwork Extension toAnyNumber ofAntenna Ports,IEEE Trans.,vol.AP-18,pp.818-820, November, 1970.
98.Cheston, T.C,andJ.Frank:ArrayAntennas, chap.IIof"RadarHandbook," M.I.Skolnik (ed.), McGraw-Hill BookCo.,NewYork,1970,sec.11.9.
99.Sheleg,B.:ButlerSubmatrix FeedSystems forAntenna Arrays,IEEETrans.,vol.AP-21,pp.228-9, March, 1973.
100.Hering, K.H.:TheDesignofHybridMultiple BeamForming Networks, ..PhasedArrayAntennas," A.A.OlinerandG.H.Knittel(eds.),ArtechHouse,Inc.,Dedham, Mass.,1972,pp.240-242.
101.Cottony, H.V.,andA.C.Wilson: AHigh-Resolution Rapid-Scan Antenna, J.Res.Nail.Bur.Sid., vol.65D,pp.101-110, 1961. I Ill.
1.1 I.('II<ONl(.Al.l.Y SIEFREII I'IIASEI) ARRAY ANTENNA IN RADAR 341  102.
Davies.
D.
E.
N.: A Fast Electronically Scanned Radar Receiving System, J.
Brit.
Inst.
Rutlio Enyrs..
 vol.
22.
pp.
305-3 18, April, 1961.
.
.
 103.
Joli~ison, M.
A.
: I'liased-Array Beam Steering by Multiplex Sampling, Proc.
I EEE, vol.
56.
 pp.
1801 - 18 1 1, Noveniber, 1968.
 104.
Radford.
M.
t-., and R.
Greenwood: A Within-Pulse Scanning Height-Finder, lnternatiottal Cor~fer-  er1c.e on Rotlor-- Pre~ettt ancl Fltt~~re, IEE Conference Publication, no.
105, pp.
50-55, 1973.
 105, Sclirank.
11.
I:..
W.
1'.
lloopcr.
and R.
S.
Davis: A Study of Array Beam Switching Techniques.
Rortrt7  Air I)c~r.t~lopn~(~t~t ( 'c~rr/c'r 7'ec.lrtric.cll I)oc-rrrrterrtur~~ Report No.
R ALK-7'DR-64-421, Deceni ber.
1964.
 100.
I~:~rtli-h;~setl 1:lect ronics, I:lcc~rrotric~s, vol.
34, no.
46, pp.
1 14, 1 15, 1 17.
Nov.
17.
196 1.
 107.
(icril, I I.: he I(oorl;~cc Acrial, I<R/ J.
(Royal Radar Establislinicrit.
Malver~i.
England).
110.
40.
 pp.
47 58.
Octohcr.
1957.
 IOX.
Slieltori.
J.
I'..
Jr..
;irici K.
S.
Kelleher: Recent Electronic Scanning Developments.
Con/: Pro(.
..
Fo~rrtl~  h'trfl.
( 'otrr..
otr htili(trt.~.
I<lot~lrortic~.s, 1'1).
30 - 34, 1960.
 109.
Skolnik.
M.
I.: Nonuniforrii Arrays.
chap.
6 ofUAntenna Theory, pt.
I," R.
E.
Collin and 1;.
J.
Zucker  (eds.), McGraw-t1ill Book Co., New York, 1969, p.
231.
 110.
Rnritli~ielli.
I-.
A,: Effects of Raridoni Errors on the Performance of Antenna Arrays of Many Ele-  rlients.
IRE Ntrrl.
Corrr..
Kt.corr1, vol.
7, pt.
I, pp.
174-187, 1959.
 1 1 I.
I.eicliter, M.: Reatii i'oiriting Errors of Long Line Sources, H~tglres Aircrqji C'o.
Teclr.
Afe~tr.
j88.
 April.
1959; also IRE 7'rc111s., vol.
AP-8, pp.
268-275, May, 1960.
 I 12.
Ri~ze.
J.: Physical Liriiitatioris on Antennas.
MI T Researcl~ Lnh.
Electronics Tech.
Rept.
248, Oct.
30.
 1952.
 113.
Elliot.
R.
S.: Mechanical arid Electrical Tolerances for Two-dimensional Scanning Antenna Arrays,  IRE 7'rt111s., vol.
AP-6.'pp.
1 14- 120, January, 1958.
 114.
Bales.
R.
11.
I-.: Random Errors in Aperture Distributions, IRE Trans., vol.
AP-7, pp.
369-372,  Octohcr.
1959.
 115.
Miller.
C.
J.: Minimizing the EfTects of Phase Quantization Errors in an Electronically Scanned  Array.
" Proceedings of Symposium on Electronically Scanned Array Techniques and Applications,"  Rorrrcl Air Der~eloprne~~t Cerrrer Trclrnicc~l Doc~~rrttenrarj~ Report No.
RADC-TDR-64-225, vol.
I,  pp.
17 38.
July.
1964.
 110.
('liariipine.
(i.
A.: ('otnputer Control of Array Radar, Sprrry Enginerrinq Retie#'.
vol.
18.
No.
4.
 pp.
I8 23.
Winter.
1965.
 1 17.
Sclicff.
13.
t 1..
and I).
(i.
1 Inrnniel: Real-time Computer Co~itrol of Phased Array Radars.
Srrppl.
to  IkIIl: 'l'rtrtr\  or^ .It~rr~.sj~trc.c~ crr~rl I<lcc~rronic S~.stt~rtrs, vol.
AES-3, no.
6, pp.
198-206, Nov., 1967.
 118.
Kceti.
J.
E.: l'lie ANIFPS-XS Radar System, Proc.
IEEE, vol.
57, pp.
324-335, March, 1969.
 119.
Johnson.
C.
M.: Ballistic-Missile Defense Radars, IEEE Speclrrtm, vol.
7, pp.
32-41, March, 1970.
 120.
Wciristock.
W.: Computer Control of a hlultifunction Radar, RCA Engineer, vol.
18, no.
I, June-  .luly.
1972.
 17 1, 13;1ugli.
R.
A.: "('o~iiputer Control of Modern Radars," Privately published by RCA Inc., 1973.
 122.
Motkin.
11.
L.: Three-dimensional Air Surveillance Radar, Systems Technology.
(Plessey Co, Iford.
 England).
no.
21.
pp.
29 33.
June.
1975.
 123.
Knittel.
G.
11.: Choosing the Number of Faces of a Phased-Array Antenna for Hemisphere Scan  Coverage.
IEEE Trcr~l.~., VOI.
AP-13, pp.
878-882, Nov., 1965.
 124.
Kriietzo.
J.
L.: An Analytical Approach to the Coverage of a Hemisphere by N Planar Phased  Arrays, IEEE 7'rt111s., vol.
AP-15, pp.
367-371, May, 1967.
 125.
tiering.
K.
11.: Optimization of Tilt Angle and Element Arrangement for Planar Arrays, Microwat~e  .I., vol.
14.
pp.
41-51, Jan., 1971.
 176.
12ichriian.
P.
M..
L.
Schwartzman, and A.
E.
Hylas: Dome Radar-A New Phased Array System.
 Record of rhe IEEE 197.5 Irrrernational Radar Conference, pp.
349-353, Apr.
21-23, 1975, IEEE Publi-  cation 75 CHO 938- 1 AES.
 127.
Bearse.
S.
V.: Planar Array Looks Through Lens to Provide Hemispherical Coverage, Microwat~es.
 vol.
14.
pp.
9-10.
July.
1975.
 128.
Schwartzni;~n.
L..
and J.
Stangel: The Dome Antenna, Microtvar*e J., vol.
18, pp.
31-34.
October.
 1975.
 129.
Schwartnnan.
L., and P.
M.
Lieb~nan: A Report on the Sperry Dome Radar.
Microrc!utw J., vol.
22.
 pp.
65 69.
March.
1979.
 130.
I I~II~SCI~, R.
C'.: Confornial Arrays, h.fic~ronvrrx~ J., vol.
13, p.
39, April, 1970.
 13 1.
Snre;\u, J.
C'.: Confornial Arrays Come of Age, Mic.rowatle J., vol.
16, pp.
23-26, October, 1973.
 132.
Giannini.
R.
J., J.
H.
Gutman.
and P.
W.
Hannon: A Cylindrical Phased-Array Antenna for ATC  Interrogation, Mic.rowar-e J., vol.
16, pp.
46-49, October, 1973.
 133.
Kummer.
W.
H.
(ed.): Special Issue on Conformal Arrays, IEEE Trara..
vol.
AP-22, no.
I.
January.
 1974.
 1111:FI.ITTIWNICALI.Y STEERED PHASED ARRAY ANTENNA INRADAR341 102.Davies.D.E.N.:AFastElectronically Scanned RadarReceiving System,J.Brit.
11l.~t.RadioEllgrs..
vol.22.pp..105-.1IR.
April,1961.
103.Johnson, M.A.:Phased-Array BeamSteering byMultiplex Sampling, Proc.IEEE,vol.56.
pp.1801-1811,November, 1968.
104.Radford.
M.r.,andR.Greenwood: AWithin-Pulse Scanning Height-Finder, International COllfer­ ellcemlRadar--PresellfalldFlItllre,lEEConference Publication, no.105,pp.50-55,1973.
105.Schrank, II.F..W.P.Ilooper.
andR.S.Davis:AStudyofArrayBeamSwitching Techniques.
ROll1c 11ir/)CI'e/0f!IIICllt CCllterTechllical DOCllll1ellt aryReportNo.RADC-TDR-64-42I, December.
1964.
10(,.Earth-based Electronics.
J:/cctI'lJllics.
vol..14,no.46,pp.114,JIS,117.Nov.17,1961.
107.(ient,II.:TheBootlace Aerial.URLJ.(RoyalRadarEstablishment, Malvern.
England), no.40.
pr.475H.October.
1t>57.
IOH.Shelton.
J.P..Jr..andK.S.Kelleher: RecentElectronic Scanning Developments.
CalifPmc.,Fourth NIIII.('(}IIf'.
OilMilitary Llccfrtmics, PI'..10·.14,1%0.
109.Skolnik.
M.I.:Nonuniform Arrays,chap.6of"Antenna Theory,pI.I."R.E.CoJ/inandF.J.Zucker (cds.).McGraw-Hili BookCo.,NewYork,1969,p.231.
110.Rondinelli.
L.A.:EffectsofRandom ErrorsonthePerformance ofAntenna ArraysofManyEle­ ments.IRE NaIl.COllI'.Record,vol.7,pt.I.pp.174-187, 1959.
III.Leichter, M.:BeamPointing ErrorsofLongLineSources, HlIghesAircraft Co.Tech.Melli.5R8.
April.1959;alsoIRETraIlS.,vol.AP-8,pp.268-275, May,1960.
112.RUle.J.:Physical Limitations onAntennas.
MITResearch Lah.Electronics Tech.
Rep/.248,Oct.30.
It>52.
11.1.Elliot.R.S.:Mechanical andElectrical Tolerances forTwo-dimensional Scanning Antenna Arrays, IRE]rCl/ls.,vol.AP-6.'pp.
114-120, January, 1958.
114.Bates.R.H.T.:Random ErrorsinAperture Distributions, IRETrailS.,vol.AP-7,pp.369-372.
Octoher.
1959.
115.Miller,C.J.:Minimizing theEffectsofPhaseQuantization ErrorsinanElectronically Scanned Array."Proceedings ofSymposium onElectronically Scanned ArrayTechniques andApplications," ROllleAirDel'e[op'llellt CellterTecllllical DOC!lIIlelltary ReportNo.RADC-TDR-64-225, vol.I, rp17JR.July.1964.
116.(·hampinc.
G.A.:Computer Control ofArrayRadar,Sperr.l'EllqineerillY Rel·iew,vol.18,No.4.
Pl'.182.1.Winter.1%5.
117.Scheff.B.II..andD.G.Hammel: Real-time Computer Control ofPhasedArrayRadars.SlIppl.to I'JJ~Fram OilAc/'()sl'ace alldE!ecrrollic Srstellls.
vol.AES-3.no.6,Pl'.198-206, Nov.,1967.
118.Reed.J.E.:TheAN/FPS-H5 RadarSystem.
Pmc.IEEE,vol.57,pp.324-335, March,1969.
119.Johnson.
C.M.:Ballistic-Missile DefenseRadars,IEEESpectrum, vol.7,pp.32-41,March,1970.
120.Weinsl<lck.
W.:Computer Control ofaMultifunction Radar,RCAEllgilleer, vol.18,no.I,June­ .Iuly.1972.
121.Baugh.R.A.:"Computer Control ofModern Radars," Privately published byRCAInc.,1973.
122.Motkin.
D.L.:Three-dimensional AirSurveillance Radar.Systems Technology, (Plessey Co,Hord.
England).
no.21.pp.29.1.1.June.1975.
In.Knittel.G.II.:Choosing theNumber ofFacesofaPhased-Array Antenna forHemisphere Scan Coverate.
IEEETrailS.,vol.AP-13,pp.878-882, Nov.,1965.
124.Kl1lctlO.
J.L.:AnAnalytical Approach totheCoverage ofaHemisphere byNPlanarPhased Arrays,IEEETrailS.,vol.AP-15.pp..167-.171.
May,1967.
125.lIering.K.II.:Optimization ofTiltAngleandElement Arrangement forPlanarArrays,MicrvwQl'e J.,vol.14,pp.41-51.Jan.,1971.
126.Liehman.
P.M.,L.Schwartzman, andA.E.Hylas:DomeRadar-A NewPhasedArraySystem, RecordoftheIEEE1975llIterllatiollal RadarConference.
pp.349-353.
Apr.21-23.1975.IEEEPubli­ cation75CHO938-1AES.
127.Bearse,S.V.:PlanarArrayLooksThrough LenstoProvide Hemispherical Coverage.
Microwal'es, vol.14.pp.9-10,July,1975.
12H.Schwartzman.
L..andJ.Stangel: TheDomeAntenna, MicrowQl'e J.,vol.18.pp.31-34,October, 1t>75.
129.Schwartzman.
L..andP.M.Liebman: AReportontheSperryDomeRadar.Microwal'e J.•vol.22.
PI'·6569.March,1979.
UO.Hansen, R.c.:Conformal Arrays,MierOl\'(/l'e J.,vol.13,p.39,April,1970.
IJI.Sureau,J.c.:Conformal ArraysComeofAge,Microwal'l' J.,vol.16.pp.23-26,October, 197).
132.Giannini.
R.1.,1.H.Gutman, andP.W.Hannon: ACylindrical Phased-Array Antenna forATC Interrogation, MicrowQl'e J.,vol.16,pp.46-49,October.
1973.
IJJ.Kummer.
W.H.(ed.):SpecialIssueonConformal Arrays,IEEETrailS.,vol.AP-22.no.t.January, 1974. 342 1NTKODUCTli)N TO RADAR SYSTEMS  134.
Hansen, R.
C.: Workshop on Conformal Arrays, Microwur!e J., vol.
18, p.
28, October, 1975.
 135.
tlsiao, J.
K..
and A.
G.
Cha:.
Patterns md Polarizations ofSi~11uItaneously Excited Planar Arrays on  a Conformal Surface, IEEE Trans., vol.
AP-22, pp.
81-84, January, 1974.
 136.
Skolnik, M.
I.: Nonuniform Arrays, chap.
6 in "Antenna Theory, pt.
I," R.
E.
Collin and F.
J.
Zuckcr  (eds.), McGraw-Hill Book Co., New York, 1969.
 137.
Skolnik.
M.
I., G.
Nemhauser, and J.
W.
Sherman: Dynamic Progratnming Applied to Unequally  Spaced Arrays, I EEE Trans., vol.
AP-12, pp.
35-43, January, 1964.
 138.
Skolnik, M.
I., J.
W.
Sherman, and F.
C.
Ogg: Statistically Designed Density-tapered Arrays, IEEE  Trans., vol.
AP-12, pp.
408-417, July, 1964.
 139.
Steinberg, B.
D.: The Peak Sidelobe of the Phased Array Having Randomly L'oca~ed Elements.
IEEE.
 Trutts., vol.
AP-20, pp.
129-136, March, 1972.
 140.
Skolnik, M.
I.: Resolution of Angular Ambiguities in Radar Array Antennas with Widely-Spaced  Elements and Grating Lobes, 1 EEE Trans., vol.
AP- 10, pp.
35 1-352, May, 1962.
 141.
Goto.
N., and D.
K.
Cheng: Phase Shifter Thinning and Sidelobe Reduction for Large Phased  Arrays, IEEE Trans., vol.
AP-24, pp.
139-143, March, 1976.
 142.
Hansen, R.
C.
(ed.): Special Issue on Active and Adaptive Antennas, IEEE Tratls., voL AP-12, no.
2,  March, 1964.
 143.
Skolnik, M.
I., and D.
D.
King: Self-phasing Arrays, IEEE Trans., vol.
AP-12, pp.
143-49.
March.
 1964.
 144.
Widrow, B..
P.
E.
Mantey, L.
J.
Griffiths, and B.
B.
Goode: Adaptive Antenna Systems.
Pro'..
1 EEE,  vol.
55, pp.
2 143-2 159, December, 1967.
 135.
Gabriel, W.
F.: Adaptive Array Antennas for AEW Radar, Repori of NRL Proyrr.~.~, pp.
39-44  December, 1973.
 146.
Brennan, L.
E., and 1.
S.
Reed: Theory of Adaptive Radar, IEEE Trans., vol.
AES-9, pp.
237-252,  March, 1973.
 147.
Zahm, C.
L.: Application of Adaptive Arrays to Suppress Strong Jammers in the Presence of Weak  Signals, IEEE Trans., vol.
AES-9, pp.
260-271, March, 1973.
 148.
Brennan, L.
E., I.
S.
Reed, and P.
Swerling: Adaptive Arrays, Micro\r.uc.e J., vol.
17, pp.
43 46, p.
7.1,  May, 1974.
 149.
O'Donovan, P.
L., and A.
W.
Rudge: Adaptive Control of a Flexible Linear Array, E1ec.rrotlic.s  Lerters, vol.
9, pp.
121-122, Mar.
22, 1973.
 150.
Gabriel, W.
F.: Adaptive Arrays-An Introduction, Proc.
IEEE, vol.
64, pp.
239-272, February,  1976.
 I5 I.
Gabriel, W.
F.
(ed.): Special Issue on Adaptive Antennas, I EEE Trans., vol.
AP-24, September, 1976.
 152.
Sharp, E.
D.: A Triangular Arrangement of Planar-Array Elements that Reduces the Number  Needed, IRE Trans., vol.
AP-9, pp.
126-129, March, 1961.
 153.
Cheng, D.
H.
S.: Characteristics of Triangular Lattice Arrays, Proc.
IEEE, vol.
56, pp.
18 1 1 - 18 17.
 November, 1968.
 154.
Nelson, E.
A.: Quantization Sidelobes of a Phased Array with a Triangular Element Arrangement,  1 EEE Trans., vol.
AP-17, pp.
363-365, May, 1969.
 155.
Garver, R.
V.: " Microwave Diode Control Devices," Artech House, Inc., 1976.
 156.
Whicker, L.
R., and R.
R.
Jones: A Digital Current Controlled Latching Ferrite Phase Shifter, iEEE  1965 International Conuenrion Record, pt.
V, pp.
2 17-223.
 157.
Ward, H.
R., C.
A.
Fowler, and H.
I.
Lipson: GCA Radars: Their History and State of Development,  Proc.
IEEE, vol.
62, pp.
705-716, June, 1974.
 158.
Ethington, D.
A.: The ANlTPQ-36 and ANlTPQ-37 Firefinder Radars, It~irrnarional Cot$tlr~.rrncr  RADAR-77, Oct.
25-28, 1977, IEE (London) Publication no.
155, pp.
33-35.
 159.
Ruvin, A.
E., and L.
Weinberg: Digital Multiple Beamforming Techniques for Radar, IEEE  EASCON '78 Record, pp.
152-163, Sept.
25-27, 1978, IEEE Publication 78 CH 13544 AES.
 160.
Malagisi, C.
S.: Microstrip Disc Element Reflect Array, I EEE EASCON '78 Record, pp.
186- 192.
 Sept.
25-27, 1978, IEEE Publication 78 CH 1352-4 AES.
 161.
Ricardi, L.
J.: Array Beam-Forming Networks, MIT Lincoln Luhoratol.y Trchttical Noir 1965- 12.
 13 April 1965.
 162.
Whicker, L.
R., and C.
W.
Young, Jr.: The Evolution of Ferrite Control Components, Micro\vui.t~ J..
 vol.
21, pp.
33-37, November, 1978.
 342INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS 134.Hansen, R.c.:Workshop onConformal Arrays,MicrowalJe J.,vol.18,p.28,October, 1975.
135.Hsiao,J.K.,andA.G.Cha:Pallerns aodPolarizations ofSimultaneously ExcitedPlanarArrayson aConformal Surface,IEEETrans.,vol.AP-22,pp.81-84,January, 1974.
1J6.Skolnik, M.I.:Nonuniform Arrays,chap.6in"Antenna Theory, pI.1,"R.E.CollinandF.J.Zucker (eds.),McGraw-Hill BookCo.,NewYork,1969.
137.Skolnik, M.I.,G.Nemhauser, andJ.W.Sherman: Dynamic Programming Applied toUnequally SpacedArrays,IEEETrans.,vol.AP-12,pp.35-43,January, 1964.
138.Skolnik, M.I.,J.W.Sherman, andF.C.Ogg:Statistically Designed Density-tapered Arrays,IEEE Trans.,vol.AP-12,pp.408-417, July,1964.
139.Steinberg, B.D.:ThePeakSidelobe ofthePhasedArrayHavingRandomly ~ocated Elements, IEEE TraIlS.,vol.AP-20,pp.129-136, March,1972.
140.Skolnik, M.I.:Resolution ofAngular Ambiguities inRadarArrayAntennas withWidely-Spaced Elements andGrating Lobes,IEEETrans.,vol.AP-IO,pp.351-352, May,1962.
141.Goto,N.;andD.K.Cheng: PhaseShifterThinning andSidelobe Reduction forLargePhased Arrays,IEEETrans.,vol.AP-24,pp.139-143, March,1976.
142.Hansen, R.C.(ed.):SpecialIssueonActiveandAdaptive Antennas,lEEE Trans.,vol.AP-12,no.2, March,1964.
143.Skolnik, M.I.,andD.
D.King:Self-Phasing Arrays,IEEETraIlS.,vol.AP-12,pp.142-49,March, 1964.
144.Widrow, B.,P.E.Mantey, L.J.Griffiths, andB.
B.Goode: Adaptive Antenna Systems, Proc.IEEE, vol.55,pp.2143-2159, December, 1967.
145.Gabriel, W.F.:Adaptive ArrayAntennas forAEWRadar,ReportofNRLPruyress, pp.39-44.
December, 1972.
146.Brennan, L.E.,andl.S.Reed:Theoryof Adaptive Radar,IEEETrans.,vol.AES-9,pp.237-25~, March,1973.
147.Zahm,C.L.:Application ofAdaptive ArraystoSuppress StrongJammers inthePresence ofWeak Signals,IEEETrans.,vol.AES-9,pp.260---271, March,1973.
148.Brennan, L.E.,I.S.Reed,andP.Swerling: Adaptive Arrays,Microware J.,vol.17,pp.4346,p.74, May,1974.
149.O'Donovan, P.L.,andA.W.Rudge:Adaptive Control ofaFlexible LinearArray,Electronin Letters,vol.9,pp.121-122, Mar.22,1973.
150.Gabriel, W.F.:Adaptive Arrays-An Introduction, Proc.IEEE,vol.64,pp.239-272, February, 1976.
151.Gabriel, W.F.(ed.):SpecialIssueonAdaptive Antennas, IEEETrans.,vol.AP-24,September, 1976.
152.Sharp,E.D.:ATriangular Arrangement ofPlanar-Array Elements thatReduces theNumber Needed, IRETrans.,vol.AP-9,pp.126-129, March,1961.
153.Cheng,D.H.S.:Characteristics ofTriangular LatticeArrays,Proc.IEEE,vol.56,pp.1811-1817, November, 1968.
154.Nelson, E.A.:Quantization Sidelobes ofaPhasedArraywithaTriangular Element Arrangement, IEEETrans.,vol.AP-17,pp.363-365, May,1969.
155.Garver, R.V.:"Microwave DiodeControl Devices," ArtechHouse,Inc.,1976.
156.Whicker, L.R.,andR.R.Jones:ADigitalCurrent Controlled Latching FerritePhaseShifter,IEEE 1965International COnl,ention Record,pt.V,pp.217-223.
157.Ward,H.R.,C.A.Fowler,andH.I.Lipson:GCARadars:TheirHistoryandStateofDevelopment.
Prot'.IEEE,vol.62,pp.705-716, June,1974.
158.Ethington, D.A.:TheAN[fPQ-36 andAN[fPQ-37 Firefinder Radars,Imertlational Cunference RADAR-77, Oct.25-28,1977,lEE(London) Publication no.155,pp.33-35.
159.Ruvin,A.E.,andL.Weinberg: DigitalMultiple Beamforming Techniques forRadar,IEEE EASCON '78Record,pp.152-163, Sept.25-27,1978,IEEEPublication 78CH1354---4AES.
160.Malagisi, C.S.:Microstrip DiscElement Rel1ectArray,IEEEEASCON '78Recurel,pp.186-192.
Sept.25-27,1978,IEEEPublication 78CH1352-4AES.
161.Ricardi, L.J.:ArrayBeam-Forming Networks, MITLincolnLahoratory Technical Notl!1965-12.
13April1965.
162.Whicker,L.R.,andC.W.Young,Jr.:TheEvolution ofFerriteControl Components, MicrowaL'1! J., vol.21,pp.33-37,November, 1978. CHAPTER  NINE  RECEIVERS, DISPLAYS, AND DUPLEXERS  9.1 'I'HE RADAR RECEIVER  The function of the radar receiver is to detect desired echo signals in the presence of noise,  interference, or clutter.
It must separate wanted from unwanted signals, and amplify the  wanted signals to a level where target information can be displayed to an operator or used in  an automatic data processor.
The design of the radar receiver will depend not only on the type  of waveform to be detected, but on the nature of the noise, interference, and clutter echoes with  which the desired echo signals must compete.
In this chaptel-, the receiver design is considered  mainly as a problem of extracting desired signals from noise.
Chapter 13 considers the problem  of radar design when the desired signals must compete with clutter.
The current chapter also  includes brief discussions of radar displays and duplexes.
 Noise can enter the receiver via the antenna terminals along with the desired signals, or it  might be generated within the receiver itself.
At the microwave frequencies usually used for  radar, the external noise which enters via the antenna is generally quite low so that the receiver  sensitivity is usually set by the internal noise generated within the receiver.
(External noise is  discussed in Sec.
12.8.) The measure of receiver internal noise is the noise-figure (introduced  previously in Sec.
2.3).
 Good receiver design is based on maximizing the output signal-to-noise ratio.
As  described in Sec.
10.2, to maximize the output signal-to-noise ratio, the receiver must be  designed as a matched filter, or its equivalent.
The matched filter specifies the frequency  response function of the IF part of the radar receiver.
Obviously, the receiver should be  designed to generate as little internal noise as possible, especially in the input stages where the  desired signals are weakest.
Although special attention must be paid to minimize the noise of  the input stages, the lowest noise receivers are not always desired in many radar applications if  other important receiver properties must be sacrificed.
,  Keceiver design also must be concerned with achieving sufficient gain, phase, and ampli-  tude stability, dynamic range, tuning, ruggedness, and simplicity.
Protection must be provided  against overload or saturation, and burnout from nearby interfering transmitters.
Timing and  CHAPTER NINE RECEIVERS, DISPLAYS, ANDDUPLEXERS 9.1THERADAR RECEIVER Thefunction oftheradarreceiver istodetectdesiredechosignalsinthepresence ofnoise, interference.
orclutter.Itmustseparate wantedfromunwanted signals,andamplify the wantedsignalstoalevelwheretargetinformation canbedisplayed toanoperator orusedin anautomatic dataprocessor.
Thedesignoftheradarreceiverwilldependnotonlyonthetype ofwaveform tobedetected, butonthenatureofthenoise,interference, andclutterechoeswith whichthedesiredechosignalsmustcompete.
Inthischapter, thereceiverdesignisconsidered mainlyasaproblem ofextracting desiredsignalsfromnoise.Chapter 13considers theproblem ofradardesignwhenthedesiredsignalsmustcompete withclutter.Thecurrentchapteralso includes briefdiscussions ofradardisplays andduplexers.
Noisecanenterthereceiverviatheantenna terminals alongwiththedesiredsignals,orit mightbegenerated withinthereceiver itself.Atthemicrowave frequencies usuallyusedfor radar,theexternal noisewhichentersviatheantenna isgenerally quitelowsothatthereceiver sensitivity isusuallysetbytheinternalnoisegenerated withinthereceiver.
(External noiseis discussed inSec.12.8.)Themeasure ofreceiverinternalnoiseisthenoise-figure (introduced previously inSec.2.3).
Goodreceiver designisbasedonmaximizing theoutputsignal-to-noise ratio.As described inSec.10.2,tomaximize theoutputsignal-to-noise ratio,thereceiver mustbe designed asamatched filter,oritsequivalent.
Thematched filterspecifies thefrequency response function oftheIFpartoftheradarreceiver.
Obviously, thereceiver shouldbe designed togenerate aslittleinternalnoiseaspossible, especially intheinputstageswherethe desiredsignalsareweakest.
Although specialattention mustbepaidtominimize thenoiseof theinputstages,thelowestnoisereceivers arenotalwaysdesiredinmanyradarapplications if otherimportant receiverproperties mustbesacrificed.
Receiver designalsomustbeconcerned withachieving sufficient gain,phase,andampli­ tudestability, dynamic range,tuning,ruggedness, andsimplicity.
Protection mustbeprovided againstoverload orsaturation.
andburnout fromnearbyinterfering tr~nsmitters.
Timingand 344 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  reference signals are needed to properly extract target information.
Specific applicat~orls such  as MTI radar, tracking radar, or radars designed lo ~nill~lni~c clutter placc special tler~la~~ils 011  the receiver.
Receivers that must operate with a transmitter whose frequency can drift need  some means of automatic frequency control (AFC).
Radars that encounter hostile counter-  measures need receivers that can minimize the effects of such interference.
Thus there can be  many demands placed upon the receiver designer in meeting the requirements of modern  high-quality radar systems.
The receiver engineer has responded well to the challenge, and  there exists a highly refined state of technology available for radar applications.
Radar receiver  design and implementation may not always be an easy task; but in tribute to the receiver  designer, it has seldom been an obstacle preventing the radar systems engineer from eventually  accomplishing the desired objectives.
 Although the superregenerative, crystal video, and tuned radio frequency (TRF) receivers  have been employed in radar systems, the superheterodyne has seen almost exalusive applica-  tion because of its good sensitivity, high gain, selectivity, and reliability.
No other receiver type  has been competitive to the superheterodyne.
A simple block diagram of a radar siiperheter-  odyne receiver was shown in Fig.
1.2.
There are many factors that enter into the tlesign of  radar receivers; however, only the receiver noise-figure and the receiver front-end, as they  determine receiver sensitivity, will be discussed here.
 9.2 NOISE FIGURE  In Sec.
2.3 the noise figure of a receiver was described as a measure of the noise produced by a  practical receiver as compared with the noise of an ideal receiver.'a2 The noise figure F, of a  linear network may be defined as  where Sin = available input signal power  Nin = available input noise power (equal to kTo B,)  So,, = available output signal power  No,, = available output noise power  "Available power" reiers to the power which would be delivered to a matched load.
The  available gain G is equal to S,,,/Sin, k = Boltzmann's constant = 1.38 x 10-'' J/deg,  To = standard temperature of 290 K (approximately room temperati~re), and B, is the noise  bandwidth defined by Eq.
(2.3).
The product kTo 4 x W/Hz.
The purpose for  defining a standard temperature is to refer any measurements to a common basis of compari-  son.
Equation (9.1) permits two different but equivalent interpretations of noise figure.
It ruay  be considered as the degradation of the signal-to-noise ratio caused by the network (receiver),  or it may be interpreted as the ratio of the actual available output noise power to the noise  power which would be available if the network merely amplified the thermal noise.
The  noise figure may also be written  where AN is the additional noise introduced by the network itself.
 The noise figure is commonly expressed in decibels, that is, 10 log F,.
The term noise  factor is also used at'times instead of noise figure.
The two terms are now synonymous.
 344INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS reference signalsareneededtoproperly extracttargctinformatioll.
Specific applicatiolls such asMTIradar,tracking radar,orradarsdesigned.to minimize dutterplacespecialdelllalHls on thereceiver.
Receivers thatmustoperate withatransmitter whosefrequency candriftneed somemeansofautomatic frequency control (AFC).Radarsthatencounter hostilecounter­ measures needreceivers thatcanminimize theeffectsofsuchinterference.
Thustherecanbe manydemands placeduponthereceiver designer inmeeting therequirements ofmodern high-quality radarsystems.
Thereceiver engineer hasresponded welltothechallenge, and thereexistsahighlyrefinedstateoftechnology available forradarapplications.
Radarreceiver designandimplementation maynotalwaysbeaneasytask;butintributetothereceiver designer, ithasseldombeenanobstacle preventing theradarsystems engineer fromeventually accomplishing thedesiredobjectives.
Although thesuperregenerative, crystalvideo,andtunedradiofrequency (TRF)receivers havebeenemployed inradarsystems, thesuperheterodyne hasseenalmostexolusive applica­ tionbecause ofitsgoodsensitivity, highgain,selectivity, andreliability.
Nootherreceiver type hasbeencompetitive tothesuperheterodyne.
Asimpleblockdiagram ofaradarsuperheter­ odynereceiver wasshowninFig.1.2.Therearemanyfactorsthatcnterintothedesignof radarreceivers; however, onlythereceiver noise-figure andthereceiver front-end, asthey determine receiver sensitivity, willbediscussed here.
9.2NOISE FIGURE InSec.2.3thenoisefigureofareceiver wasdescribed asameasure ofthenoiseproduced bya practical receiver ascompared withthenoiseofanidealreceiver.
1.2ThenoisefigureFnora linearnetwork maybedefinedas (9.I) (9.2)whereSin=available inputsignalpower Nin=available inputnoisepower(equaltokToBn) SOUl=available outputsignalpower Noul=available outputnoisepower "Available power" referstothepowerwhichwouldbedelivered toamatched loall.The available gainGisequaltoSouJSin, k=Boltzmann's constant =1.38x10-23J/deg.
To=standard temperature of290K(approximately roomtemperature), and8nisthenoise bandwidth defined byEq.(2.3).Theproduct kTo~4 xto-21W/Hz.Thepurpose for defining astandard temperature istoreferanymeasurements toacommon basisofcompari­ son.Equation (9.1)permits twodifferent butequivalent interpretations ofnoisefigure.ItlIlay beconsidered asthedegradation ofthesignal-to-noise ratiocausedbythenetwork (receiver).
oritmaybeinterpreted astheratiooftheactualavailable outputnoisepowertothcnoise powerwhichwouldbeavailable ifthenetwork merelyamplified thethermal noise.The noisefiguremayalsobewritten F=kToBnG+liN=1+liN nkToBnG kToBnG whereI1Nistheadditional noiseintroduced bythenetwork itself.
Thenoisefigureiscommonly expressed indecibels, thatis,10logFn'Thetermnoise factorisalsousedanimes insteadofnoisefigure.Thetwotermsarenowsynonymous. HtiC'l:IVERS, LIISI'LAYS, AND DUPLEXERS 345  The definition of noise figure assumes the input and output of the network are matched.
 In some devices.
less noise is obtained under mismatched, rather than matched, conditions.
In  spite of definitions, such networks would be operated so as to achieve the maximum output  signal-to-noise ratio.
 Noise figure of networks in cascade.
Consider two networks in cascade, each with the same  noise bandwidtt~ B, but with dimerent noise figures and available gain (Fig.
9.1).
Let F,, GI be  the noise figure arid available gain, respectively, of the first network, and F,, G, be similar  pararneters for the second network.
The problem is to find F,, the overall noise-figure of the  two circuits in cascade.
From the definition of noise figure [Eq.
(9.1)] the output noise No of  the two circuits iri cascade is  No = FOG', G2k71;,B, = noise from network 1 at output of network 2  + noise ANz introduced by network 2 (9.h)  The contribution of the second network to the overall noise-figure may be made negligible if  the gain of the first network is large.
This is of importance in the design of multistage receivers.
 It is not sufficient that only the first stage of a low-noise receiver have a small noise figure.
The  succeeding stage must also have a small noise figure, or else the gain of the first stage must be  high enough to swamp the noise of the succeeding stage.
if the first network is not an amplifier  but is a network with loss (as in a crystal mixer), the gain GI should be interpreted as a number  less than unity.
 The noise figure of N networks in cascade may be sbwn to be  Similar expressions may be derived when bandwidths and/or the temperature of the individual  networks aremot the same.3  Noise temperature.
The noise introduced by a network may also be expressed as an eflective  ~roise tenlperattrre, T,, defined as that (fictional) temperature at the input of the network which  would account for the noise AN at the output.
Therefore AN = kT, B, G and  Te = (F, - l)To (9.7)  The system noise tenlperature T, is defined as the effective noise temperature of the receiver  system including the effects of antenna temperature T,.
(It is also sometimes called the system  Figure 9.1 Two networks in cascade.
 RECEIVERS, IJISPLA YS,ANIJIJUPLEXERS 345 Thedefinition ofnoisefigureassumes theinputandoutput ofthenetwork arematched.
Insomedevices.
lessnoiseisobtained undermismatched, ratherthanmatched, conditions.
In spiteofdefinitions.
suchnetworks wouldbeoperated soastoachieve themaximum output signal-to-noise ratio.
Noisefigureofnetworks incascade.
Consider twonetworks incascade, eachwiththesame noisebandwidth BnbutwithdilTerent noisefiguresandavailable gain(Fig.9.1).LetFI'GIbe thenoisefigureandavailable gain,respectively, ofthefirstnetwork, andF2,G2besimilar parameters forthesecondnetwork.
Theproblem istofindF0'theoverallnoise-figure ofthe twocircuits incascade.
Fromthedefinition ofnoisefigure[Eq.(9.1)]theoutputnoiseNoof thetwocircuits incascade is N"=F"GJG2kJ;)Bn=noisefromnetwork 1atoutputofnetwork 2 +1I0iseliN2introduced bynetwork 2 No=k1~BnFIGIG2 +IiN2=kToBnFtGtG2 +(F2-l)kToBnG2 or(9.3a) (9.3b) (9.4) (9.5)Thecontribution ofthesecondnetwork totheoverallnoise-figure maybemadenegligible if thegainofthefirstnetwork islarge.Thisisofimportance inthedesignofmultistage receivers.
Itisnotsufficient thatonlythefirststageofalow-noise receiver haveasmallnoisefigure.The succeeding stagemustalsohaveasmallnoisefigure,orelsethegainofthefirststagemustbe highenoughtoswampthenoiseofthesucceeding stage.Ifthefirstnetwork isnotanamplifier butisanetwork withloss(asinacrystalmixer),thegainG1shouldbeinterpreted asanumber lessthanunity.
ThenoisefigureofNnetworks incascade maybeshowntobe F=F+F2 -I+F.].-=l+...+__.!:~_-=-~_ o 1GtG1G2 G1G2'''GN-1 Similarexpressions maybederived whenbandwidths and/orthetemperature oftheindividual networks are{f1ot thesame.) Noisetemperature.
Thenoiseintroduced byanetwork mayalsobeexpressed asaneffective noisetemperature, T..,definedasthat(fictional) temperature attheinputofthenetwork which wouldaccount forthenoiseliNattheoutput.Therefore Ii.N=kTeBnGand (9.6) (9.7) Thesystemnoisetemperature I:isdefinedastheeffective noisetemperature ofthereceiver systemincluding theeffectsofantenna temperature Ta.(Itisalsosometimes calledthesystem Figure9.1Twonetworks incascade. operating noise ternperat~tre.~~) If the receiver effective noise temperature is 'c, then  where F, is the system noise-figure including the effect of antenna temperature.
 The enective noise temperature of a receiver consisting of a number of networks in  cascade is  where 7; and G, are the effective noise temperature and gain of the ith network.
 The effective noise temperature and the noise figure both describe the same characteristic  of a network.
In general, the effective noise temperature has been preferred fgr describing  low-noise devices, and the noise figure is preferred for conventional receivers.
For radar  receivers the noise figure is the more widely used term, and is what is used in this text.
 18 Measurement of noise figure.
The noise figure of a radar receiver can degrade in operation and  cause reduced capability.
Therefore some means for monitoring the noise figure shoi~lcf be  provided in operating radars so that a worsening of receiver sensitivity can be detected and  corrected.
The monitoring of the noise figure can be accomplished either automatically or  manually by the operator.
 The receiver noise-figure can be measured with a broadband noise source of known  intensity, such as a gas-discharge tube22 or a solid-state noise source.
The noise figure 1s  determined by measuring (1) the noise power output N, of the receiver when a matched  impedance at temperature To = 290 K is connected to the receiver input and (2) the noise  power output N2 when a matched noise generator of temperature T2 is connected to the  receiver input.2 The temperature T2 is the equivalent noise temperature of the broadband noise  senerator.
The noise figure can be shown to be  where Y = N2/Nl.
;.J ^1  The measurement of noise figure can be made during radar operation without degrading  the receiver seilsitivity by pulse-modulating the noise source in synchronism with the radar  trigger and injecting the noise into the receiver during the " flyback " or "dead time" of the  radar, just prior to the triggering of the next transmitter pulse.
The measurement of the  receiver output with the noise source on (N2) and the noise source off (NI) can be made on  alternate pulse periods.
 The receiver noise-figure or sensitivity can also be measured by use of a calibrated signal  generator.
With a matched resistance at the receiver input, the output power is due to receiver  noise alone.
The signal generator power is then applied to the receiver input and adjusted until  the signal-plus-noise power is equal to twice the receiver noise power read with the matched  resistance.
The input signal under this condition is sometimes said to be the minimum discern-  ible signal.
It is also proportional to.
the receiver noise-figure.
 The sensitivity of a radar may be visually displayed by using the measurement of receiver  noise to display the normal range rings on the PPI only within the range at which the radar  can detect targets reliably.
This provides the operator with a continuous and immediate  indication of radar sensitivity.
When noise jamming is present, the appearance or nonappear-  ance of the range rings can be made to be a function of azimuth as well as range.
 346INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS operating noisetemperature.60)Ifthereceivereffective noisetemperature isTit,then ~='fa+Tit=ToFs (9.8) whereFsisthesystemnoise-figure including theeffectofantenna temperature.
Theeffective noisetemperature ofareceiver consisting ofanumber ofnetworks 10 cascade is (9.9) where7;andGiaretheeffective noisetemperature andgainoftheithnetwork.
Theeffective noisetemperature andthenoisefigurebothdescribe thesamecharacteristic ofanetwork.
Ingeneral, theeffective noisetemperature hasbeenpreferred f9rdescribing low-noise devices, andthenoisefigureispreferred forconventional receivers.
Forradar receivers thenoisefigureisthemorewidelyusedterm,andiswhatisusedinthistext.
Measurement ofnoisefigure.Thenoisefigureofaradarreceivercandegrade inoperation and causereduced capability.
Therefore somemeansformonitoring thenoisefigureshouldbe provided inoperating radarssothataworsening ofreceiversensitivity canbedetected and corrected.
Themonitoring ofthenoisefigurecanbeaccomplished eitherautomatically or manually bytheoperator.
Thereceiver noise-figure canbemeasured withabroadband noisesourceofknown intensity, suchasagas-discharge tube22orasolid-~tate noisesource.Thenoisefigureis determined bymeasuring (1)thenoisepoweroutputN1ofthereceiver whenamatched impedance attemperature To=290Kisconnected tothereceiver inputand(2)thenoise poweroutputN2whenamatched noisegenerator oftemperature T2isconnected tothe receiverinput.2Thetemperature T2istheequivalent noisetemperature ofthebroadband noise ;enerator.
Thenoisefigurecanbeshowntobe (9.10) whereY=N 2/N1• Themeasurement ofnoisefigurecanbemadeduringradaroperation withoutdegrading thereceiver sensitivity bypulse-modulating thenoisesourceinsynchronism withtheradar triggerandinjecting thenoiseintothereceiverduringthe"f1yback"or"deadtime"ofthe radar,justpriortothetriggering ofthenexttransmitter pulse.Themeasurement ofthe receiveroutputwiththenoisesourceon(N2)andthenoisesourceoff(Ndcanbemadeon alternate pulseperiods.
Thereceivernoise-figure orsensitivity canalsobemeasured byuseofacalibrated signal generator.
Withamatched resistance atthereceiver input,theoutputpowerisduetoreceiver noisealone.Thesignalgenerator poweristhenappliedtothereceiverinputandadjusted until thesignal-plus-noise powerisequaltotwicethereceiver noisepowerreadwiththematched resistance.
Theinputsignalunderthiscondition issometimes saidtobetheminimum discern­ iblesignal.Itisalsoproportional to.thereceiver noise-figure.
Thesensitivity ofaradarmaybevisuallydisplayed byusingthemeasurement ofreceiver noisetodisplaythenormalrangeringsonthePPIonlywithintherangeatwhichtheradar candetecttargetsreliably.
Thisprovides theoperator withacontinuous andimmediate indication ofradarsensitivity.
Whennoisejamming ispresent,theappearance ornonappear­ anceoftherangeringscanbe,made tobeafunction ofazimuth aswellasrange. RECEIVERS, DISPLAYS, AND DUPLEXERS 347  In making a measurement of the receiver noise-figure, the noise source or signal generator  is usually inserted by a directional coupler ahead of the duplexer and other RF components so  that the overall noise-figure of the system is measured rather than that of the receiver alone.
 h1:tny radar superheterodyne receivers do not employ a low-noise RF amplifier.
Instead, the  first stage is simply the mixer.
Although the noise figure of a mixer front-end may not be as low  as other devices that can be used as receiver front-ends, it is acceptable for many radar  applications when other factors besides low noise are important.
The function of the mixer is  to corlvert RF energy to IF energy with minimum loss and without spurious responses.
Silicon  poin t-con tact and Schot tky-barrier  diode^'^.'^ based on the nonlinear resistance character-  is tic of metal-to-semiconductor contacts have been used as the mixing element.4.5 Schottky-  barrier tliodes are made of either silicon or GaAs, with GaAs preferred for the higher  microwave frequencies.
The Schottky-barrier diodes have had lower noise figures and lower  flicker noise than conventional point-contact diodes, but the silicon point-contact diode has  Iiati better burnout properties.
An integral part of the mixer is the local oscillator.
The IF  amplifier is also of importance in mixer design because of its influence on the overall  noise-figure.
 i'onversion Itss and noise-temperature ratio.
The conversion loss of a mixer is defined as  available RF power L = - -- - -.
 available IF power  it is a measure of the efficiency of the mixer in converting RF signal power into IF.
The  conversion loss of typical microwave crystals in a conventional single-ended mixer  configuration varies from about 5 to 6.5 dB.
A crystal mix& is called "broadband" when the  signal and image frequencies are both terminated in matched loads.
A signal impressed in  the RF signal channel of a broadband mixer is converted in equal portions to the IF signal and  the RF image.
Therefore the theoretical conversion loss can never be less than 3 dB with this  configuration.
(The image frequency is defined as that frequency which is displaced from the  local oscillator frequency fLO by the IF frequency, and which appears on the opposite side of  the local oscilfator frequency as the signal frequencyh,.
It is equal to 2f~0 - JRF .)  Short-circuiting or open-circuiting the image-frequency termination results in a" narrow-  hand " mixer.
The conversion loss is less in the narrowband than in the broadband mixer.
In  principle, it can be about 2 dB lower.6 The design of a broadband mixer has been simpler to  achieve arid less critical than a narrowband mixer.
 'i't~e rloise-terrtperature ratio of a crystal mixer (not to be confused with effective noise  tenlperature) is defined as  actual available IF noise power  t, = - - - - - - -- -  available noise power from an equivalent resistance (9.12a)  where I;, = crystal mixer noise figure and LC = 1/G, = conversion loss.
The noise temperature  ratio of a crystal mixer varies approximately inversely with frequency from about 100 kHz (the  exact value depends upon the diode25) down to a small fraction of a hertz.
This is calledflicker  (9.11)RECEIVERS, DISPLA V5,ANDDUPLEXERS 347 J11makingameasurement ofthereceivernoise-figure, thenoisesourceorsignalgenerator isusuallyinserted byadirectional coupleraheadoftheduplexer andotherRFcomponents so thattheoverallnoise-figure ofthesystemismeasured ratherthanthatofthereceiver alone.
9.31\lIXERS Manyradarsuperheterodyne receivers donotemploy alow-noise RFamplifier.
Instead, the firststageissimplythemixer.Although thenoisefigureofamixerfront-end maynotbeaslow asotherdevices thatcanbeusedasreceiver front-ends, itisacceptable formanyradar applications whenotherfactorsbesideslownoiseareimportant.
Thefunction ofthemixeris toconvert RFenergytoIFenergywithminimum lossandwithoutspurious responses.
Silicon point-contact andSchottky-barrier diodes,s.24basedonthenonlinear resistance character­ isticofmetal-to-semiconductor contacts havebeenusedasthemixingelement.4•sSchottky­ harrierdiodesaremadeofeithersiliconorGaAs,withGaAspreferred forthehigher microwave frequencies.
TheSchottky-barrier diodeshavehadlowernoisefiguresandlower flickernoisethanconventional point-contact diodes,butthesiliconpoint-contact diodehas hadbetterburnout properties.
Anintegral partofthemixeristhelocaloscillator.
TheIF amplifier isalsoofimportance inmixerdesignbecause ofitsinfluence ontheoverall noise-figure.
('onvcrsion lossandnoise-temperature ratio.Theconversion lossofamixerisdefined as available RFpowerL=---------c----- Cavailable IFpower Itisameasure oftheefficiency ofthemixerinconverting RFsignalpowerintoIF.The conversion lossoftypical microwave crystals inaconventional single-ended mixer configuration variesfromabout5to6.5dB.Acrystal mix~riscalled"broadband" whenthe signalandimagefrequencies arebothterminated inmatched loads.Asignalimpressed in theRFsignalchannel ofabroadband mixerisconverted inequalportions totheIFsignaland theRFimage.Therefore thetheoretical conversion losscanneverbelessthan3dBwiththis configuration.
(Theimagefrequency isdefinedasthatfrequency whichisdisplaced fromthe localoscillator frequency fLObytheIFfrequency, andwhichappears ontheopposite sideof thelocaloscilfator frequency asthesignalfrequency filF'Itisequalto2fLO-fRF') Short-circuiting oropen-circuiting theimage-frequency termination resultsina"narrow­ band"mixer.Theconversion lossislessinthenarrowband thaninthebroadband mixer.In principle, itcanbeabout2dBlower.6Thedesignofabroadband mixerhasbeensimplerto achieveandlesscriticalthananarrowband mixer.
The/loise-temperature ratioofacrystalmixer(nottobeconfused witheffective noise temperature) isdefined as oractualavailable IFnoisepowert=..-..'---"....-.----------.- ravailable noisepowerfromanequivalent resistance t=Fc~!jJ.BnS =FG=Fe rkToBnCCLc(9.12a) (9.12b) whereFc=crystalmixernoisefigureandLc=1/Ge=conversion loss.Thenoisetemperature ratioofacrystalmixervariesapproximately inversely withfrequency fromabout100kHz(the exactvaluedepends uponthediode2S)downtoasmallfractionofahertz.Thisiscalledfiicker noise, or l$ noise.
Above approximately 500 kHz, the noise-temperature ratio approaches a  constant value.
At a frequency of 30 MHz, a typical radar IF, it might range from 1.3 to 2.0.
 From Eq.
(9.12b) the noise figure of the mixer is Fc = r, LC.
This, however, is not a  complete measure of the sensitivity of a receiver with a mixer front-end.
The overall noise-  figure depends not only on the mixer stage, but also on the noise figure of the IF stage and the  mixer conversion loss.
It may be determined from the expression for the noise figure of two  networks in cascade [Eq.
(9.4)].
The first network is the mixer with noise figure t, LC and  gain = IJL,.
The second network is the IF amplifier with a noise figure F1,.
The receiver  noise-figure with a mixer front-end is then  (This does not include losses in the RF transmission line connecting the rweiver to the  antenna.)If, for example, the conversion loss of the mixer were 6.0 dB, the IF noise figure 1.5 dB,  and the noise-temperature ratio 1.4, the receiver noise figure would be 8.6 dB.
For low-noise-  temperature-ratio diodes, the receiver noise figure is approximately equal to the conversion  < .*,f loss times the IF noise figure.
 Balanced mixers.
Noise that accompanies the local-oscillator (LO) signal can appear at the IF  frequency because of the nonlinear action of the mixer.
The LO noise must be removed if  receiver sensitivity is to be maximized.
One method for eliminating LO noise that interferes  with the desired signal is to insert a narrow-bandpass RF filter between the local oscillator and  the mixer.
The center frequency of the filter is that of the local oscillator, and its bandwidth  must be narrow so that LO noise at the signal and the image frequencies do not appear at the  mixer.
Since the receiver is tuned by changing the LO frequency, the narrowband filter milst be  tunable also.
 A method of eliminating local-oscillator noise without the disadvantage of a narrow-  bandwidth filter is the balanced mixer (Fig.
9.2).
A balanced mixer uses a hybrid junction, a  magic T, or an equivalent.
These are four-port junctions.
Figure 9.2 illustrates a magic T in  which the LO and RF signals are applied to two ports.
Diode mixers are in each of the  remaining two arms of the magic T.
At one of the diodes the sum of the RF and LO signals  appears, and at the other diode the difference of the two is obtained.
(In a magic T the LO  would be applied to the H-plane arm, and the RF signal would be applied to the E-plane arm.
 The diode mixers would be mounted at equal distances in each of the collinear arms.) The  two diode mixers should have identical characteristics and be well matched.
The IF signal is  Figure 9.2 Principle of the balanced mixer based on the magic T.
Magic T  H LO RF  tt  Jtk-  IC RF  7 ZIL  348INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS noise,or111noise.Aboveapproximately 500kHz,thenoise-temperature ratioapproaches a constant value.Atafrequency 0£30MHz,atypicalradarIF,itmightrangefrom1.3to2.0.
FromEq.(9.12b)thenoisefigureofthemixerisFe=(rLe.This,however, isnota complete measure ofthesensitivity ofareceiver withamixerfront-end.
Theoverallnoise­ figuredepends notonlyonthemixerstage,butalsoonthenoisefigureoftheIFstageandthe mixerconversion loss.Itmaybedetermined fromtheexpression forthenoisefigureoftwo networks incascade [Eq.(904)].Thefirstnetwork isthemixerwithnoisefigure (rLeand gain=I/Le•Thesecondnetwork istheIFamplifier withanoisefigureFIF.Thereceiver noise-figure withamixerfront-end isthen F2-IF0=F1+G1=Le(tr+FIF-I) (9.13) (Thisdoesnotinclude lossesintheRFtransmission lineconnecting ther~eiver tothe antenna.) If,forexample, theconversion lossofthemixerwere6.0dB,theIFnoisefigure1.5dB, andthenoise-temperature ratiolA,thereceiver noisefigurewouldbe8.6dB.Forlow-noise­ temperature-ratio diodes,thereceiver noisefigureisapproximately equaltotheconversion losstimestheIFnoisefigure.
Balanced mixers.Noisethataccompanies thelocal-oscillator (LO)signalcanappearattheIF frequency because ofthenonlinear actionofthemixer.TheLOnoisemustberemoved if receiversensitivity istobemaximized.
Onemethod foreliminating LOnoisethatinterferes withthedesiredsignalistoinsertanarrow-bandpass RFfilterbetween thelocaloscillator and themixer.Thecenterfrequency ofthefilteristhatofthelocaloscillator, anditsbandwidth mustbenarrowsothatLOnoiseatthesignalandtheimagefrequencies donotappearatthe mixer.Sincethereceiveristunedbychanging theLOfrequency, thenarrowband filtermustbe tunablealso.
Amethod ofeliminating local-oscillator noisewithout thedisadvantage ofanarrow­ bandwidth filteristhebalanced mixer(Fig.9.2).Abalanced mixerusesahybridjunction, a magicT,oranequivalent.
Thesearefour-port junctions.
Figure9.2illustrates amagicTin whichtheLOandRFsignalsareapplied totwoports.Diodemixersareineachofthe remaining twoarmsofthemagicT.AtoneofthediodesthesumoftheRFandLOsignals appears, andattheotherdiodethedifference ofthetwoisobtained.
(InamagicTtheLO wouldbeappliedtotheH-plane arm,andtheRFsignalwouldbeappliedtotheE-planearm.
Thediodemixerswouldbemounted atequaldistances in·eachofthecollinear arms.)The twodiodemixersshouldhaveidentical characteristics andbewellmatched.
TheIFsignalis..::1 LORF t~ E RF IFoutput Figure9.2Principle ofthebalanced mixerbasedonthemagicT. RECEIVERS, DISPI,AYS, AND DUPLEXERS 349  recovered by subtracting the outputs of the two diode mixers.
In Fig.
9.2 the balanced diodes  are shown reversed so that the IF outputs can be added.
Local-oscillator noise at the two  diode mixers will be in phase and will be canceled at the output.
It is only the AM noise of the  local oscillator which is canceled.
The FM noise inserted by the local oscillator is unaffected by  the balanced mixer.9  In a single-ended mixer, the mixing action generates all harmonics of the RF and LO  frcqr~encies, and conlbinations there~f.~ The output is designed to filter out the frequency of  irltercst, usually the difTerence frequerlcy.
A balarlced mixer suppresses the even harttio~lics of  tlte LO signal.
A tlorthlc-hnlar~cet rr~ixer is basically two single-ended mixers connected in  par;illel and 180" out of phase.
It suppresses ever) tiarrnonics of both the RF and the LO   signal^.^.^^  Reactive image termination.
If the image frequency of a mixer is presented with the proper  reactive termination (such as an open or a short circuit), the conversion loss and the noise  figure can be 1 to 2 dB less than with a "broadband" mixer in which the image frequency is  terminated in a matched The reactive termination causes energy converted to the  image frequency to be reflected back into the mixer and reconverted to IF.'6-24  Both the sun1 and the image frequencies can be reflected back to the diode mixer to  achieve a lower conversion loss, but a number of adjustments are required for good results.24  One method for terminating the image in a reactive load is to employ a narrow bandpass filter,  or preselector, at the RF signal frequency.
A limitation of this approach is that it is not suitable  for very wide bandwidths.
The filter has to be retuned if the mixer must operate at another  frequency.
Also, the high Q of the filter introduces a loss which will increase the system  noise-figure.
 A method for achieving a reactive termination without narrow-bandwidth components is  the irrrage-recovery mixer shown in Fig.
9.3.
This has also been called an image-enhanced  ntixer," or product return mixer.56 (It is similar to the image-reject rni~er~.'*"*~~ whose  purpose is to reject the image response.) The RF hybrid junction on the left of the circuit  produces a 90" phase difference between the LO inputs to the two mixers.
The IF hybrid  junction on the right imparts another 90" phase differential in such a manner that the images  cancel, but the IF signals from the two mixers add in phase.
The two mixers in Fig.
9.3 may be  single-ended, balanced, or double-balanced mixers.
' This mixer is capable of wide bandwidth,  and is restricted only by the frequency sensitivity of the structure of the microwave circuit.
The  noise figure of an image-recovery circuit (Fig.
9.4) is competitive with other receiver front-  ends.
The irkage-recovery mixer is attractive as a receiver front-end because of its high dy-  namic range, low intermodulation prcxlucts, less susceptibility to burnout, and less cost as  compared to other front-ends.13  Diode  mixer 7-  RF  input junction  Diode  mlxer Figure 9.3 Image-recovery mixer.
 RECEIVERS, DISPLAYS, ANDDUPLEXERS 349 recovered bysubtracting theoutputsofthetwodiodemixers.InFig.9.2thebalanced diodes areshownreversed sothattheIFoutputs canbeadded.Local-oscillator noiseatthetwo diodemixerswillbeinphaseandwillbecanceled attheoutpuLIl isonlytheAMnoiseofthe localoscillator whichiscanceled.
TheFMnoiseinserted bythelocaloscillator isunaffected by thebalanced mixer.9 Inasingle-ended mixer,themixingactiongenerates allharmonics oftheRFandLO frequencies, andcombinations thereof.
7Theoutputisdesigned tofilteroutthefrequency of interest, usuallythedifference frequency.
Abalanced mixersuppresses theevenharmonics of theLOsignal.AdOllhle-halallced mixerisbasically twosingle-ended mixersconnected in parallel and1ROOoutofphase.Itsuppresses evenharmonics ofboththeRFandtheLO signals.s.B Reactive imagetermination.
Iftheimagefrequency ofamixerispresented withtheproper reactive termination (suchasanopenorashortcircuit), theconversion lossandthenoise figurecanbeJto2dBlessthanwitha"broadband" mixerinwhichtheimagefrequency is terminated inamatched load.6•IOThereactive termination causesenergyconverted tothe imagefrequency toberenected backintothemixerandreconverted toIF.16•24 Boththesumandtheimagefrequencies canbereflected backtothediodemixerto achievealowerconversion loss,butanumber ofadjustments arerequired forgoodresults.24 Onemethodforterminating theimageinareactive loadistoemployanarrowbandpass filter, orpreselect or,attheRFsignalfrequency.
Alimitation ofthisapproach isthatitisnotsuitable forverywidebandwidths.
Thefilterhastoberetuned ifthemixermustoperateatanother frequency.
Also,thehighQofthefilterintroduces alosswhichwillincrease thesystem noise-figure.
/\.methodforachieving areactivetermination withoutnarrow-bandwidth components is theimage-recovery mixershowninFig.9.3.Thishasalsobeencalledanimage-enhanced mixer,I7 orproduct returnmixer.56(Itissimilartotheimage-reject mixer6,7,ll,55whose purpose istorejecttheimageresponse.) TheRFhybriqjunction ontheleftofthecircuit produces a900phasedilTerence between theLainputstothetwomixers.TheIFhybrid junction ontherightimpartsanother 900phasedifferential insuchamannerthattheimages cancel,buttheIFsignalsfromthetwomixersaddinphase.ThetwomixersinFig.9.3maybe single-ended, balanced, ordouble-balanced mixers.
12Thismixeriscapableofwidebandwidth, andisrestricted onlybythefrequency sensitivity ofthestructure ofthemicrowave circuit.The noisefigureofanimage-recovery circuit(Fig.9.4)iscompetitive withotherreceiver front­ ends.Theirhage-recovery mixerisattractive asareceiver front-end becauseofitshighdy­ namicrange,lowintermodulation products, lesssusceptibility toburnout, andlesscostas compared tootherfront-ends.
13 Diode mixer RF InputIF output Figure9.3Image-recovery mixer. 350 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  Diode burnout.
A crystal diode which is subjected to excessive RF power may suffer brrrnour.
 This is a rather loosely defined term which is applied to any irreversible deterioration in the  detection or conversion properties of a crystal diode as the result of electrical overload.
If  excessive RF energy is applied to the diode the heat generated cannot be dissipated properly  and the diode can be damaged.
Excessive energy causes the diode to open-circuit or the  semiconductor to puncture, resulting in failure of the device.
As defined above, however,  burnout of a diode can occur before the onset of physical destruction.
An increase in the  receiver noise due to the effects of excessive RF energy can be just as harmful as complete  destruction; perhaps more so, for gradual deterioration of performance might not be noticed  as readily as would catastrophic failure.
It is for this reason that some means of automatic  monitoring of receiver noise-figure is necessary if the radar is to be maintained in prime  operating conditions.
 A degradation in the noise figure of a predetermined amount usually is cogsidered as the  criterion for diode failure when defining burnout.
Sometimes an increase in noise figure of  3 dB has been used as the criterion.lg In other cases, a I-dB increase has been used.''  However, with Schottky and point-contact diodes, there is an increase in Ilf noise and a  decrease in the breakdown voltage at lower power levels than would be indicated by the above  criteria.14  One of the causes of diode burnout in radar receivers has been the increased RF leakage  through a conventional duplexer due to aging of the TR tube.
When the transmitter fires, the  TR tube breaks down.
A finite time, usually on the order of several nanoseconds, must elapse  before breakdown is complete.
During this time, RF energy leaks into the receiver.
This is  called the spike-leakage energy.
From 1 to 10 ergs of spike-leakage energy might be required to  burn out microwave crystal diodes.
The amount of energy contained within the remainder of  the pulse after the initial spike is usually small and is not as serious as spike leakage.
 When a solid-state duplexer is used or when a solid-state limiter follows the TR switch,  there need be no initial spike and burnout is not determined by the pulse energy.
Burnout due  to pulses without an initial spike, but greater than about 1 ps in duration, is determined  primarily by the peak power.16 (The burnout conditions for pulses 1 ps or greater is essentially  the same as for CW.) Crystal diodes can withstand several watts or more of peak power under  pulse conditions.
For pulses shorter than 1 ps, the peak-power capability increases, but not at  a sufficient rate for constant energy.
ls  In addition to leakage through the duplexer, diode burnout can result from the accidental  reception of power from nearby radars or from the discharge of static electricity through the  diode.
 Noise figure due to RF Iwes.
Any losses in the RF portion ahead of the receiver front-end  result in a lowering of the overall noise-figure.
These losses, denoted LRY, might be due to the  receiver transmission line, duplexer, rotary joint, preselector filter, monitoring devices, or loss  in the randome.
The noise figure due to these RF losses may be derived from the definition of  Eq.
(9.
l), which is  The noise No,, from the lossy RF components is kTo B,, and G = 1/&, .
Therefore on substi-  tution into Eq.
(9.
l), the noise figure FL due to the RF losses is simply  FL = LR F (9.14)  350INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS Diodeburnout.
Acrystaldiodewhichissubjected toexcessive RFpower may sufferbUrtlOlj[.
Thisisaratherlooselydefinedtermwhichisappliedtoanyirreversible deterioration inthe detection orconversion properties ofacrystaldiodeastheresultofelectrical overload.If excessive RFenergyisappliedtothediodetheheatgenerated cannotbedissipated properly andthediodecanbedamaged.
Excessive energycausesthediodetoopen-circuit orthe semiconductor topuncture, resulting infailureofthedevice.Asdefinedabove,however, burnout ofadiodecanoccurbeforetheonsetofphysical destruction.
Anincrease inthe receivernoiseduetotheeffectsofexcessive RFenergycanbejustasharmful ascomplete destruction; perhaps moreso,forgradualdeterioration ofperformance mightnotbenoticed asreadilyaswouldcatastrophic failure.Itisforthisreasonthatsomemeansofautomatic monitoring ofreceiver noise-figure isnecessary iftheradaristobemaintained inprime operating conditions.
Adegradation inthenoisefigureofapredetermined amountusuallyisc09sidered asthe criterion fordiodefailure when defining burnout Sometimes anincrease innoisefigureof 3dBhasbeenusedasthecriterion: 9Inothercases,aI-dBincrease hasbeenused.15 However, withSchottky andpoint-contact diodes,thereisanincrease inIlfnoiseanda decrease inthebreakdown voltageatlowerpowerlevelsthanwouldbeindicated bytheabove criteria.14 Oneofthecausesofdiodeburnout inradarreceivers hasbeentheincreased RFleakage through aconventional duplexer duetoagingoftheTRtube.Whenthetransmilter fires,lhe TRtubebreaksdown.Afinitetime,usuallyontheorderofseveralnanoseconds, mustelapse beforebreakdown iscomplete.
Duringthistime,RFenergyleaksintothereceiver.
Thisis calledthespike-leakage energy.From1to10ergsofspike-leakage energymightberequired to burnoutmicrowave crystaldiodes.Theamountofenergycontained withintheremainder of thepulseaftertheinitialspikeisusuallysmallandisnotasseriousasspikeleakage.
Whenasolid-state duplexer isusedorwhenasolid-state limiterfollowstheTRswitch, thereneedbenoinitialspikeandburnout isnotdetermined bythe pulse energy.Burnout due topulseswithout aninitialspike,butgreaterthanaboutI~sinduration, isdetermined primarily bythepeakpower.16(Theburnout conditions forpulses1~sorgreaterisessentially thesameasforCW.)Crystaldiodescanwithstand severalwattsormoreofpeakpowerunder pulseconditions.
Forpulsesshorterthan1~s,thepeak-power capability increases, butnotat asufficient rateforconstant energy.
IS Inaddition toleakagethroughtheduplexer, diodeburnout canresultfromtheaccidental reception ofpowerfromnearbyradarsorfromthedischarge ofstaticelectricity through the diode.
NoisefigureduetoRFlosses.AnylossesintheRFportionaheadofthereceiver front-end resultinalowering ofthe overall noise-figure.
Theselosses,denoted Lu,mightbeduetothe receivertransmission line,duplexer, rotaryjoint,preselectorfilter,monitoring devices,orloss intherandome.
ThenoisefigureduetotheseRFlossesmaybederivedfromthedefinition of Eq.(9.1),whichis NOUI Fn=kT,BGon(9.1) ThenoiseNou,fromthelossyRFcomponents iskToBn,andG=1/4F'Therefore onsubsti­ tutionintoEq.(9.1),thenoisefigureFLduetotheRFlossesissimply (9.14) RECEIVERS, DISPLAYS, AND DUPLEXERS 351  The noise figure of a receiver with noise figure F,, preceded by RF losses equal to L,, is  F2 - 1 F - F1 + o - = LRF + (Fr - 1)LRF = FrLRF (9.15)  GI  where F, = kF, GI = I/LRFr and F2 = F,.
 9.4 LOW-NOISE FRONT-ENDS  Early microwave superheterodyne receivers did not use an RF amplifier as the first stage, or  front-end, since the RF amplifiers at that time had a greater noise figure than when the mixer  alone was employed as the receiver input stage.
There are now a number of RF amplifiers that  can provide a suitable noise figure.
Figure 9.4 plots noise figure as a function of frequency for  the several receiver front-ends used in radar applications.
The parametric amplifierl0.I8 has  the lowest noise figure of those devices described here, especially at the higher microwave  frequencies.
Ifowever, it is generally more complex and expensive compared to the other  fro11 t-ends.
 'The transistor a~rlplifier can be applied over most of the entire range of frequencies of inter-  est to radar.10-'9.20 The silicon bipolar-transistor has been used at the lower radar frequencies  (bclow I, batld) atld tile galiu~tl arserlide field-eKect transistor (GaAs FET) is preferred at the  I I I I I I Ill I I  5000 10,000 30,000  Frequency - MHz  Figure 9.4 Noise figures of typical microwave receiver front-ends as a function of frequency- 6 0  50  m = 4 0.-  I  ?!  1T'  w 30.-  0 z  2 0  10- -  Image-recovery mlxer wtlh  r  parametric amplifier  RECEIVERS, DISPLAYS, ANDDUPLEXERS 351 Thenoisefigureofareceiver withnoisefigureFr,preceded byRFlossesequaltoLRFis F2-1F0=FI+------=LRF+(Fr-l)LRF=FrLRFG1 whereF1=4F,G1=I/LRF,andF2=Fr· 9.4LOW-NOISE FRONT-ENDS(9.15) Earlymicrowave superheterodyne receivers didnotuseanRFamplifier asthefirststage,or front-end.
sincetheRFamplifiers atthattimehadagreaternoisefigurethanwhenthemixer alonewasemployed asthereceiver inputstage.TherearenowanumberofRFamplifiers that canprovide asuitable noisefigure.Figure9.4plotsnoisefigureasafunction offrequency for theseveralreceiver front-ends usedinradarapplications.
Theparametric amplifier1o,lB has thelowestnoisefigureofthosedevicesdescribed here,especially atthehighermicrowave frequencies.
However, itisgenerally morecomplex andexpensive compared totheother front-ends.
Thetransistor amplifier canbeappliedovermostoftheentirerangeoffrequencies ofinter­ esttoradar.,o.'9.2o Thesiliconbipolar-transistor hasbeenusedatthelowerradarfrequencies (helowLhand)andthegaliumarsenide field-elTect transistor (GaAsFET)ispreferred atthe 60 CD "0<'10 ~ ::>0' <1J30-- 1/1 <5z 20 10- 5000 10,000 Frequency -MHz30,000 Figure9.4Noisefiguresoftypicalmicrowave receiverfront-ends asafunctionoffrequency- higher frequencies.
The transistor is generally used in a multistage config~~ration with a  typical gain per stage decreasing from 12 dB at VHF to 6 dB at K, band." In the GaAs FET,  the thermal noise contribution is greater than the shot noise.
Cooling the device will therefore  improve the noise figure."  The tunnel-diode amplifier has been considered in the past as a low-notse front-end, with  noise figures from 4 to 7 dB over the range 2 to 25 GHz." It has been supplanted by the  improvements made in the transistor amplifier.
The traveling-wave-tube amplifier has also  been considered as a low-noise front-end, but it has been overtaken by other devices.
Cryo-  genic parametric amplifiers and masers produce the lowest noise figures, but the added  complexity of operating at low temperatures has tempered their use in radar.
 The noise figure of the ordinary "broadband" mixer whose image frequency is ter-  minated in a matched load is not shown in Fig.
9.4.
It would lie about 2 dB higher than the  noise figure shown for the image-recovery mixer.
4  There are other factors beside the noise figure which can influence the selection of a  receiver front-end.
Cost, burnout, and dynamic range must also be considered.
The selection of  a particular type of receiver front-end might also be influenced by its instantaneous band-  width, tuning range, phase and amplitude stability, and any special requirements for cool~ng.
 The image-recovery mixer represents a practical compromise which tends to balance its  slightly greater noise figure by its lower cost, greater ruggedness, and greater dynamtc range."  Utility of low-noise front-ends.
The lower the noise figure of the radar receiver, the less need be  the transmitter power and/or the antenna aperture.
Reductions in the size of the transmitter  and the antenna are always desirable if there are no concomitant reductions in performance.
A  few decibels improvement in receiver noise-figure can be obtained at a relatively low cost as  compared to the cost and complexity of adding the same few decibels to a high-power  transmitter.
 There are, however, limitations to the use of a low-noise front-end in some radar  applications.' As mentioned above, the cost, burnout, and dynamic range of low-noise devices  might not be acceptable in some applications.
Even if the low-noise device itself is of large  dynamic range, there can be a reduction of the dynamic range of the receiver as compared to a  receiver with a mixer as its front-end.
Dynamic range is usually defined as the ratio of the  maximum signal that can be handled to the smallest signal capable of being detected.
The  smallest signal is the minimum detectable signal as determined by receiver noise, and  the maximum signal is that which causes a specified degree of intermodulation or a specified  deviation from linearity (usually 1 dB) of the output-vs.-input curve.
 When an RF amplifier is inserted ahead of the mixer stage, and if no change is made in the  remainder of the receiver, the minimum signal will be reduced because of the lower noise  figure of the RF amplifier, but the maximum signal that can be handled by the receiver will  also be reduced by an amount equal to the gain of the amplifier.
Since the gain of the RF  amplifier is usually high compared to the reduction in receiver noise-figure, the net result is a  reduction in receiver dynamic range.
However, this can be corrected and the original dynamic  range recovered by reducing the gain of the IF amplifier to maintain a constant output (or  constant noise level going into the di~play).'~ On the other hand, if the mixer rather than the  IF amplifier is what limits the total dynamic range of the receiver, the introduction of the  low-noise front-end will cause a sacrifice in the mixer dynamic range and, consequently,  the dynamic range of the entire recei~er.~  A low-noise receiver may also not be warranted if the RF losses preceding the receiver are  high.
From Eq.
(9.15) the overall noise figure of a radar receiver with a noise figure F, preceded  by RF circuitry with a loss hF, is equal to F,hF.
In a radar the overall loss hF due to the  352INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS higherfrequencies.
Thetransistor isgenerally usedinamultistage configuration witha typicalgainperstagedecreasing frOml2dB atVHFto6dBatKIIband.10IntheGaAsFET, thethermal noisecontribution isgreaterthantheshotnoise.Cooling thedevicewilltherefore improve thenoisefigure.2I Thetunnel-diode amplifier hasbeenconsidered inthepastasalow-noise front-end, with noisefiguresfrom4to7dBovertherange2to25GHz.IOIthasbeensupplanted bythe improvements madeinthetransistor amplifier.
Thetraveling-wave-tube amplifier hasalso beenconsidered asalow-noise front-end, butithasbeenovertaken byotherdevices.
Cryo­ genicparametric amplifiers andmasersproduce thelowestnoisefigures, buttheadded complexity ofoperating atlowtemperatures hastempered theiruseinradar.
Thenoisefigureoftheordinary" broadband" mixerwhoseimagefrequency ister­ minated inamatched loadisnotshowninFig.9.4.Itwouldlieabout2dBhigherthanthe noisefigureshownfortheimage-recovery mixer.
,J Thereareotherfactorsbesidethenoisefigurewhichcaninfluence theselection ofa receiver front-end.
Cost,burnout, anddynamic rangemustalsobeconsidered.
Theselection of aparticular typeofreceiver front-end mightalsobeinfluenced byitsinstantaneous band­ width,tuningrange,phaseandamplitude stability, andanyspecialrequirements forcooling.
Theimage-recovery mixerrepresents· apractical compromise whichtendstobalance its slightlygreaternoisefigurebyitslowercost,greaterruggedness, andgreaterdynamic range.l.l Utilityoflow-noise front-ends.
Thelowerthenoisefigureoftheradarreceiver, thelessneedbe thetransmitter powerand/ortheantenna aperture.
Reductions inthesizeofthetransmiuer andtheantenna arealwaysdesirable iftherearenoconcomitant reductions inperformance.
A fewdecibels improvement inreceiver noise-figure canbeobtained atarelatively lowcostas compared tothecostandcomplexity ofaddingthesamefewdecibels toahigh-power transmitter.
Thereare,however, limitations totheuseofalow-noise front-end insomeradar applications.
7A~mentioned above,thecost,burnout, anddynamic rangeoflow-noise devices mightnotbeacceptable insomeapplications.
Evenifthelow-noise deviceitselfisoflarge dynamic range,therecanbeareduction ofthedynamic rangeofthereceiver ascompared toa receiver withamixerasitsfront-end.
Dynamic rangeisusuallydefined astheratioofthe maximum signalthatcanbehandled tothesmallest signalcapable ofbeingdetected.
The smallest signalistheminimum detectable signalasdetermined byreceiver noise,and themaximum signalisthatwhichcausesaspecified degreeofintermodulation oraspecified deviation fromlinearity (usually IdB)oftheoutput-vs.-input curve.
WhenanRFamplifier isinsertedaheadofthemixerstage,andifnochangeismadeinthe remainder ofthereceiver, theminimum signalwillbereduced because ofthelowernoise figureoftheRFamplifier, butthemaximum signalthatcanbehandled bythereceiver will alsobereduced byanamount equaltothegainoftheamplifier.
SincethegainoftheRF amplifier isusuallyhighcompared tothereduction inreceiver noise-figure, thenetresultisa reduction inreceiverdynamic range.However, thiscanbecorrected andtheoriginaldynamic rangerecovered byreducing thegainoftheIFamplifier tomaintain aconstant output(or constant noiselevelgoingintothedisplay).54 Ontheotherhand,ifthemixerratherthanthe IFamplifier iswhatlimitsthetotaldynamic rangeofthereceiver, theintroduction ofthe low-noise front-end willcauseasacrifice inthemixerdynamic rangeand,consequently, thedynamic rangeoftheentirereceiver.7 Alow-noise receiver mayalsonotbewarranted iftheRFlossespreceding thereceiverare high.FromEq.(9.15)theoverallnoisefigureofaradarreceiver withanoisefigureF,preceded byRFcircuitry withaloss.l...ttF'isequaltoFr.l...ttF'Inaradartheoverallloss.l...ttFduetothe RECEIVERS, DISPLAYS, AND DUPLEXERS 353  transn~ission line, rotary joint, duplexer, receiver protector, and preselector filter might not be  insignificant.
In some nonradar applications, as for example radio astronomy, most of these  lossy components are not necessary as they are 'in radar, so that a low noise figure front-end  can be used effectively.
However, an extremely low receiver noise-figure is not usually warranted  in radar because of the unavoidable RF losses found in most radars.
Even if the noise figure of  the receiver were essentially 0 dB, the overall receiver noise-figure would still be equal to the  losses in the RF portiori of the systeni.
 In a military radar, a low-noise receiver car1 make the radar more susceptible to the effects  of deliberate electrorlic countermeasures (ECM).
When practical, it may be preferred to delib-  erately employ a conventional receiver with modest sensitivity and to make up for the  reduced sensitivity by larger transmitter power.
This is not the most economical way to build a  radar, but it does make the task of the hostile ECM designer more difficult.
 A variety of low-noise radar receivers are available to the radar system designer.
The  well-recognized benefits of low-noise receivers, combined with their relative affordability,  make them an attractive feature in modern radar design.
However, low-noise receivers are  ~ornetinies accompanied by otlier less desirable properties that tend to result in a compromise  irl receiver perforr~iance.
'fhus a low-noise receiver might not always be the obvious selection.
 if properties otlier than sensitivity are in~portant.
 9.5 DISPLAYS  The purpose of the display is to visually present in a form suitable for operator interpretatiorl  and action the information contained in the radar echo signal.
When the display is connected  directly to the video output of the receiver, the information displayed is called raw video.
This  is the " traditional " type of radar presentation.
When the receiver video output is first  processed by an aut'omatic detector or automatic detection and tracking processor (ADT), the  output displayed is sometimes called sytlthetic video.
 The cathode-ray tube (CRT) has been almost universally used as the radar display.
There  are two basic cathode-ray tube displays.
One is the dejection-modulated CRT, such as the  A-scope, in which a target is indicated by the deflection of the electron beam.
The other is the  irltertsit~~-rrrod~~late~i CRT, such as the PPI, in which a target is indicated by intensifying  the electron beam and presenting a luminous spot on the face of the CRT.
In general,  deflection-modulated displays have the advantage of simpler circuits than those of intensity-  modulated displays, and targets may be more readily discerned in the presence of noise or  interference.
On the other hand, intensity-modulated displays have the'advantage of present-  ing data in a convenient and easily interpreted form.
The deflection of the beam or the  appearance of an intensity-modulated spot on a radar display caused by the presence of a  target is commonly referred to as a blip.
.
 ?'he focusing and deflection of the electron beam may be accomplished electrostatically,  electrornagnetically, or by a combination of the two.
Electrostatic deflection CRTs use an  electric field applied to pairs of deflecting electrodes, or plates, to deflect the electron beam.
 Such tubes are usually longer than magnetic tubes, but the overall size, weight, and power  dissipation are less.
Electromagnetic deflection CRTs .require magnetic coils, or deflection  yokes, positioned around the neck of the tube.
They are relatively lossy and require more drive  power than electrostatic devices.
Deflection-modulated CRTs, such as the A-scope, generally  employ electrostatic deflection.
Intensity-modulated CRTs, such as the PPI, generally employ  electromagnetic deflection.
 Magnetically focused tubes utilize either an electromagnet or a permanent magnet around  RECEIVERS.
lJISPLAYS.
ANDDUPLEXERS 353 transmission line.rotaryjoint.duplexer.
receiver protector.
andpreselector filtermightnotbe insignificant.
Insomenonradar applications, asforexample radioastronomy, mostofthese lossycomponents arenotnecessary asth'eyate 'inradar,sothatalownoisefigurefront-end canbeusedeffectively.
However, anextremely lowreceivernoise-figure isnotusuallywarranted inradarbecauseoftheunavoidable RFlossesfoundinmostradars.Evenifthenoisefigureof thereceiver wereessentially 0dB.theoverallreceivernoise-figure wouldstillbeequaltothe lossesintheRFportionofthesystem.
Inamilitary radar,alow-noise receivercanmaketheradarmoresusceptible totheeffects ofdeliberate electronic countermeasures (ECM).Whenpractical.
itmaybepreferred todelib­ eratelyemploy aconventional receiver withmodestsensitivity andtomakeupforthe reducedsensitivity bylargertransmitter power.Thisisnotthemosteconomical waytobuilda radar.butitdoesmakethetaskofthehostileECMdesigner moredifficult.
Avarietyoflow-noise radarreceivers areavailable totheradarsystemdesigner.
The well-recognized benefits oflow-noise receivers, combined withtheirrelativealTordability.
makethemanattractive featureinmodern radardesign.However, low-noise receivers are somctimes accompanied byotherlessdesirable properties thattendtoresultinacompromise inreceivcrperformance.
Thusalow-noise receiver mightnotalwaysbetheobvious selection.
ifproperties otherthansensitivity areimportant.
9.5DISPLAYS Thepurposeofthedisplayistovisuallypresentinaformsuitable foroperator interpretation andactiontheinformation contained intheradarechosignal.Whenthedisplayisconnected directlytothevideooutputofthereceiver.
theinformation displayed iscalledrawvideo.This isthe"traditional." typeofradarpresentation.
Whenthereceiver videooutputisfirst processed byanautomatic detector orautomatic detection andtracking processor (ADT),the outputdisplayed issometimes calledsynthetic video.
Thecathode-ray tube(CRT)hasbeenalmostuniversally usedastheradardisplay.There aretwobasiccathode-ray tubedisplays.
Oneisthedeflection-modulated CRT,suchasthe A-scope.
inwhichatargetisindicated bythedeflection oftheelectron beam.Theotheristhe illtensit,l'-modtllated CRT,suchasthePPI,inwhichatargetisindicated byintensifying theelectron beamandpresenting aluminous spotonthefaceoftheCRT.Ingeneral, deflection-modulated displays havetheadvantage ofsimplercircuitsthanthoseofintensity­ modulated displays, andtargetsmaybemorereadilydiscerned inthepresence ofnoiseor interference.
Ontheotherhand,intensity-modulated displays havethe'advantage ofpresent­ ingdatainaconvenient andeasilyinterpreted form.Thedeflection ofthebeamorthe appearance ofanintensity-modulated spotonaradardisplaycausedbythepresence ofa targetiscommonly referred toasablip.
Thefocusing anddeflection oftheelectron beammaybeaccomplished electrostatically, electromagnetically, orbyacombination ofthetwo.Electrostatic deflection CRTsusean electricfieldappliedtopairsofdeflecting electrodes, orplates,todeflecttheelectron beam.
Suchtubesareusuallylongerthanmagnetic tubes,buttheoverallsize,weight,andpower dissipation areless.Electromagnetic deflection CRTs.require magnetic coils,ordeflection yokes,positioned aroundtheneckofthetube.Theyarerelatively lossyandrequiremoredrive powerthanelectrostatic devices.
Deflection-modulated CRTs,suchastheA-scope, generally employelectrostatic deflection.
Intensity-modulated CRTs,suchasthePPI,generally employ electromagnetic deflection.
Magnetically focusedtubesutilizeeitheranelectromagnet orapermanent magnetaround 354 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  the neck of the CRT to provide an axial magnetic field.
Magnetic focus generally can provide  better resolution, but the spot tends to defocus at the edge of the tube.
 The CRT display is by no means ideal.
It employs a relatively large vacuum tube and the  entire display is often big and can be expensive.
The cost is not simply the tube itself, which is  usually modest, but the various circuits needed to display the desired information and provide  the operator with flexibility.
The amount of information that can be displayed is limited by the  spot size, which in a high-performance display is less than 0.1 percent of the screen diameter."  In some high-range-resolution radars, however, the number of resolvable range cells available  from the radar might be greater than the number of resolution cells available on the PPI  screen.
The result is a collapsing loss (Sec.
2.12).
Increasing the CRT diameter does not  necessarily help, since the spot diameter varies linearly with the screen diameter.
Another  limitation is the dynamic range, or contrast ratio, of an intensity modulated display which is of  the order of 10 dB.
This might cause blooming of the display by large targets so as to mask the  blips from nearby smaller targets.
4  The decay of the visual information displayed on the CRT should be long enough to allow  the operator not to miss target detections, yet short enough not to allow the information  painted on one scan to interfere with the new information entered from the succeeding scan.
'  However, there is usually not sufficient flexibility available to the CRT designer to always  obtain the desired phosphor decay characteristics.
The brilliance of the initial " flash " from the  CRT phosphor may be high, but the afterglow is dim so that it is often necessary to carefully  control both the color and the intensity of the ambient lighting to achieve optimum seeing  conditions.
The conventional CRT usually requires a darkened room or the use of a viewing  hood by the operator.
In spite of the limitations of the conventional CRT display, it is almost  universally used for radar applications.
Many of its limitations can be overcome, but  sometimes with a sacrifice in some other property.
 The ability of an operator to extract information efficiently from a CRT display will  depend on such factors as the brightness of the display, density and character of the back-  ground noise, pulse repetition rate, scan rate of the antenna beam, signal clipping, decay time  of the phosphor, length of time of blip exposure, blip size, viewing distance, ambient illumina-  tion, dark adaptation, display size, and operator fatigue.
Empirical data derived from exper-  imental testing of many of these factors are a~ailable.~'*~~  There has been much interest in applying solid-state technology as a radar display to  replace the vacuum-tube CRT.
Although the light-emitting diode has been too costly and ,  complex to be a general replacement for the CRT, it might be applied when required to display  limited information without the display occupying excessive space, such as in the Distance  from Touchdown Indicator (DFTI) used in aircraft control towers to monitor landing  aircraft.?' Liquid crystal displays which can operate in high ambient lighting conditions have  also been of interest for some special radar requirements, but they also are limited compared  to the capability of a CRT.
The plasma panel has also been considered as a bright radar  display capable of incorporating alphanumeric labels.59  Types of display presentations.
The various types of CRT displays which might be used for  surveillance and tracking radars are defined as follows:  A-scope.
A deflection-modulated display in which the vertical deflection is proportional to target echo  strength and the horizontal coordinate is proportional to range.
 B-scope.
An intensity-modulated rectangular display with azimuth angle indicated by the horizontal  coordinate and range by the vertical coordinate.
 C-scope.
An intensity-modulated rectangular display with azimuth angle indicated by the horizontal  coordinate and elevation angle by the vertical coordinate.
 D-scope.
A C-scope in which the blips extend vertically to give a rough estimate of distance.
 354INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS theneckoftheCRTtoprovideanaxialmagnetic field.Magnetic focusgenerally canprovide betterresolution, butthespottendstodefocusattheedgeofthetube.
TheCRTdisplayisbynomeansideal.Itemploys arelatively largevacuum tubeandthe entiredisplayisoftenbigandcanbeexpensive.
Thecostisnotsimplythetubeitself,whichis usuallymodest,butthevariouscircuitsneededtodisplaythedesiredinformation andprovide theoperator withflexibility.
Theamountofinformation thatcanbedisplayed islimitedbythe spotsize,whichinahigh-performance displayislessthan0.1percentofthescreen diameter.17 Insomehigh-range-resolution radars,however, thenumber ofresolvable rangecellsavailable fromtheradarmightbegreaterthanthenumber ofresolution cellsavailable onthePPI screen.Theresultisacollapsing loss(Sec.2.12).Increasing theCRTdiameter doesnot necessarily help,sincethespotdiameter varieslinearly withthescreendiameter.
Another limitation isthedynamic range,orcontrast ratio,ofanintensity modulated displaywhichisof theorderof10dB.Thismightcauseblooming ofthedisplaybylargetargetssoastomaskthe blipsfromnearbysmallertargets.
..} Thedecayofthevisualinformation displayed ontheCRTshouldbelongenoughtoallow theoperator nottomisstargetdetections, yetshortenoughnottoallowtheinformation paintedononescantointerfere withthenewinformation enteredfromthesucceeding scan.
However, thereisusuallynotsufficient flexibility available totheCRTdesigner toalways obtainthedesiredphosphor decaycharacteristics.
Thebrilliance oftheinitial"flash"fromthe CRTphosphor maybehigh,buttheafterglow isdimsothatitisoftennecessary tocarefully controlboththecolorandtheintensity oftheambient lightingtoachieveoptimum seeing conditions.
Theconventional CRTusuallyrequires adarkened roomortheuseofaviewing hoodbytheoperator.
Inspiteofthelimitations oftheconventional CRTdisplay, itisalmost universally usedforradarapplications.
Manyofitslimitations canbeovercome, but sometimes withasacrifice insomeotherproperty.
Theabilityofanoperator toextractinformation efficiently fromaCRTdisplaywill dependonsuchfactorsasthebrightness ofthedisplay, densityandcharacter oftheback­ groundnoise,pulserepetition rate,scanrateoftheantenna beam,signalclipping, decaytime ofthephosphor, lengthoftimeofblipexposure, blipsize,viewingdistance, ambient illumina­ tion,darkadaptation, displaysize,andoperator fatigue.Empirical dataderivedfromexper­ imentaltestingofmanyofthesefactorsareavailable.28•29 Therehasbeenmuchinterestinapplying solid-state technology asaradardisplayto replacethevacuum-tube CRT.Although thelight-emitting diodehasbeentoocostlyand complex tobeageneralreplacement fortheCRT,itmightbeappliedwhenrequired to1isplay limitedinformation without thedisplayoccupying excessive space,suchasintheDistance fromTouchdown Indicator (DFTI) usedinaircraft control towerstomonitor landing aircraft.
27Liquidcrystaldisplays whichcanoperateinhighambient lightingconditions have alsobeenofinterestforsomespecialradarrequirements, buttheyalsoarelimitedcompared tothecapability ofaCRT.Theplasmapanelhasalsobeenconsidered asabrightradar displaycapableofincorporating alphanumeric labels.S9 Typesofdisplaypresentations.
ThevarioustypesofCRTdisplays whichmightbeusedfor surveillance andtracking radarsaredefinedasfollows: A-scope.Adeflection-modulated displayinwhichtheverticaldeflection isproportional totargetecho strengthandthehorizontal coordinate isproportional torange.
B-scope.
Anintensity-modulated rectangular displaywithazimuthangleindicated bythehorizontal coordinate andrangebytheverticalcoordinate.
C-scope.
Anintensity-modulated rectangular displaywithazimuthangleindicated bythehorizontal coordinate andelevation anglebytheverticalcoordinate.
D-scope.AC-scopeinwhichtheblipsextendvertically togivearoughestimateordistance. RECEIVERS, DISPLAYS, AND DUPLEXERS 355  E-scope.
An intensity-modulated rectangular display with distance indicated by the horizontal coordinate  and elevation angle by the vertical coordinate.
Similar to the RHi in which target height or altitude is  the vertical coordinate.
 f'-Scope A rectangular display in which a target appears as a ceiltralizcd blip when the radar anterlna is  alnled at it.
iiorizontal and vertical aiming errors are respectively indicated by the horizontal and  vertical displacement of the blip.
 G-Scope.
A rectangular display in which a target appears as a laterally centralized blip when the radar  nntenna is ainled a1 it in a7iniuth, and wings appear to grow on the pip as the distance to the target is  dit~lirlished; tlorizori~al and vertical rtillli~lg errors are respectively indicated by llorizotllal and verti-  cal displacement of the blip.
 If-scope.
A B-scope r~lodified to include indication of angle of elevation.
The target appears as two closely  spaced blips which approximate a short bright line, the slope of which is in proportion to the sine of  the angle of target elevation.
 I-scope.
A display in which a target appears as a complete circle when the radar antenna is pointed at it  and in which the radius of the circle is proportional to target distance; incorrect aiming of the  antenna changes the circle to a segment whose arc length is inversely proportional to the magnitude  of the pointing error, and the position of the segment indicates the reciprocal of the pointing  direction of the antenna.
 J-scope.
A modified A-scope in which the time base is a circle and targets appear as radial deflections from  the time base.
 K-scope.
A modified A-scope in which a target appears as a pair of vertical deflections.
When the radar  antenna is correctly pointed at the target, the two deflections are of equal height, and when not so  pointed, the dikrence in deflection amplitude is an indication of the direction and magnitude of the  pointing error.
 L-scope.
A display in which a target appears as two horizontal blips, one extending to the right from a  central vertical time base and the other to the left; both blips are of equal amplitude when the radar is  pointed directly at the target, any inequality representing relative pointing error, and distance  upward along the baseline representing target distance.
 hf-scope.
A type of A-scope in which the target distance is determined by moving an adjustable pedestal  signal along the baseline until it coincides with the horizontal position of the target signal  deflections; the control which moves the pedestal is calibrated in distance.
 N-scope.
A K-scope having an adjustable pedestal signal, as in the M-scope, for the measurement of  distance.
 0-scope.
An A-scope modified by the inclusion of an adjustable notch for measuring distance.
 PPI, or Plan Position Indicator (also called P-scope).
An intensity-modulated circular display on which  echo signals produced from reflecting objects are shown in plan position with range and azimuth  angle displayed in polar (rho-theta) coordinates, forming a map-like display.
An offset, or offcenter,  PPI has the zero position of the time base at a position other than at the center of the display to  provide the equivalent of a larger display for a selected portion of the service area.
A delayed PPl is  one in which the initiation of the time base is delayed.
 R-scope.
An A-scope with a segment of the time base expanded near the blip for greater accuracy in  distanq measurement.
 RNI, or Range-Height Indicator.
An intensity modulated display with height (altitude) as the vertical axis  and range as the horizontal axis.
 The above definitions are taken from the IEEE Standard  definition^,^^ with some  modifications.
The terms A-scope and A-display, B-scope and B-display, etc., are used inter-  changeably.
These letter descriptions of radar displays date back to World War 11.
They are  not all in current usage; however, the PPI, A-scope, B-scope, and RHI are among the more  usual displays employed in radar.
There are also other types of modern radar displays not  included in the above listing which have not been given special letter designations.
These  include the various synthetic and raw video displays with alphanumeric characters and sym-  bols for conveying additional information directly on the display.
 CRT scream.
A number of different cathode-ray-tube screens are used in radar applications.
 They differ primarily in their decay times and persistence.
The properties of some of the  nhosphors which have been used in radar CRTs are listed in Table 9.1.
The degree of image  RECEIVERS, DISPLAYS, ANDDUPLEXERS 355 E-scope.
Anintensity-modulated rectangular displaywithdistance indicated bythehorizontal coordinate andelevation anglebytheveHital coordinate: SimilartotheRHfinwhichtargetheightoraltitudeis theverticalcoordinate.
['-Scope.
Arectangular displayinwhichatargetappears asacentralized blipwhentheradarantenna is aimedatit.Horizontal andverticalaimingerrorsarerespectively indicated bythehorizontal and verticaldisplacement oftheblip.
G-Scope.
Arectangular displayinwhichatargetappears asalaterally centralized blipwhentheradar antenna isaimedatitinazimuth.
andwingsappeartogrowonthepipasthedistance tothetargetis diminished; horizontal andverticalaimingerrorsarerespectively indicated byhorizontallllH.I verti­ caldisplacement oftheblip.
II-scope.
AB-scope modified toincludeindication ofangleofelevation.
Thetargetappearsastwoclosely spacedblipswhichapproximate ashortbrightline,theslopeofwhichisinproportion tothesineof theangleoftargetelevation.
I-scope.Adisplayinwhichatargetappears asacomplete circlewhentheradarantenna ispointedatit andinwhichtheradiusofthecircleisproportional totargetdistance; incorrect aimingofthe antenna changes thecircletoasegment whosearclengthisinversely proportional tothemagnitude ofthepointing error,andtheposition ofthesegment indicates thereciprocal ofthepointing direction oftheantenna.
J-5cope.
Amodified A-scope inwhichthetimebaseisacircleandtargetsappearasradialdeflections from thetimebase.
K-scope.Amodified A-scope inwhichatargetappears asapairofverticaldeflections.
Whentheradar antenna iscorrectly pointedatthetarget,thetwodeflections areofequalheight,andwhennotso pointed, thedifference indeflection amplitude isanindication ofthedirection andmagnitude ofthe pointing error.
L-scope.
Adi~playinwhichatargetappears astwohorizontal blips,oneextending totherightfroma centralverticaltimebaseandtheothertotheleft;bothblipsareofequalamplitude whentheradaris pointed directly atthetarget,anyinequality representing relative pointing error,anddistance upwardalongthebaseline representing targetdistance.
M-scope.
AtypeofA-scope inwhichthetargetdistance isdetermined bymovinganadjustable pedestal signalalongthebaseline untilitcoincides withthehorizontal position ofthetargetsignal deflections; thecontrolwhichmovesthepedestal iscalibrated indistance.
N-scope.AK-scope havinganadjustable pedestal signa~asintheM-scope, forthemeasurement of distance.
O-scope.
AnA-scope modified bytheinclusion ofanadjustable notchformeasuring distance.
PPI,orPlanPositionIndicator (alsocalledP-scope).
Anintensity-modulated circular displayonwhich echosignalsproduced fromreflecting objectsareshowninplanposition withrangeandazimuth angledisplayed inpolar(rho-theta) coordinates, forming amap-like display.
Anoffset,oroffcenter, PPIhasthezeroposition ofthetimebaseataposition otherthanatthecenterofthedisplayto provide theequivalent ofalargerdisplayforaselectedportionoftheservicearea.AdelayedPPIis oneinwhichtheinitiation ofthetimebaseisdelayed.
R-scope.
AnA-scope withasegment ofthetimebaseexpanded neartheblipforgreateraccuracy in distancr measurement.
RHI,orRange-Height Indicator.
Anintensity modulated displaywithheight(altitude) astheverticalaxis andrangeasthehorizontal axis.
Theabovedefinitions aretakenfromtheIEEEStandard Definitions,23 withsome modifications.
ThetermsA-scope andA-display, B-scopeandB-display, etc.,areusedinter­ changeably.
Theseletterdescriptions ofradardisplays datebacktoWorldWarII.Theyare notallincurrentusage;however, thePPI,A-scope, B-scope, andRHIareamongthemore usualdisplays employed inradar.Therearealsoothertypesofmodernradardisplays not included intheabovelistingwhichhavenotbeengivenspecialletterdesignations.
These includethevarioussynthetic andrawvideodisplays withalphanumeric characters andsym­ bolsforconveying additional information directlyonthedisplay.
CRTscreem.
Anumberofdifferent cathode-ray-tube screensareusedinradarapplications.
Theydifferprimarily intheirdecaytimesandpersistence.
Theproperties ofsomeofthe ohosphors whichhavebeenusedinradarCRTsarelistedinTable9.1.Thedegreeofimage persistence required in a cathode-ray-tube screen depends upon the application.
A long-  persistence screen such as the PI9 is appropriate for PPI presentations where the frar~le times  are on the order of several seconds.
On the other hand, where no persistence is needed, as when  the frame time is less than the response time of the eye (0.1 s or less), a PI phospl~or niight he  used.
The PI phosphor is commonly found in most A-scope presentations.
 In order to achieve long decay times a two-layer, or cascade, screen is sometimes used, as  in the P7 or the P14.
The first phosphor layer emits an intense light of short duration when  excited by the electron beam.
The light from the initial flash excites the second layer, emitting a  persistent luminescence.
The tandem action of the cascade screen results in greater efficiency  than if the second, long-persistence layer had been excited by the electron beam directly,  instead of by light emitted from the first layer.
In the P14 screen, the initial flash of short  duration from the first screen is blue in color and the persistent light radiated by the second  screen is orange.
An orange filter placed across the face of the tube eliminates the flash and  leaves only the long-persistent trace.
If a blue filter were used instead, the afterglow of  the second layer wouid be removed, leaving only the short-duration flash.
Thus a single  cascade screen can give either a short or a long persistence display, depending upon the filter  employed.
 In Table 9.1 the color emitted by the screen during both fluorescence (short duration) and  phosphorescence (long duration) is given.
In general terms, fluorescence may be thought of as  luminescence which ceases almost immediately upon removal of the excitation, whereas in  phosphorescence the luminescence persists.
Cascaded screens produce different colors under  fluorescence or phosphorescence.
 Not all longduration screens need be cascade.
The P 19 is a single-component phosphor  with long persistence and no flash.
If extremely long persistence is desired in a cathode-ray-tube  display, a storage tube may be used.
For all practical purposes, an image placed on a storage  tube will remain indefinitely until erased.
 Table 9.1 Radar CRT phosphor characteristics (after   erg^^)  Phosphor Fluorescent color Phosphorescent color Persistence*  P 1 Yellowish green Yellowish green Medium  P7 Blue Yellowish green Blue, medium short;  yellow, long  PI2 Orange Orange Long  P13 Reddish orange Reddish orange Medium  P14 Purplish blxe Yellowish orange Blue, medium short;  yellowish orange, medium  P 17 Blue Yellow Blue, short; yellow, long  PI9 Orange Orange Long  P2 1 Reddish orange Reddish orange Medium  P25 Orange Orange Medium  P26 Orange Orange Very long  P28 Yellowish green Yellowish green Long  P3 2 Purplish blue Yellowish green Long  P3 3 Orange Orange Very long  P34 Bluish green Yellowish green Very long  P38 Orange Orange Very long  P39 Yellowish green Yellowish green Long  * Persistence to 10 percent level: short = 1 to 10 ps; medium short = 10 ps to I ms;  medium = 1 to 100 ms; long = 100 ms to 1 s; very long = > 1 s.
 356INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS persistence required inacathode-ray-tube screendepends upontheapplication.
Along­ persistence screensuchastheP19isappropriate ,forPPI presentations wheretheframetimes areontheorderofseveralseconds.
Ontheotherhand,wherenopersistence isneeded,aswhen theframetimeislessthantheresponse timeoftheeye(0.1sorless),aPIphosphor mighthe used.ThePIphosphor iscommonly foundinmostA-scope presentations.
Inordertoachievelongdecaytimesatwo-layer, orcascade, screenissometimes used,as intheP7ortheP14.Thefirstphosphor layeremitsanintenselightofshortduration when excitedbytheelectron beam.Thelightfromtheinitialflashexcitesthesecondlayer,emitting a persistent luminescence.
Thetandemactionofthecascade screenresultsingreaterefficiency thanifthesecond, long-persistence layerhadbeenexcitedbytheelectron beamdirectly, insteadofbylightemitted fromthefirstlayer.IntheP14screen,theinitialflashofshort duration fromthefirstscreenisblueincolorandthepersistent lightradiated bythesecond screenisorange.Anorangefilterplacedacrossthefaceofthetubeeliminates theflashand leavesonlythelong-persistent trace.Ifabluefilterwereusedinstead,thepersisterlt afterglow of thesecondlayerwou1dberemoved, leavingonlytheshort-duration flash.Thusasingle cascadescreencangiveeitherashortoralongpersistence display,depending uponthefilter employed.
InTable9.1thecoloremittedbythescreenduringbothfluorescence (shortduration) and phosphorescence (longduration) isgiven.Ingeneralterms,fluorescence maybethoughtoras luminescence whichceasesalmostimmediately uponremoval oftheexcitation, whereas in phosphorescence theluminescence persists.
Cascaded screensproduce different colorsunder fluorescence orphosphorescence.
Notalliong-duration screensneedbecascade.
TheP19isasingle-component phosphor withlongpersistence andnoflash.Ifextremely longpersistence isdesiredinacathode-ray-tube display,astoragetubemaybeused.Forallpractical purposes, animageplacedonastorage tubewillremainindefinitely untilerased.
Table9.1RadarCRTphosphor characteristics (afterBerg26) Phosphor Fluorescent color Phosphorescent color Persistence· PI Yellowish green Yellowish green Medium P7 Blue Yellowish green Blue,medium short; yellow,long P12 Orange Orange Long Pl3 Reddish orange Reddishorange Medium Pl4 Purplishbbe Yellowish orange Blue,medium short; yellowish orange,medium Pl7 Blue Yellow Blue,short;yellow,long Pl9 Orange Orange Long P21 Reddish orange Reddish orange Medium P25 Orange Orange Medium P26 Orange Orange Verylong P28 Yellowish green Yellowish green Long P32 Purplish blue Yellowish green Long P33 Orange Orange Verylong P34 Bluishgreen Yellowish green Verylong P38 Orange Orange Verylong P39 Yellowish green Yellowish green Long •Persistence to10percent level:short=1to10Jls;medium short=10Jlsto1ms; medium=1to100ms;long=100msto1s;verylong=>1s. RECEIVERS, DISPLAYS, AND DUPLEXERS 357  Resolution on the CRT is lirnited by the phosphor characteristics as well as the electron  beam.
A double-layer phosphor will have poorer resolution that a single-layer phosphor.
 Color CRTs.
The availability of color cathode-ray tubes provides another "dimension" for  the display of target inforrnat ion.
Target altitude, cross section, or identity might be color  coded.
The outputs from more than one radar or the outputs from each beam of a stacked-  beam radar may be displayed on the same CRT in different color, as can alphanumeric data  or synibols.
Color can be an "atterition-getter," arid can improve the accuracy of recognition.
 In an M'I'I radar with a syr~tl~etic-video display that presents only moving targets, the clutter  that is rejected (tlie raw video) can be superimposed on the display by showing it in a  diffcrr~it color tIi;111 tlie sy~ithet ic-video targets.
(The display of weather clutter is of importance  to Ilie air traflic cor~troller to avoid directing aircraft to areas of severe weather.
TIie display  of land clutter is also of importance in some applications so as to provide reference landmarks.)  lri pririciple.
availability of color allows an intensity-modulated CRT, which is normally of  lir~iited dyriai~iic range, to display target amplitude informatiori by color coding the target blip  according to the magnitude of the target cross section.
Studies show that three or perhaps  four colors is the optimum number for color display appli~ation.~~*~~ A particular four-color  display tested for air-traffic-control radar utilized yellow to present the aircraft data blocks,  gteen for the area-sector map lines, red for navigation aids, and orange for showing  pre~ipitation.~ '  The tricolor shadow-mask cathode-ray tube commonly used for color television has a  pliosphor screen that consists of a series of three color dots.
Although it may be well suited  for comniercial TV, it is not always a good display for radar since its resolution is limited  by the size and spacing of the dots.
Another color CRT of interest to radar is the penetration  color rtrhe using a multi-layer screen.
The color is controlled by the anode voltage which  determines the depth of penetration of the electron beam into a series of phosphor layers.
 Varying the anode voltage varies the depth of penetration and the particular phosphor layer  that is excited.
Typically, the difference between penetration of the layers is about 4 kV per  lay~r.~" A single-electrorl-gull, bicolor penetration-CRT, for example, might employ a layer of  red phosphor and a layer of green separated by a layer of transparent dielectric materia1.26.27  At low ancde voltage (6 kV) the red pliosphor is excited.
At high voltage (12 kV), the  green phosphor is excited.
With intermediate voltages, yellow and orange can be obtained,  giving a total of four dinerent colors which can be distinguished.
This method of color  excitation permits better resolution to be obtained than with conventional TV color tubes.
 The range ofcolors available is not as great as with a color TV tube, but in many information-  display applications it is sufficient.
 A similar technique using anode-voltage control with two phosphors having the same  color but different decay times can provide a CRT display with variable persistence.
It is also  possible to achieve a multicolor tube with variable persistence.
 Although color displays may be pleasing and attractive to the operator, the applications  in which they have proven superior to properly coded monochromatic displays apparently  are fewer in number than might have been anticipated."  Bright displays.
There are applications where it is not possible or convenient to use the  conventional CRT display that requires a darkened environment; such as in the cockpit of an  aircraft or an airfield control tower.
One form of bright display is the direct-view storage  t~ihe." It riot otily operates under ambient light conditions, but it can provide a variable  persistence.
In this device, neither the brightness nor the persistence is directly affected by the  short duration of the video signal, or by the characteristic of the viewing-screen phosphor.
 RECEIVERS, DISPLAYS, ANDDUPLEXERS 357 Resolution ontheCRTislimitedbythephosphor characteristics aswellastheelectron beam.Adouble-layer phosphor willhavepoorerresolution thatasingle-layer phosphor.
ColorCRTs.Theavailability ofcolorcathode-ray tubesprovides another "dimension" for thedisplayoftargetinformation.
Targetaltitude, crosssection,oridentity mightbecolor coded.Theoutputs frommorethanoneradarortheoutputs fromeachbeamofastacked­ beamradarmaybedisplayed onthesameCRTindifferent color,ascanalphanumeric data orsymhols.
Colorcanbean"attention-getter," andcanimprove theaccuracy ofrecognition.
IIIanMTIradarwithasynthetic-video displaythatpresents onlymovingtargets,theclutter thatisrejected (therawvideo)canbesuperimposed onthedisplay byshowing itina difTcrcl1tcolorthanthesynthetic-videotargets.(Thedisplayofweatherclutterisofimportance totheairtrafficcontroller toavoiddirecting aircrafttoareasofsevereweather.
Thedisplay oflandclutterisalsoofimportance insomeapplications soastoprovidereference landmarks.) Inprinciple.
availability ofcolorallowsanintensity-modulated CRT,whichisnormally of limiteddynamic range,todisplaytargetamplitude information bycolorcodingthetargetblip according tothemagnitude ofthetargetcrosssection.
Studiesshowthatthreeorperhaps fourcolorsistheoptimum number forcolordisplayapplication.s7,58Aparticular four-color displaytestedforair-traffic-control radarutilizedyellowtopresenttheaircraftdatablocks, gleenforthearea-sector maplines,redfornavigation aids,andorange forshowing precipitation.61 Thetricolorshadow-mask cathode-ray tubecommonly usedforcolortelevision hasa phosphor screenthatconsists ofaseriesofthreecolordots.Although itmaybewellsuited forcommercial TV.itisnotalwaysagooddisplayforradarsinceitsresolution islimited bythesizeandspacingofthedots.Another colorCRTofinteresttoradaristhepenetration color(liheusingamulti-layer screen.Thecoloriscontrolled bytheanodevoltagewhich determines thedepthofpenetration oftheelectron beamintoaseriesofphosphor layers.
Varying theanodevoltagevariesthedepthofpenetration andtheparticular phosphor layer thatisexcited.Typically, thedifference between penetration ofthelayersisabout4kVper layer.·,nAsingle-electron-gun.
bicolorpenetration-CRT, forexample, mightemployalayerof redphosphor andalayerofgreenseparated byalayeroftransparent dielectric materiaJ.26.2 7 Atlowanodevoltage(6kV)theredphosphor isexcited.
Athighvoltage(12kV),the greenphosphor isexcited.
Withintermediate voltages, yellowandorangecanbeobtained, givingatotaloffourdifferent colorswhichcanbedistinguished.
Thismethod ofcolor excitation permitsbetterresolution tobeobtained thanwithconventional TVcolortubes.
Therangeorcolors available isnotasgreataswithacolorTVtube,butinmanyinformation­ displayapplications itissufficient.
Asimilartechnique usinganode-voltage controlwithtwophosphors havingthesame colorbutdifferent decaytimescanprovideaCRTdisplaywithvariable persistence.
Itisalso possible toachieveamulticolor tubewithvariable persistence.
Although colordisplays maybepleasing andattractive totheoperator, theapplications inwhichtheyhaveprovensuperior toproperly codedmonochromatic displays apparently arefewerinnumber thanmighthavebeenanticipated.58 Brightdisplays.
Thereareapplications whereitisnotpossible orconvenient tousethe conventional CRTdisplaythatrequires adarkened environment; suchasinthecockpitofan aircraftoranairfieldcontrol tower.Oneformofbrightdisplay isthedirect-view storage ("he.31Itnotonlyoperates underambient lightconditions, butitcanprovide avariable persistence.
Inthisdevice,neitherthebrightness northepersistence isdirectlyaffected bythe shortduration ofthevideosignal,orbythecharacteristic oftheviewing-screen phosphor. 358 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  The storage tube uses two electron beams generated by separate electron guns.
One is a  writing beam.
The other is a flood beam that permits a bright, persistent display of the  information carried by the writing beam.
The writing beam does not impinge directly on the  viewing screen as in a conventional CRT.
It strikes a storage mesh, mounted just behind the  screen, made up of a thin film of insulator material deposited on a metallic backing electrode.
 The insulator, which is the storage medium, is illuminated continuously by a "flood" beam.
 When illuminated by the writing beam, charge is stored on the insulator surface because of  its secondary emission characteristics.
The information written on the insulator storage  surface forms a charge pattern that is made visible by the action of the flood beam.
At those  points where the action of the writing beam reduces the potential of the storage medium  sufficiently, the electrons from the flood beam are allowed to pass through and reach the  viewing screen.
The display is continuous since the phosphor is continuously excited in the  written areas by the flood beam.
3  A resolution of about 80 lines per inch with a screen brightness of 200 foot-lamberts  can be obtained.
The persistence can be varied from a fraction of a second to several  minutes, or 10nger.~' From five to seven gray-scale ranges are typical.2b The direct-view  storage tube can also be obtained with two colors and the shades in between."  The direct-view storage tube generally is capable of less resolution than a conventional  CRT.
Also, the continuous buildup on the storage medium of strong, fixed clutter echoes  when the persistence is long can result in a loss of picture quality due to a loss of resolution  and a loss of contrast caused by the brightening of the dark area immediately surrounding  the blip.
 Another method for achieving a bright display is the scan converter.
The output of a  normal PPI display is stored in either an analog or digital storage medium, and the stored  information is read out and displayed on a conventional TV monit~r.~~.~~.~~ The conversion  of the radial rho-theta raster of the PPI to the rectangular raster of the TV represents a  "scan conversion," hence the name.
)The stored display may be read out repetitively to  produce a bright flicker-free display.
The display is bright not only because the stored  information is displayed at a sufficiently high repetition rate to appear conlin~ious, bill  also because TV monitors with typical brightness of 50 to 100 foot-lamberts are inherently  brighter than the conventional CRT display.
 One type of storage device that has been used in scan converters is a double-ended  storage tube with two electron guns, one on each side of a charge-storage surface.32 The  radar output is written in PPI format by one electron gun on one side of the charge-storage  surface.
The second gun, on the other side of the storage surface, reads the stored charge  pattern with a TV raster.
The video outputs of several different radars, each with their own  scan converter, can be combined on a single TV display.
Use of the scan converter permits  the convenient display of data from radars with different antenna rotation rates witholrt tht:  confusion produced by generating different rotation rates on the PPI.
The complete displays  of each radar or selected sectors from each radar can be combined as desired so that the TV  display presents the available information in the best possible manner without including the  sectors of those radars with poor or no data.
Radar video clutter-maps or computer-generated  information can also be combined on the TV display.
A disadvantage of this form of scan  converter is its low resolution.
 A digital memory can be used as the storage device in a scan converter to overcome  the limitations of the analog storage tube.
 Rear Port.
This is a flat plate-glass window in the cone of a cathode-ray tube aligned to be  parallel to the tube It allows slide or film information to be projected onto the  358INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS Thestoragetubeusestwo electron beamsgenerated byseparate electron guns.Oneisa writingbeam.Theotherisafloodbeamthatpermits abright;persistent displayofthe information carriedbythewritingbeam.Thewritingbeamdoesnotimpinge directlyonthe viewingscreenasinaconventional CRT.Itstrikesastoragemesh,mounted justbehindthe screen,madeupofathinfilmofinsulator material deposited onametallic backingelectrode.
Theinsulator, whichisthestoragemedium, isilluminated continuously bya..flood"beam.
Whenilluminated bythewritingbeam,chargeisstoredontheinsulator surfacebecause of itssecondary emission characteristics.
Theinformation writtenontheinsulator storage surfaceformsachargepatternthatismadevisiblebytheactionofthefloodbeam.Atthose pointswheretheactionofthewritingbeamreducesthepotential ofthestoragemedium sufficiently, theelectrons fromthefloodbeamareallowed topassthrough andreachthe viewingscreen.Thedisplayiscontinuous sincethephosphor iscontinuously excitedinthe writtenareasbythefloodbeam.
.J Aresolution ofabout80linesperinchwithascreenbrightness of200foot-lamberts canbeobtained.
Thepersistence canbevariedfromafraction ofasecondtoseveral minutes, orlonger.31Fromfivetosevengray-scale rangesaretypical.26Thedirect-view storagetubecanalsobeobtained withtwocolorsandtheshadesinbetween.3o Thedirect-view storagetubegenerally iscapableoflessresolution thanaconventional CRT.Also,thecontinuous buildup onthestoragemedium ofstrong,fixedclutterechoes whenthepersistence islongcanresultinalossofpicturequalityduetoalossofresolution andalossofcontrast causedbythebrightening ofthedarkareaimmediately surrounding theblip.
.
Another methodforachieving abrightdisplayisthescanconverter.
Theoutputofa normalPPIdisplayisstoredineitherananalogordigitalstoragemedium, andthestored information isreadoutanddisplayed onaconventional TVmonitor.26.32.33 Theconversion oftheradialrho-theta rasterofthePPItotherectangular rasteroftheTVrepresents a "scanconversion," hencethename.,Thestoreddisplaymaybereadoutrepetitively to produce abrightflicker-free display., Thedisplay isbrightnotonlybecause thestored information isdisplayed atasufficiently highrepetition ratetoappearcontinuous, btit alsobecauseTVmonitors withtypicalbrightness of50to100foot-Iamberts areinherently brighter thantheconventional CRTdisplay.
Onetypeofstoragedevicethathasbeenusedinscanconverters isadouble-ended storagetubewithtwoelectron guns,oneoneachsideofacharge-storage surface.32The radaroutputiswritteninPPIformatbyoneelectron gunononesideofthecharge-storage surface.Thesecondgun,ontheothersideofthestoragesurface, readsthestoredcharge patternwithaTVraster.Thevideooutputsofseveraldifferent radars,eachwiththeirown scanconverter, canbecombined onasingleTVdisplay.
Useofthescanconverter permits theconvenient displayofdatafromradarswithdifferent antenna rotation rateswithoutthe confusion produced bygenerating different rotation ratesonthePPI.Thecomplete displays ofeachradarorselectedsectorsfromeachradarcanbecombined asdesiredsothattheTV displaypresents theavailable information inthebestpossible mannerwithout including the sectorsofthoseradarswithpoorornodata.Radarvideoclutter-maps orcomputer-generated information canalsobecombined ontheTVdisplay.
Adisadvantage ofthisformofscan converter isitslowresolution.
, Adigitalmemory canbeusedasthestoragedeviceinascanconverter toovercome thelimitations oftheanalogstoragetube.
.
..
RearPort.Thisisaflatplate-glass window intheconeofacathode-ray tubealignedtobe paralleltothetubefaceplate.34,S?Itallowsslideorfilminformation tobeprojected ontothe RECEIVERS, DISPLAYS, AND DUPLEXERS 359  back of the tube phosphor, or it can be used to photograph the display without interfering  with the operator.
The CRT phosphor doubles as an optical and an electronic screen to give  the operator a mixed presentation viewed in the usual manner from the front.
 Synthetic-video ~is~la~s.~~~~~~~~ The use of a digital computer, as in an automatic detection  and tracking processor.
to extract target information results in a synthetic display in which  target informatiorl is preserited wit11 standard symbols and accompanying alphanumerics.
 This is especially useful in an air-traffic-control display in which such information as target  ide~ltity a~id altitude is desired to be displayed.
The positions of targets on a predeterniiried  number of previous scans might be shown on a synthetic display, or a line might be generated  tb indicate the direction of the target's trajectory and the target's speed.
(The length of the  line can be made proportional to target speed.) The use of a computer to generate the  grapllicq arid coritrol the CRT display offers flexibility in the choice of such things as range  scales, olfcenter displ;ty, blow-up of selected areas, physical map outlines, grid displays, airport  runways, stored clutter map, raw video, outlines of areas of weather blanked by the operator,  tlispiay of stored flight plans, arid time-compressed display of several successive radar scans.
 Also it can aid in the requesting of height-finder data by the operator, blanking of areas  coritaining excessive interference or weather, providing training of operators by superimposing  sinlulated targets, and otller futictions necessary for an air-traffic-control system or air-defense  system.
The operator can conirnunicate in an interactive manner with the computer by such  means as a keyboard, light pen, track ball, or even voice entry.
Sometimes an auxiliary  CRT display is mounted adjacent to the main radar display to provide tabular data and  other information that would otherwise clutter the main display.
 The characters and symbols that constitute the synthetic information may be inserted  on a CRT during the radar dead time at the end of the sweep prior to the triggering of the  next pulse.
In some situations there might be too much information to be fully inserted  during the available dead time.
In a long-range air-traffic-control radar located in a busy area  there might be more than a hundred targets for display extracted.
For each target the  necessary information to be presented might consist of perhaps ten alphanumeric characters  and a number of line segments.35 When the amount of data is large, writing time might  have to be taken from the radar time by blanking one out of every n sweeps or writing the  synthetic information during a random interruption of the sweep.
It is also possible to utilize  a second electron gun in the CRT to minimize the amount of time taken from the radar to  insert the synthetic data.
Another method for achieving the necessary time to display alpha-  numeric data is to store the video in a shift register and then read it out at a higher rate.
 The CCD, or charge coupled device, is one possibility as a shift register.
 The data on the synthetic display must be refreshed at a sufficiently high rate to obtain  a Iiigh brightness and to avoid flicker.
When a number of displays are used with the output  of a single radar, a dedicated minicomputer can be used at each display position for the  refresh of data so as to reduce the data-transfer rate from the radar central processor.
 9.6 DUPLEXEHS AND RECEIVER PROTECTORS  The duplexer is the device that allows a single antenna to serve both the transmitter and the  receiver.
On transmission it must protect the receiver from burnout or damage, and on  reception it must channel the echo signal to the receiver.
Duplexers, especially for high-power  applications, sometimes employ a form of gas-discharge device.
Solid-state devices are also  utilized.
In a typical duplexer application the transmitter peak power might be a megawatt or  RECEIVERS, DISPLAYS, ANDDUPLEXERS 359 backofthetubephosphor, oritcanbeusedtophotograph thedisplaywithout interfering withtheoperator.
TheCRTphosphordoublesasarloptical andanelectronic screentogive theoperator amixedpresentation viewedintheusualmanner fromthefront.
Synthetic-video Displa~'s,26.35.36 Theuseofadigitalcomputer, asinanautomatic detection andtracking processor, toextracttargetinformation resultsinasynthetic displayinwhich targetinformation ispresented withstandard symbols andaccompanying alphanumerics.
Thisisespecially usefulinanair-trame-control displayinwhichsuchinformation astarget identityandaltitude isdesiredtobedisplayed.
Thepositions oftargetsonapredetermined numberofprevious scansmightbeshownonasynthetic display,oralinemightbegenerated toindicate thedirection ofthetarget'strajectory andthetarget'sspeed.(Thelengthofthe linecanbemadeproportional totargetspeed.)Theuseofacomputer togenerate the graphics andcontroltheCRTdisplayoffersl1exibility inthechoiceofsuchthingsasrange scales,olTcellter display,blow-up ofselectedareas,physicalmapoutlines, griddisplays, airport runways.
storedcluttermap,rawvideo,outlinesofareasofweather blanked bytheoperator, displayofstorednightplans,andtime-compressed displayofseveralsuccessive radarscans.
Alsoitcanaidintherequesting ofheight-finder databytheoperator, blanking ofareas containing excessive interference orweather, providing trainingofoperators bysuperimposing simulated targets,andotherfunctions necessary foranair-traffic-control systemorair-defense system.Theoperator cancommunicate inaninteractive manner withthecomputer bysuch meansasakeyboard, lightpen,trackball,orevenvoiceentry.Sometimes anauxiliary CRTdisplay ismounted adjacent tothemainradardisplaytoprovide tabulardataand otherinformation thatwouldotherwise clutterthemaindisplay.
Thecharacters andsymbols thatconstitute thesynthetic information maybeinserted onaCRTduringtheradardeadtimeattheendofthesweeppriortothetriggering ofthe nextpulse.Insomesituations theremightbetoomuchinformation tobefullyinserted duringtheavailable deadtime.Inalong-range air-traffic-control radarlocatedinabusyarea theremightbemorethanahundred targetsfordisplay extracted.
Foreachtargetthe necessary information tobepresented mightconsistofperhaps tenalphanumeric characters andanumber oflinesegments.J5Whentheamount ofdataislarge,writingtimemight havetobetakenfromtheradartimebyblanking oneoutofeverynsweepsorwritingthe synthetic information duringarandom interruption ofthesweep.Itisalsopossible toutilize asecondelectron gunintheCRTtominimize theamount oftimetakenfromtheradarto insertthesynthetic data.Another methodforachieving thenecessary timetodisplayalpha­ numeric dataistostorethevideoinashiftregisterandthenreaditoutatahigherrate.
TheCCD,orchargecoupled device,isonepossibility asashiftregister.
Thedataonthesynthetic displaymustberefreshed atasufficiently highratetoobtain ahighbrightness andtoavoidl1icker.Whenanumberofdisplays areusedwiththeoutput ofasingleradar,adedicated minicomputer canbeusedateachdisplayposition forthe refreshofdatasoastoreducethedata-transfer ratefromtheradarcentralprocessor.
9.6DVPLEXERS ANDRECEIVER PROTECTORS Theduplexer isthedevicethatallowsasingleantenna toserveboththetransmitter andthe receiver.
Ontransmission itmustprotectthereceiver fromburnout ordamage, andon reception itmustchannel theechosignaltothereceiver.
Duplexers, especially forhigh-power applications, sometimes employ aformofgas-discharge device.Solid-state devicesarealso utilized.
Inatypicalduplexer application thetransmitter peakpowermightbeamegawatt or 360 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  more and the maximum safe power that can be tolerated at the receiver might be less than a  watt.
Therefore, the duplexer must provide, in this example, more than 60 dB of isolation  between the transmitter and receiver with only negligible loss of the desired signal.
In addition,  during the interpulse period or when the radar is shut down, the receiver must be protected  from high-power radiation, as from nearby radars, that might enter the radar antenna with less  power than that needed to activate the duplexer, but with greater power than can be safely  handled by the receiver.
 There have been two basic methods employed that allow the use of a common antenna  for both transmitting and receiving.
The older method is represented by the branch-type du-  plexer and the balanced duplexer which utilize gas TR-tubes for accomplishing the necessary  switching actions.
The other method uses a ferrite circulator to separate the transmitter  and receiver, and a receiver protector consisting of a gas TR-tube and diode limiter.
 4 Branch-type duplexers.
The branch-type duplexer, diagrammed in Fig.
9.5 was one of the  earliest duplexer configurations employed.
It consists of a TR (transmit-receive) switch and an  ATR (anti-transmit receive) switch, both of which are gas-discharge tubes.
When the transmit-  ter is turned on, the TR and the ATR tubes ionize; that is, they break down, or fire.
The TK in  the fired condition acts as a short circuit to prevent transmitter power from entering the  receiver.
Since the TR is located a quarter wavelength from the main transmission line, it  appears as a short circuit at the receiver but as an open circuit at the transmission line so that  it does not impede the flow of transmitter power.
Since the ATR is displaced a quarter  wavelength from the main transmission line, the short circuit it produces during the fired  condition appears as an open circuit on the transmission line and thus has no effect on  transmission.
 During reception, the transmitter is off and neither the TR nor the ATR is fired.
The open  circuit of the ATR, being a quarter wave from the transmission line, appears as a short circuit  across the line.
Since this short circuit is located a quarter wave from the receiver branch-line,  the transmitter is effectively disconnected from the line and the echo signal power is directed to  the receiver.
The diagram of Fig.
9.5 is a parallel configuration.
Series or series-parallel  configurations are po~sible.~'  The branch-type duplexer is of limited bandwidth and power-handling capability, and has  generally been replaced by the balanced duplexer and other protection devices.
It is used, in  spite of these limitations, in some low-cost radars.
 Balanced duplexers.
The balanced duplexer, Fig.
9.6, is based on the short-slot hybrid junction  which consists of two sections of waveguides joined along one of their narrow walls with a slot  cut in the common narrow wall to provide coupling between the tw0.~9he short-slot hybrid  Antenna  Figure 9.5 Principle of branch-type duplexer.
 360INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS moreandthemaximum safepowerthatcanbetolerated atthereceiver mightbelessthana watt.Therefore, theduplexer mustprovide, inthisexample, morethan60dBofisolation between thetransmitter andreceiverwithonlynegligible lossofthedesiredsignal.Inaddition, duringtheinterpulse periodorwhentheradarisshutdown,thereceiver mustbeprotected fromhigh-power radiation, asfromnearbyradars,thatmightentertheradarantenna withless powerthanthatneededtoactivate theduplexer, butwithgreaterpowerthancanbesafely handled bythereceiver.
Therehavebeentwobasicmethods employed thatallowtheuseofacommon antenna forbothtransmitting andreceiving.
Theoldermethod isrepresented bythebranch-type du­ plexerandthebalanced duplexer whichutilizegasTR-tubes foraccomplishing thenecessary switching actions.
Theothermethod usesaferritecirculator toseparate thetransmitter andreceiver, andareceiver protector consisting ofagasTR-tube anddiodelimiter.
..} Branch-type duplexers.
Thebranch-type duplexer, diagrammed inFig.9.5wasoneofthe earliestduplexer configurations employed.
ItconsistsofaTR(transmit-receive) switchandan ATR(anti-transmit receive)switch,bothofwhicharegas-discharge tubes.Whenthetransmit­ teristurnedon,theTRandtheATRtubesionize;thatis,theybreakdown,orfire.TheTRin thefiredcondition actsasashortcircuittoprevent transmitter powerfromentering the receiver.
SincetheTRislocatedaquarter wavelength fromthemaintransmission line,it appears asashortcircuitatthereceiverbutasanopencircuitatthetransmission linesothat itdoesnotimpedetheflowoftransmitter power.SincetheATRisdisplaced aquarter wavelength fromthemaintransmission line,theshortcircuititproduces duringthefired condition appears asanopencircuitonthetransmission lineandthushasnoeffecton transmission.
Duringreception, thetransmitter isoffandneithertheTRnortheATRisfired.Theopen circuitoftheATR,beingaquarterwavefromthetransmission line,appears asashoftcircuit acrosstheline.Sincethisshortcircuitislocatedaquarterwavefromthereceiverbranch-line, thetransmitter iseffectively disconnected fromthelineandtheechosignalpowerisdirected to thereceiver.
Thediagram ofFig.9.5isaparallel configuration.
Seriesorseries-parallel configurations arepossible.37 Thebranch-type duplexer isoflimited bandwidth andpower-handling capability, andhas generally beenreplaced bythebalanced duplexer andotherprotection devices.Itisused,in spiteoftheselimitations, insomelow-cost radars.
Balanced duplexers.
Thebalanced duplexer, Fig.9.6,isbasedontheshort-slot hybridjunction whichconsistsoftwosections ofwaveguides joinedalongoneoftheirnarrowwallswithaslot cutinthecommon narrowwalltoprovidecoupling between thetwO.3MTheshort-slot hybrid Antenna Figure9.5Principle ofbranch-lype duplexer.TransmitterI-------,---+--'t---.-----+-_--------, '.
Short -slot hybrid junctions)  (a) Antenna Dummy load  Or~nl 1R I 1  - tubes  -7  +---7-t /  Antenno Dummy load Transmitter Rece~ver  protector  'short-slot hybrid junctions ,J d U - t ..J  1 I 1  Dual TR  tubes  Figure 9.6 Balanced duplexer using dual TR tubes and two short-slot hybrid junctions.
(a) Transmit  condition; (b) receive condition.
lronsm~tter  - E  may he considered as a broadband directional coupler with a coupling ratio of 3 dB.
In the  transmit condition (Fig.
9.6~) power is divided equally into each waveguide by the first short-  slot hybrid junction.
Both TR tubes break down and reflect the incident power out the antenna  arm as shown.
The short-slot hybrid has the property that each time the energy passes through  the slot in either direction, its phase is advanced 90".
Therefore, the energy must travel as  indicated by the solid lines.
Any energy which leaks through the TR tubes (shown by the  dashed lines) is directed to the arm with the matched dummy load and not to the receiver, In  addition to the attenuation provided by the TR tubes, the hybrid junctions provide an addi-  tional 20 to 30 dB of isolation.
 On reception the TR tubes are unfired and the echo signals pass through the duplexer and  into the receiver as shown in Fig.
9.6b.
The power splits equally at the first junction and  because of the 90" phase advance on passing through the slot, the energy recombines in the  receiving artn and not in the dummy-load arm.
 The power-handling capability of the balanced duplexer is inherently greater than that of  the branch-type duplexer and it has wide bandwidth, over ten percent with proper design.
A  receiuer protector, to be described later, is usually inserted between the duplexer and the  receiver for added protection.
 Another form of balanced duplexerJg uses four ATR tubes and two hybrid junctions  (Fig.
9.7).
During transmission (Fig.
9.7~) the ATR tubes located in a mount between the two  short-slot hybrids ionize and allow high power to pass to the antenna.
Dashed lines show the  flow of power.
During reception (Fig.
9.7b) the ATR tubes present a high impedance which  results in the echo-signal power being reflected to the receiver.
The ATR type of balanced  duplexer has higher power-handling capability than that of Fig.
9.6, but it has less bandwidth.
 TR tubes.
?'he TR tube is a gas-discharge device designed to break down and ionize quickly at  the onset of high RF power, and to deionize quickly once the power is removed.
One common  construction of a TR consists of a section of waveguide containing one or more resonant filters 7  Receiver  F protector  L A L r - ---f-- F  Antenna DliolIR .tubesRECEIVERS, DISPLAYS, ANDDUPLEXERS 361 Dummy load Transmitter+--~------<'~ / //; f----""---- ry'---/~',-;--+~:/r_-_~-"""--_n Receiver •./~ ~(;~ - -+/ Uprotector \ -d', ).Short-slothylHiJunctIOns (al Antenna Dummy load TransmitterDualTR tubes Receiver protector \Short-slothybridjUnctions) (b) Figure9.6Balanced duplexer usingdualTRtubesandtwoshort-slot hybridjunctions.
(a)Transmit condition; (b)receivecondition.
maybeconsidered asabroadband directional couplerwithacoupling ratioof3dB.Inthe transmit condition (Fig.9.6a)powerisdividedequallyintoeachwaveguide bythefirstshort­ slothybridjunction.
BothTRtubesbreakdownandreflecttheincidentpowerouttheantenna armasshown.Theshort-slot hybridhastheproperty thateachtimetheenergypassesthrough theslotineitherdirection, itsphaseisadvanced 90°.Therefore, theenergymusttravelas indicated bythesolidlines.Anyenergywhichleaksthrough theTRtubes(shownbythe dashedlines)isdirected tothearmwiththematched dummyloadandnottothereceiver.
In addition totheattenuation provided bytheTRtubes,thehybridjunctions provideanaddi­ tional20to30dBofisolation.
Onreception theTRtubesareunfiredandtheechosignalspassthroughtheduplexer and intothereceiver asshowninFig.9.6b.Thepowersplitsequallyatthefirstjunction and becauseofthe90°phaseadvance onpassingthrough theslot,theenergyrecombines inthe receiving armandnotinthedummy-load arm.
Thepower-handling capability ofthebalanced duplexer isinherently greaterthanthatof thebranch-type duplexer andithaswidebandwidth, overtenpercentwithproperdesign.A receiver protector, tobedescribed later,isusuallyinserted between theduplexer andthe receiverforaddedprotection.
Another formofbalanced duplexer39usesfourATRtubesandtwohybridjunctions (Fig.9.7).Duringtransmission (Fig.9.7a)theATRtubeslocatedinamountbetweenthetwo short-slot hybridsionizeandallowhighpowertopasstotheantenna.
Dashedlinesshowthe nowofpower.Duringreception (Fig.9.7b)theATRtubespresentahighimpedance which resuItsintheecho-signal powerbeingreflected tothereceiver.
TheATRtypeofbalanced duplexer hashigherpower-handling capability thanthatofFig.9.6,butithaslessbandwidth.
TRtubes.TheTRtubeisagas-discharge devicedesigned tobreakdownandionizequicklyat theonsetofhighRFpower,andtodeionize quicklyoncethepowerisremoved.
Onecommon construction ofaTRconsistsofasectionofwaveguide containing oneormoreresonant filters 362 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  ATR tubes  (fired)  Hece~ver  Tronsm~tter - - ,-- protector  Dumrny load Antenno  Short -slot S hort-slot  hybrid hybrid  ATR tubes  Tronsmitter Receiver  protect01  Dummy load Antenna  Short-slot S hort-slot  hybrid hybrid  Figure 9.7 Balanced duplexer using ATR tubes.
(a) Transmit condition; (b) receive condition  and two glass-to-metal windows to seal in the gas at low pressure.
A noble gas like argon in the  TR tube has a low breakdown voltage, and offers good receiver protection and relatively long  life.
Pure-argon-filled tubes, however, have relatively long deionization times and are not  suitable for short-range applications.
The deionization process can be speeded up by the  addition of water vapor or a halogen.
The life of TR tubes filled with a mixture of a noble gas  (argon) and a gas with high electron affinity (water vapor) is less than the life of tubes filled  with a noble gas only.
 To ensure reliable and rapid breakdown of the TR tube upon application of the RF pulse,  an auxiliary source of electrons is supplied to the tube.
This may be accomplished with a  " keep-alive," which is a weak d-c discharge that generates electrons which diffuse into the TR  where they act to trigger the breakdown once RF power is applied.
The keep-alive generates  noise just as any other gas-discharge device.
The excess noise temperature is generally less  than 50 K.40  Receiver protectors.
Since the keep-alive in the TR is not usually energized when the radar is  turned off, considerably more power is needed to break down the TR than when it is energized.
 Radiations from nearby transmitters mgy therefore damage the receiver without firing the TR.
 To protect the receiver under these conditions, a mechanical shutter can be used to short-  circuit the input to the receiver whenever the radar is not operating.
The shutter might be  designed to attenuate a signal by 25 to 50 dB.
 The TR is not a perfect switch; some transmitter power always leaks through to the  receiver.
The envelope of the RF leakage might be similar to that shown in Fig.
9.8.
The  short-duration, large-amplitude " spike " at the leading edge of the leakage pulse is the result of  the finite time required for the TR to ionize or break down.
Typically, this time is of the order  of 10 nanoseconds.
After the gas in the TR tube is ionized, the power leaking through the tube  is considerably reduced from the peak value of the spike.
This portion of the leakage pulse is  termed thepat.
Damage to the receiver front-end may result when either the energy contained  within the spike or the power in the flat portion of the pulse is too large.
"Typical" TR tubes  might have a spike leakage of one erg or less and might provide an attenuation of the incident  transmitter power of the order of 70 to 90 dB.
 362INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS Transmitter Dummyload~ATRtubes (fired) ..~-+'~-~ ----)(__~_'X_ Short-slot }..q Shorl-slot hybrid1-2--..j hybrid (a)H~c~i~el protector Antenna TransmitterATRtubes ______ ---jr:-:\c-::':I ReceiverX~ C~~~ -+protector Dummyload~>---------jE:3-E3 (:.:::-~--~-- Antenna Short-sial Short-slot hybrid hybrid (b)J Figure9.7Balanced duplexer usingATRtubes.(a)Transmit condition; (b)receivecondition.
andtwoglass-to-metal windows tosealinthegasatlowpressure.
Anoblegaslikeargoninthe TRtubehasalowbreakdown voltage,andotTersgoodreceiverprotection andrelatively long life.Pure-argon-filled tubes,however, haverelatively longdeionization timesandarenot suitable forshort-range applications.
Thedeionization processcanbespeeded upbythe addition ofwatervapororahalogen.
ThelifeofTRtubesfilledwithamixtureofanoblegas (argon)andagaswithhighelectron affinity(watervapor)islessthanthelifeoftubesfilled withanoblegasonly.
Toensurereliableandrapidbreakdown oftheTRtubeuponapplication oftheRFpulse, anauxiliary sourceofelectrons issupplied tothetube.Thismaybeaccomplished witha ..keep-alive," whichisaweakd-cdischarge thatgenerates electrons whichdiffuseintotheTR wheretheyacttotriggerthebreakdown onceRFpowerisapplied.Thekeep-alive generates noisejustasanyothergas-discharge device.Theexcessnoisetemperature isgenerally less than50K.40.
Receiver protectors.
Sincethekeep-alive intheTRisnotusuallyenergized whentheradaris turnedoff,considerably morepowerisneededtobreakdowntheTRthanwhenitisenergized.
Radiations fromnearbytransmitters milYtherefore damagethereceiverwithoutfiringtheTR.
Toprotectthereceiver undertheseconditions, amechanical shuttercanbeusedtoshort­ circuittheinputtothereceiver whenever theradarisnotoperating.
Theshuttermightbe designed toattenuate asignalby25to50dB.
TheTRisnotaperfectswitch;sometransmitter poweralwaysleaksthrough tothe receiver.
Theenvelope oftheRFleakage mightbesimilartothatshowninFig.9.8.The short-duration, large-amplitude" spike~'attheleadingedgeoftheleakagepulseistheresultof thefinitetimerequired fortheTRtoionizeorbreakdown.Typically, thistimeisoftheorder oftonanoseconds.
AfterthegasintheTRtubeisionized,thepowerleakingthrough thetube isconsiderably reduced fromthepeakvalueofthespike.Thisportionoftheleakagepulseis termedtheflat.Damage tothereceiverfront-end mayresultwheneithertheenergycontained withinthespikeorthepowerinthefiatportionofthepulseistoolarge...Typical" TRtubes mighthaveaspikeleakageofoneergorlessandmightprovideanattenuation oftheincident transmitter poweroftheorderof70to90dB. lime --+ Figure 9.8 Leakage pulse through a I'R tube.
 A fractiotl of the transmitter power incident on the TR tube is absorbed by the discharge.
 l.l~is is called arc loss.
Its tnagtiitude depends upon the characteristics of the input window and  the gas used.
?'he arc loss might be f to 1 dB in tubes filled with water vapor and 0.1 dB or less  with argon filling.
On reception, the TR tube introduces an insertion loss of about f to 1 dB.
 The life of a conventional TR is limited by the keep-alive, the amount of water vapor in  the gas filling, and by disappearance, or " clean-up," of the gas due to the gas molecules  becoming imbedded in the walls of the TR tubes4' The end of life of a TR tube is determined  more by the amount of leakage power which it allows to pass than by physical destruction or  wear.
 The keep-alive can be replaced as a supplier of priming electrons in the TR by a radio-  active source, such as tritium, which produces low-energy-level beta rayss2 The tritium is  in compound form as a tritide film.
The replacement of the keep-alive by radioactive tritium  eliminates the excess noise of the keep-alive and increases the life of the TR by an 'order of  magditude.
Since a tritium TR needs no active voltages, a mechanical shutter is not required to  protect the receiver from nearby transmissions when the radar is turned off.
This also improves  the reliability.
The tritium-activated TR is usually followed by a diode limiter.
The combina-  tion of the two is called a passive TR-lirniter and is widely used as a receiver protector.
 Solid-state limiters.
Solid-state PN and PIN diodes can be made to act as RF limiters and are  thus of interest as receiver prote~tors.~'-.~~ Ideally, a limiter passes low power without attenua-  tion, but above some threshold it provides attenuation of the signal so as to maintain the  output power constant.
This property can be used for the protection of radar receivers in two  differentp implementations depending on whether the diodes are operated unbiased (self-  actuated) or with a d-c forward-bias current.
Unbiased operation is also known as passive.
It is  used for low-power applications.
Biased operation is also known as active and is capable of  switching high po~er.~~.~~.~~ Biased PIN diodes can replace the gas-tube TRs of the balanced-  duplexer configuration of Fig.
9.6 or they may be used as receiver protectors.
For example>4 a  VHF balanced duplexer configuration using 32 PIN diodes mounted in 33 inch coaxial line (16  in each of two SPST shunt-type limiters) handled 150 kW peak power, 10 kW average power,  with a pulse width of 200 ,us.
At the frequency of operation (200 to 225 MHz), the use of  self-actuated diodes was practical.
Recovery time was required to be less than 10 ,us.
The loss  on transmit was 0.15 dB and on receive it was 2 dB.
(The receive loss could be reduced to  1 dB with application of reverse bias to the diodes.) The device provided from 40 to 50 dB of  protection.
Another example4' is an L-band receiver protector using 10 PIN diodes mounted  in a coaxial line which was able to handle 1.6 MW peak power and 100 kW average power  with a 50 11s pulse width over a 10 percent bandwidth.
The loss was 0.6 dB, isolation 70 dB,  turn-on time 2 )is and turn-off time 25 11s.
Although the active diode-limiter offers many  RECEIVERS, DISPLAYS, ANDDUPLEXERS 363 t Q.l0'o o> lime -~ Figure9.8Leakage pulsethrough aTRlUbe.
Afraction ofthetransmitler powerincident ontheTRtubeisabsorbed bythedischarge.
Thisiscalledarcloss.Itsmagnitude depends uponthecharacteristics oftheinputwindowand thegasused.Thearclossmightbe';to1dBintubesfilledwithwatervaporand0.1dBorless withargonfilling.Onreception, theTRtubeintroduces aninsertion lossofabout!to1dB.
Thelifeofaconventional TRislimitedbythekeep-alive, theamountofwatervaporin thegasfilling,andbydisappearance, or"clean-up," ofthegasduetothegasmolecules becoming imbedded inthewallsoftheTRtubes.41TheendoflifeofaTRtubeisdetermined morebytheamountofleakagepowerwhichitallowstopassthanbyphysical destruction or wear.
Thekeep-alive canbereplaced asasupplier ofpriming electrons intheTRbyaradio­ activesource,suchastritium, whichproduces low-energy-Ievel betarays.S2Thetritiumis incompound formasatritidefilm.Thereplacement ofthekeep-alive byradioactive tritium eliminates theexcessnoiseofthekeep-alive andincreases thelifeoftheTRbyan'orderof magnitude.
SinceatritiumTRneedsnoactivevoltages, amechanical shutterisnotrequired to protectthereceiverfromnearbytransmissions whentheradaristurnedoff.Thisalsoimproves thereliability.
Thetritium-activated TRisusuallyfollowed byadiodelimiter.Thecombina­ tionofthetwoiscalledapassiveTR-Iimiter andiswidelyusedasareceiver protector.
Solid-state limiters.
Solid-state PNandPINdiodescanbemadetoactasRFlimitersandare thusofinterestasreceiver protectors.42-44Ideally,alimiterpasseslowpowerwithoutattenua­ tion,butabovesomethreshold itprovides attenuation ofthesignalsoastomaintain the outputpowerconstant.
Thisproperty canbeusedfortheprotection ofradarreceivers intwo differentf'implementations depending onwhether thediodesareoperated unbiased (self­ actuated) orwithad-cforward-bias current.Unbiased operation isalsoknownaspassive.Itis usedforlow-power applications.
Biasedoperation isalsoknownasactiveandiscapableof switching highpower.43.44.62 BiasedPINdiodescanreplacethegas-tube TRsofthebalanced­ duplexer configuration ofFig.9.6ortheymaybeusedasreceiverprotectors.
Forexample,44 a VHFbalanced duplexer configuration using32PINdiodesmounted inJA-inchcoaxialline(16 ineachoftwoSPSTshunt-type limiters) handled 150kWpeakpower,10kWaveragepower, withapulsewidthof200/lS.Atthefrequency ofoperation (200to225MHz),theuseof self-actuated diodeswaspractical.
Recovery timewasrequired tobelessthan10/lS.Theloss ontransmit was0.15dBandonreceiveitwas2dB.(Thereceivelosscouldbereduced to IdBwithapplication ofreversebiastothediodes.)Thedeviceprovided from40to50dBof protection.
Another example4SisanL-bandreceiverprotector using10PINdiodesmounted inacoaxiallinewhichwasabletohandle1.6MWpeakpowerand100kWaverage power witha50115pulsewidthoveratopercentbandwidth.
Thelosswas0.6dB,isolation 70dB, turn-on time2115andturn-ofT time25liS.Allhough theactivediode-limiter offersmany 363 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  advantages for duplexer application, it does not protect the receiver when the bias is off.
 Therefore, it offers poor protection against nearby transmissions during the interpulse period  or when the radar is shut down.
 The passive diode-limiter without any bias current is operable at all times, but it is  capable of handling much less power than the active limiter with bias.
Thus its use as an all  solid-state limiter is restricted to low power systems, perhaps handling less than 1.5 kW peak  power.45 When it can be used, the diode limiter has the advantage of fast recovery time (about  1 ~ts for 1 kW peak power, and 50ns for 100 W);j3 no spike leakage; low flat leakage; reason-  able loss, size and weight; and it can have a long life.40  Passive TR-limiter.
The passive diode-limiter also finds important application when used with  a radioactive-primed gas tube TR.
The combination is known as a passiile TR-limiter.
The  passive TR-limiter protects the receiver from nearby transmissions even when the iadar is shut  off since it requires no active voltages for either the radioactive-primed TR tube or the diode  limiter.
The presence of the diode limiter following the TR tube considerably reduces the spike  leakage, increasing the life of the device itself as well as the receiver front-end it is supposed to  protect.
The passive TR-limiter, however, has a higher insertion loss than the TR tube but 11  generates no excess noise because it does not employ a keep-alive discharge.
Its recovery time  is superior to the conventional TR tube, but inferior to the diode limiter acting alone or the  ferrite diode limiter.40  The passive TR-limiter has low leakage over a wide range of input power.
As an  example,40 below 1 mW peak power the output power is linearly related to the input power.
 From 10 mW to 100 kW, the output flat-leakage increases by as little as 3 to 10 dB.
Below  1-W input power, the diode alone provides the limiting action.
Above I-W, the TR tube ionizes  to protect the diode limiter from burnout.
More than one diode may be used to provide  greater attenuation or larger bandwidth.
 Before the introduction of the solid-state diode limiter, a low-power gas TR-tube, known  as a protector TR, was often used as added protection for the receiver.
It was placed between  the receiver port of the duplexer and the receiver to safeguard against random pulses from  nearby radar equipments which were too weak to fire the conventional TR tubes in the  duplexer, but strong enough to damage the receiver.
The passive TR-limiter or the diode  limiter has replaced the protector TR.
Such devices are known as receiver protectors.
Receiver  protectors also serve to protect against power reflected by mismatches at the antenna.
 Ferrite limiter.
The ferrite limiter46 followed by a diode limiter, has also been eruploycd as a  solid-state receiver protect~r.~~*~~ The-diode is necessary to reduce the spike leakage to a safe  level since the ferrite acting alone does not offer sufficient suppression of the spike leakage at  high peak power.
The ferrite diode limiter has fast recovery time (can be as low as several tens  of nanoseconds), and if the power rating is not exceeded, the life should be essentially un-  limited.
The spike and flat leakage is low, but the insertion loss is usually higher and the  package is generally longer and heavier than other receiver protectors.
Except for the initial  spike, the ferrite limiter is an absorptive device as compared to the gas-tube TR or the  TR-limiter which are reflective.
Therefore, the incident power is absorbed in the ferrite so that  the average power capability can be a problem.
Air or water cooling might be needed.
 The ferrite material may be biased, as for example a latching-ferrite circulator, to permit  the handling of higher power.4s Since the latching-ferrite receiver protector is undamaged by  high power when in either state, protection from nearby transmitters can be had by inserting a  passive TR-limiter following the ferrite.
 364INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS advantages forduplexer application, itdoesnotprotectthereceiver whenthebiasisoff.
Therefore, itofferspoorprotection againstnearbytransmissions duringtheinterpulse period orwhentheradarisshutdown.
Thepassivediode-limiter without anybiascurrent isoperable atalltimes,butitis capableofhandling muchlesspowerthantheactivelimiterwithbias.Thusitsuseasanall solid-state limiterisrestricted tolowpowersystems, perhaps handling lessthan1.5kWpeak power.45Whenitcanbeused,thediodelimiterhastheadvantage offastrecovery time(about 1JLSfor1kWpeakpower,and50nsfor100W);43nospikeleakage; lowflatleakage; reason­ ableloss,sizeandweight;anditcanhavealonglife.40 PassiveTR-limiter.
Thepassivediode-limiter alsofindsimportant application whenusedwith aradioactive-primed gastubeTR.Thecombination isknownasapassiveTR-limirer.
The passiveTR-limiter protects thereceiverfromnearbytransmissions evenwhentheladarisshut offsinceitrequires noactivevoltages foreithertheradioactive-primed TRtubeorthediode limiter.Thepresence ofthediodelimiterfollowing theTRtubeconsiderably reducesthespike leakage, increasing thelifeofthedeviceitselfaswellasthereceiverfronl-end itissupposed to protect.ThepassiveTR-limiter, however, hasahigherinsertion lossthantheTRtubebutit generates noexcessnoisebecauseitdoesnotemployakeep-alive discharge.
Itsrecovery time issuperior totheconventional TRtube,butinferiortothediodelimiteractingaloneorthe ferritediodelimiter.40 ThepassiveTR-limiter haslowleakage overawiderangeofinputpower.Asan example,40 below1mWpeakpowertheoutputpowerislinearlyrelatedtotheinputpower.
From10mWto100kW,theoutputflat-leakage increases byaslittleas3to10dB.Below l-Winputpower,thediodealoneprovides thelimitingaction.Abovel-W,theTRtubeionizes toprotectthediodelimiterfromburnout.
Morethanonediodemayheusedtoprovide greaterattenuation orlargerbandwidth.
- Beforetheintroduction ofthesolid-state diodelimiter,alow-power gasTR-tube, known asaprotector TR,wasoftenusedasaddedprotection forthereceiver.
Jtwasplacedbetween thereceiver portoftheduplexer andthereceiver tosafeguard againstrandom pulsesfrom nearbyradarequipments whichweretooweaktofiretheconventional TRtubesinthe duplexer, butstrongenoughtodamage thereceiver.
ThepassiveTR-limiter orthediode limiterhasreplaced theprotector TR.Suchdevicesareknownasreceiverprotectors.
Receiver protectors alsoservetoprotectagainstpowerreflected hymismatches attheantenna.
Ferritelimiter.Theferritelimiter46followed byadiodelimiter,hasalsoheenemployed asa solid-state receiverprotector.40,45The-diode isnecessary toreducethespikeleakagetoasafe levelsincetheferriteactingalonedoesnotoffersufficient suppression ofthespikeleakageat highpeakpower.Theferritediodelimiterhasfastrecovery time(canbeaslowasseveraltens ofnanoseconds), andifthepowerratingisnotexceeded, thelifeshouldbeessentially un­ limited.Thespikeandflatleakage islow,buttheinsertion lossisusuallyhigherandthe package isgenerally longerandheavierthanotherreceiver protectors.
Exceptfortheinitial spike,theferritelimiterisanabsorptive deviceascompared tothegas-tube TRorthe TR-limiter whicharereflective.
Therefore, theincident powerisabsorbed intheferritesothat theaverage powercapability canbeaproblem.
Airorwatercooling mightbeneeded.
Theferritematerial maybebiased,asforexample alatching-ferrite circulator, topermit thehandling ofhigherpower.45Sincethelatching-ferrite receiver protector isundamaged by highpowerwhenineitherstate,protection fromnearbytransmitters canbehadbyinserting a passiveTR-lil]liter following theferrite. RECEIVERS, DISPLAYS, AND DUPLEXERS 365  Antenna  (radioactive - limiter  Circulator primed)  L J Y  Passive TR-l~rniler Receiver  Figure 9.9 <'irculator ant! receiver protector.
A four-port circulator is shown with the fourth port ter-  minated in a matched load to provide greater isolation between the transmitter and the receiver than  provided hy a three-port circulator.
 Circulator and receiver protector.
The ferrite circulator4' is a three- or four-port device that  can, in principle, offer separation of the transmitter and receiver without the need for the  conventional duplexer configurations of Figs.
9.5 to 9.7.
The circulator does not provide  sufficient protectiorl by itself and requires a receiver protector as in Fig.
9.9.
The isolation  between the transmitter and receiver ports of a circulator is seldom sufficient to protect the  receiver fj-om damage.
However, it is not the isolation between transmitter and receiver ports  that usually determines the amount of transmitter power at the receiver, but the impedance  mismatch at the antenna which reflects transmitter power back into the receiver.
The VSWR is  a measure of the amount of power reflected by the antenna.
For example, a VSWR of 1.5  means that about 4 percent of the transmitter power will be reflected by the antenna mismatch  in the direction of the receiver, which corresponds to an isolation of only 14 dB.
About 11  percent of the power is reflected when the VSWR is 2.0, corresponding to less than 10 dB of  isolation.
Thus, a receiver protector is almost always required.
It also reduces to a safe level  radiations from nearby transmitters.
The receiver protector might use solid-state diodes for an  all s6lid-state c~nfiguration,~~ or it might be a passive TR-limiter consisting of a radioactive  primed TR-tube followed by a diode limiter.49*50 The ferrite circulator with receiver protector  is attractive for radar applications because of its long life, wide bandwidth, and compact  design.
 Other duplexer considerations.
The duplexers described above using passive receiver protec-  tors have recovery times from a fraction of a microsecond to several tens of microseconds.
By  employing the principle of multipacting, a recovery time as short as 5 ns is pos~ible.~~*~~ A  multipact& is a vacuum tube which contains surfaces capable of a high yield of secondary  emission upon impact by an electron.
  he secondary emission surfaces are biased with a d-c  potential.
The presence of RF energy causes electrons to make multiple impacts to generate by  secondary emission a large electron cloud.
The electron cloud moves in phase with the oscilla-  tion of the applied RF electric field to absorb energy from the RF field.
The RF power is  dissipated thermally at the secondary emission surfaces.
The recovery time of the multipactor  is extremely fast.
It has low spike-leakage, and can handle high peak and average powers.
The  flat-leakage power passed by the multipactor is high enough to require a passive diode limiter  following the multipactor.
The multipactor has the disadvantage of being complex, and it  offers no protection if the power is turned off.
 With fast-rise-time, high-power RF sources, the receiver protector may be required to  self-limit in less than one nanosecond.
This can be achieved with fast-acting PN (varactor)  diodes.
A number of diode stages, preceded by plasma limiters, might be employed in such a  receiver protector.
In one design, an X-band passive receiver protector was capable of limiting  a 1 ns risetime, multi-kilowatt RF pulses to 1-W spike levels.53  RECEIVERS, D1SPLA Y5,ANDDUPLEXERS 365 Antenna Transmitter CirculatorTRtube r-----+I(radioac live-1----'----1 primed) y Passive TR-limiter)Receiver Figure9.9Circulator andreceiver protector.
Afour-port circulator isshownwiththefourthportter­ minated inamatched loadtoprovide greaterisolation between thetransmitter andthereceiver than provided byathree-port circulator.
Circulator andreceiver protector.
Theferritecirculator47isathree-orfour-port devicethat can,inprinciple.
offerseparation ofthetransmitter andreceiver without theneedforthe conventional duplexer configurations ofFigs.9.5to9.7.Thecirculator doesnotprovide sufficient protection by itself andrequires areceiver protector asinFig.9.9.Theisolation betweenthetransmitter andreceiver portsofacirculator isseldomsufficient toprotectthe receiver fromdamage.
However, itisnottheisolation between transmitter andreceiver ports thatusuallydetermines theamount oftransmitter poweratthereceiver, buttheimpedance mismatch attheantenna whichreflectstransmitter powerbackintothereceiver.
TheVSWRis ameasure oftheamount ofpowerreflected bytheantenna.
Forexample, aVSWRof1.5 meansthatabout4percentofthetransmitter powerwillbereflected bytheantenna mismatch inthedirection ofthereceiver, whichcorresponds toanisolation ofonly14dB.About11 percentofthepowerisreflected whentheVSWRis2.0,corresponding tolessthan10dBof isolation, Thus,areceiver protector isalmostalwaysrequired.Italsoreduces toasafelevel radiations fromnearbytransmitters.
Thereceiverprotector mightusesolid-state diodesforan allsolid-state configuration,48 oritmightbeapassiveTR-limiter consisting ofaradioactive primedTR-tube followed byadiodelimiter.49.5oTheferritecirculator withreceiverprotector isattractive forradarapplications because ofitslonglife,widebandwidth, andcompact design.
Otherduplexer considerations.
Theduplexers described aboveusingpassivereceiver protec­ torshaverecovery timesfromafractionofamicrosecond toseveraltensofmicroseconds.
By employing theprinciple ofmultipacting, arecovery timeasshortas5nsispossible.44•51A multipactdf isavacuum tubewhichcontains surfaces capable ofahighyieldofsecondary emission uponimpactbyanelectron.
Th'esecondary emission surfaces arebiasedwithad-c potential.
Thepresence ofRFenergycauseselectrons tomakemultiple impactstogenerate by secondary emission alargeelectron cloud.Theelectron cloudmovesinphasewiththeoscilla­ tionoftheapplied RFelectricfieldtoabsorbenergyfromtheRFfield.TheRFpoweris dissipated thermally atthesecondary emission surfaces.
Therecovery timeofthemultipactor isextremely fast.Ithaslowspike-leakage, andcanhandlehighpeakandaverage powers.The flat-leakage powerpassedbythemultipactor ishighenoughtorequireapassivediodelimiter following themultipactoL Themultipactor hasthedisadvantage ofbeingcomplex, andit offersnoprotection ifthepoweristurnedoff.
Withfast-rise-time, high-power RFsources, thereceiver protector mayberequired to self-limit inlessthanonenanosecond.
Thiscanbeachieved withfast-acting PN(varactor) diodes.Anumber ofdiodestages,preceded byplasmalimiters, mightbeemployed insucha receiver protector.
Inonedesign,anX-bandpassivereceiver protector wascapableoflimiting aInsrisetime, multi-kilowatt RFpulsestol-Wspikelevels.53 In many radar systems the STC (sensitivity time control), which is a time-dependent  attenuator, is placed in the RF portion of the radar receiver rather than in the IF.
When a  diode limiter is used in the receiver protector, the STC function can be readily incorporated by  inserting a variable bias into the limiter diodes to provide an attenuator that varies with  time.40*49 The PIN diodes serve the dual function of self-limiting during transmit, and act as a  variable attenuator, or STC, during receive.
One of the advantages of an integral STC using  the diode limiter rather than a separate RF STC, is that no additional insertion loss is suffered  for the STC other than that inherent in the TR-limiter itself.
 In a solid-state limiter, it is also possible to couple a noise diode into the output to  provide a convenient source for checking receiver noise-figure."  Several hundred hours of life is considered typical for conventional TR tubes that use an  active keep-alive discharge.
However, a duplexer using a passive radioactive-primed TR and  diode limiter is capable of perhaps five thousand hours of life,50 with predictionsfof up to four  years of continuous ~peration.~'  REFERENCES  1.
Friis, H.
T.: Noise Figures of Radio Receivers, Proc.
IRE, vol.
32, pp.
419-422, July, 1944.
 2.
Mumford, W.
W., and E.
Scheibe: "Noise: Performance Factors in Communication Systems," Horl-  zon House-Microwave, Inc., Dedharn, Mass.
1968.
 3.
Goldberg, H.: Some Notes on Noise Figures, Proc.
IRE, vol.
36, pp.
1205-1214, October, 1948.
 4.
Van Voorhis, S.
N.
(ed.): "Microwave Receivers," MIT Radiation Laboratory Series, vol.
23,  McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York, 1948.
 5.
Torrey, H.
C., and C.
A.
Whitmer: "Crystal Rectifiers," MIT Radiation Laboratory Series, vol.
15,  McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York, 1948.
 6.
Palamutcuoglu, O., J.
G.
Gardiner, and D.
P.
Howson: Image-Cancelling Mixers at 2 GHz, Electronic  Letters, vol.
10, no.
7, pp.
104-106, Apr.
4, 1974.
 7.
Taylor, J.
W., Jr., and J.
Mattern: Receivers, chap.
5 of "Radar Handbook," M.
I.
Skolnik (ed.),  McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York, 1970.
 8.
Neuf, D., D.
Brown, and B.
Jaracz: Multi-Octave Double-Balanced Mixer, Microwaoe J., vol.
16, pp.
 13- 14, January, 1973.
 9.
Shigemoto, J.: Balanced Mixer Noise Considerations, Microwaoe J., vol.
10, pp.
77-79, October, 1967.
 10.
Okean, H.
C., and A.
J.
Kelly: Low-Noise Receiver Design Trends Using State-of-the-Arr Bliilding  Blocks, IEEE Trans., vol.
MTT-25, pp.
254-267, April, 1977.
 11.
Cochrane, J.
B., and F.
A.
Marki: Thin-Film Mixers Team Up To Block Out Image Noise, hfrcro-  waves, vol.
11, pp.
34-40, 84, March, 1977.
 12.
Neuf, D.: A Quiet Mixer, Microwarle J., vol.
16, pp.
29-32, May, 1973.
 13.
Neuf, D.: Radar Retrofit: Increase Receiver Sensitivity Cost Efiectively, Microwave System News, vol.
 5, pp.
55-60, AprilIMay, 1976.
 14.
Anand, Y., and C.
Howell: A Burnout Criterion for Schottky-Barrier Mixer Diodes, Proc.
IEEE, vol.
 56, p.
2098, November, 1968.
 15.
Anand, Y., and W.
J.
Moroney: Microwave Mixer and Detector Diodes, Proc.
IEEE, vol.
59, pp.
 1 182- 1 190, August, 197 1.
 16.
Torrey, H.
C., and C.
A.
Whitmer: "Crystal Rectifiers," MIT Radiation Laboratory Series, vol.
15,  McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York, 1948.
 17.
Dickens, L.
E., and D.
W.
Maki: An Integrated-Circuit Balanced Mixer, Image and Sum Enhanced,  IEEE Trans., vol.
MTT-23, pp.
276-281, March, 1975.
 18.
Chandler, H.
M.: Microwave Low Noise Amplifiers For Use in Radar Systems, The Marconi Review,  vol.
35, no.
185, pp.
94-120, 2d qtr., 1972.
 19.
Lindauer, J.
T., and N.
K.
Osbrink: GaAs FET Amplifiers are Closing Fast on the Low-Noise  Narrowband Leaders, Microwaoe System News, vol.
5, pp.
63-67, April/May, 1976.
 20.
Emery, F.
E.: Low Noise GaAs FET Amplifiers, Microwave J., vol.
20, pp.
79-82, June, 1977.
 2 1.
Miller, R.
E., T.
G.
Phillips, D.
E.
Iglesias, and R.
H.
Kneer: Noise Performance of Microwave GaAs  F.E.T.
Amplifiers at Low Temperatures, Electronics Letters, vol.
13, no.
I, pp.
10-1 1, Jan.
6, ,1977.
 22.
Murnford, W.
W.: A Broadband Microwave Noise Source, Bell System Tech.
J., vol.
211, pp.
608- 618,  October, 1949.
 23.
IEEE Standard 686-1977: "IEEE Standard Radar Definitions," Nov.
9, 1977,  366INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS Inmanyradarsystems theSTC(sensitivity timecontrol), whichisatime-dependent attenuator, isplacedintheRFportionoftheradarreceiver ratherthanintheIF.Whena diodelimiterisusedinthereceiver protector, theSTCfunction canbereadilyincorporated by inserting avariable biasintothelimiterdiodestoprovide anattenuator thatvarieswith time.40,49ThePINdiodesservethedualfunction ofself-limiting duringtransmit, andactasa variable attenuator, orSTC,duringreceive.Oneoftheadvantages ofanintegralSTCusing thediodelimiterratherthanaseparate RFSTC,isthatnoadditional insertion lossissuffered fortheSTCotherthanthatinherent intheTR-limiter itself.
Inasolid-state limiter, itisalsopossible tocoupleanoisediodeintotheoutputto provide aconvenient sourceforchecking receiver noise-figure"~o Severalhundred hoursoflifeisconsidered typicalforconventional TRtubesthatusean activekeep-alive discharge.
However, aduplexer usingapassiveradioactive-primed TRand diodelimiteriscapable ofperhaps fivethousand hoursoflife,50withpredictionsJof uptofour yearsofcontinuous operation.49 REFERENCES 1.Friis,H.T.:NoiseFiguresofRadioReceivers, Proc.IRE,vol.32,pp.419-422, July,1944.
2.Mumford, W.W.,andE.Scheibe:" Noise:Performance FactorsinCommunication Systems," Hori­ zonHouse-Microwave, Inc.,Dedham, Mass.1968.
3.Goldberg, H.:SomeNotesonNoiseFigures, Proc.iRE,vol.36,pp.1205-1214, October, 1948.
4.VanVoorhis, S.N.(ed.):"Microwave Receivers," MITRadiation Laboratory Series,vol.23, McGraw-Hili BookCompany, NewYork,1948.
5.Torrey,H.C,andCA.Whitmer: "Crystal Rectifiers," MITRadiation Laboratory Series,vol.15, McGraw-Hili BookCompany, NewYork,1948.
6.Palamutcuoglu, 0.,J.G.Gardiner, andD.P.Howson: Image-Cancelling Mixersat2GHz,Electronic Letters,vol.10,no.7,pp.104-106, Apr.4,1974.
7.Taylor,J.W.,Jr.,andJ.Mattern: Receivers, chap.5of"Radar Handbook," M.I.Skolnik (ed.), McGraw-Hill BookCompany, NewYork,1970.
8.Neuf,D.,D.Brown,andB.Jaracz:Multi-Octave Double-Balanced Mixer,Microwal1e J.,vol.16,pp.
13-14,January, 1973.
9.Shigemoto, J.:Balanced MixerNoiseConsiderations, Microwave J.,vol.10,pp.77-79,October, 1967.
10.Okean,H.C,andA.J.Kelly:Low-Noise Receiver DesignTrendsUsingState-of-the-Art Building Blocks,IEEETrans.,vol.MIT-25, pp.254-267, April,1977.
II.Cochrane, J.B.,andF.A.Marki:Thin-Film MixersTeamUpToBlockOutImageNoise,Micro­ waves,vol.II,pp.34-40,84,March,1977.
12.Neuf,D.:AQuietMixer,Microwave J.,vol.16,pp.29-32,May,1973.
13.Neuf,D.:RadarRetrofit: Increase Receiver Sensitivity CostEffectively, Microwave SystemNews,vol.
5,pp.55-60,April/May, 1976.
14.Anand,Y.,andCHowell: ABurnout Criterion forSchottky-Barrier MixerDiodes,Proc.IEEE,vol.
56,p.2098,November, 1968.
15.Anand,Y.,andW.J.Moroney: Microwave MixerandDetector Diodes, Proc.IEEE,vol.59,pp.
1l82-lt90, August,1971.
16.Torrey,H.C,andCA.Whitmer: "Crystal Rectifiers," MITRadiation Laboratory Series,vol.15, McGraw-Hili BookCompany, NewYork,1948.
17.Dickens,L.E.,andD.W.Maki:AnIntegrated-Circuit Balanced Mixer,ImageandSumEnhanced.
IEEETrans.,vol.MTT-23, pp.276-281, March,1975.
18.Chandler, H.M.:Microwave LowNoiseAmplifiers ForUseinRadarSystems, TheMarconi Review, vol.35,no.185,pp.94-120,2dqtr.,1972.
19.Lindauer, J.T.,andN.K.Osbrink: GaAsFETAmplifiers areClosing FastontheLow-Noise Narrowband Leaders, Microwave SystemNews,vol.5,pp.63-67,April/May, 1976.
20.Emery,F.E.:LowNoiseGaAsFETAmplifiers, Microwave J.,vol.20,pp.79-82,June,1977.
21.Miller,R.E.,T.G.Phillips, D.E.Iglesias,andR.H.Kneer:NoisePerformance ofMicrowave GaAs F.E.T.Amplifiers atLowTemperatures, Electronics Letters.vol.13,no.I,pp.10-11.Jan.6,'1977.
22.Mumford, W.W.:ABroadband Microwave NoiseSource,BellSystemTech.J.,vol.28,pp.608·-618, October, 1949.
23.IEEEStandard 686-1917: "IEEEStandard RadarDefinitions," Nov.9,1977. RECEIVERS, DlSPLA YS,ANDDUPLEXERS 367 24.Watson, H.A.,"Microwave Semiconductor Devices andTheirCircuitApplications," McGraw-Hili BookCompany, NewYork,1969.
25.Howes.M.J.,andD.V.Morgan (eds.):"Microwave Devices," JohnWiley&Sons,NewYork,1976.
26.Herg,A.A.:RadarIndicators andDisplays, chap.6of"RadarHandbook," edtbyM.I.Skolnik, McGraw-Hili BookCompany.
NewYork,1970.
27.Ryall.D.W.G..andJ.Wild:PresentandFutureRadarDisplayTechniques, International Conf.on Radar- I'resental/(IFlllllre,Oct.23-25,1973,pp.201-206, lEEConference Publication no.105.
28.Lawson, J.L.,andG.E.Uhlenbeck: "Threshold Signals," vol.24,M.I.T.Radiation Laboratory Series.
McGraw-Hili BookCompany, NewYork,1950.
29.Baker,C.If.:"ManandRadarDisplays," Macmillan Company, NewYork,1962.
.'0.Luxenberg, H.R.,andR.L.Kuehn:"DisplaySystems Engineering," McGraw-Hill BookCompany.
NewYork,1968.
31.Nairn,N.P.:BrightRadarDisplays Employing Direct-View StorageTubes,Conference onAirTraffic ControlSrstems Engineering andDesign,London, Mar.13-17,1967,lEEConference Publication no.
2R,pp.7-10.
32.Lyon,I.0.:Scan-Converted BrightDisplays forAirTrafficControl Systems, Conference onAir TrafficCOlllrol Systems Ellgineering andDesign,London, Mar.13-17,1967.lEEConference Publica­ tionno.28,pp.41-44.
33.O'Neal, N.V.,andP.M.Thiebaud: AScanConverter RadarDisplay System, NavalResearch Laboratory Memorandum Report2979,Washington, D.C.,January, 1975.
.34.Robertson, J.W.,andF.J.Savill:RearPortDisplays: TheirAdvantages, Limitations, andDesign Problems forRadarApplications, International Conference onRadar-Present andFuture,Oct.23-25.
1973,London, IEEConference Publication no.105,pp.207-212.
35.Odoardi, F.,andC'.Maggi:Modern RadarDataDisplaySystem:TheSeleniaIDM-7DigitalDisplay, RiristaTecnica Selenia(Rome.Italy),vol.2,no.4,pp.53-61,1975.
36.Kernan.
P.:Low-Cost Processing andDisplay SystemforRadarTracking andIntercept, IEEE EASCON '75Conl1ention Record,pp.108-Ato108G,1975.
37.Reintjes, J.F.,andG.T.Coate:" Principles ofRadar,"3ded.,chap.12,McGraw-Hill BookCompany, NewYork,1952.
38.Riblet,H.J.:TheShort-Slot HybridJunction, Proc,IRE,vol.40,pp.180-184, February, 1952.
39.Jones.CW.:Broad-Band Balanced Duplexers, IRETrans.,vol.MIT-5, pp.4-12,January, 1957.
40.Brown,N.J.:Modern Receiver Protection Capabilities withTR-Limiters, Microwave J.,vol.17,pp.
61-64.February, 1974.
41.Maddix, H.:CleanupinTRTubes,IEEETrans.,vol.ED-IS,pp.98-104,February, 1968.
42.Leenov, D.:TheSiliconPINDiodeasaMicrowave RadarProtector atMegawatt Levels,IEEE Trans.,vol.ED-II,pp.53-61,February, 1964.
43.Garver, R.V.:"Microwave DiodeControl Devices," ArtechHouse,lnc., Dedham, Mass.,1976.
44.White,J.F.:"Semiconductor Control," ArtechHouse,Dedham, Mass.,1977.
45.Brown.N.J.:Control andProtection Devices, IEEENEREM 74Record, pt4:RadarSystems and Components, Oct.28-31,1974,IEEECatalog No.74CHO9340NEREM, Library ofCongress Catalog no.61-3748.
46.Kupke.W.F.,T.S.Hartwick, andM.T.Weiss:Solid-State X-Band PowerLimiter, IRETrans.,vol.
MIT-9, pp.472-480, November, 1961.
47.Knerr,R.H.:AnAnnotated Bibliography ofMicrowave Circulators andIsolators: 1968-1975,/EEE Trans.,vol.MIT-23, pp.818-825, October, 1975.
48.Gawronski, M.J.,andH.Goldie:200WMICL-BandReceiver Protector, Microwave J.,vol.20,pp.
43-46,May,1977.
49.Ratliff,P.C,W.Cherry, M.J.Gawronski, andH.Goldie: L-Band ReceIver Protection, Microwave J.•vol.19,pp.57-60,January, 1976.
50.Goldie,H.:What'sNewWithReceiver Protectors?, Microwaves, vol.IS,pp.44-52,January, 1976.
51.Ferguson, P.,andR.D.Dokken: ForHigh-Power Protection ...TryMultipacting, Microwaves, vol.
13,pp.52-53,July,1974.
52.Goldie,H.:Radioactive (Tritium) IgnitorsforPlasmaLimiters,lEEE Trans.,vol.ED-19,pp.917-928, August, 1972.
53.Nelson,T.M.•andH.Goldie: FastActingX-Band Receiver Protector UsingVaractors,lEEE MIT Symposium Digest,pp.176-177, 1974.AlsoWestinghouse Systems Development Division (Baltimore.
Md.)reportDS('-973I bythesameauthorstitled,FastActingVaractors forSub-Nanosecond Power Limiting inReceiver Protectors (nodate).
54.Hirsch,R.B.:PlainTalkonLogAmps,Microwaves, vol.17,pp.40-44,March,1978.(TheefTect ofIF gainonthereceiverdynamic rangewasalsoindicated byWarrenD.White,oneofthereviewers ofthe revisedmanuscript ofthisbook.) 368 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  55.
Reynolds, J.
F., and M.
R.
Rosenzweig: Learn the Language of Mixer Specification, Microwa~~es, vol.
 17, pp.
72-80, May, 1978.
 56.
Hallford, B.
R.: Low Conversion Loss X Band Mixer, Microwave J., vol.
21, pp.
53-59, April, 1978  57.
Robertson, J.
W., and F.
J.
Savill: Practical Experience with Rear Port Displays, Intrrnurionul Conjr-  ence on Displays for Man-Machine Systems, 4-7 April, 1977 IEE (London) Conference Publication no.
 150, pp.
17-19.
 58.
Hopkin, V.
D.: Colour Displays in Air Traffic Control, International Conference on Displays for  Man-Machine Systems, Apr.
4-7, 1977, IEE (London) Conference Publication no.
150, pp.
46-49.
 59.
McLoughlan, S.
D., M.
B.
Thomas, and G.
Watkins: The Plasma Panel as a Potential Solution to the  Bright Labelled Radar Display Problem, International Conference on Displays for Man-Machine  Systems, Apr.
4-7, 1977, IEE (London) Conference Publication no.
150, pp.
14-16.
 60.
Jay, F.
(ed-in-ch.): "IEEE Standard Dictionary of Electrical and Electronics Terms," 2d ed., Inst.
of  Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Inc., New York, 1977.
 61.
Anonymous: News item in Aviation Week and Space Technology, vol.
109, no.
13, p.
61, Sept.
25, 1978.
 62.
Tenenholtz, R.: Designing Megawatt Diode Duplexers, Microwave J., vol.
21, pp.
30-34, Dec., 1978,  and vol.
22, pp.
63-68, Jan., 1979.
3  368INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS 55.Reynolds,1.
F.,andM.R.Rosenzweig: LearntheLanguage ofMixerSpecification, MicrowQI'es, vol.
17,pp.72-80,May,1978.
.
56.Hallford, B.R.:LowConversion LossXBandMixer,Microwalle J.,vol.21,pp.53-59,April,1978.
57.Robertson, J.W.,andF.J.Savill:Practical Experience withRearPortDisplays, InterntJtional COI,ler­ enceonDisplaysfor Man-Machine Systems, 4-7April,1977lEE(London) Conference Publication no.
150,pp.17-19.
58.Hopkin, V.D.:ColourDisplaysinAirTrafficControl, International Conference onDisplays for Man-Machine Systems, Apr.4-7,1977,lEE(London) Conference Publication no.150,pp.46-49.
59.McLoughlan, S.D.,M.B.Thomas, andG.Watkins: ThePlasmaPanelasaPotential Solution tothe BrightLabelled RadarDisplay Problem, International Conference onDisplays forMan-Machine Systems, Apr.4-7,1977, lEE(London) Conference Publication no.150,pp.14-16.
60.Jay,F.(ed-in-ch.): "IEEEStandard Dictionary ofElectrical andElectronics Terms," 2ded.,Inst.of Electrical andElectronics Engineers, Inc.,NewYork,1977.
61.Anonymous: NewsiteminAviation WeekandSpaceTechnology, vol.109,no.13,p.61,Sept.25,1978.
62.Tenenholtz, R.:Designing Megawatt DiodeDuplexers, Microwave J.,vol.21,pp.30-34,Dec.,1978, andvol.22,pp.63-68,Jan.,1979.
.J CHAPTER  TEN  DETECTION OF RADAR SIGNALS IN NOISE  The two basic operations performed by radar are (I) detectio~t of the presence of reflecting  objects, and (2) exrractiotl of information from the received waveform to obtain such target  data as position, velocity, and perhaps size.
The operations of detection and extraction may be  performed separately and in either order, although a radar that is a good detection device is  usually a good radar for extracting information, and vice versa.
In this chapter some aspects of  the problem of detecting radar signals in the presence of noise will be considered.
Noise  ultimately limits the capability of any radar.
The problem of extracting information from the  received waveform is described in the next chapter.
The detection of signals in the presence of  clutter is discussed in Chap.
13.
 A network wllose frequency-respoose function maximizes the output peak-signal-to-tnean-  noise (power) ratio is called a matchedfilter.
This criterion, or its equivalent, is used for the  design of almost all radar receivers.
 The frequency-response function, denoted H( f ), expresses the relative amplitude and  phase of the output of a network with respect to the input when the input is a pure sinusoid.
 The magnitude I H( f) I of the frequency-response function is the receiver amplitude passband  characteristic.
If the bandwidth of the receiver passband is wide compared with that occupied  by the signal energy, extraneous noise is introduced by the excess bandwidth which lowers the  output signal-to-noise ratio.
On the other hand, if the receiver bandwidth is narrower than the  bandwidth occupied by the signal, the noise energy is reduced along with a considerable part  of the signal energy.
The net result is again a lowered signal-to-noise ratio.
Thus there is an  optimum bandwidth at which the signal-to-noise ratio is a maximum.
This is well known to  the radar receiver designer.
The rule of thumb quoted in pulse radar practice is that the  CHAPTER TEN DETECTION OFRADAR SIGNALS INNOISE 10.1INTRODUCTION Thetwobasicoperations performed byradarare(1)detection ofthepresence ofreflecting objects,and(2)extraction ofinformation fromthereceived waveform toobtainsuchtarget dataasposition, velocity, andperhapssize.Theoperations ofdetection andextraction maybe performed separately andineitherorder,although aradarthatisagooddetection deviceis usuallyagoodradarforextracting information, andviceversa.Inthischaptersomeaspectsof theproblem ofdetecting radarsignalsinthepresence ofnoisewillbeconsidered.
Noise ultimately limitsthecapability ofanyradar.Theproblem ofextracting information fromthe received waveform isdescrihed inthenextchapter.
Thedetection ofsignalsinthepresence of clutterisdiscussed inChap.13.
(' 10.2MATCHED-FILTER RECEIVER18 Anetwork whosefrequency-response function maximizes theoutputpeak-signal-to-mean­ noise(power) ratioiscalledamatched filter.Thiscriterion, oritsequivalent, isusedforthe designofalmostallradarreceivers.
Thefrequency-response function, denotedH(f),expresses therelativeamplitude and phaseoftheoutputofanetwork withrespecttotheinputwhentheinputisapuresinusoid.
ThemagnitudeIH(f)Iofthefrequency-response function isthereceiveramplitude passband characteristic.
Ifthebandwidth ofthereceiverpassband iswidecompared withthatoccupied bythesignalenergy,extraneous noiseisintroduced bytheexcessbandwidth whichlowersthe outputsignal-to-noise ratio.Ontheotherhand,ifthereceiverbandwidth isnarrower thanthe bandwidth occupied bythesignal,thenoiseenergyisreduced alongwithaconsiderable part ofthesignalenergy.Thenetresultisagainalowered signal-to-noise ratio.Thusthereisan optimum bandwidth atwhichthesignal-to-noise ratioisamaximum.
Thisiswellknownto theradarreceiver designer.
Theruleofthumbquotedinpulseradarpractice isthatthe receiver bandwidth B should be approximately equal to the reciprocal of the pulse width T.
As  we shall see later, this is a reasonable approximation for pillse radars with conventional  superheterodyne receivers.
It is not generally valid for other waveforms, however, and is  mentioned to illustrate in a qualitative manner the effect of the receiver characteristic on  signal-to-noise ratio.
The exact specification of the optimum receiver characteristic involves  the frequency-response function and the shape of the received waveform.
 The receiver frequency-response function, for purposes of this discussion, is assumed to  apply from the antenna terminals to the output of the IF amplifier.
(The second detector and  video portion of the well-designed radar superheterodyne receiver will have negligible effect on  the output signal-to-noise ratio if the receiver is designed as a matched filter.) Narrowbanding  is most conveniently accomplished in the IF.
The bandwidths of the RF and mixer stages of  the normal superheterodyne receiver are usually large compared with the IF bandwidth.
 Therefore the frequency-response function of the portion of the receiver included'between the  antenna terminals to the output of the IF amplifier is taken to be that of the IF amplifier alone.
 Thus we need only obtain the frequency-response function that maximizes the signal-to-noise  ratio at the output of the IF.
The IF amplifier may be considered as a filter with gain.
The  response of this filter as a function of frequency is the property of interest.
 For a received waveform s(t) with a given ratio of signal energy E to noise energy No (or  noise power per hertz of bandwidth), North1 showed that the frequency-response functton of  the linear, time-invariant filter which maximizes the output peak-signal-to-mean-noise  (power) ratio for a fixed input signal-to-noise (energy) ratio is  H(f) = G,S*(f) exp ( -j2ncSt 1) (10.1)  00  where S(f) = s(t) exp (-j2zfi) dl = voltage spectrum (Fourier transform) of input  J -m  signal  S*(f) = complex conjugate of S( f)  t, = fixed value of time at which signal is observed to be maximum  G, = constant equal to maximum filter gain (generally taken to be unity)  The noise that accompanies the signal is assumed to be stationary and to have a uniform  spectrum (white noise).
It need not be gaussian.
If the noise is not white, Eq.
(10.1) may be  modified as discussed later in this section.
The filter whose frequency-response function is  given by Eq.
(10.1) has been called the North filter, the conjugate filter, or more usually the  matched filter.
It has also been called the Fourier transform criterion.
It should not be confused  with the circuit-theory concept of impedance matching, which maximizes the power transfer  rather than the signal-to-noise ratio.
 The frequency-response function of the matched filter is the conjugate of the spectrum of  the received waveform except for the phase shift exp (- j2rcftl).
This phase shift varies uniformly  with frequency.
Its effect is to cause a constant time delay.
A time delay is necessary in the  specification of the filter for reasons of physical realizability since there can be no output from  the filter until the signal is applied.
The frequency spectrum of the received signal may be  written as an amplitude spectrum IS( f) ( and a phase spectrum exp [- j4,( f )].
The matched-  filter frequency-response function may similarly be written in terms of its amplitude and phase  spectra / H( f) ) and exp [-I&,( f )].
Ignoring the constant G,, Eq.
(10.1) for the matched filter  may then be written as  and 4m(f) = -4df) + 2xfil (10.3b)  370INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS receiverbandwidth 8shouldbeapproximately equaltothereciprocal ofthepulse width r.As weshallseelater,thisisareasonable approximation forpulseradarswithconventional superheterodyne receivers.
Itisnotgenerally validforotherwaveforms, however, andis mentioned toillustrate inaqualitative manner theeffectofthereceiver characteristic on signal-to-noise ratio.Theexactspecification oftheoptimum receiver characteristic involves thefrequency-response function andtheshapeofthereceived waveform.
Thereceiver frequency-response function, forpurposes ofthisdiscussion, isassumed to applyfromtheantenna terminals totheoutputoftheIFamplifier.
(Theseconddetector and videoportionofthewell-designed radarsuperheterodyne receiverwillhavenegligible efTecton theoutputsignal-to-noise ratioifthereceiver isdesigned asamatched filter.)Narrowbanding ismostconveniently accomplished intheIF.Thebandwidths oftheRFandmixerstagesof thenormalsuperheterodyne receiver areusuallylargecompared withtheIFbandwidth.
Therefore thefrequency-response function oftheportionofthereceiver included' between the antenna terminals totheoutputoftheIFamplifier istakentobethatoftheIFamplifier alone.
Thusweneedonlyobtainthefrequency-response function thatmaximizes thesignal-to-noise ratioattheoutputoftheIF.TheIFamplifier maybeconsidered asafilterwithgain.The response ofthisfilterasafunction offrequency istheproperty ofinterest.
Forareceived waveform s(t)withagivenratioofsignalenergyEtonoiseenergyNo(or noisepowerperhertzofbandwidth), North jshowedthatthefrequency-response function of thelinear,time-invariant filterwhich·maximizes theoutputpeak-signal-to-mean-noise (power) ratioforafixedinputsignal-to-noise (energy) ratiois H(J)=GaS*(J) exp(-j2nftd (10.1) 00 whereS(J)=fs(t)exp(-j2nJt)dt=voltage spectrum (Fourier transform) ofinput -00 signal S*(J)=complex conjugate ofS(J) tj=fixedvalueoftimeatwhichsignalisobserved tobemaximum Ga=constant equaltomaximum filtergain(generally takentobeunity) Thenoisethataccompanies thesignalisassumed tobestationary andtohaveauniform spectrum (whitenoise).Itneednotbegaussian.Ifthenoiseisnotwhite,Eq.(10.1)maybe modified asdiscussed laterinthissection.
Thefilterwhosefrequency-response function is givenbyEq.(10.1)hasbeencalledtheNorthfilter,theconjugate filter,ormoreusuallythe matched filter.IthasalsobeencalledtheFouriertransJorm criterion.
Itshouldnotbeconfused withthecircuit-theory concept ofimpedance matching, whichmaximizes thepowertransfer ratherthanthesignal-to-noise ratio.
Thefrequency-response function ofthematched filteristheconjugate ofthespectrum of thereceived waveform exceptforthephaseshiftexp(-j2nft1)'Thisphaseshiftvariesuniformly withfrequency.
Itseffectistocauseaconstant timedelay.Atimedelayisnecessary inthe specification ofthefilterforreasonsofphysical realizability sincetherecanbenooutputfrom thefilteruntilthesignalisapplied.
Thefrequency spectrum ofthereceived signalmaybe writtenasanamplitude spectrumIS(J)Iandaphasespectrum exp[-jtPs(J)].Thematched­ tilterfrequency-response function maysimilarly bewrittenintermsofitsamplitude andphase spectraIH(J)Iandexp[-jtPm(J)].
Ignoring theconstantGa,Eq.(10.1)forthematched filter maythenbewrittenas or andIH(J)Iexp[-jtPm(J)]=IS(J)Iexp{j[tPJ(J)-2nJt.]} IH(J}I=IS(J)I tPm(J)=-tPs(J)+2nftj(to.2) (1O.3a) (1O.3b) 'l'hus the amplitude spectrum of the matched filter is the same as the amplitude spectrurr~ of the  signal, but the phase spectrum of the matched filter is the negative of the phase spectrum of the  signal plus a phase shift proportional to frequency.
 The matched filter may also be specified by its impulse response Il(r), which is the inverse  1-ourier trar~sforrn of tI~c frequency-respot~se fur~ction.
 I = H(/) exp (j2nj1) d/  - w  Pt~ysically, the iri~pi~lse response is the output of the filter as a function of time when the itiput  is an irnpulse (delta function).
Substituting Eq.
(10.1) into Eq.
(10.4) gives  Since S*(f) = S(- f ), we have  a3  /I(() = G,, S(f) exp [j2nf (ti - r)] df = G,s(t - t)  A rather interesting result is that the impulse response of the matched filter is the image of  the received waveform; that is, it is the same as the received signal run backward in time  starting from the fixed time t,.
Figure 10.1 shows a received waveform s(t) and the impulse  response It(() of its matched filter.
 The impulse response of the filter, if it is to be realizable, is not defined for t < 0.
(One  cannot have any response before the impulse is applied.) Therefore we must always have  r < r ,.
This is equivalent to the condition placed on the transfer function H(f) that there be a  phase shift exp (-j2nj-t ,).
However, for the sake of convenience, the impulse response of the  matched filter is sometimes written simply as s(- t).
 Derivation of the matched-filter characteristic, The frequency-response function of the  matched filter has been derived by a number of authors using either the calculus of varia-  tions' or the Schwartz ineq~ality.~ In this section we shall derive the matched-filter frequency-  response function using the Schwartz inequality.
 I-,  (a)  I I-+ Figure 10.1 (a) Received waveform s(t); (b) impulse response  (b) It(t) of the matched filter.
 DETECTION OFRADAR SIGNALS INNOISE371 Thustheamplitude spectrum orthematched filteristhesameastheamplitude spectrum ofthe signal,butthephasespectrum ofthematched filteristhenegative ofthephasespectrum ofthe signalplusaphaseshirtproportional tofrequency.
Thematched filtermayalsobespecified byitsimpulse response h(t),whichistheinverse Fourier transform ofthefrequency-response function.
00 h(t)=fHU)exp(j2nft)df -00(10.4) Physically, theimpulse response istheoutputofthefilterasafunction oftimewhentheinput isanimpulse (deltafunction).
Substituting Eq.(10.1)intoEq.(10.4)gives II(t)=GafooS*U)exp[-j2rif(tl -t)Jdf -00 SinceS*(f)=S(-f),wehave h(t)=GafooSU)exp[j2nf(tt-t)]df=Gas(tt-t) -00(10.5) (10.6) Aratherinteresting resultisthattheimpulse response ofthematched filteristheimageof thereceived waveform; thatis,itisthesameasthereceived signalrunbackward intime starting fromthefixedtime(I'Figure10.1showsareceived waveform s(t)andtheimpulse response II(r)ofitsmatched filter.
Theimpulse response ofthefilter,ifitistoberealizable, isnotdefinedfort<O.(One cannothaveanyresponse beforetheimpulse isapplied.) Therefore wemustalwayshave ( <(I'Thisisequivalent tothecondition placedonthetransfer functionH(f)thattherebea phaseshiftexp(-j2rr.ftI)'However, forthesakeofconvenience, theimpulse response ofthe matched filterissometimes writtensimplyass(-t).
Derivation ofthematched-filter characteristic.
Thefrequency-response function ofthe matched filterhasbeenderived byanumber ofauthors usingeitherthecalculus ofvaria­ tions1ortheSchwartz inequality.9 Inthissectionweshallderivethematched-filter frequency­ response function usingtheSchwartz inequality.
5(t) t,t--- (a) h(t) (b)t-Figure10.1(a)Received waveforms(t);(b)impulseresponse h(r)ofthematched filter. 372 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  We wish to show that the frequency-response function of the linear, time-invariant filter  which maximizes the output peak-signal-to-mean-noise ratio is  when the input noise is stationary and white (uniform spectral density).
The ratio we wish to  maximize is  where (s0(t)lm,, = maximum value of output signal voltage and N = mean noise power at  receiver output.
The ratio Rf is not quite the same as the signal-to-noise ratio which has been  considered previously in the radar equation.
[Note that the peak power as used iere is actually  the peak instantaneous power, whereas the peak power referred to in the discussion of the  radar equation in Chap.
2 was the average value of the power over the duration of a pulse of  sine wave.
The ratio R , is twice the average signal-to-noise power ratio when the input signal  s(t) is a rectangular sine-wave pulse.] The output voltage of a filter with frequency-response  function H( f) is  where S(f) is the Fourier transform of the input (received) signal.
The mean output noise  power is  where No is the input noise power per unit bandwidth.
The factor appears before the integral  because the limits extend from - oo to + oo, whereas No is defined as the noise power per cycle  of bandwidth over positive values only.
Substituting Eqs.
(10.8) and (10.9) into (10.7) and  assuming that the maximum value of Is,(t)12 occurs at time t = tl, the ratio Rf becomes  Schwartz's inequality states that if P and Q are two complex functions, then  The equality sign applies when P = kQ, where k is a constant.
Letting  P* = S(f) exp (jZnfl,) and Q = H(f)  and recalling that  372INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS Wewishtoshowthatthefrequency-response function ofthelinear,time-invariant filter whichmaximizes theoutputpeak-signal-to-mean-noise ratiois H(J)=GaS*(J) exp(-j2nft1) whentheinputnoiseisstationary andwhite(uniform spectraldensity).
Theratiowewishto..
.maxImIze IS (to.7) wherejso(t)lmax =maximum valueofoutputsignalvoltageandN=meannoisepowerat receiveroutput.TheratioRfisnotquitethesameasthesignal-to-noise ratiowhichhasbeen considered previously intheradarequation.
[Notethatthepeakpowerasusedttereisactually thepeakinstantaneous power,whereas thepeakpowerreferred tointhediscussion ofthe radarequation inChap.2wastheaveragevalueofthepowerovertheduration ofapulseof sinewave.TheratioRfistwicetheaveragesignf:ll-to-noise powerratiowhentheinputsignal s(t)isarectangular sine-wave pulse.]Theoutputvoltageofafilterwithfrequency-response functionH(J)is Iso(t)I= ,f:a?S(J)H(J) exp(j2nft)dfI (to.8) whereS(J)istheFourier transform oftheinput(received) signal.Themeanoutputnoise poweris (10.9) whereNoistheinputnoisepowerperunitbandwidth.
Thefactor-1appearsbeforetht:integral becausethelimitsextendfrom-00to+00,whereasNoisdefinedasthenoisepoweri>er cycle ofbandwidth overpositive valuesonly.Substituting Eqs.(to.8)and(to.9)into(to.7)and assuming thatthemaximum valueofIso(t) 12occursattimet=tl>theratioRfbecomes R f~It:S(J)H(f) exp(j2nft,)df' NoJa?IH(f)12df 2 - a? Schwartz's inequality statesthatifPandQaretwocomplex functions, then Ip*PdxJQ*Qdx~IIP*Qdx12 Theequality signapplieswhenP=kQ,wherekisaconstant.
Letting p*=S(f)expU2nfc1)andQ=H(J) andrecalling that fp.Pdx=fIP12dx(to.10) (10.11) I>E'TECTION OF RAIIAR SIGNALS IN NOISE 373  we get, on applying the Scllwartz inequality to the numerator of Eq.
(10.10),  ,r > n~  ( 7) 1 if = s2(t) dt = signal energy = E (10.13)  m - - m  -l'tiereTc>re we have  The frequency-response function which maximizes the peak-signal-to-mean-noise ratio R,  rnay be obtained by noting that the equality sign in Eq.
(10.1 1) applies when P = kQ, or  where the constant k has been set equal to l/G,.
 The interesting property of the matched filter is that no matter what the shape of the  input-signal waveform, the maximum ratio of the peak signal power to the mean noise power  is simply twice the energy E contained in the signal divided by the noise power per hertz of  band width No.
The noise power per hertz of bandwidth, No, is equal to kTo F where k is the  Roltzmann constant, To is the standard temperature (290 K), and F is the noise figure.
 The matched filter and the correlation function.
The output of the matched filter is not a replica  of the input signal.
However, from the point of view of detecting signals in noise, preservjng the  shape of the signal is of no importance.
If it is necessary to preserve the shape of the input  pulse rather than maximize the output signal-to-noise ratio, some other criterion must be  employed.
'O  The output of the matched filter may be shown to be proportional to the input signal  cross-correlated with a replica of the transmitted signal, except for the time delay tl.
Thc  cross-correlqion function R(t) of two signals y(A) and s(A), each of finite duration, is defined as  The output yo(t) of a filter with impulse response h(t) when the input is yi,(t) = s(t) + rt(t) is  If the filter is a matched filter, then h(A) = s(tl - A) and Eq.
(10.17) becomes  Thus the matched filter forms the cross correlation between the received signal corrupted by  noise and a replica of the transmitted signal.
The replica of the transmitted signal is "built in "  to the matched filter via the frequency-response function.
If the input signal y,,(t) were the  DETECTION OFRADAR SIGNALS INNOISE373 wcgct,onapplying theSchwartz inequality tothenumerator ofEq.(10.10), Cl'"' 00 rIH(f) 12elfr IS(f) 12df ·-co ·-00RJ<_.:..::....-_-------- - ~orOOIH(f)12df 2 .- <YJ FromParseval's thcorcm.No 2(10.12) r'"IS(f)12df=rae,S2(t)dt=signalenergy=£ ....<'Y1 ..-00 Thereforc wehave 2£Rf<-­-No(10.13) (10.14) Thefrequency-response function whichmaximizes thepeak-signal-to-mean-noise ratioRf maybeobtained bynotingthattheequality signinEq.(10.11)applieswhenP=kQ,or H(f)=GaS*(J) exp(-j2nftd (10.15) wheretheconstantkhasbeensetequaltoI/Ga• Theinteresting property ofthematched filteristhatnomatterwhattheshapeofthe input-signal waveform, themaximum ratioofthepeaksignalpowertothemeannoisepower issimplytwicetheenergyEcontained inthesignaldividedbythenoisepowerperhertzof bandwidth No.Thenoisepowerperhertzofbandwidth, No,isequaltokToFwherekisthe Boltzmann constant, Toisthestandard temperature (290K),andFisthenoisefigure.
lbematched filterandthecorrelation function.
Theoutputofthematched filterisnotareplica oftheinputsignal.However, fromthepointofviewofdetecting signalsinnoise,preservjng the shapeofthesignalisofnoimportance.
Ifitisnecessary topreserve theshapeoftheinput pulseratherthanmaximize theoutputsignal-to-noise ratio,someothercriterion mustbe employed.
I0 Theoutputofthematched filtermaybeshowntob(:proportional totheinputsignal cross-correlated withareplicaofthetransmitted signal,exceptforthetimedelaytl'The cross-correl<\lion functionR(t)oftwosignalsY(A)andS(A),eachoffiniteduration, isdefinedas R(t)=Ioo Y(A)S(A-t)dA -00(10.16) Theoutputyo(t)ofafilterwithimpulse response h(t)whentheinputisYin{t)=s{t)+ll{t)is 00 yo(t)=IYin(A)h(t-A)dA -00 Ifthefilterisamatched filter,then11(,1.)=S{tl-A)andEq.(1O.17)becomes Yo(t)=Ioo Y'n(A)s(t I -t+A)dA=R(t-td -00(10.17) (10.18) Thusthematched filterformsthecrosscorrelation between thereceived signalcorrupted by noiseandareplicaofthetransmitted signal.Thereplicaofthetransmitted signalis"builtin" tothematched filterviathefrequency-response function.IftheinputsignalYln(t)werethe 374 lNTRODUCTlON TO RADAR SYSTEMS  L 0% I 1 I I ] I I 1 I I 1 ll-T-T--I-l-T-] 1 11-1 -  aJ .- -  ' S/ng/e - tuned (RL C  resonont passband  0 1 .O 2.0 3.0 4 0 5 0  Holf-power bandwidth times pulsewidth, Br  Figure 10.2 Efficiency, relative to a matched filter, of a single-tuned resonant filter and a rectangular  shaped filter, when the input signal is a rectangular pulse of width r.
B = filter bandwidth.
 same as the signal s(t) for which the matched filter was designed (that is, the noise is assumed  negligible), the output would be the autocorrelation function.
The autocorrelation function of  a rectangular pulse of width r is a triangle whose base is of width 2.r.
 Efficiency of nonmatched filters.
In practice the matched filter cannot always be obtained  exactly.
It is appropriate, therefore, to examine the efficiency of nonmatched filters compared  with the ideal matched filter.
The measure of efficiency is taken as the peak signal-to-noise  ratio from the nonmatched filter divided by the peak signal-to-noise ratio (2E/No) from the  matched filter.
Figure 10.2 plots the efficiency for a single-tuned (RLC) resonant filter and a  rectangular-shaped filter of half-power bandwidth B, when the input is a rectangular pulse of  width t.
The maximum efficiency of the single-tuned filter occurs for Br w 0.4.
The correspond-  ing loss in signal-to-noise ratio is 0.88 dB as compared with a matched filter.
Table 10.1 lists  Table 10.1 Efficiency of nonmatched filters compared with the matched filter  input signal  Rectangular pulse  Rectangular pulse  Gaussian pulse  Gaussian pulse  Rectangular pulse  Rectangular pulse  Rectangular pulse Loss in SNR compared  with matched filter, dB  0.85  0.49  0.49  0 (matched)  0.88  0.56  0.5  I Filter  Rectangular  Gaussian  Rectangular  Gaussian  One-stage,  single-tuned circuit  2 cascaded single-tuned  stages , ..
 5 cascaded &le-tuned  stages ' .
 Optimum Br  1.37  0.72 0.72  0.44  0.4  0.613  0.672  374INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS L0 9r--r-....-.,--,---,----,----.,------r----r-,--..-,..---,----,-r ,--T-TT]11I-'I w- ~08 w.cu007­ E o-t;0.6 w0.
'"t:'O.S- ~ L0.4- <U- 003 >­uc: .~02u .....w "0.1-Rectangula r­ shapedpassband --Single-tuned (RLC) resonant passband 1.0 2.0 3.0 40 Holt-power bondw'ldth timespulsewidth, BT50J Figure10.2Efficiency, relativetoamatched filter,ofasingle-tuned resonant filterandarectangular shapedfilter,whentheinputsignalisarectangular pulseofwidthr.B=filterbandwidth.
sameasthesignals(t)forwhichthematched filterwasdesigned (thatis,thenoiseisassumed negligible), theoutputwouldbetheautocorrelation function.
Theautocorrelation function of arectangular pulseofwidthrisatriangle whosebaseisofwidth2r...
Efficiency ofnonmatched filters.Inpractice thematched filtercannotalwaysbeobtained exactly.Itisappropriate, therefore, toexamine theefficiency ofnonmatched filterscompared withtheidealmatched filter.Themeasure ofefficiency istakenasthepeaksignal-to-noise ratiofromthenonmatched filterdividedbythepeaksignal-to-noise ratio(2E/No)fromthe matched filter.Figure10.2plotstheefficiency forasingle-tuned (RLC)resonant filteranda rectangular-shaped filterofhalf-power bandwidth B,whentheinputisarectangular pulseof widthr.Themaximum efficiency ofthesingle-tuned filteroccursforBr;.:::::0;4,Thecorrespond­ inglossinsignal-to~noise ratiois0.88dBascompared withamatched filter.Table10.1lists Table10.1Efficiency ofnonmatched filterscompared withthematched filter LossinSNRcompared Inputsignal Filter Optimum Brwithmatched filter,dB Rectangular pulse Rectangular 1.37 0.85 Rectangular pulse Gaussian 0.72 0.49 Gaussian pulse Rectangular 0.72 0.49 Gaussian pulse Gaussian 0.44 0(matched) Rectangular pulse One-stage, single-tuned circuit 0.4 0.88 Rectangular pulse 2cascaded single-tuned stages...:',;~.0.613 0.56 Rectangular pulse 5cascaded single-tuned stages.
,.0.672 0.5 ; DETECTION OF RADAR SIGNALS IN NOISE 375  the values of Br which maximize the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) for various combinations of  filters and pulse shapes.
It can be seen that the loss in SNR incurred by use of these non-  matched filters is small.
 hlatched filter with nonwhite noise.
In the derivation of the matched-filter characteristic  [Eq.
(10.15)], the spectrurn of the noise accompanying the signal was assumed to be white; that  is, it was independent of frequency.
If this assumption were not true, the filter which maximizes  the output signal-to-noise ratio would not be the same as the matched filter of Eq.
(10.15).
It  has been shown " I' that if the input power spectrum of the interfering noise is given by  [N,(.f)J2, the frequency-response function of the filter which maximizes the output signal-to-  noise ratio is  When the noise is nonwhite, the filter which maximizes the output signal-to-noise ratio is  called the NWN (nonwhite noise) matched filter.
For white noise [Ni(f )I2 = constant and the  N W N matched-filter frequency-response function of Eq.
(10.19) reduces to that of Eq.
(10.15).
 Equation (10.19) can be written as  1 H( f) = -- --- '('I * exp ( - j2njii, )  NiO) ~a(~i(f))  This indicates that the NWN matched filter can be considered as the cascade of two filters.
The  first filter, with frequency-response function l/Ni( f ), acts to make the noise spectrum uniform,  or white.
It is sometimes called the whiteningfilter.
The second is the matched filter described  by Eq.
(10.15) when the input is white noise and a signal whose spectrum is S(f )/Ni(f ).
 10.3 CORRELATION  DETECTION'^^^  Equation (10.18) describes the output of the matched filter as the cross correlation between the  input signal and a delayed replica of the transmitted signal.
This implies that the matched-filter  receiver can be replaced by a cross-correlation receiver that performs the same rnathematica!  operation.
as shown in Fig.
10.3.
The input signal y(t) is multiplied by a delayed replica of the  transmitted Ggnal s(r - T,), and the product is passed through a low-pass filter to perform  the integration.
The cross-correlation receiver of Fig.
10.3 tests for the presence of a target at  only a single time delay T,.
Targets at other time delays, or ranges, might be found by varying  T,.
However, this requires a longer search time.
The search time can be reduced by adding  Received siqnol y;( l)  Mixer  (multiplier) filter Output  (integrator)  Stored Delay  Figure 103 Block diagram of a cross-correlation receiver.
 DETECTION OFRADAR SIGNALS INNOISE375 thevaluesofBrwhichmaximize thesignal-to-noiseratio,(SNR) forvariouscombinations of filtersandpulseshapes.ItcanbeseenthatthelossinSNRincurred byuseofthesenon­ malched filtersissmall.
Matched filterwithnonwhite noise.Inthederivation ofthematched-filter characteristic [Eq.(10.15)J, thespectrum ofthenoiseaccompanying thesignalwasassumed tobewhite;that is,itwasindependent offrequency.
Irthisassumption werenottrue, the filterwhichmaximizes theoutputsignal-ta-noise ratiowouldnotbethesameasthematched filterofEq.(10.15).It hasbeenshown 1113thatiftheinputpowerspectrum oftheinterfering noiseisgivenby [NlfW, thefrequency-response function ofthefilterwhichmaximizes theoutputsignal-to­ noiseratiois (10.19) Whenthenoiseisnonwhite, thefilterwhichmaximizes theoutputsignal-to-noise ratiois calledtheNWN(nonwhite noise)matched filter.Forwhitenoise[Nj(f)]2=constant andthe NWNmatched-filler frequency-response function ofEq.(10.19)reducestothatofEq.(10.15).
Equation (10.19)canbewrittenas 1 ( S(f))*.
H(J)=----- x G-- exp(-]2nJt)Nj(f) aNj(f) 1(10.20) Thisindicates thattheNWNmatched filtercanbeconsidered asthecascadeoftwofilters.The firstfilter,withfrequency-response functionIjNj(J),actstomakethenoisespectrum uniform, orwhite,Itissometimes calledthewhitening filter.Thesecondisthematched filterdescribed byEq.(10.15)whentheinputiswhitenoiseandasignalwhosespectrum isS(J)jNj(J).
10.3CORRELATION DETECfIONl4-23 Equation (10.18)describes theoutputofthematched filterasthecrosscorrelation between the inputsignalandadelayed replicaofthetransmitted signal.Thisimpliesthatthematched-filter receiver canbereplaced byacross-correlation receiverthatperforms thesame mathematica~ operation, asshowninFig.10.3.Theinputsignaly(t)ismultiplied byadelayed replicaofthe transmitted f1gnals(r-1;),andtheproduct ispassedthrough alow-pass filtertoperform theintegration.
Thecross-correlation receiver ofFig.10.3testsforthepresence ofatargetat onlyasingletimedelayT,.Targets atothertimedelays,orranges,mightbefoundbyvarying T,.However, thisrequires alongersearchtime.Thesearchtimecanbereduced byadding OutputReceived signalh(t)- MixerLow-pass (multlplierlf- filterf------ (integrator) Stored Delay replicasltlr,.s(t-T,.l FiRU"e10.3Blockdiagram ofacross-correlation receiver. parallel channels, each containing a delay line corresponding to a particular value of T,, as  well as a multiplier and low-pass filter.
In some applications it may be possible to record the  signal on some storage medium, and at a higher playback speed perform the search sequen-  tially with different values of T,.
That is, the playback speed is increased in proportion to the  number of time-delay intervals T, that are to be tested.
 Since the cross-correlation receiver and the matched-filter receiver are equivalent math-  ematically, the choice as to which one to use in a particular radar application is determined by  which is more practical to implement.
The matched-filter receiver, or an approximation, has  been generally preferred in the vast majority of applications.
 10.4 DETECTION CRITERIA J  The detection of weak signals in the presence of noise is equivalent to deciding whether the  receiver output is due to noise alone or to signal-plus-noise.
This is the type of decision  probably made (subconsciously) by a human operator on the basis of the information present  at the radar indicator.
When the detection process is carried out automatically by electronic  means without the aid of an operator, the detection criterion cannot be left to chance and must  be carefully specified and built into the decision-making device by the radar designer.
 In Chap.
2 the radar detection process was described in terms of threshold detection.
 Almost all radar detection decisions are based upon comparing the output of a receiver with  some threshold level.
If the envelope of the receiver output exceeds a pre-established threshold,  a signal is said to be present.
The purpose of the threshold is to divide the output into a region  of no detection and a region of detection; or in other words, the threshold detector allows a  choice between one of two hypotheses.
One hypothesis is that the receiver output is due to  noise alone; the other is that the output is due to signal-plus-noise.
It was shown in Chap.
2  that the dividing line between these two regions depended upon the probability of a false  alarm, which in turn is related to the average time between false alarms.
 There are two types of errors that might be made in the decision process.
These are  t~navoidable with observations of finite duration in the presence of noise.
One kind of error 15  to mistake noise for signal when only noise is present.
This occurs whenever the noise is large  enough to exceed the threshold level.
In statistical detection theory it is sometimes called a  type I error.
The radar engineer would call it a false alarm.
A type 11 error is one in which the  signal is erroneously considered to be noise when signal is actually present.
This is a missell  detection to the radar engineer.
The setting of the threshold represents a compromise between  these two types of errors.
A relatively large threshold will reduce the probability of a false  alarm, but there will be more missed detections.
The nature of the radar application will  influence to a large extent the relative importance of these two errors and, therefore, the setting  of the threshold.
 Neyman-Pearson observer.
The threshold level was selected in Chap.
2 so as not to exceed a  specified false-alarm probability; that is, the probability of detection was maximized for a fixed  probability of false alarm.
This is equivalent to fixing the probability of a type I error and  minimizing the type I1 error.
It is similar to the Neyman-Pearson test used in statistics  for determining the validity of a specified statistical hypothesi~.~~~~~ Therefore this type of  threshold detector is sometimes called a Neyman-Pearson Observer.
In statistical terms it is  claimed to be a uniformly most powerful test and is an optimum one, no matter what the a  priori probabilities of signal and noi~e.~"he Neyman-Pearson criterion is well suited for  radar application and is usually used in practice, whether knowingly or not.
 376INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS parallelchannels, eachcontaining adelaylinecorresponding toaparticular valueofT"as wellasamultiplier andlow-pass filter.Insomeapplications itmaybepossible torecordthe signa"!onsome storage medium, andatahigherplayback speedperform thesearchsequen­ tiallywithdifferent valuesofT,..Thatis,theplayback speedisincreased inproportion tothe numberoftime-delay intervals T,.thataretobetested.
Sincethecross-correlation receiverandthematched-filter receiverareequivalent math­ ematically, thechoiceastowhichonetouseinaparticular radarapplication isdetermined by whichismorepractical toimplement.
Thematched-filter receiver, oranapproximation, has beengenerally preferred inthevastmajority ofapplications.
lOADETECTION CRITERIA.J Thedetection ofweaksignalsinthepresence ofnoiseisequivalent todeciding whether the receiver outputisduetonoisealoneortosignal-plus-noise.
Thisisthetypeofdecision probably made(subconsciously) byahumanoperator onthebasisoftheinformation present attheradarindicator.
Whenthedetection processiscarriedoutautomatically byelectronic meanswithouttheaidofanoperator, thedetection criterion cannotbelefttochanceandmust becarefully specified andbuiltintothedecision-making devicebytheradardesigner.
InChap.2theradardetection processwasdescribed intermsofthreshold detection.
Almostallradardetection decisions arebaseduponcomparing theoutputofareceiverwith somethreshold level.Htheenvelope ofthereceiveroutputexceedsapre-established threshold, asignalissaidtobepresent.Thepurposeofthethreshold istodividetheoutputintoaregion ofnodetection andaregionofdetection; orinotherwords,thethreshold detector allowsa choicebetween oneoftwohypotheses.
Onehypothesis isthatthereceiveroutputisdueto noisealone;theotheristhattheoutputisduetosignal-plus-noise.
Itwasshown.in Chap.2 thatthedividing linebetween thesetworegionsdepended upontheprobability ofafalse alarm,whichinturnisrelatedtotheaveragetimebetween falsealarms.
Therearetwotypesoferrorsthatmightbemadeinthedecision process.
Theseare unavoidable withobservations offiniteduration inthepresence ofnoise.Onekindoferroris tomistakenoiseforsignalwhenonlynoiseispresent.Thisoccurswhenever thenoiseislarge enoughtoexceedthethreshold level.Instatistical detection theoryitissometimes calleda typeIerror.Theradarengineer wouldcallitafalsealarm.AtypeIIerrorisoneinwhichthe signaliserroneously considered tobenoisewhensignalisactually present.Thisisamissed detection totheradarengineer.
Thesettingofthethreshold represents acompromise between thesetwotypesoferrors.Arelatively largethreshold willreducetheprobability ofafalse alarm,buttherewillbemoremisseddetections.
Thenatureoftheradarapplication will influence toalargeextenttherelativeimportance ofthesetwoerrorsand,therefore, thesetting ofthethreshold.
Neyman-Pearson observer.
Thethreshold levelwasselected inChap.2soasnottoexceeda specified false-alarm probability; thatis,theprobability ofdetection wasmaximized forafixed probability offalsealarm.Thisisequivalent tofixingtheprobability ofatypeIerrorand minimizing thetypeIIerror.ItissimilartotheNeyman-Pearson testusedinstatistics fordetermining thevalidityofaspecified statistical hypothesis.24.2~ Therefore thistypeof threshold detector issometimes calledaNeyman-Pearson Observer.
Instatistical termsitis claimed tobeauniformly mostpowerful testandisanoptimum one,nomatterwhatthea prioriprobabilities ofsignalandnoise.25TheNeyman-Pearson criterion iswellsuitedfor radarapplication andisusuallyusedinpractice, whether knowingly ornot. I>f:I ECI ION OF RADAR SIGNALS IN NOIS1 377  Likelihood-ratio receiver.
The likelitlood ratio is an important statistical tool and may be  defiried as the ratio of the probability-detisity function corresponding to signal-plus-noise,  prn(r), to the probability-density function of noise alone, pn(t)).
 It is a rlieasure of how likely it is that the receiver envelope 1) is due to signal-plus-noise as  compared witti noise alone, It is a random variable and depends upon the receiver input.
If the  likelihood ratio l,,(t)) is sufficicrltly I;~rge, it would be reasonable to conclude that the siprial  was indeed present.
Thus detection rnay be accomplished by establishing a threshold at the  out put of a receiver which conlputes the likelihood ratio.
The selection of the proper threshold  level will dcpc~ld upor1 tltc statistical dctectiotl criterioti used and by the probabilities of error  desired and their relative importance.
 The likelihood ratio is primarily useful in the analysis of the statistical-detection problem.
 It is difficult to conceive, however, of a receiver that computes the likelihood ratio directly as  defined by Eq.
(10.21).
However, in certain cases the receiver which computes the likelihood  ratio is equivalent to a receiver which co~nputes the cross-correlation function or to one with a  matched-filter characteristic, that is, one which maximizes the output signal-to-noise ratio.24  Tile Neyrnan-Pearson Observer is equivalent to examining the likelihood ratio and deter-  rriining if L,(v) 2 K, where K is a real, nonnegative number dependent upon the probability of  false alarm selected.
 Interse probability receiver.
A detection criterion that has been popular particularly for the  theoretical analysis of statistical detection and for statistical parameter estimation is that  based on irlverse probability.
The usual detection criteria employ the concept of direct probabil-  ity, which describes the chance of an event happening on a given hypothesis.
For example, the  probability that a particular radar will detect a certain target under specified conditions is a  direct probability.
On the other hand, if an event actually happens, the problem of forming the  best estimate of the cause of the event is a problem in inverse probability.
For example, assume  the event in question to be the output voltage v from a radar receiver.
Upon obtaining this  voltage, it is of interest to determine whether the output was caused by noise or by signal in the  presence of noise.
The probabilities of obtaining noise and signal-plus-noise before the event  takes place are the a priori probabilities.
They represent the initial state of knowledge concern-  ing the even& The probability that the receiver output v was caused by noise or by signal-plus-  noise is an a posteriori probability and represents the state of knowledge obtained as a result  of observing the output.
 The method of inverse probability involves the use of the a priori probabilities associated  with each of the possible hypotheses which could explain the event.
The a priori probabilities  are used, along with a knowledge of the event, to compute the a posteriori probabilities.
A  separate a posteriori probability is computed for each hypothesis.
That hypothesis which  results in the largest a posteriori probability is selected as the most likely to explain the event.
 This method has been applied by Woodward and Davies to the reception of signals in  It is based upon the application of Bayes' rule for the probability of causes.29 The  joint probability of two events x and y is  where p(x) and p(y) = probabilities of events x and y, respectively  p(y 1 x) = conditional probability that event y will occur, given that event x has  occurred  p(~ 11.) - ronditir>tinl nrohnhilitv nf  veti it u eiven flint I.
hns nccr~rred  DETECTION OFRADAR SIGNALS INNOISE377 Likelihood-ratio receher.
Thelikelihood ratioisanimportant statistical toolandmaybe defined astheratiooftheprobahilliy~density function correspollding tosignal-plus-noise.
p,"(I').totheprobability-density function ofnoisealone,p"(v).
(10.21) Itisameasure ofhowlikelyitisthatthereceiver envelope IJisduetosignal-plus-noise as compared withnoisealone.Itisarandom variable anddepends uponthereceiverinput.Hthe likelihood ratioL.(p)issurticiently large,itwouldbereasonable toconclude thatthesignal wasindeedpresent.
Thusdetection Illaybeaccomplished byestablishing athreshold atthe outputofareceiver whichcomputes thelikelihood ratio.Theselection oftheproperthreshold levelwilldependuponthestatistical detection criterion usedandbytheprobabilities oferror desiredandtheirrelativeimportance.
Thelikelihood ratioisprimarily usefulintheanalysisofthestatistical-detection problem.
Itisdifficult toconceive, however, ofareceiverthatcomputes thelikelihood ratiodirectlyas definedbyEq.(10.21).However, incertaincasesthereceiver whichcomputes thelikelihood ratioisequivalent toareceiver whichcomputes thecross-correlation function ortoonewitha matched-filter characteristic, thatis,onewhichmaximizes theoutputsignal-to-noise ratio.24 TheNeyman-Pearson Observer isequivalent toexamining thelikelihood ratioanddeter­ miningifLr(v)~K,whereKisareal,nonnegative numberdependent upontheprobability of falsealarmselected.
Im'erseprobability receiver.
Adetection criterion thathasbeenpopular particularly forthe theoretical analysis ofstatistical detection andforstatistical parameter estimation isthat basedoninverseprobability.
Theusualdetection criteriaemploytheconceptofdirectprobabil­ ity,whichdescribes thechanceofaneventhappening onagivenhypothesis.
Forexample, the probability thataparticular radarwilldetectacertaintargetunderspecified conditions isa directprobability.
Ontheotherhand,ifaneventactually happens, theproblem offorming the bestestimate ofthecauseoftheeventisaproblem ininIJerseprobability.
Forexample, assume theeventinquestion tobetheoutputvoltagevfromaradarreceiver.
Uponobtaining this voltage, itisofinteresttodetermine whether theoutputwascausedbynoiseorbysignalinthe presence ofnoise.Theprobabilities ofobtaining noiseandsignal-plus-noise beforetheevent takesplacearetheaprioriprobabilities.
Theyrepresent theinitialstateofknowledge concern~ ingtheevenJ..Theprobability thatthereceiveroutputvwascausedbynoiseorbysignal-plus­ noiseisanaposteriori probability andrepresents thestateofknowledge obtained asaresult ofobserving theoutput.
Themethodofinverseprobability involves theuseoftheaprioriprobabilities associated witheachofthepossible hypotheses whichcouldexplaintheevent.Theaprioriprobabilities areused,alongwithaknowledge oftheevent,tocompute theaposteriori probabilities.
A separate aposteriori probability iscomputed foreachhypothesis.
Thathypothesis which resultsinthelargestaposteriori probability isselected asthemostlikelytoexplaintheevent.
Thismethod hasbeenapplied byWoodward andDaviestothereception ofsignalsin noise.26-28Itisbasedupontheapplication ofBayes'rulefortheprobability ofcauses.29The jointprobability oftwoeventsxandyis p(x,y)=p(x)p(yIx)=p(y)p(xIy) (10.22) wherep(x)andp(y)=probabilities ofeventsxandy,respectively p(yIx)=conditional probability thateventywilloccur,giventhateventxhas occurred ,,(YI,.)-('nllriirinl1f11 nrnh~hilirv nfpVPllfyvivPIlfhflt,.h~<;n('C-llrrf"O 378 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  Let the event x = SN represent signal-plus-noise, and let the event y be the receiver input,  which may consist of either signal-plus-noise or noise alone.
Equation (10.22) may be  rewritten as  This is Bayes' rule.
It expresses the (a posteriori) probability that the signal is present, given  that the receiver input is y.
 For a particular input y, the receiver can assess from Eq.
(10.23) the probability that a  particular signal was received.
Since y will then be fixed, the denominator p(y) will be constant  and the a posteriori probability is  where the constant k is determined by the normalizing condition; that is, the integral of  p(SN I y) over all possible values must be unity.
Therefore, if the a priori probability p(SN) is - .
 known, the a posteriori probability may be found directly from Eq.
(10.24) once p(y1SN) has  been evaluated.
If the received waveform y(t) as a function of time consists of the signal  waveform si(t) plus the white gaussian noise waveform n(t) = y(t) - st((), Woodward and  Da~ies~~ show that  where pn[n(t)] = probability-density function for noise waveform n(t) and No = mean noise  power per unit bandwidth (dimensions of energy).
With this substitution, the a posteriori  probability for the signal si(t) becomes  The integral in this expression is a definite one, with limits defined by the duration of the  observation time (0 -, To).
 Equation (10.26) forms the basis of the technique used by Woodward and Davies for the  analysis of radar reception problems when the interference is caused by white gaussian noise.
 Except for the a priori weighting factor p(SN), Eq.
(10.26) shows that the most probable  waveform si(t) is the one which has the least-mean-square deviation from the received  waveform y(t).
 The computation of the a posteriori probability might be accomplished by computing the  cross-correlation function between the actual waveform and the various possible waveforms  that might be received.
Expanding the integral in Eq.
(10.26) we get  Upon reception, the waveform y(t) is known, so that the first integral on the right-hand side of  the equation is constant and can be absorbed in the constant k.
The last integral is the energy E  contained within the signal si(t) and also is a constant.
The second integral is not a constant.
 The a posteriori probability can be written  378INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS Lettheeventx=SNrepresent signal-plus-noise, andlettheeventybethereceiver input, whichmayconsistofeithersignalo;pius-noise ornoisealone.Equation (10.22)maybe.
rewritten as p(SNIy)=p(SN)p(y I~~l p(y)(10.23) ThisisBayes'rule.Itexpresses the(aposteriori) probability thatthesignalispresent, given thatthereceiver inputisy.
Foraparticular inputy,thereceiver canassessfromEq.(10.23)theprobabililY thata particular signalwasreceived.
Sinceywillthenbefixed,thedenominator p(y)willbeconstant andtheaposteriori probability is p(SNIy}=kp(SN}p(yISN}j(10.24) (10.25)wheretheconstant kisdetermined bythenormalizing condition; thatis,theintegral of p(SNIy)overallpossible valuesmustbeunity.Therefore, iftheaprioriprobability p(SN)is known,theaposteriori probability maybefounddirectlyfromEq.(10.24)oncep(yISN) has beenevaluated.
Ifthereceived waveform y(t}asafunction oftimeconsists ofthesignal waveform Sj(t}plusthewhitegaussian noisewaveform n(t)=y(e}-Sj(t),Woodward and Davies27showthat p(yISN)=Pn[n(t}]=Pn[y(t}-Sj(t)]exexp[-~~fn2(e)deI wherePn[n(t)]=probability-density function fornoisewaveform n(t)andNo=meannoise powerperunitbandwidth (dimensions ofenergy).
Withthissubstitution, theaposteriori probability forthesignalSj(t}becomes {ITO }p(SNIy)=kp(SN)exp-Not[y(t)-Si(tWdt (10.26) Theintegral inthisexpression isadefinite one,withlimitsdefinedbytheduration ofthe observation time(0-.To).
Equation (10.26)formsthebasisofthetechnique usedbyWoodward andDaviesforthe analysis ofradarreception problems whentheinterference iscausedbywhitegaussian noise.
Exceptfortheaprioriweighting factorp(SN),Eq.(10.26)showsthatthemostprobable waveform Sj(t)istheonewhichhastheleast-mean-square deviation fromthereceived waveform y(t}.
Thecomputation oftheaposteriori probability mightbeaccomplished bycomputing the cross-correlation function between theactualwaveform andthevariouspossible waveforms thatmightbereceived.
Expanding theintegral inEq.(10.26)weget f[y(t)-Sj(t)]2dt=fy2(t)dt-2fy(t)s/(t)dt+fsf(t)de (10.27) Uponreception, thewaveform y(t)isknown,sothatthefirstintegralontheright-hand sideof theequation isconstant andcanbeabsorbed intheconstant k.ThelastintegralistheenergyE contained withinthesignalSj(t)andalsoisaconstant.
Thesecondintegral isnotaconstant.
Theaposteriori probability canbewritten [2Tolp(SNIy)=kp(SN)expN~ty(t)s/(t)dt (10.28) IjETECTION OF RADAR SIGNALS IN NOISE 379  where the first and third integrals of Eq.
(10.27) are absorbed in the constant k.
An a posteriori  receiver, if it could be built, is one whose output is given by the above equation.
If the receiver  output (the a posteriori probability) is greater than a predetermined threshold, a target is said  to be present.
If the a priori probability p(SN) can be considered constant, the computation of  the a posteriori probability is equivalent to multiplying the received signal y(t) by the signal  wavefor111 s,(r) aritf iritcgr;lting with respect to tirlie.
'This is tlle same process performed by the  cross-correlation receiver (Sec.
10.3) and is equivalent to the operation of a matched filter  (Sec.
10.2).
 A liriiitation of ttie rnethod of inverse probability based on the application of Bayes' rule is  the difficulty of specifying the a priori probabilities.
In most cases of practical interest, one is  ignorant of the a priori probabilities.
For example, it would be necessary to specify the a priori  probability of finding a target at any particular range at any particular time.
This is an almost  inipossible task.
In the absence of better data, it might be assumed that all range intervals are  equally probable a priori, and the a priori probability may be considered to be constant.
 However, such an assumption applied blindly to computations involving inverse probability  can sonietimes lead to erroneous and contradictory conclusions.29 This difficulty in specifying  the a priori probability was recognized by Woodward and Davies2' They suggest, however,  that the a priori factor be omitted from the inverse-probability specification when it is doubt-  ful, and in practice it may be supplied subjectively by the human observer.
This merely begs  the question, for it has not been proved that an operator can supply the necessary a priori  probability, and in addition, there are many applications where no operator is involved in  making the detection decision.
Nevertheless, it may be stated that whenever the a priori  probabilities are known, the inverse-probability method may be used with confidence.
When  the a priori probabilities are not known, the likelihood-ratio test is usually employed.
 Relationship of inverse probability and likelihood-ratio receivers.
The receiver input y may be  either signal-plus-noise or noise alone.
Therefore the probability of the event y may be ex-  pressed as  P(Y) = P(Y I SN)P(SN) + P(Y I N)P(N) (10.29)  The a posteriori probability of Eq.
(10.23) becomes  Or, in terms of the likelihood ratio3'  Therefore, if a receiver can be built which computes the likelihood ratio and if the a priori  probability p(SN) is known, the a posteriori probability can be calculated.
Since ~(sNJ~) is a  rnonotonic function of Lr(y), the output of the likelihood receiver (or the matched-filter  receiver) can be calibrated directly in terms of the a posteriori probability.
The chief difference  between the two representations is that the concept of inverse probability requires a knowlege  of the a priori probabilities whereas the likelihood ratio does not.
(The likelihood ratio follows  from inverse probability if the assumption is made that the a priori probabilities are equally  likely.) Both the a posteriori method and the likelihood method may be implemented by  computing the cross-correlat ion function between the received signal and the signal s,(t).
 DETECTION OFRADAR SIGNALS INNOISE379 wherethefirstandthirdintegrals ofEq.(1O.27) areabsorbed intheconstant k.Anaposteriori receiver, ifitcouldbebuilt,isonewhoseoutputisgivenbytheaboveequation.Ifthereceiver output(theaposteriori probability) isgreaterthanapredetermined threshold, atargetissaid tobepresent.
Iftheaprioriprobability p(SN)canbeconsidered constant, thecomputation of theaposteriori probability isequivalent tomultiplying thereceived signaly(t)bythesignal waveform Sj(t)andintegrating withrespecttotime.Thisisthesameprocessperformed bythe cross-correlation receiver (Sec.10.3)andisequivalent totheoperation ofamatched filter (Sec.10.2).
;\limitation ofthemethod ofinverseprobability basedontheapplication ofBayes'ruleis thedifficulty ofspecifying theaprioriprobabilities.
Inmostcasesofpractical interest, oneis ignorant oftheaprioriprobabilities.
Forexample, itwouldbenecessary tospecifytheapriori probability offindingatargetatanyparticular rangeatanyparticular time.Thisisanalmost impossible task.Intheabsence ofbetterdata.itmightbeassumed thatallrangeintervals are equally probable apriori,andtheaprioriprobability maybeconsidered tobeconstant.
However, suchanassumption applied blindlytocomputations involving inverseprobability cansometimes leadtoerroneous andcontradictory conclusions.29Thisdifficulty inspecifying theaprioriprobability wasrecognized byWoodward andDavies.27Theysuggest, however, thattheapriorifactorbeomitted fromtheinverse-probability specification whenitisdoubt­ ful,andinpractice itmaybesupplied subjectively bythehumanobserver.
Thismerelybegs thequestion, forithasnotbeenprovedthatanoperator cansupplythenecessary apriori probability, andinaddition, therearemanyapplications wherenooperator isinvolved in making thedetection decision.
Nevertheless, itmaybestatedthatwhenever theapriori probabilities areknown, theinverse-probability method maybeusedwithconfidence.
When theaprioriprobabilities arenotknown, thelikelihood-ratio testisusuallyemployed.
Relationship ofinverseprobability andlikelihood-ratio receivers.
Thereceiver inputymaybe eithersignal-plus-noise ornoisealone.Therefore theprobability oftheeventymaybeex­ pressed as p(y)=p(yISN)p(SN)+p(yIN)p(N) Theaposteriori probability ofEq.(10.23)becomes N_ p(SN)p(yISN) p(SIy)-p(yISN)p(SN)+p(yIN)p(N) r Or,intermsofthelikelihood rati030 L ( )=p(yIS~J , yp(yIN) L,(y)p(SN) p(SNIy)=L,(y)p(SN)+1-p(SN)(10.29) (10.30) (10.31) Therefore, ifareceiver canbebuiltwhichcomputes thelikelihood ratioandiftheapriori probability p(SN)isknown,theaposteriori probability canbecalculated.
Sincep(SNIY) isa monotonic function ofL,(y),theoutputofthelikelihood receiver (orthematched-filter receiver) canbecalibrated directly intermsoftheaposteriori probability.
Thechiefdifference between thetworepresentations isthattheconcept ofinverse probability requires aknowlege oftheaprioriprobabilities whereas thelikelihood ratiodoesnot.(Thelikelihood ratiofollows frominverseprobability iftheassumption ismadethattheaprioriprobabilities areequally likely.)Boththeaposteriori method andthelikelihood method maybeimplemented by computing thecross-correlation function between thereceived signalandthesignals,(t). ldeal observer.
The criterion of Neyman-Pearson is not the only one which might be used for  establishing a threshold level.
One of the first mathematical criteria applied to the theory of  radar detection was the Idea Observer as formulated by Siegert.j ' (The term " Ideal " does not  necessarily imply that this criterion is the ideal criterion.) The criterion of the Ideal Observer  maximizes the total probability of a correct decision (or minimizes the total probability of an  error).
Since the two ways in which an error might be made are (I) false alarm and (2) missed  detection, the of ari error is.
 where p(N) and p(SN) = a priori probabilities of obtaining noise and signal-plus-noise, re-  spectively [p(N) + p(SN) = 11  p,, = conditional probability of a false alarm, given that noise is present  J p, = conditional probability of a miss, given that signal 1s present (a, B  are often used in mathematical references for pf, and p,)  The a priori probability is the probability of obtaining either noise alone or signal-plus-noise  before the detection decision is made.
These probabilities must be known beforehand in the  Ideal Observer.
 The false-alarm probability depends upon the miss probability in the case of the Ideal  Observer.
This is unlike the Neyman-Pearson Observer in which Pf, was fixed.
The function of  the Ideal Observer is to minimize the total probability of error.
It accomplishes this by  adjusting the threshold, which in turn affects both the false alarm and the miss probabilities.
 The dependence of the two errors upon one another is probably the chief limitation of the  Ideal Observer as a radar detection criterion.
MiddletonZ5 states that when the probability of  false alarm is 0.05, the probability of detection is 0.90.
A false-alarm probability of 0.05 is  usually high for most radar applications.
Radar false-alarm probabilities are rarely greater  than Low values of false-alarm probability with the Ideal Observer require extremely  large values of detection probabilities.
For example, a false-alarm probability of 10- corre-  sponds to a detection probability of 0.99998.
Thus the privilege of minimizing the total error  seems to result in overdetecting the target.
Therefore, from a practical point of view, the Ideal  Observer is less efficient than the Neyman-Pearson Observer for most radar applications.
 The Ideal Observer applies equal weight to an error due to a false alarm and to an error  due to a miss.
However, there may be cases in which equal weight is not appropriate (Bayes  criterion).
If the errors are not of equal importance, the theory of the Ideal Observer may be  modified to take this into account using the concepts of statistical decision t heory.24.3 2-34  Unfortunately, in most radar applications there is no realistic basis for assigning a value to a  miss or to a false alarm; consequently, the usefulness of decision theory in radar is limited.
 Sequential observer.
Most radars utilize the equivalent of the Neyman-Pearson Observer and  operate with a fixed number of pulses.
However, the detection decision might very well be  made on the basis of only a few observations or possibly a single observation, and it would not  be necessary to record the later observations that occur once the threshold has been crossed.
 Hence there may be some advantage to using a flexible detection criterion which takes account  of this fact.
Such a detection criterion is the Sequential Obser~er.~~~~ The Sequential Observer  makes an observation of the receiver output and, on the basis of this single observation,  decides between one of three choices: (1) the receiver output is due to the presence of signal  with noise; (2) the output is due to noise alone; or (3) the available evidence is not convincing  enough to make a decision between choices 1 and 2.
If the evidence is sufficient to allow a  choice to be made between signal-plus-noise (1) and noise alone (2), the test is completed.
But  380INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS Idealobserver.
Thecriterion ofNeyman-Pearson isnottheonlyonewhichmightbeusedfor establishing athreshold level.Oneofthefirstmathematical criteriaappliedtothetheoryof radardetection wastheIdeaObserver ·asformulated bySiegert 31(Theterm"Ideal" doesnot necessarily implythatthiscriterion istheidealcriterion.) Thecriterion oftheIdealObserver maximizes thetotalprobability ofacorrectdecision (orminimizes thetotalprobability ofan error).Since t~etwowaysinwhichanerrormightbemadeare(I)falsealarmand(2)missed detection, theprobability ofarierroris.
p(E)=p(N)pfa+p(SN)Pm (10.32) wherep(N)andp(SN)=aprioriprobabilities ofobtaining noiseandsignal-plus-noise, re­ spectively [peN)+p(SN)=1] Pfa=conditional probability ofafalsealarm,giventhatnoiseispresent Pm=conditional probability ofamiss,giventhatsignalIspresent (11,p areoftenusedinmathematical references forPeaandPm) Theaprioriprobability istheprobability ofobtaining eithernoisealoneorsignal-plus-noise beforethedetection decision ismade.Theseprobabilities mustbeknownbeforehand inthe IdealObserver.
Thefalse-alarm probability depends uponthemissprobability inthecaseoftheIdeal Observer.
ThisisunliketheNeyman-Pearson Observer inwhichPeawasfixed.Thefunction of theIdealObserver istominimize thetotalprobability oferror.Itaccomplishes thisby adjusting thethreshold, whichinturnaffectsboththefalsealarmandthemissprobabilities.
Thedependence ofthetwoerrorsupononeanother isprobably thechieflimitation ofthe IdealObserver asaradardetection criterion.
Middleton25statesthatwhentheprobability of falsealarmis0.05,theprobability ofdetection is0.90.Afalse-alarm probability of0.05is usuallyhighformostradarapplications.
Radarfalse-alarm probabilities arerarelygreater than10-4.Lowvaluesoffalse-alarm probability withtheIdealObserver requireextremely largevaluesofdetection probabilities.
Forexample, afalse-alarm probability of10-5corre­ spondstoadetection probability of0.99998.
Thustheprivilege ofminimizing thetotalerror seemstoresultinoverdetecting thetarget.Therefore, fromapractical pointofview,theIdeal Observer islessefficient thantheNeyman-Pearson Observer formostradarapplications.
TheIdealObserver appliesequalweighttoanerrorduetoafalsealarmandtoanerror duetoamiss.However, theremaybecasesinwhichequalweightisnotappropriate (Bayes criterion).Iftheerrorsarenotofequalimportance, thetheoryoftheIdealObserver maybe modified totakethisintoaccount usingtheconcepts ofstatistical decision theory.24.32-H Unfortunately, inmostradarapplications thereisnorealistic basisforassigning avaluetoa missortoafalsealarm;consequently, theusefulness ofdecision theoryinradarislimited.
Sequential observer.
Mostradarsutilizetheequivalent oftheNeyman-Pearson Observer and operatewithafixednumber ofpulses.However, thedetection decision mightverywellbe madeonthebasisofonlyafewobservations orpossibly asingleobservation, anditwouldnot benecessary torecordthelaterobservations thatoccuroncethethreshold hasbeencrossed.
Hencetheremaybesomeadvantage tousingaflexibledetection criterion whichtakesaccount ofthisfact.Suchadetection criterion istheSequential Observer.30-43TheSequential Observer makesanobservation ofthereceiver outputand,onthebasisofthissingleobservation, decidesbetween oneofthreechoices: (1)thereceiveroutputisduetothepresence ofsignal withnoise;(2)theoutputisduetonoisealone;or(3)theavailable evidence isnotconvincing enoughtomakeadecision between choices1and2.Iftheevidence issufficient toallowa choicetobemadebetween signal-plus-noise (1)andnoisealone(2),thetestiscompleted.
But,,/ ifchoice 3 is indicated, no coriclusive decision can be reached and another observation is made.
 The three choices are agaitt examined on the basis of the combined observations.
If no  decision is reached as to the presence of signal or the presence of noise, another observation  is made, and the process is repeated until the evidence is convincing enough to make a definite  conclusion.
 The Sequential Observer fixes the probability of errors beforehand but allows the integra-  tion time (or the number of observations) to be a variable.
Two threshold levels are established  wit11 a gray region in between.
If the output is definitely below the lower threshold, noise alone  is snit1 to hc prcscrlt.
If the upper tl~rcshold is exceeded, the signal is declared to be present  along with the noise.
But if the output lies between the two thresholds, no decision is possible  :~r)cl ;~r~otl~cr obscrv;~!ion is r~~ntfe.
 i 11e Sequerrtial Observer perr~tits a sigrlificarit reductiori in tl~e merage nuniber of sa~liples  (pulses) needed for making a decision.
The improvement depends upon whether a signal is  present or not.
If a signal is present, the average number of samples (or observations) required  for rrlakitlg a decision is significantly greater than when noise alone is present.
The Sequential  Observer makes a relatively prompt decision when only noise is present.
 The average savings also depend upon whether detection is performed coherently or  noncoherently.
Assuming coherent detection (pulses integrated predetection) and P, = 0.90  and P,, = the Sequential Observer is able to determine, on the average, that noise alone  is present with less than one-tenth the number of observations required for the Neyman-  Pearsori Ob~erver.~' In the presence of a threshold signal, the Sequential Observer requires,  on the average, about one-half the number of observations of the equivalent fixed-sample  observer.
Again assuming P, = 0.90 and PI, = a noncoherent Sequential Observer  (pulses integrated postdetection) requires only one-fourteenth the number of observations  when only noise is present.
When signal is present, approximately one-half the number of  observations are needed as with an equivalent Neyman-Pearson Observer.
 Unfortunately, the application of the Sequential Observer to radar is limited.
At any  particular antenna position a radar normally observes many range resolution intervals, per-  haps several hundred.
At each range interval within the biamwidth of the antenna a decision  has to be made concerning the presence or absence of a target before the antenna beam can be  positioned to a new direction.
Therefore the dwell time in any direction is determined not by  the average nuniber of observations made by each sequential detector, but by that range  interval which requires the largest number of observations.
This can result in relatively long  dwell times, and it is possible for the savings obtained with the Sequential Observer to be f negated.
The required dwell time might be even longer than that of the fixed sample-number  Neyman-Pearson Observer.
 If the Sequential Observer allows a savings in average power of from 8 to 10 dB when  implemented for a single-range cell, the power advantage decreases to 3 to 4 dB for 200-range  cells and can even be as little as 1 dB.40 In addition, the Sequential Observer requires some-  thing more flexible than the usual rotating-antenna radar.
Because of the variable dwell time  the anteona beam-positioning system must usually be a phased-array antenna and the data  processing must be digital.
Thus if full benefit is to be had from the Sequential Observer in  radar, only one or a few independent decisions per beam position should be made, It might be  employed when only a single " guard-band" is desired for detecting targets within a selected  range interval, a not too usual application.
It has also been considered for use in a low-signal  density environment when the criterion is that either no signal is present or one signal of fixed  and specified level is present and equally likely to be in any range inter~al.~'*~~  The term sequential detection is sometimes used synonymously with Sequential Observer.
 Sequential detection has also been used to describe a two-step, or two-stage, detection process  DETECTION OFRADAR SIGNALS INNOISE381 ifchoiceJisindicated, noconclusive decision canbereachedandanotherobservation ismade.
ThethreechoicesareagaineX'aminedon thebasisofthecombined observations.
Ifno decision isreachedastothepresence ofsignalorthepresence ofnoise,another observation ismade.andtheprocessisrepeatcd untiltheevidence isconvincing enoughtomakeadefinite conclusion.
TheSequential Observer fixestheprobability oferrorsbeforehand butallowstheintegra­ tiontime(orthenumberofobservations) tobeavariable.
Twothreshold levelsareestablished withagrayregioninbetween.Iftheoutputisdefinitely belowthelowerthreshold, noisealone issaidtohcprescnt.
Iftheuppcrthreshold isexceeded, thesignalisdeclared tobepresent alongwiththenoise.Butiftheoutputliesbetween thetwothresholds, nodecision ispossible anllanolherohservationisIll<lde.
ThcSequcntial Observer permitsasignificant reduction intheaveragenumberofsamples (pulses) neededformakingadecision.
Theimprovement depends uponwhether asignalis presentornot.Ifasignalispresent, theaveragenumberofsamples (orobservations) required formakingadecision issignificantly greaterthanwhennoisealoneispresent.TheSequential Observer makesarelatively promptdecision whenonlynoiseispresent.
Theaverage savingsalsodependuponwhether detection isperformed coherently or noncoherently.
Assuming coherent detection (pulsesintegrated predetection) andPv=0.90 andPra=10-8,theSequential Observer isabletodetermine, ontheaverage, thatnoisealone ispresentwithlessthanone-tenth thenumber ofobservations required fortheNeyman­ Pearson Observer.9oInthepresence ofathreshold signal,theSequential Observer requires, ontheaverage, aboutone-half thenumber ofobservations oftheequivalent fixed-sample observer.
Againassuming Pv=0.90andPra=10-8,anoncoherent Sequential Observer (pulsesintegrated postdetection) requires onlyone-fourteenth thenumber ofobservations whenonlynoiseispresent.
Whensignalispresent, approximately one-half thenumber of observations areneededaswithanequivalent Neyman-Pearson Observer.
Unfortunately, theapplication oftheSequential Observer toradarislimited.Atany particular antenna position aradarnormally observes manyrangeresolution intervals, per­ hapsseveralhundred.
Ateachrangeintervalwithin ~hebeamwidth oftheantenna adecision hastobemadeconcerning thepresence orabsenceofatargetbeforetheantenna beamcanbe positioned toanewdirection.
Therefore thedwelltimeinanydirection isdetermined notby theaverage number ofobservations madebyeachsequential detector, butbythatrange interval whichrequires thelargestnumberofobservations.
Thiscanresultinrelatively long dwelltimes,anditispossible forthesavingsobtained withtheSequential Observer tobe negated.
Th~required dwelltimemightbeevenlongerthanthatofthefixedsample-number Neyman-Pearson Observer.
IftheSequential Observer allowsasavingsinaverage poweroffrom8to10dBwhen implemented forasingle-range cell,thepoweradvantage decreases to3to4dBfor200-range cellsandcanevenbeaslittleas1dB.40Inaddition, th~Sequential Observer requires some­ thingmoreflexiblethantheusualrotating-antenna radar.Because ofthevariable dwelltime theantenna beam-positioning systemmustusuallybeaphased-array antenna andthedata processing mustbedigital.ThusiffullbenefitistobehadfromtheSequential Observer in radar,onlyoneorafewindependent decisions perbeamposition shouldbemade.Itmightbe employed whenonlyasingle"guard-band" isdesiredfordetecting targetswithinaselected rangeinterval, anottoousualapplication.
Ithasalsobeenconsidered foruseinalow-signal densityenvironment whenthecriterion isthateithernosignalispresentoronesignalaffixed andspecified levelispresentandequallylikelytobeinanyrangeinterval.
38,39 Thetermsequential detection issometimes usedsynonymously withSequential Observer.
Sequential detection hasalsobeenusedtodescribe atwo-step, ortwo-stage, detection process 382 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  that can be employed with phased-array radar.39*42 The radar transmits a pulse or a series of  pulses in a particular direction as in an ordinary radar, except that the false alarm probability  is slightly higher than would normally be used.
If no threshold crossings are obtained, the  antenna beam moves to the next angular position.
However, if a threshold crossing is observed  from any range cell, a second pulse or set of pulses is transmitted with higher energy, and with  a different threshold.
A target is declared to be present only if threshold crossings are observed  from the same range cell on both transmissions.
The second transmission might also be of  greater resolution as well as higher power.
When the two thresholds are optimized, it has been  found that a second transmission is employed in about four percent of the beam positions.J2 It  is claimed that a power saving of from 3 to 4 dB can be obtained as compared with uniform  scanning.42  10.5 DETECTOR CHARACTERISTICS  f  The portion of the radar receiver which extracts the modulation from the carrier is called the  detector.
The use of this term implies somewhat more than simply a rectifying element.
It  includes that portion of the radar receiver from the output of the IF amplifier to the input of  the indicator or data processor.
We shall not be concerned about the problem of amplification,  although it is an important aspect of receiver design.
Instead, we shall be more interested in the  effect of the detector on the desired signal and the noise.
 One form of detector is the envelope detector, which recognizes the presence of the signal  on the basis of the amplitude of the carrier envelope.
All phase information is destroyed.
It is  also possible to design a detector which utilizes only phase information for recognizing targets.
 An example is one which counts the zero crossings of the received waveform.
The zero-  crossings detector destroys amplitude information.
If the exact phase of the echo carrier were  known, it would be possible to design a detector which makes optimum use of both the phase  information and the amplitude information contained in the echo signal.
It would perform  more efficiently than a detector which used either amplitude information only or phase infor-  mation only.
The coherent detector is an example of one which uses both phase and amplitude.
 These three types of detectors-the envelope, the zero-crossings, and the coherent detectors- !  are considered in the present section.
 Envelope detector-optimumdetector law.
The function of the envelope detector is to extract  the modulation and reject the carrier.
By eliminating the carrier, all phase information is lost  and the detection decision is based solely on the envelope amplitude.
It will be recalled that  most of the analysis of the radar equation in Chap.
2 was based on the envelope detector.
 The envelope detector consists of a rectifying element and a low-pass filter to pass the  modulation frequencies but to remove the carrier frequency.
The rectifier characteristic relates  the output signal to the input signal and is calledbthe detector law.
Most detector laws  approximate either a linear or a square-law~characteristic.
In the linear detector the output  signal is directly proportional to the input envelope.
(Actually, the so-called linear detector is a  nonlinear device, or else it would not be a detector.) Similarly, in the square-law detector, the  output signal is proportional to the sciuare'of the input envelope.
In some of the quoted  mathematical results, the linear-detector law is assumed, while in others, the square law is  assumed.
In general, the difference2between the two is small and the detector law in any  analysis is usually chosen for mathematical convenience.
When we speak of a detector law we  really mean the combined law of the.detector and video integrator, if one is used.
If the  382INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS thatcanbeemployed withphased:-arrayradar.
39,42Theradartransmits apulseor.aseriesof pulsesinaparticular direction asinanordinary radar,exceptthatthefalsealarmprobability isslightly higherthanwouldnormally beused.Ifnothreshold crossings areobtained, the antenna beammovestothenextangularposition.
However, ifathreshold crossing isobserved fromanyrangecell,asecondpulseorsetofpulsesistransmitted withhigherenergy,andwith adifferent threshold.
Atargetisdeclared tobepresentonlyifthreshold crossings areobserved fromthesamerangecellonbothtransmissions.
Thesecondtransmission mightalsobeof greaterresolution aswellashigherpower.Whenthetwothresholds areoptimized, ithasbeen foundthatasecondtransmission isemployed inaboutfourpercentofthebeampositions:oIt isclaimed thatapowersavingoffrom3to4dBcanbeobtained ascompared withuniform scanning.42 j to.5DETECTOR CHARACTERISTICS Theportionoftheradarreceiver whichextracts themodulation fromthecarrieriscalledthe detector.
Theuseofthistermimpliessomewhat morethansimplyarectifying element.
It includes thatportionoftheradarreceiver fromtheoutputoftheIFamplifier totheinputof theindicator ordataprocessor.
Weshallnotbeconcerned abouttheproblem ofamplification, although itisanimportant aspectofreceiverdesign.Instead, weshallbemoreinterested inthe effectofthedetector onthedesired signal andthenoise.
Oneformofdetector istheenvelope detector, whichrecognizes thepresence ofthesignal onthebasisoftheamplitude ofthecarrierenvelope.
Allphaseinformation isdestroyed.
Itis alsopossible todesignadetector whichutilizesonlyphaseinformation forrecognizing targets.
Anexample isonewhichcountsthe·zerocrossings ofthereceived waveform.
Thezero­ crossings detector destroys amplitude information.
Iftheexactphaseoftheechocarrierwere known,itwouldbepossible todesignadetector whichmakesoptimum useofboththephase information andtheamplitude .information contained intheechosignal.Itwouldperform moreefficiently thanadetector 'Yhich.usedeitheramplitude information onlyorphaseinfor­ mationonly.Thecoherent detector isanexample ofonewhichusesbothphaseandamplitude.
Thesethreetypesofdetectors-the envelope, thezero-crossings, andthecoherent detectors­ areconsidered inthepresentsection...
Em'elope detector-optimum-detector law.Thefunction oftheenvelope detector istoextract themodulation andrejectthecarrier.Byeliminating thecarrier,allphaseinformation islost andthedetection decision isbasedsolelyontheenvelope amplitude.
Itwillberecalled that mostoftheanalysis oftheradarequation inChap.2wasbasedontheenvelope detector.
Theenvelope detector consis~sofarectifying element andalow-pass filtertopassthe modulation frequencies buttoremovethecarrierfrequency.
Therectifiercharacteristic relates theoutputsignaltotheinputsignaland·iscalled-thedetector law.Mostdetector laws approximate eitheralinearorasquare-law'characteristic.
Inthelineardetector theoutput signalisdirectlypr9portional totheinputenvelope.
(Actually, theso-called lineardetector isa nonlinear device,orelseitwouldnotbeadetector.) Similarly, inthesquare-law detector, the outputsignalisproportional tothe'square!oftheinputenvelope.
Insomeofthequoted mathematical results,thelinear-detector lawisassumed, whileinothers,thesquarelawis assumed.
Ingeneral, thedifference' between thetwoissmallandthedetector lawinany analysis isusuallychosenformathematical convenience.
Whenwespeakofadetector lawwe reallymeanthecombined lawofthe,detector andvideointegrator, ifoneisused.Ifthe detector were linear while the video integrator had a square-law characteristic, the combina-  tion of detector and integrator would be considered square law.
 In the following we shall derive the optimum form of the secondadetector  la^.^^*^^  Assurne that there are rl independent pulses with envelope amplitudes u,, v2, .
.
.
, on available  from the radar receiver.
The probletn consists in determining whether these rt pulses are due to  signal-plus-noise or wliether they are due to noise alone.
The probability-density function for  the envelope of 11 independent noise sanlples is the product of the probability-density function  for each sarrlple, or  n  The probability-derlsity function for itll noise pulse pn(oi) is given by Eq.
(2.2 I), rewritten  wl~ere I., i5 ttie ratio of the envelope amplitude R to the rms noise voltage Likewise, the  probability-derlsity fu~lctiorl for the e~lvelope of n signal-plus-noise pulses is  The probability-density function for signal-plus-noise, p,(vi), is the Rice distribution of  Eq.
(2.27)  where a = ratio of signal (sine-wave) amplitude to rms noise voltage and Io(x) = modified  Bessel function of zero order.
The detection process is equivalent tc determining which of the  two density functions [Eq.
(10.33) or (10.34)] more closely describes the output of the receiver.
 The ratio of the density function for signal-plus-noise to that for noise alone is the  likelihood ratio.
It may be used to decide whether or not the signal is present.
The greater the  likelihood ratio, the more probable it is that the receiver input is due to signal-plus-noise  rather than noise alone.
The likelihood ratio, or any other monotonic function of this ratio,  must exceed a predetermined threshold value in order to declare that the signal is present.
 The selection of the threshold will depend upon the probability of false alarm.
The likelihood  ratio [Eq.
(1634) divided by (10.33)] is  where I is the constant which depends on the false-alarm probability.
Taking the logarithm  gives  a2 In Io(avi) t In I + n - 2 (10.36)  i= 1  This states that for optimum processing one should take the pulses, each of amplitude v,  n  (where i = I, 2, .
.
., n), and sum them according to the law C In lo(av,).
This sum is  1= 1  compared with a threshold as given by the right-hand side of Eq.
(10.36).
Therefore the  combined detector and integrator must have a law given by  DETECTION OFRADAR SIGNALS INNOISE383 detector werelinearwhilethevideointegrator hadasquare-law characteristic, thecombina­ tionofdetector andintegrator wouldbeconsidered squarelaw.
Inthefollowing weshallderivetheoptimum formofthesecond~detector law.26•43 Assume thatthereareIIindependent pulseswithenvelope amplitudes VJ,V2'.••,Vnavailable fromtheradarreceiver.
Theproblem consists indetermining whether theseIIpulsesaredueto signal-plus-noise orwhether theyareduetonoisealone.Theprobability-density function for theenvelope ofIIindependent noisesamples istheproductoftheprobability-density function foreachsample.
or n Pn(lI,I'd=nPn(vd i=I(10.33) Theprohahility-density function forithnoisepulsePn(Vj)isgivenbyEq.(2.21),rewritten (2.21) where 1';istheratiooftheenvelope amplitude Rtothermsnoisevoltaget/Ji,/2.Likewise, the probability-density function fortheenvelope of"signal-plus-noise pulsesis n P.•(II,Vi)=nPs(Vi) i=1(10.34) Theprobability-density function forsignal-plus-noise, Ps(Vi), IStheRicedistribution of Eq.(2.27) (2.27) (10.35)wherea=ratioofsignal(sine-wave) amplitude tormsnoisevoltageandIo(x)=modified Besselfunction ofzeroorder.Thedetection processisequivalent t<.-determining whichofthe twodensityfunctions [Eq.(10.33)or(10.34)]morecloselydescribes theoutputofthereceiver.
Theratioofthedensity function forsignal-plus-noise tothatfornoisealoneisthe likelihood ratio.Itmaybeusedtodecidewhether ornotthesignalispresent.
Thegreaterthe likelihood ratio,themoreprobable itisthatthereceiver inputisduetosignal-plus-noise ratherthannoisealone.Thelikelihood ratio,oranyothermonotonic function ofthisratio, mustexceedapredetermined threshold val"ueinordertodeclarethatthesignalispresent.
Theselection ofthethreshold willdependupontheprobability offalsealarm.Thelikelihood ratio[Eq.(1<f34)divided by(10.33)] is (a2)nLr(I')=exp-"2}]Io(avj)~A where A.istheconstant whichdepends onthefalse-alarm probability.
Takingthelogarithm gives (10.36) Thisstatesthatforoptimum processing oneshouldtakethepulses,eachofamplitude VI n (wherei=I,2,...,,,),andsumthemaccording tothelawLInIo(avl)'Thissumis 1=1 compared withathreshold asgivenbytheright-hand sideofEq.(10.36).
Therefore the combined detector andintegrator musthavealawgivenby y=InIo{av) (to.37) where y = output voltage of detector and integrator  a = amplitude of sine-wave signal divided by rms noise voltage  v = amplitude of IF voltage envelope divided by rms noise voltage  l,(x) = modified Bessel function of zero order  This equation specifies the form of the detector law which maximizes the likelihood ratio  for a fixed probability of false alarm.
A suitable approximation to Eq.
(10.37) is9'  For large signal-to-noise ratios (a B I), this is approximately  Thus the linear detector is a good approximation to the optimum In l,(as)detyo law when  the signal-to-noise ratio is large.
For small signal-to-noise ratios the approximation of  Eq.
(10.38) can be written ,  which is the characteristic of a square-law detector.
 Hence it may be concluded that for small signal-to-noise.
ratios the square-law detector  may be a suitable approximation to the optimum detector, while for large signal-to-noise  ratios the linear detector is more appropriate.
In practice, it makes little difference which of the  two detector laws is used.
The difference between the square-law and the linear detectors was  shown by Mar~um~~ to produce less than 0.2 dB difference in the required signal-to-noise  ratio.
If one has a choice, the linear law might be preferred because of its linearity and, hence,  its large dynamic range.
The linear detector, like any detector law, approaches the square-law  characteristic for small signal-to-noise ratios.
 Logarithmic detector.
If the output of the receiver is proportional to the logarithm of the input  envelope, it is called a logarithmic receiver.
It finds application where large variations of input  signals are expected.
It might be used to prevent receiver saturation or to reduce the effects  of unwanted clutter targets in certain types of non-MTI radar receivers (Sec.
13.8).
 The detection characteristics (probability of detection as a function of the probability of  false alarm, signal-to-noise ratio, and the number of hits integrated) for the logarithmic  receiver have been computed by Green,44 following the methods of Mar~um.~~ For 10 pulses  integrated, the loss with the logarithmic receiver is about 0.5 dB, while for 100 pulses in-  tegrated, the loss is about 1.0 dB.
As the number of pulses increases, the loss due to a logarith-  mic detector approaches a maximum value' of 1.1 dB.45  Zero-crossings detector.
The information contained in the zero crossings of the received signal  can, in principle, be used for detecting the presence of signals in noise.
The greater the  signal-to-noise ratio the less will be the average number of zero crossings.
The average number  of zero-crossings per second at the output of a narrow-bandpass filter of rectangular shape  when the input is a sine wave in gaussian noise is46  where fo = center frequency of filter .
 f, = filter bandwidth  SIN = signal-to-noise (power) ratio  384INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS wherey=outputvoltageofdetector andintegrator a=amplitude ofsine-wave signaldivided byrmsnoisevoltage v=amplitude ofIFvoltageenvelope divided byrmsnoisevoltage lo(x)=modified Besselfunction ofzeroorder Thisequation specifies theformofthedetector lawwhichmaximizes thelikelihood ratio forafixedprobability offalsealarm.Asuitable approximation toEq.(10.37)is91 y=Inlo(av) ~~+4-2 (10.38) Forlargesignal-to-noise ratios(a~I),thisisapproximately y~av (10.39) Thusthelineardetector isagoodapproximation totheoptimum InIo(al1)detector lawwhen thesignal-to-noise ratioislarge.Forsmallsignal-to-noise ratiostheapp1oximation of Eq.(10.38)canbewritten --- (10.40) whichisthecharacteristic ofasquare-law detector.
Henceitmaybeconcluded thatforsmallsignal-to-noise ratiosthesquare-law detector maybeasuitable approximation totheoptimum detector, whileforlargesignal-to-noise ratiosthelineardetector ismoreappropriate.
Inpractice, itmakeslittledifference whichofthe twodetector lawsisused.Thedifference between thesquare-law andthelineardetectors was shownbyMarcum43toproduce lessthan0.2dBdifference intherequired signal-to-noise ratio.Ifonehasachoice,thelinearlawmightbepreferred because ofitslinearity and,hence, itslargedynamic range.Thelineardetector, likeanydetector law,approaches thesquare-law characteristic forsmallsignal-to-noise ratios.
Logarithmic detector.
Iftheoutputofthereceiver isproportional tothelogarithm oftheinput envelope, itiscalledalogarithmic receiver.Itfindsapplication wherelargevariations ofinput signalsareexpected.Itmightbeusedtoprevent receiver saturation ortoreducetheeffects ofunwanted cluttertargetsincertaintypesofnon-MTI radarreceivers (Sec.13.8).
Thedetection characteristics (probability ofdetection asafunction oftheprobability of falsealarm,signal-to-noise ratio,andthenumber ofhitsintegrated) forthelogarithmic receiver havebeencomputed byGreen,44 following themethods ofMarcum.43For10pulses integrated, thelosswiththelogarithmic receiver isabout0.5dB,whilefor100pulsesin­ tegrated, thelossisabout1.0dB.Asthenumber ofpulsesincreases, thelossduetoalogarith­ micdetector approaches amaximum value'of1.1dB.45 Zero-crossings detector.
Theinformation contained inthezerocrossings ofthereceived signal can,inprinciple, beusedfordetecting thepresence ofsignals innoise.Thegreaterthe signal-to-noise ratiothelesswillbetheaveragenumberofzerocrossings.
Theaveragenumber ofzero-crossings persecondattheoutputofanarrow-bandpass filterofrectangular shape whentheinputisasinewaveingaussian noiseis46 _ _[SIN+1+(/82/12/02)]1/2 no-2/0SIN+1 wherefo=centerfrequency offilter f8=filterbandwidth SIN=srgnal-to-noise (power) ratio(10.42) Figure 10.4 Basic configuration of a collerent detector.
Input -  fo 9 40 ?  If a suitable device is used to measure ito, a target signal is said to be present if this number is  less thari a predeterniined (threshold) value and is said to be absent if the threshold is  exceeded.
(The value of ii, is a rnaxirnum when SIN = 0.)  Coherent detector.
The cohere11 t detector (Fig.
10.4) consists of a reference oscillator feeding a  balanced mixer.
The input to the mixer is a signal of known frequency f, and known phase 40  plus its accor~lpariyirig noise.
The reference-oscillator signal is assumed to have the same  frequency and phase as the input signal to be detected.
The output of the mixer is followed by a  low-pass filter which allows only the d-c and the low-frequency modulation components to  pass while rejecting the higher frequencies in the vicinity of the carrier.
The coherent detector  provides a translation of the carrier frequency to direct current.
It does not extract the  modulation envelope and is a truly linear detector, whereas the " linear" envelope detector was  not linear in the same sense.
Therefore the coherent detector will be a more efficient detector,  especially when signal-to-noise ratios are low.
 The coherent detector does not destroy phase information as does the envelope detector,  nor does it destroy amplitude information as does the zero-crossings detector.
Since it utilizes I 1 Balanced  mixer  Figure 10.5 Cotnparison of detection probabilities for signal known completely (coherent detector) and  for signal known except for phase (envelope detector).
Low-pass  filter -  DETECTION OFRADAR SIGNALS INNOISE385 Input fa'epa Figure10.4Basicconfiguration ofacoherent detector.
Ifasuitable deviceisuscdtomeasure /10,atargetsignalissaidtobepresentifthisnumber is lessthanapredetermined (threshold) valueandissaidtobeabsentifthethreshold is cxccedcd, (Thevalucof/10isamaximum whenSIN=0.) Coherent detector.
Thecoherent detector (Fig.10.4)consistsofareference oscillator feedinga balanced mixer.Theinputtothemixerisasignalofknownfrequency foandknownphase¢o plusitsaccompanying noise.Thereference-oscillator signalisassumed tohavethesame frequency andphaseastheinputsignaltobedetected.
Theoutputofthemixerisfollowed bya low-pass filterwhichallowsonlythed-candthelow-frequency modulation components to passwhjlerejecting thehigherfrequencies inthevicinityofthecarrier.Thecoherent detector provides atranslation ofthecarrierfrequency todirectcurrent.Itdoesnotextractthe modulationenvelope andisatrulylineardetector, whereasthe"linear"envelope detector was notlinearinthesamesense.Therefore thecoherent detector willbeamoreefficient detector, especially whensignal-to-noise ratiosarelow.
Thccoherent detector doesnotdestroyphaseinformation asdoestheenvelope detector, nordoesitdestroyamplitude information asdoesthezero-crossings detector.
Sinceitutilizes 708090100--- Signalknown - - - Signalknown exceptforphase Probability otfalsealarm/ / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / / I ?O30405060 2['//NorProbability offalsealarm 10999- 998 995 99 98 c95- 0-u90-OJ-OJ u a80 ~70-- .D600.D 050L CL40- 30- 20 10 5 2 () Fi2ure IO.~Comparison ofdetection prohabilities forsignalknowncompletely (coherent detector) and forsignalknownexceptforphase(envelope detector). more information than either the envelope or the zero-crossings detector, it is not surprising  that the signal-to-noise ratio from the coherent detector is better than from the other two.
The  improvement in the signal-to-noise ratio might vary from 1 to 3 dB or more, over the range of  signal-to-noise ratios of interest in most radar applications.
A comparison is shown in  Fig.
10.5 of the detection probabilities when the signal parameters are known completely  (coherent detector) and when the signal is known except for phase (envelope detector)." The  abscissa is plotted as 2E/No instead of signal-to-noise ratio, where E is the signal energy and  No is the noise power per hertz of bandwidth.
 Although the coherent detector may be of superior sensitivity than other detectors it is  seldom used in radar applications since the phase of the received signal is not usually known.
 10.6 PERFORMANCE OF THE RADAR OPERATOR  J  The rate of information inherent in a typical radar signal is considerably greater than can be  handled by a human operator.
A one-mevahertz-bandwidth signal, for example, is capable of  conveying information at a rate of two megabitsls, but an operator can accept an information  rate of only 10 to 20 bits/s.
Thus there is a tremendous mismatch between the information  content of a radar and the information-handling capability of an operator.
The function of the  radar display is to aid the operator to extract in an efficient manner the information contained  in the radar signal that is important to the task.
The usual type of radar display is a cathode-  ray tube or its equivalent.
 The ability of the operator to detect radar signals in the presence of noise or clutter  cannot be determined with as great a reliability as can the performance of the electronic  threshold detector described in Chap.
2.
Human behavior is certainly less predictable than  that of an electronic device.
However, it appears that an operator's performance can be as  good as that predicted for the ideal electronic threshold detector ifthe operator is well trained,  motivated, alert, not fatigued, and the display is properly designed.
Furthermore, the operator  is probably better able to recognize and interpret patterns relating groups of associated echoes  than can automatic  device^,^'  It has been shown experimentally that when an operator views a display in which the  pulses received from successive sweeps are displayed side-by-side without loss of memory  (fading of the recorded signals with time), the integration improvement achieved by an opera-  tor is equivalent to what would be expected from classical detection the~ry.~'.~~ This is  illustrated by the data of Fig.
10.6, which plots the experimentally observed signal-to-noise  ratio necessary to achieve a probability of detection of 0.50 as a function of the number of  pulses available on the display.
Curve A applies to a chemical recorder which makes a  permanent record, and curve B applies to an intensity modulated B-scope of long persistence.
 (The chemical recorder has been of more use in sonar than in radar.) The integration improve-  ment was found to be from 2.2 to 2.5 dB per doubling of the number of pulses, which is  consistent with the computations for the theoretical integration improvement obtained by  Mar~urn~~ for ideal postdetection integration.
The results for the chemical recorder (curve A)  are slightly better than the B-scope (curve B) due to the imperfect memory of the cathode-ray  tube B-scope as compared with the permanent memory of the chemical recorder.
Similar  results were noted for the improvement in a conventional PPI when the pulses were displayed  side-by-side.
 In other experiments with the PPI, the integration improvement has been reported to be  proportional to 1.5 dB per doubling of the number of pulses, which corresponds to n"2.50  Improvements as high as 1.8 dB per doubling were also observed, but this is less than the 2.2 to  386INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS moreinformation thaneithertheenvelope orthezero-crossings detector.
itisnotsurprising thatthesignal-to-noise.ratio fromthecoherent detector isbetterthanfromtheothertwo.The improvement inthesignal-to-noise ratiomightvaryfrom1to3dBormore,overtherangeof signal-to-noise ratiosofinterest inmostradarapplications.
Acomparison isshownin Fig.10.5ofthedetection probabilities whenthesignalparameters areknowncompletely (coherent detector) andwhenthesignalisknownexceptforphase(envelope detector).24 The abscissa isplottedas2E/N0insteadofsignal-to-noise ratio.whereEisthesignalenergyand Noisthenoisepowerperhertzofbandwidth.
Although thecoherent detector maybeofsuperior sensitivity thanotherdetectors itis seldomusedinradarapplications sincethephaseofthereceived signalisnotusuallyknown.
10.6PERFORMANCE OFTHERADAR OPERATOR .) Therateofinformation inherent inatypicalradarsignalisconsiderably greaterthancanbe handled byahumanoperator.
Aone-me~ahertz-bandwidth signal,forexample.
iscapableof conveying information atarateoftwomegabits/s, butanoperator canacceptaninformation rateofonly10to20bits/soThusthereisatremendous mismatch between theinformation contentofaradarandtheinformation-handling capability ofanoperator.
Thefunction ofthe radardisplayistoaidtheoperator toextractinanefficientmannertheinformation contained intheradarsignalthatisimportant tothetask.Theusualtypeofradardisplayisacathode­ raytubeoritsequivalent.
Theabilityoftheoperator todetectradarsignalsinthepresence ofnoiseorclutter cannotbedetermined withasgreatareliability ascantheperformance oftheelectronic threshold detector described inChap.2.Humanbehavior iscertainly lesspredictable than thatofanelectronic device.However, itappears thatanoperator's performance canbeas goodasthatpredicted fortheidealelectronic threshold detectoriftheoperator iswelltrained, motivated, alert,notfatigued, andthedisplayisproperly designed.
Furthermore, theoperator isprobably betterabletorecognize andinterpret patterns relatinggroupsofassociated echoes thancanautomatic devices.47 Ithasbeenshownexperimentally thatwhenanoperator viewsadisplayinwhichthe pulsesreceived fromsuccessive sweepsaredisplayed side-by-side without lossofmemory (fadingoftherecorded signalswithtime),theintegration improvement achieved byanopera­ torisequivalent towhatwouldbeexpected fromclassical detection theory.48,49 Thisis illustrated bythedataofFig.10.6,whichplotstheexperimentally observed signal-ta-noise rationecessary toachieveaprobability ofdetection of0.50asafunction ofthenumberof pulsesavailable onthedisplay.
CurveAappliestoachemical recorder whichmakesa permanent record,andcurveBappliestoanintensity modulated B-scopeoflongpersistence.
(Thechemical recorder has beenofmoreuseinsonarthaninradar.)Theintegration improve­ mentwasfoundtobefrom2.2to2.5dBperdoubling ofthenumber ofpulses.whichis consistent withthecomputations forthetheoretical integration improvement obtained by Marcum43foridealpostdetection integration.
Theresultsforthechemical recorder (curveA) areslightlybetterthantheB-scope (curveB)duetotheimperfect memory ofthecathode-ray tubeB-scope ascompared withthepermanent· memory ofthechemical recorder.
Similar resultswerenotedfortheimprovement inaconventional PPIwhenthepulsesweredisplayed side-by-side.
Inotherexperiments withthePPI,theintegration improvement hasbeenreported tobe proportional to1.5dBperdoubling ofthenumberofpulses,whichcorresponds ton1/2•SO Improvements ashighas1.8dBperdoubling werealsoobserved, butthisislessthanthe2.2to Number of pulses integrated  Figure 10.6 Improvement of operator detection threshold (signal-to-noise ratio per pulse) as a function of  the number of pulses (sweeps) for side-by-side displays.
Curve A, chemical recorder; curve B, cathode-ray-  tube B-scope display; curve C, line of slope 1.5 dB/doubling (m nil2); curve D, line of slope 3 dB/doubling  (cc n) lor perfect predetection integration.
A's are theoretical values for ideal postdetection-integration  improvement as computed by Marcum4' for a false-alarm probability of (From J.
Brit.
IRE.49)  2.5 dB per doubling mentioned above.
The applicability of these particular tests to the usual  PPI display can be questioned since a 5-inch-diameter CRT was used with simulated echoes  placed at an azimuth unknown to the operator at a distance of 1 inch from the center of the  scope.
The conclusion that might be drawn from such experiments is that somewhat less than  theoretical integration improvement will be obtained if the pulses are not displayed properly;  that is, the persistence of the display should be sufficient to prevent excessive "loss of  memory," the dynamic range of the display must be large enough not to lose signal informa-  tion, and the display resolution should be consistent with the radar resolution to avoid  collapsing loss.
Since the dynamic range of most displays is limited to a relatively small valus,  the pulses received from a target should be displayed side by side (as is usually the case on a  PPI or B-sbpe) rather than piled up at a single point on the display.
In such a case the  integration is performed by the eye-brain combination of the operator.
 Experimental measurements of the operator's ability to detect signals on an A-scope  showed the integration-improvement factor to be n1I2, or 1.5 dB per doubling of the number of  pulses ir~tegrated.~' This is less than predicted for an ideal postdetection integrator.
It was also  found that the operator's detection capability was maximum when Br 1, where B = IF  bandwidth and r = pulse width, as is consistent with the analysis of Sec.
10.2.
 The detectability of a target echo on a CRT display depends on such factors as the size  and brightness of the CRT spot, the noise background, pulse repetition frequency, antenna  rotation rate, type of phosphor, and its decay characteristics, the size of the display, and the  color and intensity of the ambient illumination.
The effect of most of these factors has been  determined empiri~ally.~'.~'.~~ The name pipology is sometimes applied to the art of designing  and operating the radar display so as to optimize the operator's ability to detect target pips.
(A  target pip is also called a blip.) It has also been found from experience that an operator should  not, in general, be required to perform his duties for more than one-half hour at one sitting."  DETECTION OFRADAR SIGNALS INNOISE387 -12 ~-Il ~0-100 If) L-9- .2 CD-8D 0- 7--a L-6(l) V> 0-5c "'- "-4- c0'-3V> D-2"- .c.
V>-lOJ-L.c.f- +110 20c 30406080100 Number ofpulsesintegrotedA B..
200300400 Figure10.6Improvement ofoperator detection threshold (signal-to-noise ratioperpulse)asafunction of thenumberofpulses(sweeps) forside-by-side displays.
CurveA,chemical recorder; curveB,cathode-ray­ tubeB-scopedisplay; curveC.lineofslope1.5dB/doubling (ocn1/2);curveD,lineofslope3dB/doubling (rxn)forperfectpredetection integration.
A'Saretheoretical valuesforidealpostdetection-integration improvement ascomputed byMarcum43forafalse-alarm probability of10-3.(FromJ.Brit.IRE.49) 2.5dBperdoubling mentioned above.Theapplicability oftheseparticular teststotheusual PPJdisplaycanbequestioned sincea5-inch-diameter CRTwasusedwithsimulated echoes placedatanazimuth unknown totheoperator atadistance of1inchfromthecenterofthe scope.Theconclusion thatmightbedrawnfromsuchexperiments isthatsomewhat lessthan theoretical integration improvement willbeobtained ifthepulsesarenotdisplayed properly; thatis,thepersistence ofthedisplayshouldbesufficient toprevent excessive "lossof memory," thedynamic rangeofthedisplaymustbelargeenoughnottolosesignalinforma­ tion,andthedisplayresolution shouldbeconsistent withtheradarresolution toavoid collapsing loss.Sincethedynamic rangeofmostdisplays islimitedtoarelatively smallvalue, thepulsesreceived fromatargetshouldbedisplayed sidebyside(asisusuallythecaseona PPIorB-st"ope) ratherthanpiledupatasinglepointonthedisplay.Insuchacasethe integration isperformed bytheeye-brain combination oftheoperator.
Experimental measurements oftheoperator's abilitytodetectsignalsonanA-scope showedtheintegration-improvement factortoben1/2,or1.5dBperdoubling ofthenumberof pulsesintegrated.31Thisislessthanpredicted foranidealpostdetection integrator.
Itwasalso foundthattheoperator's detection capability wasmaximum whenBT~1,whereB=IF bandwidth andT=pulsewidth,asisconsistent withtheanalysis ofSec.10.2.
ThedetectabilityofatargetechoonaCRTdisplaydepends onsuchfactorsasthesize andbrightness oftheCRTspot,thenoisebackground, pulserepetition frequency, antenna rotation rate,typeofphosphor, anditsdecaycharacteristics, thesizeofthedisplay,andthe colorandintensity oftheambient illumination.
Theeffectofmostofthesefactorshasbeen determined empirically.31.51.62 Thenamepipology issometimes appliedtotheartofdesigning andoperating theradardisplaysoastooptimize theoperator's abilitytodetecttargetpips.(A targetpipisalsocalledablip.)Ithasalsobeenfoundfromexperience thatanoperator should not,ingeneral, berequired toperform hisdutiesformorethanone-half houratonesitting.
51 388 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  10.7 AUTOMATIC DETECTION  The function of the radar operator viewing the ordinary radar display is to recognize the  presence of targets and extract their location.
When the function is performed by electronic  decision circuitry without the interventiotl of an operator, the process is known as u~cton~c~tic  detection.
One of the chief reasons for employing automatic detection is to overcome the  limitations of an operator due to fatigue, boredom, and overload.
In addition, the use of  automatic detection allows the radar output to be transmitted over telephone lines rather than  by more expensive broadband microwave links, since only detected target information need be  transmitted and not the full bandwidth signal (raw video).
Automatic detection is also an  important part of automatic detection and track (ADT) systems, as discussed in Sec.
5.10.
The  automatic detector has also been called plot extractor and rinta extractor.
 Usually there are four basic aspects to automatic detection: (I) the integration of the  pulses received from the target; (2) the detection decision; and the determination of the target  location in (3) range and (4) azimuth.
Sometimes there is also included in automatic-detection  circuitry the means for maintaining a constant false alarm rate (CFAR).
This is discussed  separately in the next section.
 Binary moving-window detect~r.~~.~~-~~ As a radar antenna scans by a target it will normally  receive n echo pulses.
If m of these expected n pulses exceed a predetermined value (threshold),  a target may be declared to be present.
The use of a criterion that requires m out of n echo  pulses to be present is a form of integration.
It is less efficient than ideal postdetection  integration, but it has the advantage of simplicity.
It is called the binary moving-window  detector, but it has also been called double-threshold detector, m-out-of-n detector, coinci-  dence detector, sliding-window detector, and binary integrator.
 A block diagram of the binary moving-window detector is shown in Fig.
10.7.
The radar  video is passed through a threshold detector, which may be thought of as a bottom clipper.
 Only those signals whose amplitude exceeds the preset threshcld are allowed to pass.
This is  the first of two thresholds, hence the name double-threshold detector which is sometimes used.
 The output of the first threshold is sampled by the quantizer at least once per range-resolution  cell.
A standard pulse is generated if the video waveform exceeds the first threshold, and  nothing if it does not.
These are designated by 1 or 0 respectively.
Thus the output of the  quantizer is a series of Is and 0s.
This is then separated into separate range cells by the range -/  First , .
 threshold Second  threshold  Ronge gate , .
,: ' .
py~-~-l-* lUl ye1  $+-  I.
 Figure 10.7 Block diagram of a binary moving window detector, or binary integrator.
Count  sampler Radar  receiver Pulse.
Binory  counter Ronge gate  No.
1 + Video - Quantizer Threshold  detector i  388INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS 10.7AUTOMATIC DETECTION Thefunction oftheradaroperator viewing theordinaryradardisplay istorecognize the presence oftarge.tsandextracttheirlocation.
W.henthefunction isperformed byelectronic decision circuitry without theinterventioll ofanoperator, theprocess isknownasmttomatic detection.
Oneofthechiefreasons foremploying automatic detection istoovercome the limitations ofanoperator duetofatigue,boredom, andoverload.
Inaddition, theuseof automatic detection allowstheradaroutputtobetransmitted overtelephone linesratherthan bymoreexpensive broadband microwave links,sinceonlydetected targetinformation needbe transmitted andnotthefullbandwidth signal(rawvideo).Automatic detection isalsoan important partofautomatic detection andtrack(ADT)systems, asdiscussed inSec.5.10.The automatic detector hasalsobeencalledplotextractor anddataextractor.
Usually therearefourbasicaspectstoautomatic detection: (I)theinte§ration ofthe pulsesreceived fromthetarget;(2)thedetection decision; andthedetermination ofthetarget location in(3)rangeand(4)azimuth.
Sometimes thereisalsoincluded inautomatic-detection circuitry themeansformaintaining aconstant falsealarmrate(CFAR).
Thisisdiscussed separately inthenextsection.
Binarymoving-window detector.39.52-60 Asaradarantenna scansbyatargetitwillnormally receivenechopulses.Ifmoftheseexpected npulsesexceedapredetermined value(threshold), atargetmaybedeclared tobepresent.Theuseofacriterion thatrequires moutofnecho pulsestobepresent.isaformofintegration.
Itislessefficient thanidealpostdetection integration, butithastheadvantage ofsimplicity.
Itiscalledthebinarymoving-window detector, butithasalsobeencalleddouble-threshold detector, m-out-of-n detector, coinci­ dencedetector, sliding-window detector, andbinaryintegrator.
Ablockdiagram ofthebinarymoving-window detector isshowninFig.10.7.Theradar videoispassedthrough athreshold detector, whichmaybethought ofasabottomclipper.
Onlythosesignalswhoseamplitude exceedsthepresetthreshdd areallowed topass.Thisis thefirstoftwothresholds, hencethenamedouble-threshold detector whichissometimes used.
Theoutputofthefirstthreshold issampled bythequantizer atleastonceperrange-resolution cell.Astandard pulseisgenerated ifthevideowaveform exceeds thefirstthreshold, and nothing ifitdoesnot.Thesearedesignated by1or0respectively.
Thustheoutputofthe quantizer isaseriesofIsandOs.Thisisthenseparated intoseparate rangecellsbytherange First thresholdSecond threshold I •Target pulse Figure10.7Blockdiagram ofabinarymovingwindowdetector, orbinaryintegrator. III:II:(*TION ot: RADAR SI(;NAI.S IN NOISE 389  gi~tcq, ;rt~rl 111e Is ;irl(l 0s fro111  he ii~st tt $weeps are stored and counted in the binary counter.
If  there are at least rt~ Is withir~ the last tt sweeps, a target -is said to be present.
The number ttt is  the secorld threshold to be passed in the double-threshold detector.
The two thresholds must  be selected jointly for best performance.
The optimum value of ni for a constant echo signal is  F!I~H'~I in Fig.
10.8.
(Sirnilar resi~lts are available for fluctuating  target^.^^*^*.^^) This curve  is approximate sirlce there is some slight dependence upon the false-alarm probability, but it  appears to be irldeperldent of the signal-to-noise ratio.
The actual value of rtt can diner  sig~~ific.;~~~tiy frot~l ttr,,,, witl~otrt a large penalty in signal-to-noise ratio.
For example.
the  signal-to-noise ratio will be within 0.5 dB of optimum for 1?2 ranging over a value of 0.44 !r for a  nor~fluctuating target or a Swerling case I, and 0.34 n for a Swerling case 2.59  The quantization of signals into but two levels (zero or one) in the binary moving-window  detector results in a loss of about 1.5 to 2 dB in signal-to-noise ratio as compared to the ideal  post-detection integrat~r.~~ 55.5 ' When the artlplitude is quantized into more than two levels,  the loss is less.
For example, quantization into four levels (2 bits), reduces the loss to about  or~c-tllirti (Ilit t experienced ir~ t wo-level, or binary, quantization (1 bit).60  A corollary advantage of the binary rnoving-window detector is that it is less sensitive to  the effects of a single large interference pulse that might exist along with the target echo pulses.
 In (he usual integrator, the full energy of the interference pulse is added.
In the binary  moving-window detector, however, it contributes no more than would any other pulse that  crosses the first threshold since a I is recorded no matter what the amplitude.
Similarly, the  double-threshold detector has some advantage over the usual integrator when the background  interfereuce is not receiver noise but is nongaussian, as is some sea clutter and land clutter.
 .& 0  L : looF - E - -  2 -  C - 0 - - 0 - - -  r -  10 .F -  -  -  Figure 10.8 Optimum number of pulses mop, (out of a  t I maximum of n) for a binary moving window detector.
A  0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 constant (nonfluctuating) target is assumed.
(AJter  mopt /n ~werling,~~ courtesy Rand Corporation.)  IWrFCTlON OFRADAR SIGNALS INNOISE389 gates.andtheIsandOsfromthelast11sweepsarestoredandcounted inthebinarycounter.If thereareatleast 111Iswithir}thelast11sweeps,atargeHssaid tobepresenl.
Thenumber tilis thesecondthreshold tobepassedinthedouble-threshold detector.
Thetwothresholds must beselected jointlyforbestperformance.
Theoptimum valueofInforaconstant echosignalis showninFig.lOX(Similar resultsareavailable forfluctuating targets.39,58,59)Thiscurve isapproximate sincethereissomeslightdependence uponthefalse-alarm probability, butit appears tobeindependent ofthesignal-to-noise ratio.Theactualvalueofmcandiffer signiticantly fmlllmoplwithollt alargepenalty insignal-to-noise ratio.Forexample.
the signal-to-noise ratiowillbe within 0.5dBofoptimum forInranging overavalueof0.44 11fora nonnuctuating targetoraSwerling caseI,and0.34nforaSwerling case2.59 Thequantization ofsignalsintobuttwolevels(zeroorone)inthebinarymoving-window dctector resultsinalossofabout1.5to2dBinsignal-to-noise ratioascompared totheideal post-detection integrator.5355.57Whentheamplitude isquantized intomorethantwolevels, thelossisless.Forexample, quantization intofourlevels(2bits),reduces thelosstoabout onc-third thatexperienced intwo-level, orbinary,quantization (Ibit).60 ;\corollary advantage ofthebinarymoving-window detector isthatitislesssensitive to theeffectsofasinglelargeinterference pulsethatmightexistalongwiththetargetechopulses.
fntheusualintegrator, thefullenergyoftheinterference pulseisadded.Inthebinary moving-window detector.
however, itcontributes nomorethanwouldanyotherpulsethat crossesthefirstthreshold sincea Iisrecorded nomatterwhattheamplitude.
Similarly, the double-threshold detector hassomeadvantage overtheusualintegrator whenthebackground interrerence isnotreceiver noisebutisnongaussian, asissomeseaclutterandlandclutter.
10,000.---rlr------,,-------,-----,---:cJ l{) r0-0 -N8 -::, (l)~.cu'"00o L1,000::-- §t -<l: oneu ~ :::Jr 0.
'0 Leu100D E :::J C 0 0 r::: 10 Figure10.8Optimum numberofpulsesmOpl(outofa f '__--'--__..L..._--..l.__-l-_~ maximum ofn)forabinarymovingwindowdetector.
A o0.2 0.4 0.60.81.0constant (nonfluctuating) targetisassumed.
(After mop!In Swerling,H courtesyRandCorporation.) Such clutter is characterized by having large "spiky" echoes.
Although they may occur in-  frequently, they can be quite large and give undue weight in a conventional integrator.
In the  double-threshold detector they contribute the same as any threshold-crossing signal no matter  what their amplitude.
An analysis of the problem of detection of signals in clutter (or noise)  that is nongaussian, indicates that a detector based on the median value crossing a threshold is  significantly more efficient than the usual detection criterion based on the nterin value.61 The  implementation of the binary moving window detector is similar to that of the median  detector.
 An estimate of the target's angular position may be made by locating the center of the  group of tr pulses.s6 This operation is called beunr splitting.
The moving-window detector has  no prior knowledge of the target beginning.
It must be sufficiently sensitive to quickly detect a  region of increased density of Is, yet it must not be so sensitive that it initiates false alarms due  to noise.
Once a target beginning is realized, the detector must be able to sense tJe end of the  region of increased-density of Is.
Again, if it is too sensitive to change, the detector will tend to  split targets.
I  1  Tappeddelay-line integrator.
An integrator based on the tapped delay line is shown in  Fig.
10.9.
The time delay through the line is made equal to the total integration time, and the  taps are spaced at intervals equal to the pulse-repetition period.
The number of taps equals the  number of pulses to be integrated.
The outputs from each of the taps are tied together to form  the sum of the previous n pulses.
One of the advantages of this integrator is that any type of  weighting may be applied to the individual pulses by simply inserting the proper attenuation  at each tap of the delay line.
 This form of integrator that sums the last n pulses is also known as the nroving-wirttlow  detector or the analog moving-window It, of course, can also be implemented In  digital circuitry.
It is similar to the binary rnoving-window detector discussed above, but it  does not use a double threshold and it does not suppress the effects of large interference spikes  as does the binary detector.
It does not suffer the 1.5 to 2 dB loss of the binary detector and ~t  can be employed to estimate the target's angle by beam splitting.
The detection performance of  the moving-window detector is about 0.5 dB worse than the optimal detector which weights  the returned signals by the fourth power of the antenna voltage pattern.63 The angular loca-  tion of the target can be estimated from the output of this detector by taking the midpoint  between the first and last crossings of the detection threshold, or by taking the maximum value  of the running sum.
After correcting for the bias, the accuracy of the location measurement is  only about 20 percent worse than the~retical.~~  Recirculating-delay-line integrat~r.~' -" The delay-line integrator, or moving-window detec-  tor, described above requires that a number of pulses, equal to that expected from the target,  be held in storage.
A simplification can be had by recirculating the output through a single  delay line (Fig.
10.10~) whose delay is equal to the pulse repetition period.
The recirclrlatiny-  Topped deloy line  Video in  output  Figure 10.9 Pulse integrator using tapped delay line.
 390INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS Suchclutterischaracterized byhavinglarge"spiky"echoes.Although theymayoccur in~ frequently, theycanbequitelargeandgiveundueweightinaconventional integrator.
Inthe double-threshold detector theycontribute thesameasanythreshold-crossing signalnomatter whattheiramplitude.
Ananalysis oftheproblem ofdetection ofsignalsinclutter(ornoise) thatisnongaussian, indicates thatadetector basedonthemedianvaluecrossing athreshold is significantly moreefficient thantheusualdetection criterion basedontheme(lIIvalue.61The implementation ofthebinarymoving window detector issimilartothatofthemedian detector.
Anestimate ofthetarget'sangular position maybemadebylocating thecenterofthe groupof11pulses.56Thisoperation iscalledbeamsplitting.
Themoving-window detector has nopriorknowledge ofthetargetbeginning.
Itmustbesufficiently sensitive toquicklydetecta regionofincreased densityofIs,yetitmustnotbesosensitive thatitinitiates falsealarmsdue tonoise.Onceatargetbeginning isrealized, thedetector mustbeabletosensetjeendofthe regionofincreased-density ofIs.Again,ifitistoosensitive tochange,thedetector willtendto splittargets.
I ' .1 Tapped-delay-line integrator.
Anintegrator basedonthetappeddelaylineisshownin Fig.to.9.Thetimedelaythrough thelineismadeequaltothetotalintegration time,andthe tapsarespacedatintervals equaltothepulse-repetition period.Thenumberoftapsequalsthe numberofpulsestobeintegrated.
Theoutputsfromeachofthetapsaretiedtogether toform thesumoftheprevious npulses.Oneoftheadvantages ofthisintegrator isthatanytypeof weighting maybeappliedtotheindividual pulsesbysimplyinserting theproperattenuation ateachtapofthedelayline.
Thisformofintegrator thatsumsthelastnpulsesisalsoknownasthemoping-window detector ortheanalogmoving-window detector.64'It,ofcourse,canalsobeimplemented in digitalcircuitry.Itissimilartothebinarymoving-window detector discussed above,butit doesnotuseadoublethreshold anditdoesnotsuppress theeffectsoflargeinterference spikes asdoesthebinarydetector.ItdoesnotsutTerthe1.5to2dBlossofthebinarydetector andit canbeemployed toestimate thetarget'sanglebybeamsplitting.
Thedetection performance of themoving-window detector isabout0.5dBworsethantheoptimaldetector whichweights thereturned signalsbythefourthpoweroftheantenna voltagepattern.63Theangular loca­ tionofthetargetcanbeestimated fromtheoutputofthisdetector bytakingthemidpoint between thefirstandlastcrossings ofthedetection threshold, orbytakingthemaximum value oftherunning sum.Aftercorrecting forthebias,theaccuracy ofthelocation measurement is onlyabout20percentworsethantheoretica1.63 Recirculating-delay-line integrator.65·70Thedelay-line integrator, ormoving-window detec­ tor,described aboverequires thatanumberofpulses,equaltothatexpected fromthetarget, beheldinstorage.
Asimplification canbehadbyrecirculating theoutputthrough asingle delayline(Fig.to.toa)whosedelayisequaltothepulserepetition period.Therecirculating- Topped delayline ~~g'O"d output Figure10.9Pulseintegrator usingtappeddelayline. Loop gain = k < 1  71  Input .- -9-- 1-1 -J  J.
 Inleqroled  output Integrated  output  f  Delay line  Integrated  oulpul .
 Deloy line Delay line  Figure 10.10 Recirculating-delay-line integrator, or feedback integrator, k = loop gain < 1.
(a) single  delay loop; (h) double loop: (c) two-pole filter.
 delay-liue integrator.
also called the feedback integrator, adds each new sweep to the sum of all  the previous sweeps.
To prevent unwanted oscillations, or "ringing," due to positive feedback,  the sum must be attenuated by an amount k after each pass through the line.
The factor k is the  gain of the loop formed by the delay line and the feedback path.
It must be less than unity for  stable operation.
The effect of k < 1 is that the integrator has imperfect "memory." The  optimum value of k depends on the number of pulses received from the target (Sec.
2.6 and  Ref.
65).
 Analog delay lines that have been used in such devices include acoustic lines, lumped-  parameter delay lines, electrostatic storage tubes, and magnetic drums or disks.
They do not  have, in general, sufficient stability to permit large values of k.
When analog lines are used,  loop gains $re not much larger than 0.9 in the configuration of Fig.
10.10a, and 0.98 in the  configuration of Fig.
10.10b.
Since the effective number of pulses integrated is equal to  (I - k)- ', a value of k = 0.9 corresponds to about 10 pulses integrated and k = 0.98 to about  50 pulses.
However, when the recirculating-delay-line integrator is implemented with digital  circuitry, values of k approaching unity can be achieved.6s ,  The factor k in the recirculating-delay-line integrator of Fig.
10.10~ is equivalent to an  exponential weighting of the received pulses.
It results in a loss of about 1.0 dB in signal-to-  noise ratio as compared with the ideal postdetection integrator that weights the received pulses  in direct proportion to the fourth power of the antenna beam pattern.66 It is 0.5 dB less  efficient than the moving window detector with uniform weights.67 The double-loop integrator  of Fig.
10.
lob is a two-pole filter with a multiple pole.
It is about 0.3 dB less efficient than the  ideal integrator with optimum weights.66 The double delay-tine configuration of Fig.
10.10~ is  also a two-pole filter but unlike the double-loop integrator, the two poles need not be at the  same location.
Its detection performance is only 0.15 dB less efficient than the optimum.66  The recirculating delay-line integrators of Fig.
10.10 can be used to obtain an estimate of  Integrated outputInput --~--Loopgoin=k<1 -~-IDeloyIi"IJInput-­+DETECTION OFRADAR SIGNALS INNOISE391 Integrated output (a) {Delayline ~+Integrated output,(b) Delayline '------<.k21------------' (c) Figure10.10Recirculating-delay-line integrator, orfeedback integrator, k=loopgain<l.(a)single delayloop;(h)douhleloop:(c)two-pole filter.
delay-lille integrator, alsocalledthefeedback integrator, addseachnewsweeptothesumofall theprevious sweeps.Topreventunwanted oscillations, or"ringing," duetopositivefeedback, thesummustbeattenuated byanamountkaftereachpassthrough theline.Thefactorkisthe gainoftheloopformedbythedelaylineandthefeedback path.Itmustbelessthanunityfor stableoperation.
TheeITectofk<Iisthattheintegrator hasimperfect" memory." The optimum valueofkdepends onthenumberofpulsesreceived fromthetarget(Sec.2.6and Ref.65).
Analogdelaylinesthathavebeenusedinsuchdevicesincludeacoustic lines.lumped­ parameter delaylines,electrostatic storage tubes,andmagnetic drumsordisks~Theydonot have,ingeneral, sufficient stability topermitlargevaluesofk.Whenanaloglinesareused, loopgainsarenotmuchlargerthan0.9intheconfiguration ofFig.10.lOa,and0.98inthe configuration ofFig.10.lOb.Sincetheeffective number ofpulsesintegrated isequalto (I-krI,avalueofk=0.9corresponds toabout10pulsesintegrated andk=0.98toabout 50pulses.However, whentherecirculating-delay-line integrator isimplemented withdigital circuitry, valuesofkapproaching unitycanbeachieved.6s• Thefactorkintherecirculating-delay-line integrator ofFig.1O.lOaisequivalent toan exponential weighting ofthereceived pulses.Itresultsinalossofabout1.0dBinsignal-to­ noiseratioascompared withtheidealpostdetection integrator thatweightsthereceived pulses indirectproportion tothefourthpoweroftheantenna beampattern.66Itis0.5dBJess efficientthanthemovingwindowdetector withuniform weights.67Thedouble-loop integrator ofFig.to.lObisatwo-pole filterwithamultiple pole.Itisabout0.3dBlessefficient thanthe idealintegrator withoptimum weights.66Thedoubledelay-line configuration ofFig.1O.Wcis alsoatwo-pole filterbutunlikethedouble-loop integrator, thetwopolesneednotbeatthe samelocation.
Itsdetection performance isonly0.15dBlessefficient thantheoptimum.66 Therecirculating delay-line integrators ofFig.10.10canbeusedtoobtainanestimateof 392 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  the angular location of the target.
The target can be found, as in beam splitting, by taking the  midpoint between the start and end of the threshold crossing.
There will be a bias in the angle  estimate that depends on the signal-to-noise ratio, but this bias can be estin~ated acc~rately.~'  The standard deviation of angular estimates obtained with the single delay-line is about 15  percent greater than the optimum estimates based on the Cramer-Rao lower bot~nti.'~ If tire  maximum value of the output is used as an estimator of the target location, the bias is  constant.
However, the standard deviation of the estimates are 100 percent greater than the  Similarly the standard deviation of the double-loop integrator using the maxi-  mum value as the estimator produces a standard deviation 50 to 100 percent greater than the  optimum.
The two-pole filter of Fig.
IO.lOc, on the other hand, has a standard deviat~on 15  percent greater than optimum, and the estimator based on the maxin- dm value has a constant  bias.66 Its relatively good dngle-estimating accuracy, good detection performance, along with  the relative simplicity of a feedback integrator makes the two-pole filter a gooddchoice as an  automatic detector for scanning radars.
 10.8 CONSTANT-FALSE-ALA RM-RATE (CFAR) RECEIVER  The threshold ;it the oiltpiit of a radar receiver, as discussed in Sec.
2.5, is cliosein so as to  achieve a desired falsc-alarn-t probability.
The false-alarrn rate is quite sensitive to the thresh-  old level.
For example, a 1 dB change in the threshold can result in three orders of magni-  tude cnange in the false alarm probability (Fig.
2.5).
It does not takc much .if a drift in the  receiver gain, a change in receiver noise, or the presence of external noise or clutter echoes to  inundate the radar display with extraneous responses.
 If changes in the false-alarm rate are gradual, an operator viewing a display can compen-  sate with a manual gain adjustment.
It has been said75 that the maximum increase in noise  level that can be tolerated with a manual system using displays anj operators is from 5 to  10 dB.
But with an automatic detection and tracking (ADT) system, the tolerable increase is  less than 1 dB.
Excessive false alarms in an ADT system cause the computer to overload as it  attempts to associate false alarms with established tracks or to generate new, but false, tracks.
 Manual control is too slow and imprecise for automatic systems.
Some automatic, instanta-  neous means is required to maintain a constant false-alarm rate.
Devices that accomplish this  purpose are called CFAR.
 A CFAR may be obtained by observing the noise or clutter background in the vicinity of  the target and adjusting the threshold in accordance with the measured background.
Figure  10.11 illustrates the cell-averaging CFAR which utilizes a tapped dejjy-line :o sample the  range cells to either side of the range cell of interest, or test cell.
The output of the test cell is the  radar output.
The spacing betwen the taps is equal to the rang? :esolution.
'The o~iputs from  the delay line taps are summed.
This sum, when multiplied by the appropriate constant,  determines the threshold level for achieving the desired probability of false alarm.
Thus  the threshold varies contin:.~ously accord in^ ?r, the noise Jr the clutter environment fc:!nd  within a range interval surrounding the range cell under ob~ervation.~~ This form of CFAR  has sometimes been called Adaptive Video Threshold, or AVT.
The particular CFAR shown in  Fig.
10.1 1 does not sum all the range cells as described above, but sums the cells ahead of the  test cell separately from the sum of the cells following the test cell.
The threshaid is determined  by whichever of the two sums is the greater.
This is done to minir-ize the generation of false  alarms at the leading and trailing edges of abrupt clutter regions.' .
4 small additional loss is  incurred, however, compare:i to using all the taps to establish the ~hreshold.
(For example,  with 32 reference cells, a probability of false alarm, and 0.9 probability of detection, the  392INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS theangular location ofthetarget.Thetargetcanbefound,asinbeamsplitting, bytakingthe midpoint between thestartandendofthethreshold crossing.
Therewillheahiasintheangle estimate thatdependsonthesignal-to-noise ratio,butthishiascanbeestimated accuratdy.
C>7 Thestandard deviation ofangularestimates obtained withthesingledelay-line isabout15 percentgreaterthantheoptimum estimates hasedontheCramer-Rao lowerhound.C>C>Ifthe maximum valueoftheoutputisusedasanestimator ofthetargetlocation, thebiasis constant.
However, thestandard deviation oftheestimates are100percentgreaterthanthe optimum.66Similarly thestandard deviation ofthedouble-loop integrator usingthemaxi­ mumvalueastheestimator produces astandard deviation 50totOOpercentgreaterthanthe optimum.
Thetwo-pole filterofFig.IO.lOe,ontheotherhand,hasastandard deviation 15 percentgreaterthanoptimum, andtheestimator basedonthemaxiwumvaluehasaconstant bias.66Itsrelatively goodangle-estimating accuracy, gooddetection performance, alongwith therelativesimplicity ofafeedback integrator makesthetwo-pole filteragood...}choice asan automatic detector forscanning radars.
10.8CONSTANT-FALSE-ALARM-RATE (CFAR) RECEIVER Thethreshold attheoutputofaradarreceiver, asdiscussed inSec.2.5,ischosensoasto achieveadesiredfalst·alarm probability.
Thefalse-alarm rateisquitesensitive tothethresh­ oldlevel.Forexample, a 1dBchangeinthethreshold canresultinthreeordersofmagni­ tudechangeinthefalsealarmprobability (Fig.2.5).Itdoesnottakemuch");' adriftinthe receiver gain,achangeinreceivernoise,orthepresence ofexternal noiseorclutterechoesto inundate theradardisplaywithextraneous responses.
[fchanges inthefalse-alarm ratearegradual, anoperator viewingadisplaycancompen­ satewithamanualgainadjustment.
Ithasbeensaid75thatthemaximum increase innoise levelthatcanbetolerated withamanual systemusingdisplays anJoperators isfrom5to 10dB.Butwithanautomatic detection andtracking (ADT)system,thetolerable increase is lessthan1dB.Excessive falsealarmsinanADTsystemcausethecomputer tooverload asit attempts toassociate falsealarmswithestablished tracksortogenerate new,butfalse,tracks.
Manual control istooslowandimprecise forautomatic systems.
Someautomatic, instanta­ neousmeansisrequired tomaintain aconstant false-alarm rate.Devicesthataccomplish this purpose arecalledCFAR.
ACFARmaybeobtained byobserving thenoiseorclutterbackground inthevicinilYof thetargetandadjusting thethreshold inaccordance withthemeasured background.
Figure 10.11illustrates thecell-averaging CFARwhichutilizesatappedde}.1y-line tosamplethe rangecellstoeithersideoftherangecellofinterest,ortestcell.T11eoutputofthetestcellisthe radaroutput.Thespacingbetwe-m thetapsisequaltotherange;esolution.
Theoutputsfrom thedelaylinetapsaresummed.
Thissum,whenmultiplied bytheappropriate constant, determines thethreshold levelforachieving thedesired probability offalsealarm.Thus thethreshold variescontinuously according ''Jthenoiseartheclutterenvironment fmmd withinarangeintervalsurrounding therangecellunderobservation.76ThisformofCFAR hassometimes beencalledAdaptive VideoThreshold, orAVT.Theparticular CFARshownin Fig.tO.11doesnotsumalltherangecellsasdescribed above,butsumsthecellsaheadofthe testcellseparately fromthesumofthecellsfollowing thetestcell.Thethreshoid isdetermined bywhichever ofthetwosumsisthegreater.Thisisdonetominirizethegeneration offalse alarmsattheleadingandtrailingedgesofabruptclutterregions.
";<\smalladditional lossis incurred, however, compared tousingallthetapstoestablish the;hreshold.
(Forexample, with32reference cells,a10-5probability offalsealarm,and0.9probability ofdetection, the DETECTION OF RADAR SIGNALS IN NOISE 393  .- Tnpp~d delay line Test Tapped delay line  1 Greater  0 f  I WAF? Threshold output  Fi~ure 10.1 1 Cell averaging CFAR.
In this version the greater of the outputs from the range cells ahead of  or behind the cell of interest is used to set the threshold.
 oss with a conventional cell-averaging CFAR is 0.8 dB.
With the "greater-of" technique the  oss is itlcreased to I.
l dB.75)  Typically the number of taps used in a cell-averaging CFAR might vary from 16 to 20.
 The CFAR may be thought of as using the outputs of the sampled cells to estimate the  unknown amplitude of the background noise or clutter.
Because of the finite number of  samples, the background is not completely known and a loss occurs compared to the ideal  detector.
For example, when only 10 independent samples are used, a loss of 3.5 dB is said to  result for a probabiiity of detection of 0.9 and probability of false alarm of when the  background is broadband noise or clutter with a Rayleigh probability den~ity.~~~~~ With 20  independent samples the loss is 1.5 dB, and with 40 samples it is 0.7 dB.
The above applies to  single-hit detection.
The loss decreases with increasing number of pulses integrated.
With 10  pulses integrated, the loss with 10 independent samples decreases to 0.7 dB, and to 0.3 dB for  100 pulses integrated.88  If the target echo is large, energy can spill over into the adjacent range-resolution cells and  affect the measurement of the average background.
Fur this reason, the range cells surround-  ing the test cell are often omitted when averaging the background.
As mentioned in Sec.
5.10,  the resolution of targets in range is degraded by the adaptive threshold process.
 The above description of the cell-averaging CFAR assumed that the background from  which the threshold was set was determined by sampling in range.
In those radars which  extract the doppler frequency shift, as with a bank of doppler filters, the estimate of the  background Ean be based on both the range and the doppler domains.77 It is also possible to  utilize data from the adjacent angle-resolution cells to establish the threshold.
 A common assumption in the design of many CFARs is that the probability density  function of the background noise amplitude is known (usually taken to be gaussian) except for  a scale factor.
Clutter, however, is often nonhomogeneous and thus nonstationary, as well as  being of unknown probability density function in some cases.
With such uncertainty in the  background, a nonparametric method of detection must be (A nonpararnetric  detector, also called a distribution-free detector, in its most general form does not require prior  knowledge of the probability density function of the noise or the signal.39) A nonparametric  detector permits a constant false-alarm rate to be achieved for background noise that might be  described by very broad classes of probability density functions.
It has a greater loss than when  the character of the noise is known and an optimum detector can be designed, but it does keep  the false alarm rate fixed.
One form of nonparametric detector is based on the "ranks" of  observations in which the components of the observations are ranked in order of magnitude,  and detection is basid only on some function of these ranks.3g This can be implemented with a  DETECTION OFRADAR SIGNALS INNOISE393 Vldpo Il1put1Tapped delayIineI~lliillTapped delaylineIcell Threshold I Sum I I Sum I I J !GreaterI IofI ICFAR output Figure10.11Cellaveraging CFAR.Inthisversionthegreateroftheoutputs rromtherangecellsaheador orbehindthecellofinterest isusedtosetthethreshold.
losswithaconventional cell-averaging CFARis0.8dB.Withthe"greater-of" technique the lossisincreased to1.1dB.7S) Typically thenumberoftapsusedinacell-averaging CFARmightvaryfrom16to20.
TheCFARmaybethought ofasusingtheoutputs ofthesampled cellstoestimate the unknown amplitude ofthebackground noiseorclutter.Because ofthefinitenumberof samples, thebackground isnotcompletely knownandalossoccurscompared totheideal detector.
Forexample, whenonly10independent samplesareused,alossof3.5dBissaidto resultforaprobability ofdetection of0.9andprobability offalsealarmof10-6,whenthe background isbroadband noiseorclutterwithaRayleigh probability density.
74,7SWith20 independent samples thelossis1.5dB,andwith40samples itis0.7dB.Theaboveappliesto single-hit detection.
Thelossdecreases withincreasing numberofpulsesintegrated.
With10 pulsesintegrated, thelosswith10independent samplesdecreases to0.7dB,andto0.3dBfor 100pulsesintegrated.B8 Ifthetargetechoislarge,energycanspilloverintotheadjacent range-resolution cellsand affectthemeasurement oftheaveragebackground.
Forthisreason,therangecellssurround­ ingthetestcellareoftenomitted whenaveraging the background.
Asmentioned inSec.5.10, theresolution oftargetsinrangeisdegraded bytheadaptive threshold process.
Theabovedescription ofthecell-averaging CFARassumed thatthebackground from whichthethreshold wassetwasdetermined bysampling inrange.Inthoseradarswhich extractthedoppler frequency shift,aswithabankofdoppler filters,theestimate ofthe background fanbebasedonboththerangeandthedopplerdomains.77Itisalsopossible to utilizedatafromtheadjacent angle-resolution cellstoestablish thethreshold.
Acommon assumption inthedesignofmanyCFARsisthattheprobability density function ofthebackground noiseamplitude isknown(usuallytakentobegaussian) exceptfor ascalefactor.Clutter,however, isoftennonhomogeneous andthusnonstationary, aswellas beingofunknown probability densityfunction insomecases.Withsuchuncertainty inthe background, anonparametric methodofdetection mustbeused.75•78-;82(Anonparametric detector, alsocalledadistribution-free detector, initsmostgeneralformdoesnotrequireprior knowledge oftheprobability densityfunction ofthenoiseorthesigna1.39)Anonparametric detector permitsaconstant false-alarm ratetobeachieved forbackground noisethatmightbe described byverybroadclassesofprobability densityfunctions.
Ithasagreaterlossthanwhen thecharacter ofthenoiseisknownandanoptimum detector canbedesigned, butitdoeskeep thefalsealarmratefixed.Oneformofnonparametric detector isbasedonthe"ranks"of observations inwhichthecomponents oftheobservations arerankedinorderofmagnitude, anddetection isbas~donlyonsomefunctionoftheseranks.39Thiscanbeimplemented witha 394 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  rank detector which computes the ranks by pair-wise comparisons of the output from the range  cell under test with each of the outputs from the neighboring range cells that sample the  background n~ise.~'-'' After the detector ranks the sample under test with its neighboring  samples, it integrates the ranks and a target is declared after testing against a fixed and an  adaptive thresh~ld.~~*'~  There are several other methods for achieving CFAR besides the use of cell averaging.
 One of the first CFAR receivers to be described in the literature used the output of a post-  detection integrator (low-pass filter) to estimate the average noise.
This was then applied as a  feed-forward signal to control the threshold level to maintain the false-alarm rate  constant.' The noise had to remain constant for a time corresponding to the total number  of pulses returned from the target.
Another CFAR technique is the hard limiter, sometimes  called the Dickefi~.'~-~~ This consists of a broadband IF filter followed by a hard limiter and  a narrow-band matched filter.
The hard limiter is set low enough to ensure that receiver noise  is limited.
Thus the output is unaffected by the level of the noise.
A signal, however, causes the  output of the matched filter to increase by a factor M, equal to the ratio of the bandwidth of  the broadband filter to the bandwidth of the narrow-band (matched) filter.
This form of CFAR  may not be desirable with MTI since hard limiting reduces the improvement factor or the  clutter attenuation (Sec.
4.8).
Hard limiting also introduces an additional loss.
The larger the  ratio of the bandwidths M, the less the loss.
For example, for a 0.5 probability of detection and  a probability of false alarm, the loss is 1.0 dB for M = 100, 2.2 dB for M = 20, and 7 dB  for M = In essence the Dicke fix (that uses wideband limiting) samples the adjacent  resolution cells in the frequencyldomain, as compared to the cell-averaging CFAR that  samples the background in the adjacent resolution cells in the time domain.
 When the product of the bandwidth Band the pulse width z is greater than unity, as in a  pulse compression radar, the loss is determined by the product MBr rather than M.
Thus, a  loss of 1.0 dB corresponds to MBt = 100.
The ratio of the bandwidths M therefore can be  unity when Br is large enough.73 Both coded-pulse waveformsss and frequency-modulated  waveforms have been considered for pulse compression radar with CFAR.~~  The benefits of a large Br for CFAR can also be obtained without transmitting a pulse-  compression waveform.87 A conventional pulse waveform can be transmitted, and on recep-  tion the received signal passed through a dispersive delay line (a pulse expansion network) that  spreads the signal over a duration T.
The output of the dispersive filter is hard limited and fed  to a second dispersive delay line with a characteristic inverse to the first.
The rms noise power  at the output is smaller than the peak power from a point target by the factor BT.
A detection  threshold is set somewhere within this range of possible amplitude to allow point targets that  are larger than the background to be detected.
This dispersive CFAR may be placed either  before or after the matched Alter.
, ,I  The log-FTC receiver described in Sec.
13.8 has CFAR properties when the background  has a Rayleigh probability density function.
The FTC, or fast time-constant, acts as a differen-  tiating circuit, or high-pass filter, to remove the mean value of the clutter or noise.
This  function can be obtained with a more sophisticated filter consisting of a parallel combination  of integrator and subtra~tor.~~ The integrator is a narrow-band filter that averages the order of  ten range-resolution cells to establish the background level.
A receiver implemented in this  manner has been called a log-CFAR.iThe term LOGICFAR has been applied to the cell-  averaging CFAR which* is precedediby a logarithmic detector.84 The normalization of the  threshold is accomplished in thclCOG/CFAR by subtraction rather than by division as in the  conventional cell-averaging CFAR.' Also, the LOGICFAR is capable of operating over a larger  dynamic range of background noise levels, but it has poorer detectability forthe same number  of reference noise samples than the conventional cell-averaging CFAR.
 394INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS rankdetector whichcomputes theranksbypair-wise comparisons oftheQutputfromtherange cellundertestwitheachoftheoutpl,ltsfromtheneighboring rangecellsthatsamplethe background noise.78-81Afterthedetector ranksthesampleundertestwithitsneighboring samples, itintegrates theranksandatargetisdeclared aftertestingagainstafixedandan adaptive threshold.8o,81 Thereareseveralothermethods forachieving CFARbesidestheuseofcellaveraging.
OneofthefirstCFARreceivers tobedescribed intheliterature usedtheoutputofapost­ detection integrator (low-pass filter)toestimate theaveragenoise.Thiswasthenappliedasa feed-forward signaltocontrol thethreshold leveltomaintain thefalse-alarm rate constant.71.72Thenoisehadtoremainconstant foratimecorresponding tothetotalnumber ofpulsesreturned fromthetarget.Another CFARtechnique isthehardlimiter,sometimes calledtheDickefix.72-74Thisconsistsofabroadband IFfilterfollowed byahardlimiterand anarrow-band matched filter.Thehardlimiterissetlowenoughtoensurethjtreceivernoise islimited.Thustheoutputisunaffected bythelevelofthenoise.Asignal,however, causesthe outputofthematched filtertoincrease byafactorM,equaltotheratioofthebandwidth of thebroadband filtertothebandwidth ofthenarrow-band (matched) filter.ThisformofCFAR maynotbedesirable withMTIsincehardlimiting reduces theimprovement factororthe clutterattenuation (Sec.4.8).Hardlimitingalsointroduces anadditional loss,Thelargerthe ratioofthebandwidths M,thelesstheloss.Forexample, fora0.5probability ofdetection and a10-3probability offalsealarm,thelossis1.0dBforM=100,2.2dBforM=20,and7dB forM=10.73InessencetheDickefix(thatuseswideband limiting) samples theadjacent resolution cellsinthefrequency' domain, ascompared tothecell-averaging CFARthat samples thebackground intheadjacent resolution cellsinthetimedomain.
Whentheproductofthebandwidth Bandthepulsewidthrisgreaterthanunity,asina pulsecompression radar,thelossisdetermined bytheproduct MBTratherthanM.Thus,a lossof1.0dBcorresponds toMBt='100.Theratioofthebandwidths Mtherefore canbe unitywhenBrislargeenough.73Bothcoded-pulse waveforms8sandfrequency-modulated waveforms havebeenconsidered forpuls~compression radarwithCFAR.86 ThebenefitsofalargeBrforCFARcanalsobeobtained withouttransmitting apulse­ compression waveform.87Aconventional pulsewaveform canbetransmitted, andonrecep­ tionthereceived signalpassedthroughadispersive delay'line (apulseexpansion network) that spreadsthesignaloveraduration T.Theoutputofthedispersive filterishardlimitedandfed toaseconddispersive delaylinewithacharacteristic inversetothefirst.Thermsnoisepower attheoutputissmallerthanthepeakpowerfromapointtargetbythefactorBT.Adelection threshold issetsomewhere withinthisrangeofpossible amplitude toallowpointtargetsthat arelargerthanthebackground to,bedetected.
Thisdispersive CFARmaybeplacedeither beforeorafterthematched filter.' Thelog-FTC receiver described inSec.'13.8hasCFARproperties whenthebackground hasaRayleigh probability densityfunction.
TheFTC,orfasttime-constant, actsasadifferen­ tiatingcircuit"orhigh-pass filter,toremovethemeanvalueoftheclutterornoise.This function canbeobtained withamoresophisticated filterconsisting ofaparallelcombination ofintegrator andsubtractor.83Theintegrator isanarrow-band filterthataverages theorderof tenrange-resolution cellstoestablish thebackground level.Areceiver implemented inthis manner hasbeencalledalog-CFAR.' ThetermLOGjCFAR hasbeenappliedtothecell­ averaging CFARwhich-ispreceded Iby:alogarithmic detector.84Thenormalization ofthe threshold isaccomplished inthe'COGjCFAR bysubtraction ratherthanbydivision asinthe conventionalcell-averaging CFAR~Also,theLOGjCF ARiscapableofoperating overalarger dynamic rangeofbackground noiselevels,butithaspoorerdetectability for'thesamenumber ofreference noisesamples thantheconventional cell-averaging CFAR. DETECTION OF RADAR SIGNALS IN NOISE 3%  CFAR is widely used to prevent clutter and noise interference from saturating the display  of an ordinary radar and preventing targets from being obscured.
It is also needed in ADT, or  track-while-scan systems, to prevent the tracking computer from being overloaded by extra-  neous clutter targets or noise.
CFAR, however, is not without its disadvantages and can be  considered a necessary evil.
It introduces an additional loss compared to optimum detection,  and in some systems the number of pulses processed needs to be large to keep the loss low.
 More important, CFAR maintains the false-alarm rate constant at the expense of the probabil-  ity of detection.
Thus, it causes targets to be missed.
Furthermore, the operator is usually  given no indication that there may be missed detections.
In radars with a simple CFAR,  interference or hostile jamming can lower the sensitivity of the radar without the operator even  being aware that it is happening since the jamming is not visible on the scope.
Thus some  means should be included to inform the operator when the detection probability has been  lowered bccausc of the C17AR actiori.
 It is better to incorporate in the design of a radar means for eliminating unwanted signals  before they eriter the ADT than to depend on CFAR to eliminate them.
Examples of signal  processing techniques that eliminate unwanted signals without a severe penalty in detectability  include MTI for clutter echoes, the low sidelobe antenna and/or sidelobe cancelers for jam-  ming noise, and the sidelobe blanker or the prf filter for pulse interference.
 REFERENCES  1.
North, D.
0.: An Analysis of the Factors Which Determine Signal/Noise Discrimination in Pulsed-  carrier Systems, RCA Tech.
Rept.
PTR-6C, June 25, 1943 (AT1 14009).
Reprinted in Proc.
IEEE,  vol.
5 1, pp.
1016- 1027, July, 1963.
 The following references (2 to 8) appear in IRE Trans., vol.
IT-6, no.
3, June, 1960, special issue on  Matched Filters:  2.
Turin, G.
L.: An Introduction to Matched Filters, pp.
311-329.
 3.
Westerfield, E.
C., R, H.
Prager, and J.
L.
Stewart; Processing Gains against Reverberation (Clutter)  Using Matched Filters, pp.
342-348.
 4.
Middleton.
D.: On New Classes of Matched Filters and Generalizations of the Matched Filter  Concept, pp.
349-360.
 5.
Sussman, S.
M.: A Matched Filter Communications System for Multipath Channels, pp.
367-373.
 6.
Lerner, R.
M.: A Matched Filter Detection System for Complicated Doppler Shifted Signals,  pp.
373-385.
 7.
Cutrona L.
J., E.
N.
Leith, C.
J.
Palermo, and L.
J.
Porcello: Optical Data Processing and Filtering  Systems, pp.
386-400.
 8.
Welte, G.
R.: Quaternary Codes for Pulsed Radar, pp.
400-408.
 9.
Van Vleck, J.
H., and D.
Middleton: A Theoretical Comparison of Visual, Aural, and Meter Reception  of Pulsed Signals in the Presence of Noise, J.
Appl.
Phys., vol.
17, pp.
940-971, November, 1946.
 10.
Davenport, W.
B., Jr., and W.
L.
Root: "Introduction to Random Signals and Noise," chap.
11,  McGraw-Hill Book Company, Inc., New York, 1958.
 11.
Dwork, B.
M.: Detection of a Pulse Superimposed on Fluctuation Noise, Proc.
IRE, vol.
38,  pp.
771-774, July, 1950.
 12.
Zadeh, L.
A., and J.
R.
Ragazzini: Optimum Filters for the Detection of Signals in Noise, Proc.
IRE,  vol.
40, pp.
1223-1231, October, 1952.
 13.
Urkowitz.
H.: Filters for the Detection of Small Radar Signals in Clutter, J.
Appl.
Phys., vol.
24,  pp.
1024- 103 1, August, 1953.
 14.
Raemer, H.
R., and A.
B.
Reich: Correlation Devices Detect Weak Signals, Electronics, vol.
32, no.
21,  pp.
58-60.
May 22, 1959.
 15.
Lee.
Y.
W.: Application of Statistical Methods to Communication Problems, MIT Research Lab.
 Electronics Tech.
Rept.
18 1, Sept.
1, 1950.
 16.
Lee, Y.
W., T.
P.
Cheatham, Jr., and J.
B.
Wiesner: Application of Correlation Analysis to the  Detection of Periodic Signals in Noise, Proc.
IRE, vol.
38, pp.
1165-1171, October, 1950.
 DETECTION OFRADAR SIGNALS INNOISE395 CFARiswidelyusedtopreventclutterandnoiseinterference fromsaturating thedisplay ofanordinary radarandpreventing targetsfrom-being obscured.
ItisalsoneededinADT,or track-while-scan systems, topreventthetracking computer frombeingoverloaded byextra­ neouscluttertargetsornoise.CFAR,however, isnotwithout itsdisadvantages andcanbe considered anecessary evil.Itintroduces anadditional losscompared tooptimum detection, andinsomesystems thenumber ofpulsesprocessed needstobelargetokeepthelosslow.
Moreimportant.
CFARmaintains thefalse-alarm rateconstant attheexpenseoftheprobabil­ ityofdetection.
Thus,itcausestargetstobemissed.Furthermore, theoperator isusually givennoindication thattheremaybemisseddetections.
InradarswithasimpleCFAR, interference orhostilejamming canlowerthesensitivity oftheradarwithouttheoperator even beingawarethatitishappening sincethejamming isnotvisibleonthescope.Thussome meansshouldbeincluded toinformtheoperator whenthedetection probability hasbeen lowered because oftheCFARaction.
Itisbettertoincorporate inthedesignofaradarmeansforeliminating unwanted signals heforetheyentertheADTthantodependonCFARtoeliminate them.Examples ofsignal processing techniques thateliminate unwanted signalswithoutaseverepenaltyindetectability includeMTIforclutterechoes,thelowsidelobe antenna and/orsidelobe cancelers forjam­ mingnoise,andthesidelobeblankerortheprffilterforpulseinterference.
REFERENCES I.North,D.0.:AnAnalysis oftheFactorsWhichDetermine Signal/Noise Discrimination inPulsed­ carrierSystems, RCATech.Rept.PTR-6C, June25,1943(ATI14009).Reprinted inProc.IEEE, vol.51,pp.1016-1027, July,1963.
Thefollowing references (2to8)appearinIRETrans.,vol.IT-6,no.3,June,1960,specialissueon Matched Filters: 2.Turin,G.L.:AnIntroduction toMatched Filters,pp.311-329.
3.Westerfield, E.C,R.H.Prager,and1.L.Stewart; Processing GainsagainstReverberation (Clutter) UsingMatched Filters,pp.342-348.
4.Middleton, D.:OnNewClasses ofMatched FiltersandGeneralizations oftheMatched Filter Concept.
pp.349-360.
5.Sussman, S.M.:AMatched FilterCommunications SystemforMultipath Channels, pp.367-373.
6.Lerner, R.M.:AMatched FilterDetection SystemforComplicated Doppler ShinedSignals, pp.373-385.
7.Cutronfo L.J.,E.N.Leith,CJ.Palermo, andL.J.Porcello: OpticalDataProcessing andFiltering Systems, pp.386-400.
8.Welte,G.R.:Quaternary CodesforPulsedRadar,pp.400-408.
9.VanVleck,J.H.,andD.Middleton:ATheoretical Comparison ofVisual,Aural,andMeterReception ofPulsedSignalsinthePresence ofNoise,J.Appl.Phys.,vol.17,pp.940-971, November, 1946.
to.Davenport, W.B.,Jr.,andW.L.Root:"Introduction toRandom SignalsandNoise,"chap.11, McGraw-Hili BookCompany, Inc.,NewYork,1958.
11.Dwork, B.M.:Detection ofaPulseSuperimposed onFluctuation Noise,Proc.IRE,vol.38, pp.771-774, July,1950.
12.Zadeh,L.A.,and1.R.Ragazzini: Optimum FiltersfortheDetection ofSignalsinNoise,Proc.IRE, vol.40,pp.1223-123 I,October, 1952.
t3.Urkowitz.
H.:FiltersfortheDetection ofSmallRadarSignalsinClutter,J.Appl.Phys.,vol.24, pp.1024-1031, August, 1953.
14.Raemer, H.R.,andA.B.Reich:Correlation DevicesDetectWeakSignals,Electronics, vol.32,no.21, pp.58-60,May22,1959.
15.Lee,Y.W.:Application ofStatistical Methods toCommunication Problems, MITResearch Lab.
Electronics Tech.Rept.181,Sept.I,1950.
16.Lee,Y.W.,T.P.Cheatham, Jr.,andJ.B.Wiesner: Application ofCorrelation Analysis tothe Detection ofPeriodic SignalsinNoise,Proc.IRE,vol.38,pp.1165-1171, October, 1950. 3% INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  17.
Lee, Y.
W., and J.
B.
Wiesner: Correlation Functions and Communication Applications, Electronics,  vol.
23, pp.
86-92, June, 1950.
 18.
Singleton, H.
E.: A Digital Electronic Correlator, Proc.
IRE, vol.
38, pp.
1422- 1428, December, 1950.
 19.
Horton, B.
M.: Noise-modulated Distance Measuring Systems, Proc.
IRE, vol.
47, pp.
82 1-828, May,  1959.
 20.
Rudnick, P.: The Detection of Weak Signals by Correlation Methods, J.
Appl.
Phys., vol.
24,  pp.
128- 13 1, February, 1953.
 21.
Fano, R.
M.: Signal-to-noise Ratios in Correlation Detectors, MIT Research Lub.
Electronrcs Tech.
 Repr.
186, Feb.
19, 1951.
 22.
George, S.
F.: EKectiveness of Crosscorrelation Detectors, Proc.
Nail.
Electronics Con/.
(Chicago).
 VOI.
10, pp.
109- 118, 1954.
 23.
Green, P.
I., Jr.: The Output Signal-to-noise Ratio of Correlation Detectors, IRE Trans., vol.
IT-3,  pp.
10-18, March, 1957.
 24.
Peterson, W.
W., T.
G.
Birdsall, and W.
C.
Fox: The Theory of Signal Detectability, IRE Truns.,  no.
PGIT-4, pp.
17 1-2 12, September, 1954.
 25.
Middleton, D.: Statistical Criteria for the Detection of Pulsed Carriers in Noise, pts.
1yd 11, J.
Appl  Phys., vol.
24, pp.
371-391, April, 1953; also letters to the editor by D.
Middleton et al.
in J.
Appl.
 Phys., January, 1954.
 26.
Woodward, P.
M.: "Probability and Information Theory with Applications to Radar," McCiraw-llril  Book Company, New York, 1953.
 27.
Woodward, P.
M., and I.
L.
Davies: Information Theory and Inverse Probability in Telecommunica-  tlons, Proc.
IEE, vol.
99, pt.
111, pp.
37-44, March, 1952.
 28.
Davies, I.
L.: On Determining the Presence of Signals in Noise, Proc.
IEE, pt.
111, pp.
45-51, March,  1952.
 29.
Fuller, W.: "An Introduction to Probability Theory and Its Applications," 2d ed., vol.
1, p.
114, John  Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York, 1957.
 30.
Peterson, W.
W., and T.
G.
Birdsall: The Theory of Signal Detectability, Unio.
Mich., Dept.
Elec.
Eny.
 Tech.
Rept.
13, Contract DA-36-039 sc-15358, June, 1953.
 3 1.
Lawson, J.
L., and G.
E.
Uhlenbeck (eds.): "Threshold Signals," MIT Radiation Laboratory Series,  vol.
24, sec.
7.5, McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York, 1950.
 32.
Middleton, D.: Statistical Theory of Signal Detection, IRE Trans., no.
PGIT-3, pp.
26-51, March,  1954.
 33.
Van Meter, D., and D.
Middleton: Modern Statistical Approaches to Reception in Communication  Theory, IRE Trans., no.
PGIT-4, pp.
119-141, September, 1954.
 34.
Middleton, D., and D.
Van Meter: Detection and Extraction of Signals in Noise from the Viewpoint of  Statistical Decision Theory, J.
Soc.
Ind.
Appl.
Math., vol.
3, pp.
192-253, December, 1955, and vol.
4,  pp.
86-1 19, June, 1956:.
 35.
Bussgang, J.
J., and D.
Middleton: Optimum Sequential Detection of Signals in Noise, IRE Trans.,  vol.
IT-1, pp.
5-18.
December, 1955.
 36.
Blasbalg, H.: The Relationship of Sequential Filter Theory tp Information Theory and Its Application  to the Detection of Signals in Noise by Bernoulli Trials, IRE Trans., vol.
IT-3, pp.
122-131, June,  1957.
 37.
Wald, A.: "Sequential Analysis," John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York, 1947.
 38.
Marcus, M.
B., and P.
Swerling: Sequential Detection in Radar with Multiple Resollition Elements,  IRE Trans., vol.
IT-8, pp.
237-245, April, 1962.
 39.
Caspers, 3.
W.: Automaticdetection Theory, chap.
15 of "Radar Handbook," M.
I.
Skolnik (ed.),  McGraw-Hill Book Company, Inc., New York, 1970.
 40.
Bussgang, J.
J.: Sequential Methods in Radar Detection, Proc.
IEEE, vol.
58, pp.
73 1-743, May, 1970.
 41.
Guarguaglini, P.
F., and F.
Marcoz: The DFTSD: A Sequential Suboptimum Processor for Multiple-  range-bin Radar Systems, IEEE Trans., vol.
AES-10, pp.
193-203, March, 1974.
 42.
Brennan, L.
E., and F.
S.
Hill, Jr.: A Two-step Sequential Procedure for Improving the Cumulative  Probability of Detection in Radars, IEEE Trans., vol.
MIL-9, pp.
278-287, July-October, 1965.
 43.
Marcum, J.: A Statistical Theory of Target Detection by Pulsed Radar, Mathematical Appendix, IRE  Trans., vol.
IT-6, pp.
145-267, April, 1960.
 44.
Green, B.
A., Jr.: Radar Detection Probability with Logarithmic Detectors, IRE Trans., vol.
IT-4,  pp, 50-52, March, 1958.
 45.
Hansen, V.
G.: Postdetection Integration Loss for Logarithmic Detectors, JEEE Trans., vol.
AES-8,  pp.
386-388, May, 1972.
See correction, AES-10, p.
168, January, 1974.
 46.
Bendat, J.
S.: " Principles and Applications of Random Noise Theory," chap.
10, John Wiley & Sons,  Inc., New York, 1958.
, 1.
J) ,*.I .'  396INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS 17.Lee,Y.W.,andJ.B.Wiesner: Correlation Functions andCommunication Applications, Electronics, vol.23,pp.86-92,June,1950.
18.Singleton, H.E.:ADigital EI~ctronic Couela.lor,Proc.
IRE,vol.38,pp.l422~l428,December, 1950.
19.Horton, B.M.:Noise-modulated Distance Measuring Systems, Proc.IRE,vol.47,pp.821-828, May, 1959.
20.Rudnick, P.:TheDetection ofWeakSignals byCorrelation Methods, J.Appl.Phys.,vol.24, pp.128-131, February, 1953.
21.Fano,R.M.:Signal-to-noise Ratios inCorrelation Detectors, MITResearch Lab.Electronics Tech.
Repr.186,Feb.19,1951.
22.George, S.F.:Effectiveness ofCrosscorrelation Detectors, Proc.NaIl.Electronics Conf.(Chicago), vol.10,pp.109-118, 1954.
23.Green,P.I.,Jr.:TheOutputSignal-to-noise RatioofCorrelation Detectors, IRETrans.,vol.IT-3, pp.10-18,March,1957.
24.Peterson, W.W.,T.G.Birdsall, andW.C.Fox:TheTheoryofSignalDetectability, IRETrans., no.PGIT-4, pp.171-212, September, 1954.
25.Middleton,D.:Statistical Criteria fortheDetection ofPulsedCarriers inNoise,pts.I~ndIf,J.App/.
Phys.,vol.24,pp.371-391, April,1953;alsoletterstotheeditorbyD.Middleton etal.in1.Appl.
Phys.,January, 1954.
26.Woodward, P.M.:"Probability andInformation TheorywithApplications toRadar,"McGraw-Hili BookCompany, NewYork,1953.
27.Woodward, P.M.,andI.L.Davies:Information TheoryandInverseProbability inTelecommunica­ tions,Proc.lEE,vol.99,pI.III,pp.37-44,March,1952.
28.Davies,I.L.:OnDetermining thePresence ofSignalsinNoise,Proc.IEE,pI.JII,pp.45-51,March, 1952.
29.Fuller,W.:"AnIntroduction toProbability TheoryandItsApplications," 2ded.,vol.I,p.114,John Wiley&Sons,Inc.,NewYork,1957.
30.Peterson, W.W.,andT.G.Birdsall: TheTheoryofSignalDetectability, Univ.Mich.,Dept.Elec.Eng.
Tech.Rept.13,Contract DA-36-039 sc-15358, June,1953.
31.Lawson,1.
L.,andG.E.Uhlenbeck (eds.):"Threshold Signals," MITRadiation Laboratory Series, vol.24,sec.7.5,McGraw-Hili BookCompany, NewYork,1950.
32.Middleton, D.:Statistical TheoryofSignalDetection, IRETrans.,no.PGIT-3, pp.26-51,March, 1954.
33.VanMeter,D.,andD.Middleton: Modern Statistical Approaches toReception inCommunication Theory,IRETrans.,no.PGIT-4, pp.119-141, September, 1954.
34.Middleton, D.,andD.VanMeter:Detection andExtraction ofSignalsinNoisefromtheViewpoint of Statistical Decision Theory,J.Soc.
Ind.
Appl.Math.,vol.3,pp.192-253, December, 1955,andvol.4, pp.86-119,June,1956:, 35.Bussgang, J.J.,andD.Middleton: Optimum Sequen,tial Detection ofSignalsinNoise,IRETrans., vol.IT-I,pp.5-18,December, 1955.
36.B1asbalg, H.:TheRelationship ofSequential FilterTheorytpInformation TheoryandItsApplication totheDetection ofSignalsinNoisebyBernoulli Trials,IRETrans.,vol.IT-3,pp.122-131, June, 1957.
37.Wald,A.:"Sequential Analysis," JohnWiley&Sons,Inc.,NewYork,1947.
38.Marcus, M.8.,andP.Swerling: Sequential Detection inRadarwithMultiple Resolution Elements, IRETrans.,vol.1T-8,pp.237-245, April,1962., 39.Caspers, J.W.:Automatic-detection Theory, chap.15of••RadarHandbook," M.1.Skolnik (ed.~ McGraw-Hill BookCompany, Inc.,NewYork,1970.
40.Bussgang, J.J.:Sequential Methods inRadarDetection, Proc.IEEE,vol.58,pp.731-743, May,1970.
41.Guarguaglini, P.F.,andF.Marcoz: TheDFTSD: ASequential Suboptimum Processor forMultiple­ range-bin RadarSystems, IEEETrans.,vol.AES-I0, pp.193-203, March,1974.
42.Brennan, L.E.,andF.S.HiI~Jr.:ATwo-step Sequential Procedure forImproving theCumulative Probability ofDetection inRadars,IEEETrans.,vol.MIL-9,pp.278-287, July-October, 1965.
43.Marcum, J.:AStatistical TheoryofTargetDetection byPulsedRadar,Mathematical Appendix, IRE Trans.,vol.IT-6,pp.145-267, Apri~1960.
44.Green,B.A.,Jr.:RadarDetection' Probability withLogarithmic Detectors, IRETrans.,vol.IT-4, pp.50-52,March,1958.
45.Hansen, V.G.:PostdetectionIntegration LossforLogarithmic Detectors, IEEETrans.,vol.AES-8, pp.386-388, May,1972.Seecorrection, AES-lO, p.168,January, 1974.
46.Bendat,J.S.:..Principles andApplications ofRandom NoiseTheory," chap.10,JohnWiley&Sons, Inc.,NewYork,1958.
".:.'i·.1':'. DETECTION OF RADAR SIGNALS IN NOISE 397  47.
Benjamin, R.: Man and Machine in the Extraction and Use of Radar Information.
J.
Brit.
IRE,  vol.
26, pp.
309-3 16, October, 1963.
 48.
Tucker, D.
G.: Detection of Pulse Signals in Noise: Trace-to-Trace Correlation in Visual Displays, J.
 Brit.
IRE, voi.
17, pp.
3 19-329, June, 1957.
 49.
Skolnik M.
I., and D.
G.
Tucker: Discussion on " Detection of Pulse Signals in Noise: Trace-to-Trace  Correlation in Visual Displays," J.
Brit.
IRE, vol.
17, pp.
705-706, December, 1957.
 50.
Payne-Scott, R.: The Visibility of Small Echoes on Radar PPI Displays, Proc.
IRE, vol.
36,  pp.
18CL 196.
February, 1948.
 5 1.
Baker, C.
H.: " Man and Radar Displays," The Macmillan Company, New York, 1962.
 52.
Swerling, P.: The " Double Threshold" Method of Detection, Rand Corp.
Rept.
RM-1008, Dec.
17,  1952, Santa Monica, Calif.
 53.
Harrington, J.
V.: An Analysis of the Detection of Repeated Signals in Noise by Binary Integration,  IRE Trans..
vol.
IT- I.
pp.
1-9.
March, 1955.
 54.
Schwartz M.: A Coincidence Procedure for Signal Detection, IRE Trans., vol.
IT-2, pp.
135-139,  December, 1956.
 55.
llrukey, D.
L., and L.
C.
Levitt: Radar Range Performance, Hughes Aircraft Co.
Tech.
Mem.
560,  Aug.
1, 1957, Culver City, Calif.
 6.
I)inneen.
G.
P., arid I.
S.
Reed: An Analysis of Signal Detection and Location by Digital Means.
IRE  7'rnn~., vol.
11'-2, pp.
29-38, March, 1956.
 57.
Il)illard.
G.
M.: A Moving-Window Detector for Binary Integration, IEEE Trans., voi.
IT-13, pp.
2-6,  January.
1967.
 58.
Worley, R.: Optimum Thresholds for Binary Integration, IEEE Trans., vol.
IT-14, pp.
349-353,  March, 1968.
 59.
Walker, J.
F.: Performance Data for a Double-Threshold Detection Radar, IEEE Trans., vol.
AES-7,  pp.
142- 146, January, 197 1.
Comment by V.
G.
Hansen, p.
561, May, 1971.
 60.
Hansen, V.
G.: Optimization and Performance of Multilevel Quantization in Automatic Detectors,  IEEE Trans., vol.
AES-10, pp.
274-280, March, 1974.
 61.
Trunk, G.
V., and S.
F.
George: Detection of Targets in Non-Gaussian Sea Clutter, IEEE Trans.,  vol.
AES-6, pp.
620-628, September, 1970.
 62.
Popov, G.
P.: "Engineering Psychology in Radar," JPRS-55522, Joint Publications Research Service,  Washington, D.C., 23 March, 1972.
 62.
Trunk, G.
V.: Radar Signal Processing, "Advances in Electronics and Electron Physics," vol.
45,  edited by L.
Marton, Academic Press, Inc., New York, 1978, pp.
203-252.
Also Trunk, G.
V.: Survey  of Radar Signal Processing, Naval Research Laboratory Report 81 17, Washington, D.C., June 21,  1977.
 64.
Hansen, V.
G.: Performance of the Analog Moving Window Detector, IEEE Trans., vol.
AES-6,  pp.
173-179, March, 1970.
 65.
Trunk, G.
V.: Detection Results for Scanning Radars Employing Feedback Integration, IEEE Trans.,  voi.
AES-6, pp.
522-527, July, 1970.
 66.
Cantrell, B.
H., and G.
V.
Trunk: Angular Accuracy of a Scanning Radar Employing a Two-Pole  Filter, IEEE Trans., vol.
AES-9, pp.
649-653, September, 1973.
 67.
Trunk, G.cV.: Comparison of Two Scanning Radar Detectors: The Moving Window and the Feed-  back Integrator, IEEE Trans., vol.
AES-7, pp.
395-398, March, 1971.
 68.
Urkowitz, 11.: Analysis and Synthesis of Delay Line Periodic Filters, IRE Trans., vol.
CT-4, pp.
41-53,  June, 1957.
 69.
Cooper, D.
C., and J.
W.
R.
Griffiths: Video Integration in Radar and Sonar Systems, J.
Brit.
IRE,  vol.
21, pp.
421-433, May, 1961.
 70.
Palmer, D.
S., and D.
C.
Cooper: An Analysis of the Performance of Weighted Integrators, IEEE  Trans., vol.
IT- 10, pp.
296-302, October, 1964.
 71.
Siebert, W.
M.: Some Applications of Detection Theory to Radar, IRE Natl.
Conu.
Record, vol.
6,  pt.
4, pp.
5- 14, 1958.
 72.
flansen, V.
G., and A.
J.
Zottl: The Detection Performance of the Siebert and Dicke-Fix CFAR Radar  Detectors, IEEE Trans., vol.
AES-7, pp.
706-709, July, 1971.
 73.
Carpentier, M.
H.: "Radars: New Concepts," Gordon and Breach, New York, 1968, sec.
4.6.
 74.
Nathanson, F.
E.: "Radar Design Principles," McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York, 1969,  chap.
4.
 75.
Hansen, V.
G.: Constant False Alarm Processing in Search Radars, International CoMerence on  Radar-Present and Future, Oct.
23-25, 1973, pp.
325-332, IEE Publication No.
105.
 76.
Hubbard, J.
V.: Digital Automatic Radar Data Extraction Equipment, J.
Brit.
IRE, vol.
26,  pp.
397-405, November, 1963.
 DETECTION OFRADAR SIGNALS INNOISE397 47.Benjamin, R.:ManandMachine intheExtraction andUseofRadarInformation, J.Brit.IRE, vol.26,pp.309-316, October, 1963.
48.Tucker, D.G.:Detection ofPulseSignalsinNoise:Trace-to-Trace Correlation inVisualDisplays, J.
Brit.IRE,vol.17,pp.319-329, June,1957.
49.Skolnik M.I.,andD.G.Tucker: Discussion on"Detection ofPulseSignalsinNoise:Trace-to-Trace Correlation inVisualDisplays," J.Brit.IRE,vol.17,pp.705-706, December, 1957.
50.Payne-Scott, R.:TheVisibility ofSmallEchoes onRadarPPIDisplays, Proc.IRE,vol.36, pp.180-196.
February, 1948.
51.Baker,C.H.:..ManandRadarDisplays," TheMacmillan Company, NewYork,1962.
52.Swerling, P.:The"DoubleThreshold" Method ofDetection, RandCorp.Rept.RM-l008, Dec.17, 1952,SantaMonica, Calif.
53.Harrington, J.V.:AnAnalysis oftheDetection ofRepeated SignalsinNoisebyBinaryIntegration, IRETrans.,vol.IT-I,pp.1-9,March,/955.
54.Schwartz, M.:ACoincidence Procedure forSignalDetection, IRETrans.,vol.IT-2,pp.135-139, December, J956.
55.Drukey, D.L.,andL.C.Levitt:RadarRangePerformance, HughesAircraft Co.Tech.Mem.560, Aug.I,1957,CulverCity,Calif.
56.Dinneen, G.P..andI.S.Reed:AnAnalysis ofSignalDetection andLocation byDigitalMeans,IRE 'j/ Trans..vol.1'1'-2,pp.29-38,March,1956.
57.Dillard.G.M.:AMoving-Window Detector forBinaryIntegration, IEEETrans.,vol.IT-13,pp.2-6, January, 1967.
58.Worley, R.:Optimum Thresholds forBinaryIntegration, IEEETrans.,vol.IT-14,pp.349-353, March,1968.
59.Walker, J.F.:Performance DataforaDouble-Threshold Detection Radar,IEEETrans.,vol.AES-7, pp.142-146, January, 1971.Comment byV.G.Hansen, p.561,May,1971.
60.Hansen, V.G.:Optimization andPerformance ofMultilevel Quantization inAutomatic Detectors, IEEETrans.,vol.AES·lO, pp.274-280, March,1974.
61.Trunk,G.V.,andS.F.George: Detection ofTargets inNon-Gaussian SeaClutter, IEEETrans., vol.AES-6,pp.620-628, September, 1970.
62.Popov,G.
P.:..Engineering Psychology inRadar,"JPRS-55522, JointPublications Research Service, Washington, D.C.,23March,1972.
63.Trunk,G.V.:RadarSignalProcessing.
"Advances inElectronics andElectron Physics," vol.45, editedbyL.Marton, Academic Press,Inc.,NewYork,1978,pp.203-2~2.
AlsoTrunk,G.V.:Survey ofRadarSignalProcessing, NavalResearch Laboratory Report8117,Washington, D.C.,June21, /977.
64.Hansen, V.G.:Performance oftheAnalogMoving Window Detector, IEEETrans.,vol.AES-6, pp./73-/79, March,1970.
65.Trunk,G.V.:Detection ResultsforScanning RadarsEmploying Feedback Integration, IEEETrans., vol.AES-6,pp.522-527, July,1970.
66.Cantrell, B.H.,andG.V.Trunk: Angular Accuracy ofaScanning RadarEmploying aTwo-Pole Filter,IEEE Tra".~.,vol.AES-9,pp.649-653, September, 1973.
67.Trunk,G.rV.:Comparison ofTwoScanning RadarDetectors: TheMoving Window andtheFeed­ backIntegrator, IEEETrans.,vol.AES-7,pp.395-398, March,1971.
68.Urkowit7., II.:Analysis andSynthesis ofDelayLinePeriodic Filters,IRETrans.,vol.CT-4,pp.41-53, June,1957.
69.Cooper, D.c.,andJ.W.R.Griffiths: VideoIntegration inRadarandSonarSystems, J.Brit.IRE, vol.21,pp.421-433, May,1961.
70.Palmer, D.S.,andD.C.Cooper: AnAnalysis ofthePerformance ofWeighted Integrators, IEEE Trans.,vol.IT-lO,pp.296-302, October, 1964.
71.Siebert, W.M.:SomeApplications ofDetection TheorytoRadar,IRENatl.Conv.Record,vol.6, pt.4,pp.5-14,1958.
72.Hansen, V.G.,andA.J.Zottl:TheDetection Performance oftheSiebertandDicke-Fix CFARRadar Detectors, IEEETrans.,vol.AES-7,pp.706-709, July,1971.
73.Carpentier, M.H.:..Radars: NewConcepts," Gordon andBreach,NewYork,1968,sec.4.6.
74.Nathanson, F.E.:..RadarDesignPrinciples," McGraw-Hili BookCompany, NewYork,1969, chap.4.
75.Hansen, V.G.:Constant FalseAlarmProcessing inSearchRadars, International Conference on Radar-Present andFuture,Oct.23-25,1973,pp.325-332, lEEPublication No.105.
76.Hubbard, J.V.:DigitalAutomatic RadarDataExtraction Equipment, J.Brit.IRE,vol.26, pp.397-405, November, 1963. 398 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  77.
Finn, H.
M., and R.
S.
Johnson: Adaptive Detection Mode with Threshold Control as a Function of  Spatially Sampled Clutter-Level Estimates, RCA Re[]., vol.
29, pp.
414-464, September, 1968.
 78.
Dillard, G.
M., and C.
E.
Antoniak: A Practical Distribution-Free Detection Procedure for Multiple-  Range-Bin Radars, I EEE Trans., vol.
AES-6, pp.
629-635, November, 1970.
 79.
Hansen, V.
G., and B.
A.
Olsen: Nonparametric Radar Extraction Using a Generalized Sign Test,  IEEE Trans., vol.
AES-7, pp.
942-950, September, 1971.
 80.
Trunk, G.
V., B.
H.
Cantrell, and F.
D.
Queen: Modified Generalized Sign Test Processor for 2-D  Radar, IEEE Trans., vol.
AES-10, pp.
574-582, September, 1974.
 81.
Cantrell, B.
H., G.
V.
Trunk, F.
D.
Queen, J.
D.
Wilson, and J.
J.
Alter: Automatic Detection and  Integrated Tracking System, Record of the IEEE 1975 International Radar Conference, pp.
391-395,  IEEE Publication 75 CHO 938-1 AES.
 82.
Dillard, G.
M.: Mean-Level Detection Utilizing a Digital First-Order Recursive Filter, IEEE Tran-r ,  vol.
AES-12, pp.
793-798, November, 1976.
 83.
Taylor, J.
W., Jr., and J.
Mattern: Receivers, chap.
5 of "Radar Handbook," M.
I.
Skolnik (ed.),  McGraw-Hill Book Co., Inc., New York, 1970.
 84.
Hanson, V.
G., and H.
R.
Ward: Detection Performance of the Cell Averaging LOGIdFAR Receiver,  IEEE Trans., vol.
AES-8, pp.
648-652, September, 1972.
 85.
Taylor, J.
W., Jr., and G.
Brunins: Long-Range Surveillance Radars for Automatic Control Systems,  Record of the IEEE 1975 International Radar Conference, pp.
3 12-3 17.
 86.
Mortley, W.
S., and S.
N.
Radcliffe: Pulse Compression and Signal Processing, International Conjer-  ence on Radar-Present and Future, Oct.
23-25, 1073, pp.
292-296, IEE Publication no.
105.
 87.
Ward, H.
R.: Dispersive Constant False Alarm Rate Receiver, Proc.
IEEE, vol.
60, pp.
735-736, June,  1972.
 88.
Mitchell, R.
L., and J.
F.
Walker: Recursive Methods for Computing Detection Probabilities, IEEE  Trans., vol.
AES-7, pp.
671-676, July, 1971.
 89.
Gupta, D.
V., J.
F.
Vetelino, T.
J.
Curry, and J.
T.
Francis: An Adaptive Threshold System for  Nonstationary Noise Backgrounds, IEEE Trans., vol.
AES-13, pp.
11-16, January, 1977.
 90.
Preston, G.
W.: The Search Efficiency of the Probability Ratio Sequential Search Radar, IRE Intern.
 Conu.
Record, vol.
8, pt.
4, pp.
116124, 1960.
 9 1.
This expression was suggested by Warren D.
White, one of the reviewers of the revised manuscript of  this book.
 398INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS 77.Finn,H.M.,andR.S.Johnson: Adaptive Detection ModewithThreshold ControlasaFunction of Spatially Sampled Clutter-Level Estimates, RCARev.,vol.29,pp.414-464, September, 1968.
78.Dillard,G.M.,andC.E.Antoniak: APractical Distribution-Free Detection Procedure forMultiple­ Range-Bin Radars,IEEETrans.,vol.AES-6,pp.629-635, November, 1970.
79.Hansen, V.G.,andB.A.Olsen:Nonparametric RadarExtraction UsingaGeneralized SignTest, IEEETrans.,vol.AES-7,pp.942-950, September, 1971.
80.Trunk,G.V.,B.H.Cantrell, andF.D.Queen:Modified Generalized SignTestProcessor for2-D Radar,IEEETrans.,vol.AES-IO, pp.574-582, September, 1974.
81.Cantrell, B.H.,G.V.Trunk,F.D.Queen,J.D.Wilson,andJ.J.Alter:Automatic Detection and Integrated Tracking System,RecordoftheIEEE1975International RadarConference, pp.391-395, IEEEPublication 75CHO938-1AES.
82.Dillard,G.M.:Mean-Level Detection Utilizing aDigitalFirst-Order Recursive Filter,IEEETrans., vol.AES-12, pp.793-798, November, 1976.
83.Taylor,J.W.,Jr.,andJ.Mattern: Receivers, chap.5of"RadarHandbook," M.I.Skolnik (ed.~ McGraw-Hill BookCo.,Inc.,NewYork,1970.
84.Hanson, V.G.,andH.R.Ward:Detection Performance oftheCellAveraging LOGjGF' ARReceiver, IEEETrans.,vol.AES-8,pp.648-652, September, 1972.
85.Taylor,J.W.,Jr.,andG.Brunins: Long-Range Surveillance RadarsforAutomatic Control Systems, RecordoftheIEEE1975International RadarConference, pp.312-317.
86.Mortley, W.S.,andS.N.Radcliffe: PulseCompression andSignalProcessing, International Confer­ enceonRadar-Present andFuture,Oct.23-25,1973,pp.292-296, lEEPublication no.105.
87.Ward,H.R.:Dispersive Constant FalseAlarmRateReceiver, Proc.IEEE,vol.60,pp.735-736, June, 1972.
88.Mitchell, R.L.,andJ.F.Walker: Recursive Methods forComputing Detection Probabilities, IEEE Trans.,vol.AES-7,pp.671-676, July,1971.
89.Gupta,D.V.,J.F.Vetelino, T.J.Curry,andJ.T.Francis: AnAdaptive Threshold Systemfor Nonstationary NoiseBackgrounds, IEEETrans.,vol.AES-13, pp.11-16,January, 1977.
90.Preston, G.W.:TheSearchEfficiency oftheProbability RatioSequential SearchRadar,IREIntern.
Conv.Record,vol.8,pt.4,pp.116-124, 1960.
91.Thisexpression wassuggested byWarrenD.White,oneofthereviewers oftherevisedmanuscript of thisbook. CHAPTER  ELEVEN  EXTRACTION OF INFORMATION  AND WAVEFORM DESIGN  11.1 INTRODUCTION  In Chap.
10, which was concerned with detection, it was stated that the observation of radar  signals in noise could be divided into (1) the detection of the presence of signals in noise and  (2) the extraction of the target information contained in the signal.
The analysis of the detec-  tion of signals in noise is based in large part on the mathematics of statistical hypothesis testing.
 Similarly, extraction of information from radar signals is a problem in statistical parameter  estimation.
The detection of signals and the extraction of information are not totally indepen-  dent processes since either one without the other is meaningless.
 This chapter discusses some of the concepts involved in the extraction of information  from a radar signal.
The next section considers in a qualitative manner the type of target  information available from a radar signal.
The theoretical accuracies with which range, rela-  tive velocity (doppler frequency), and angle of arrival can be determined are derived in  Sec.
11.3.
This is followed by a treatment of the ambiguity function and its effect on waveform  design.
Pulse compression waveforms and processing are discussed in Sec.
11.5.
Although  pulse compression radar is of interest for other than the extraction of information, it is  included in this chapter because of its close relation to the ambiguity function.
The final  section reviews several radar techniques that might be used to distinguish one class of target  from another.
 11.2 INFORMATION AVAILABLE FROM A RADAR  A radar obtains information about a target by comparing the received echo signal with the  transmitted signal.
The availability of an echo signal indicates the presence of a reflecting  target; but knowing a target is present is of little use by itself.
Something more must be known.
 Therefore, a radar provides the location of.the target as well as its presence.
It can also provide  information about the type of target.
This is known as target classification.
 The time delay between the transmission of the radar signal and the receipt of an echo is a  measure of the distance, or range, to the target.
The range measurement is usually the most  significant a radar makes.
No other sensor has been able to compete with radar for determin-  ing the range to a distant target.
A typical radar might be able to measure range to an accuracy  CHAPTER ELEVEN EXTRACTION OFINFORMATION ANDWAVEFORM DESIGN 11.1INTRODUCTION InChap.10,whichwasconcerned withdetection, itwasstatedthattheobservation ofradar signalsinnoisecouldbedividedinto(1)thedetection ofthepresence ofsignalsinnoiseand (2)theextraction ofthetargetinformation contained inthesignal.Theanalysisofthedetec~ tionofsignalsinnoiseisbasedinlargepartonthemathematics ofstatistical hypothesis testing.
Similarly, extraction ofinformation fromradarsignalsisaproblem instatistical parameter estimation.
Thedetection ofsignalsandtheextraction ofinformation arenottotallyindepen­ dentprocesses sinceeitheronewithouttheotherismeaningless.
Thischapterdiscusses someoftheconcepts involved intheextraction ofinformation fromaradarsignal.Thenextsectionconsiders inaqualitative mannerthetypeoftarget information available fromaradarsignal.Thetheoretical accuracies withwhichrange,rela­ tivevelocity (doppler frequency), andangleofarrivalcanbedetermined arederivedin Sec.11.3.Thisisfollowed byatreatment oftheambiguity function anditseffectonwaveform design.Pulsecompression waveforms andprocessing arediscussed inSec.11.5.Although pulsecompression radarisofinterestforotherthantheextraction ofinformation, itis included inthischapterbecauseofitscloserelation totheambiguity function.
Thefinal sectionreviewsseveralradartechniques thatmightbeusedtodistinguish oneclassoftarget fromanother.
1l.2INFORMATION AVAILABLE FROMARADAR Aradarobtainsinformation aboutatargetbycomparing thereceived echosignalwiththe transmitted signal.Theavailability ofanechosignalindicates thepresence ofareflecting target;butknowing atargetispresentisoflittleusebyitself.Something moremustbeknown.
Therefore, aradarprovides thelocationofthetargetaswellasitspresence.Itcanalsoprovide information aboutthetypeoftargetThisisknownastargetclassification.
Thetimedelaybetween thetransmission oftheradarsignalandthereceiptofanechoisa measure ofthedistance, orrange,tothetarget.Therangemeasurement isusuallythemost significant aradarmakes.Noothersensorhasbeenabletocompete withradarfordetermin­ ingtherangetoadistanttarget.Atypicalradarmightbeabletomeasure rangetoanaccuracy 399 400 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  of several hundred meters, but accuracies better than a fraction of a meter are practical.
Radar  ranges might be as short as that of the police traffic-speed-meter, or as long as the distances to  the nearby planets.
 Almost all radars utilize directive antennas.
A directive antenna not only provides the  transmitting gain and receiving aperture needed for detecting weak signals, but its narrow  beamwidth allows the target's direction to be determined.
A typical radar might have a heam-  width of perhaps one or two degrees.
The angular resolution is determined by the beamwidtli,  but the angular accuracy can be considerably better than the beamwidth.
A ten to one hetr~~l  splitting would not be unusual for a typical radar.
Some radars can measure angular accuracy  considerably better than this.
An rms error of 0.1 mrad is possible with the best tracking  radars.
 The echo from a moving target produces a frequency shift due to the doppler effect, which  is a measure of the relative r~elocity.
Relative velocity also can be determined ftom the rate of  change of range.
Tracking radars often measure relative velocity in this manner rather tliari trse  the doppler shift.
However, radars for the surveillance and tracking of extraterrestrial targets,  such as satellites and spacecraft, might employ the cioppler shift to Ineasure tiirectly tllc  relative velocity, but it is seldom used for this purpose in aircraft-surveillance radars.
Instead,  aircraft-surveillance radars use the doppler frequency shift to separate the desired moving  targets from the undesired fixed clutter echoes, as in MTI radars.
 Ifthe target can be viewed from many directions, its shape can be determined.
Space object  identification (SOI) radars are an example of those that extract target shape information.
The  synthetic aperture radar (SAR) which maps the terrain is another example.
Radars that  determine the shape of a target are sometimes called inlugirtg radars.
 To obtain the target size or shape requires resolution in range and in angle.
Good range  resolution is generally easier to achieve than comparable resolution in angle.
In some radar  applications it is possible to utilize resolution in the doppler frequency shift as a substitute for  resolution in angle, if there is relative motion between the distributed target and the radar.
 Resolution is possible since each element of the distributed target has a different relative  velocity.
This principle has been used in synthetic aperture radars for ground mapping, inverse  SAR for SO1 and the imaging of planets, and in the scatterometer for measuring the ground or  sea echo as a function of incidence angle.
 Internal motions of the target such as the rotation of aircraft engines, vibrations of vehi-  cles, the spinning ofa satellite, or the rotation of antennas can also provide information about  the target.
The different responses to different polarizations of the electromagnetic wave  provide information on the target symmetry.
It is this property that permits echoes from  symmetrical raindrops to be discriminated against in 'favor of echoes from asymmetrical  i~ircraft.
Many microwave radars use circular polarization for this purpose.
The nature of the  surface roughness can be inferred from the radar echo, as can the dielectric properties of the  scattering surface.
The former has been applied to the measurement of sea state (iron1 satel-  lites), and the latter was used in early radar astronomy to probe the nature of the moon's  surface.
 11.3 THEORETICAL ACCURACY OF RADAR MEASUREMENTS  The ability of a radar to detect the presence of an echo signal is fundamentally limited by noise.
 Likewise, noise is the factor that limits the accuracy with which the radar signals may be  estimated.
The parameters usually of interest in radar applications are the range (time delay),  the range rate (doppler velocity), and the angle of arrival.
The amplitude of the echo signal  400INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS ofseveralhundred meters,butaccuracies betterthanafractionofameterarepractical.
Radar rangesmightbeasshortasthatofthepoiice traffic-speed-meter, oraslongasthedistances to thenearbyplanets.
Almostallradarsutilizedirective antennas.
Adirective antenna notonlyprovides the transmitting gainandreceiving aperture neededfordetecting weaksignals,butitsnarrow beamwidth allowsthetarget'sdirection tobedetermined.
Atypicalradarmighthaveaheam­ widthofperhapsoneortwodegrees.
Theangular resolution isdetermined bythebeamwidth, buttheangularaccuracy canbeconsiderably betterthanthebeamwidth.
Atentooneheam splitting wouldnotbeunusual foratypicalradar.Someradarscanmeasure angular accuracy considerably betterthanthis.Anrmserrorof0.1mradispossible withthebesttracking radars.
Theechofromamovingtargetproduces afrequency shiftduetothedopplereffect,which isameasure oftherelativeuelocity.
Relative velocity alsocanbedetermined f,omtherateof changeofrange.Tracking radarsoftenmeasure relativevelocity inthismannerratherthanuse thedoppler shift.However, radarsforthesurveillance andtracking ofextraterrestrial targets, suchassatellites andspacecraft, mightemploy thedoppler shirttomeasure directly the relativevelocity, butitisseldomusedforthispurpose inaircraft-surveillance radars.Instead, aircraft-surveillance radarsusethedoppler frequency shifttoseparate thedesiredmoving targetsfromtheundesired fixedclutterechoes,asinMTIradars.
Hthetargetcanbeviewedfrommanydirections, itsshapecanhedetermined.
Spaceobject identification (SOl)radarsareanexample ofthosethatextracttargetshapeinformation.
The synthetic aperture radar(SAR)whichmapstheterrainisanother example.
Radarsthai determine theshapeofatargetaresometimes calledimaging radars.
Toobtainthetargetsizeorshaperequires resolution inrangeandinangle.Goodrange resolution isgenerally easiertoachievethancomparable resolution inangle.Insomeradar applications itispossible toutilizeresolution inthedoppler frequency shiftasasubstitute for resolution inangle,ifthereisrelativemotionbetween thedistributed targetandtheradar.
Resolution ispossible sinceeachelement ofthedistributed targethasadifferent relative velocity.
Thisprinciple hasbeenusedinsynthetic aperture radarsforgroundmapping, inverse SARforSOlandtheimaging ofplanets,andinthescatterometer formeasuring thegroundor seaechoasafunction ofincidence angle.
Internalmotionsofthetargetsuchastherotation ofaircraftengines, vibrations ofvehi­ cles,thespinning ofasatellite, ortherotation ofantennas canalsoprovide information about thetarget.Thedifferent responses todifferent polarizations oftheelectromagnetic wave provide information onthetargetsymmetry.
Itisthisproperty thatpermits echoesfrolll ~ymmetrical raindrops tobediscriminated againstin'favorofechoesfromasymmetrical aircraft.
Manymicrowave radarsusecircular polarization forthispurpose.
Thenatureofthe surfaceroughness canbeinferred fromtheradarecho,ascanthedielectric properties ofthe scattering surface.Theformerhasbeenappliedtothemeasurement ofseastate(fromsatel­ lites),andthelatterwasusedinearlyradarastronomy toprobethenatureofthemoon's surface.
11.3THEORETICAL ACCURACY OFRADAR MEASUREMENTS Theabilityofaradartodetectthepresence ofanechosignalisfundamentally limitedbynoise.
Likewise, noiseisthefactorthatlimitstheaccuracy withwhichtheradarsignalsmaybe estimated.
Theparameters usuallyofinterestinradarapplications aretherange(timedelay), therangerate(doppler velocity), andtheangleofarrival.Theamplitude oftheechosignal might also be measured, but its precise value is usually not important except insofar as it  influences the signal-to-noise ratio.
 In this section the theoretical accuracies of radar nieasurements will be derived.
To  simplify the analysis.
it is assunied that the signal is large compared with the noise.
This is a  reasonable assurnption since tlie signal-to-noise ratio tnust be relatively large if the detection  decision is to be reliable (Sec.
2.5).
Furthermore, as will be evident later, large signal-to-noise  ratios are necessary for accurate measurements.
It is also assumed that the error associated  \\*i~li a r~~easurer~ier~t of a particular pararneter is independent of the errors in any of the other  ~~r:inietcr<.
'l'hc validity of this assurnption depends upon the availability of a large signal-to-  rioisc riirio.
(fTurtIler i~ifc>rr~lation regarding radar rtieasure~netits call be found in Ref.
7.)  .I'licorctic;il racfar accuracies niay be derived by a variety of methods including those  based on (I) si~iiple geoliietrical relatiorisliips between signal, noise, and the parameter to be  ~lieast~red.
(2) inverse probability, (3) a suitably selected gating function preceded by a  ~natched filter, arid (4) the estimate of the variance using the likelihood function.
The measure  of the error is the root mean square of the difference between the measured value and the true  value.
The disturbance limiting the accuracy of the radar measurement is assumed to be the  receiver noise.
It is furthermore assumed that bias errors have been removed.
 It will be shown that the rms error SM of a radar measurement M can be expressed as  where E is the received signal energy, No.
is the noise power per unit bandwidth, and k is a  constant whose value is of the order of unity.
For a time-delay measurement, k depends on the  shape of the frequency spectrurrl S(f), and M is the rise time of the pulse; for a doppler  frequency rneasurenient, k depends on ttie shape of the time waveform s(t) and M is the  spectral resolution, or the reciprocal of the observation time; and for an angle measurement k  depends on the shape of the aperture illumination A(x), and M is the beamwidth.
 Range-accuracy - leading-edge measurement.
The measurement of range is the measurement of  t irne delay TR = 2R/c, where c is the velocity of light.
One method of determining range with a  pulsed waveforrtl is to measure the time at which the leading edge of the pulse crosses sonie  threshold' (Fig.
11.1).
The pulse uncorrupted by noise is shown by the solid curve.
The shape  of the pulse is not perfectly rectangular; the rise and decay times are not zero, for this would  require an fifinite bandwidth.
The effect of noise is to perturb the shape of the pulse and to  shift the time of threshold crossing as shown by the dashed curve.
The maximum slope (rate of  rise) of the leading edge of a rectangular pulse of amplitude A at the output of a video filter is  \ 'IRect~n~u/or"~u/se F- p/us noise [ +---- ~hreshold  Figure 11.1 Measurement of  time delay using the leading (or \ \ trailing) edge of the pulse.
Solid ', - - - curve represents echo pulse un-  corrupted by noise.
Dashed  + curve represents the effort of  = tr noise.
 EXTKACTION OFINH)RMATION ANDWAVEFORM DESIGN401 mightalsobemeasured, butitsprecisevalueisusuallynotimportant exceptinsofarasit influences thesignal-to-noise ratio.
Inthissection thetheoretical accuracies ofradarmeasurements willbederived.
To simplify theanalysis.
itisassumed thatthesignalislargecompared withthenoise.Thisisa reasonable assumption sincethesignal-to-noise ratiomustberelatively largeifthedetection decision istobereliable(Sec.2.5).Furthermore, aswillbeevident later,largesignal-to-noise ratiosarenecessary foraccurate measurements.
Itisalsoassumed thattheerrorassociated withameasuremellt ofaparticular parameter isindependent oftheerrorsinanyoftheother paramctcrs.
Thcvalidityofthisassumption depends upontheavailability ofalargesignal-to­ 1I0iseratio.(Furthcr information regarding radarmeasurements callbefoundinRef.7.) Theoretical radaraccuracies maybederived byavarietyofmethods including those bascdon(I)simplcgeometrical relationships between signal,noise,andtheparameter tobe measured.
(2)inverse probability, (3)asuitably selected gatingfunction preceded bya matchcd filler,and(4)theestimate ofthevariance usingthelikelihood function.
Themeasure oftheerroristherootmeansquareofthedifference between themeasured valueandthetrue value.Thedisturbance limiting theaccuracy oftheradarmeasurement isassumed tobethe receiver noise.Itisfurthermore assumed thatbiaserrorshavebeenremoved.
Itwillbeshownthatthermserror(jMofaradarmeasurement Mcanbeexpressed as kM(jM=---=fiE/No(11.1) whereEisthereceived signalenergy.No.isthenoisepowerperunitbandwidth, andkisa constant whosevalueisoftheorderofunity.Foratime-delay measurement, kdepends onthe shapeofthefrequency spectrum 5(1),andMistherisetimeofthepulse;foradoppler frequcncy measurement, kdepends ontheshapeofthetimewaveform s(t)andMisthe spectral resolution, orthereciprocal oftheobservation time;andforananglemeasurement k depends ontheshapeoftheaperture illumination A(x),andMisthebeamwidth.
Range-accuracy -leading-edge measurement.
Themeasurement ofrangeisthemeasurement of timedelayTR=2R/c,wherecisthevelocity oflight.Onemethodofdetermining rangewitha pulsedwaveform istomeasure thetimeatwhichtheleadingedgeofthepulsecrossessome threshold I(Fig.11.1).Thepulseuncorrupted bynoiseisshownbythesolidcurve.Theshape ofthepulseisnotperfectly rectangular; theriseanddecaytimesarenotzero,forthiswould requireaninfinitebandwidth.
Theeffectofnoiseistoperturb theshapeofthepulseandto shiftthetimeofthreshold crossing asshownbythedashedcurve.Themaximum slope(rateof rise)oftheleadingedgeofarectangular pulseofamplitude Aattheoutputofavideofilteris Figure11.1Measurement or timedelayusingtheleading(or trailing)edgeorthepulse.Solid curverepresents echopulseun­ corrupted bynoise.Dashed curverepresents theeffortof noise.__ _-.......
11 "/1 /h/ -- - - \Rectangular pulse \.~"Rectangular"pulse \"plusnoise \ A \Threshold--------\------- \ \ \ ""-.....
.............._---- -I~ise ~flme =trT1(t)--"J.
I_________ _L I 6T,-~f.--RI I---.....
/......__/ 302 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  Air,, where t, is the rise time.
For large signal-to-noise ratios the slope of the pulse corrupted  by noise is essentially the same as the slope of the uncorrupted pulse.
From Fig.
11.1 the slope  of the pulse in noise may be written as n(t)/ATR, where n(f) is the noise voltage in the vicinity of  the threshold crossing and ATR is the error in the time-delay measurement.
Equating the two  expressions for the slope gives"  where A'/? is the video signal-to-noise (power) ratio.
The last part of Eq.
(1 1.3) follows from  the fact that the video signal-to-noise power ratio is equal to twice the IF signal-to-noise  power ratio (SIN), assuming a linear-detector law and a large signal-to-noise ratio.
 If the rise time of the video pulse is limited by the bandwidth B of the IF amplifier, then  t, = l/B.
Letting S = Elr and N = No B, where E is the signal energy, No the noise power per \  unit bandwidth, and r the pulse width, the error in the time delay can be written  112  T~ = (2 BE, N 0)  If a similar independent time-delay measurement is made at the trailing edge of the pulse, the  two combined measurements will be improved by $, or  * 112  = (4BE/No) rectangular pulse  For constant pulse amplitude A, the rms time-delay error given by Eq.
(1 1.3) is proportional  to the rise time and is independent of the pulse width.
An improvement in accuracy is ob-  tained, therefore, by decreasing the rise time (increasing the bandwidth) or increasing the  signal-to-noise ratio.
 The actual estimate of the time delay obtained by determining when the leading or  trailing edge of the pulse crosses a threshold will depend on the value of the threshold relative  to the peak value of the pulse.
This can result in an error in measurement even if no noise is  present.
It is possible to alleviate this situation, however, by using an adaptive threshold in  which the level of the threshold is always a fixed fraition of the pulse amplit~de.~  Range accuracy using gating signals and matched  filter^.^ Consider the receiver block diagram  shown in Fig.
11.2 consisting of a multiplier followed by a low-pass filter (or integrator).
The  two inputs to the multiplier are the received echo signal y(t) and a gating signal g(t - TR).
The  time TR = 2Rlc is the estimate of the true delay time To.
The purpose of the gating signal is to  aid in extracting an esimate of To.
As before, it is assumed that the signal is large compared  with noise; consequently there is no doubt as to the existence or the approximate position of  the echo pulse.
 Mult~pl~er  Figure 11.2 Receiver for rneas~lring range (time delay)  using a gating signal g(t - TH), where TR is the estimate  of the true time delay.
Note the similarity to the cross-  q (t-7;7) correlation receiver of Fig.
10.3.
 402INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS A/t"wheret,ist,herisetime.Forlargesignal-to-noise ratiostheslopeofthepulsecorrupted bynoiseisessentially thesameastheslopeoftheuncorrupted pulse.FromFig.11.1theslope ofthepulseinnoisemaybewrittenasn(t)/L\TR,wherelI(t)isthenoisevoltageinthevicinityof thethreshold crossing andL\TRistheerrorinthetime-delay measurement.
Equating thetwo \"expressions fortheslopegives orL\TR=~~l Alt, [(L\TR)2]'/2=bTR=-~-_.- --_!~_.(A2In2)112-(2S/N)112(11.2) (11.3) whereA2/n2isthevideosignal-to-noise (power) ratio.ThelastpartofEq.(11.3)followsfrom thefactthatthevideosignal-to-noise powerratioisequaltotwicetheIFsignal-to-noise powerratio(SIN),assuming alinear-detector lawandalargesignal-to-noise ratio.
Iftherisetimeofthevideopulseislimitedbythebandwidth BoftheIFamplifier.
then t,:::::;;l/B.LettingS=E/randN=NoB,whereEisthesignalenergy,Nothenoisepowerper unitbandwidth, and't"thepulsewidth,theerrorinthetimedelaycanbewritten (r )112 bTR=2BE/No(11.4) Ifasimilarindependent time-delay measurement ismadeatthetrailingedgeofthepulse,the twocombined measurements willbeimproved by)2,or (r)1/2 c5TR=4BEINorectangular pulse (11.5) Forconstant pulseamplitude A,thermstime-delay errorgivenbyEq.(11.3)isproportional totherisetimeandisindependent ofthepulsewidth.Animprovement inaccuracy isob­ tained,therefore, bydecreasing therisetime(increasing thebandwidth) orincreasing the signal-to-noise ratio.
Theactualestimate ofthetimedelayobtained bydetermining whentheleadingor trailingedgeofthepulsecrossesathreshold willdependonthevalueofthethreshold relative tothepeakvalueofthepulse.Thiscanresultinat)errorinmeasurement evenifnonoiseis present.Itispossible toalleviate thissituation, however, byusinganadaptive threshok\ in whichthelevelofthethreshold isalwaysafixedfractionofthepulseamplitude.2 Rangeaccuracy usinggatingsignalsandmatched filters.3Consider thereceiver blockdiagram showninFig.11.2consisting ofamultiplier followed byalow-pass filter(orintegrator).
The twoinputstothemultiplier arethereceived echosignaly(t)andagatingsignalg(t-TR).The timeTR=2R/cistheestimate ofthetruedelaytimeTo.Thepurpose ofthegatingsignalisto aidinextracting anesimateofTo.Asbefore,itisassumed thatthesignalislargecompared withnoise;consequently thereisnodoubtastotheexistence ortheapproximate position of theechopulse.
yU) MultiplierLow-pass filter (integrotor)Output )0 Figure11.2Receiver formeasuring range(limedelay) usingagatingsignalg(t-TR).whereTRistheestimate ofthetruetimedelay.Notethesimilarity tothecross­ correlation receiverofFig.10.3. EXI'HACTION OF INFORMATION AND WAVEFORM DESIGN 403  The echo signal y(t) is composed of signal and noise, s(t - To) + n(t), where s(t - To) is  the echo signal in the absence of noise.
The cor~tributions due to signal so and noise no at the  output of the low-pass filter may be expressed as  Defining ATR = TR - To, the form of the output so(ATR) with an optimum gating signal  should be an odd function.
Its value is zero at ATR = 0, and its even-order derivatives are zero.
 For small values of A&, the output will be directly proportional to ATR.
(Thus it is similar to  the angle-error detector of a monopulse tracking radar.)  The ratio of the root mean-square noise voltage (z)112 to the slope M of the output  ,(AT,) evaluated at ATR = 0 will be taken as a measure of the rms error in time measure-  ' rnenl.
or  where  The error is illustrated in Fig.
1 \.3.
The receiver output characteristic with signal so only is  represented by the solid curve.
The effect of noise is shown by the dashed curve.
Noise  displaces the zero crossing by an amount At.
 Using the calculus of variations, Mallinckrodt and Sollenberger3 show that the Fourier  transform S,(f) of the optimum gating function which minimizes the time-delay error  [Eq.
(1 1.8)] is given, except for an arbitrary constant factor, by  Figure 11.3 Effect of noise n(t) in shifting the apparent zero crossing of the output s0(TR - To) of the  gating receiver of Fig.
11.2.
 EXTRACTION orINH>RMATION ANDWAVEFORM DESIGN403 Theechosignaly(t}iscomposed ofsignalandnoise,s(t-To)+n(t),wheres(t-To)is theechosignalintheabsence ofnoise.Thecontributions duetosignalSoandnoisenoatthe outputofthelow-pass filtermaybeexpressed as (11.6) (11.7) Defining ~TR=TR-To,theformoftheoutput so(~TR)withanoptimum gatingsignal shouldbeanoddfunction.
Itsvalueiszeroat~TR=0,anditseven-order derivatives arezero.
Forsmallvaluesof~1R,theoutputwillbedirectlyproportional to~TR•(Thusitissimilarto .theangle-error detector ofamonopulse tracking radar.) Theratiooftherootmean-square noisevoltage(;;;)1/2totheslopeMoftheoutput I(~TR)evaluated at~TR=°willbetakenasameasure ofthermserrorintimemeasure­ ment.or (11.8) where(-2)1/2 (5TR=(~t2)1/2 =~_ M M=[~~~~~)LTR=O Theerrorisillustrated inFig.1l.3.Thereceiveroutputcharacteristic withsignal Soonlyis represented bythesolidcurve.TheelTectofnoiseisshownbythedashedcurve.Noise displaces thezerocrossing byanamountM.
Usingthecalculus ofvariations, Mallinckrodt andSollenberger3showthattheFourier transform 5g(f)oftheoptimum gatingfunction whichminimizes thetime-delay error [Eq.(11.8)]isgiven,exceptforanarbitrary constant factor,by (11.9) r / ::Ja.
~ ::Ja L Q) > Q) u Q) Cl:: -/l/-----~/_E-----------____=,....__:::__.MR=TR-lQ Figure11.3Effectofnoisen{t}inshiftingtheapparent zerocrossing oftheoutputso(TR-To)ofthe gatingreceiverofFig.11.2. 404 1NTRODUCTiON TO RADAR SYSTEMS  where S(f) and N,(f) are the Fourier transforms of the input signal s(r - To) and the inpltt  noise n(t), respectively.
The factorj2nf corresponds to a differentiation.
Therefore the optimum  gating waveform appears as the time derivative of the received waveform, if the noise spectrum  is constant.
By applying the convolution theorem to Eq.
(1 1.6), the Fourier transform of the  output So( f) is equal to So( f )S*( f ), or  j2.f I S(f l2 s (f) = ..
.-  I Ni(f l2  This is a transform of an odd function.
 The gating signal and the matched filter are related to one another.
In Sec.
10.2 it was  shown that the frequency-response function of the matched filter was given, except for a  constant and a time delay, by  where in the notation of Sec.
10.2, S*(f) is the complex conjugate of the Fourier transform of  the input signal in the absence of noise and N,(,f) is the spectrum of the input noihe (the  Fourier transform of the input noise voltage).
Therefore, if the multiplier of Fig.
11.2 is  preceded by a matched filter, the form of the optimum gating signal will be  This is the Fourier transform of the doublet impulse 1r2(t), or first derivative of the inlpulst.
 function df(t).
The gating waveform is therefore  The above analysis indicates that optimum range processing consists in passing the ecllo  signal through a matched filter followed by a gating in time that samples the signal waveform  at the instant before and the instant following the time TR.
The difference between these two  samples is a measure of the difference between the estimated delay time TR and the true delay  time To.
In some respects, the gating process is analogous to the split-range-gate technique for  range-tracking radars described in Sec.
5.6, except that the sampling gates described here are  of infinitesimal width whereas they are usually of the order of a pulse width in range tracking.
 Substituting the optimum gating signal into the expression for accuracy gives (Rel.
3,  Eq.
12)  If the noise spectrum is a constant with spectral energy equal to No watts/Hz of bandwidth,  the mean square error is  An effective bandwidth B may be defined such that  where E is the signal energy.
This definition of bandwidth is unlike those discussed previously  404INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS whereS(J)andNi(J)aretheFouriertransforms oftheinputsignals(t-To}andtheinput noisen(t),respectively.
Thefactorj2nJcorresponds toadifferentiation.
Therefore theoptimum gatingwaveform appearsasthetimederivative ofthereceived waveform, ifthenoisespectrum isconstant.
Byapplying theconvolution theorem toEq.(11.6),theFouriertransform ofthe outputSo(J)isequaltoSlI(J)S*(J), or j2nJIS(J) 12 So(J)='IN;{IYI 2-- (11.10) Thisisatransform ofanoddfunction.
Thegatingsignalandthematched filterarerelatedtooneanother.
InSec.10.2itwas shownthatthefrequency-response function ofthematched filterwasgiven,exceptforit constant andatimedelay,by S*(J)H(J)=---------- 1Nj(J) 12 (11.11) whereinthenotation ofSec.10.2,S*(J)isthecomplex conjugate oftheFouriertransform of theinputsignalintheabsence ofnoiseandNlf)isthespectrum oftheinputnoise(the Fourier transform oftheinputnoisevoltage).
Therefore, ifthemultiplier ofFig.11.2is preceded byamatched filter,theformoftheoptimum gatingsignalwillhe (11.12) ThisistheFouriertransform ofthedoubletimpulse 112(t),orfirstderivative oftheimpulse functionJ'(t).Thegatingwaveform istherefore (11.13) Theaboveanalysis indicates thatoptimum rangeprocessing consists inpassingtheecho signalthrough amatched filterfollowed byagatingintimethatsamples thesignalwaveform attheinstantbeforeandtheinstantfollowing thetimeTR•Thedifference between thesetwo samples isameasure ofthedifference between theestimated delaytimeTilandthetruedelay timeTo.Insomerespects, thegatingprocessisanalogous tothesplit-range-gate technique for range-tracking radarsdescribed inSec.5.6,exceptthatthesampling gatesdescribed hereare ofinfinitesimal widthwhereas theyareusuallyoftheorderofapulsewidthinrangetracking.
Substituting theoptimum gatingsignalintotheexpression foraccuracy gives(Ref.3, Eq.12) JT~= 00 --~--- "'- 4I(2nJ)2IS(JW/IN j(J)12ilJ o(11.14) Ifthenoisespectrum isaconstant withspectralenergyequaltoNowatts/Hz ofbandwidth, themeansquareerroris 2 No(JTR)=-00------- 4f(2nJ)21S(J) 12dJ o Aneffective bandwidthpmaybedefinedsuchthat 00f(2nJ)2IS(J)12dJ <XJ p2= - 0000 =kf(2nJ)21S(J)12dffIs(!)12dJI -00 -00(11.15) (11.16) whereEisthesignalenergy.Thisdefinition ofbandwidth isunlikethosediscussed previously EX TRACTION OF INFORMATION AND WAVEFORM DESIGN 405  iri tliis hook and is not siriiply related to eitlier tile lialf-power bandwidth or the noise band-  ~vicftli.
Iri terrlis of tile ekctivc t~:~riciwicltli, tlie tii~ie-delay error becomes  and tlie range error is 6R = (~12) 67;.
 l'lic cKective h;~rielwiiftli ;IS tlcliricci hy Eel.
(I 1.16) was first introduceti by Gabor4 atid Ii:ts  heen used by Woodwards iri his treatnient of detection and accuracy by means of inverse  probability.
13otli Ci:tt~or nricl Wootiwarti defirie the effective bandwidth in ternis of tile  co~iiplex-frequency represeri tat ion, while the definition presented above is in terms of the real  tirne waveft>r~ris.
In essence, p2 is the riorr~ialized second mornent of the spectrum IS(f )I2  :~btrut tile tne;lri (Iicre take11 to be at zero frequency).
The larger tlie value of P2, the tliorc  accurate will be the range ~~ieasurenier~t.
 Examples of tirne-delay (range) accuracy.
The computation of P2 for a perfectly rectangular  pulcc orie with 7ero rise titile anti zero fall tirne-results in /I2 = co.
This implies that the  rriiriir~iuni rrrls range error for a perfectly rectangular pulse is zero and that the range measure-  nient can be made with no error.
In practice, however, pulses are not perfectly rectangular  since a zero rise time or a zero fall time requires an infinite bandwidth.
Finite bandwidths  result in finite rise times and finite D2.
 In order to compute /I2 (and the range error) for a practical " rectangular" pulse, it will be  :lssi~rned that the pulse spectrum is of the fortn S( f) = (sin fi)/~rJ just as with the perfectly  rectangular pulse of width T, but tliat the bandwidth is limited to a finite value B as shown in  Fig.
11.4.' Tliis is equivalent to passing a perfectly rectangular pulse through a filter of width  B.
The tinie waveforni of the output will be a pulse of width approximately r, but the slopes of  the leading and trailing edges are finite.
An example of the shape of a bandwidth-limited  rectangular pulse is shown in Fig.
11.5.
The integrals in the expression for P2 [Eq.
11.161  extend, in this instance, from - B/2 to + B/2 instead of from - co to + oo.
Thus the efTective  where Si x fs the sine integral furiction defined by (sin u)/u du.
As Br -+ m, the product  p2r2 4 2Br.
or  2B /I2 = - - - for large Br r  - - .
-8--  - 11 0 E 11  a  ? Figure 11.4 Spectrum of a band-  rr~nq~nvr~ --% width-limited "rectaneular pulse "  (11.18)EXTRACTION OFINFORMATION ANDWAVEFORM DESIGN405 inthishookamIisnotsimplyrelateutoeitherthehalf-power bandwidth orthenoiseband­ width.IIItermsoftheerret:live bandwidth.
thetime-delay errorbecomes 1 (n~=fl(2EjNo)lfi (11.17) andtherangeerroris()R=(e/2) ()1~.
Tileeffectivc bandwidth asdefincd byEq.(r1.16)wasfirstintroduced byGabor4andlias beenusedbyWoodward~ inhistreatment ofdetection andaccuracy bymeansofinverse probability.
BothGaborandWoodward definetheeffective bandwidth intermsofthe complex-frequency representation, whilethedefinition presented aboveisintermsofthereal timewaveforms.
Inessence, f12isthenormalized secondmoment ofthespectrumISU) 12 aholltthemean(heretakelltobeatzerofrequency).
TilelargerthevalueoffJ2,themore accurate willbetherangemeasurement.
Examples oftime-delay (range)accuracy.
Thecomputation of/32foraperfectly rectangular pulseonewithzerorisetimeandzerofalltime-resultsinfJ2=00.Thisimpliesthatthe minimum rmsrangeerrorforaperfectly rectangular pulseiszeroandthattherangemeasure­ mentcanbemadewithnoerror.Inpractice, however, pulsesarenotperfectly rectangular sinceazerorisetimeorazerofalltimerequires aninfinitebandwidth.
Finitebandwidths resultinfiniterisetimesandfinitefJ2.
Inordertocompute f12(andtherangeerror)forapractical" rectangular" pulse,itwillbe assumed thatthepulsespectrum isoftheformSU)=(sinnfr)/nf,justaswiththeperfectly rectangular pulseofwidthr,butthatthebandwidth islimitedtoafinitevalueBasshownin Fig.[1.4.(,Thisisequivalent topassing aperfectly rectangular pulsethrough afilterofwidth B.Thetimewaveform oftheoutputwillbeapulseofwidthapproximately t,buttheslopesof theleadingandtrailing edgesarefinite.Anexample oftheshapeofabandwidth-limited rectangular pulseisshowninFig.11.5.Theintegrals intheexpression for{32[Eq.11.16] extend, inthisinstance, from-B/2to+B/2insteadoffrom-00to+00.Thustheeffective handwidth is R/2 (2rrrrf2(sin2rrfr)/rr2f2tlfnBr-sinnBrf12= ~/-i8/!- ------------- =----------- ----".--,--- rt25i(nBt)+(cosnBr-1)/nBr (sin2rrfr)/n2f2tlf • -R/2 whereSixfsthesineintegral function defined byr(sinu)/uduoAsBr~00,theproduct • 0 22Bf1:::::--- rforlargeBr (11.19) t a.
E <[--B----------~ rrnn1lnnr'J __-.Figure11.4Spectrum ofaband­ width-limited "rectangular pulse." 406 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  This is a reasonably good approximation for almost any value of Br.
Therefore the rms error  in the time-delay measurement for a "rectangular" pulse of width r, limited to a bandwidth B,  is approximately 3 A  t 112  (4BE/No) bandwidth-limited rectangular pulse ( 1 1.20) 0 '0 3 + - - a  E a  The pulse width r in the above expression is that of the perfectly rectangular pulse before band  limiting.
It is a good approximation to the width of the band-limited pulse when Br is large.
 Equation (1 1.20) is the same as Eq.
(1 1.5) but is derived in a totally different manner.
This  is a rather interesting result, for it seems to imply that the value of time delay obtained with a  straightforward method like the leading-edge technique can be as accurate as the optimum  processing technique described above.
It was assumed in the analysis of a bandwidth-limited  pulse that a matched filter was employed.
If the spectral width of the "rectangular" pulse is  changed, the matched filter must be changed also.
 The rms timedelay error for a trapezoidal-shaped pulse of width 2T1 across the top, flat  portion and with rise and fall times of Tz may be shown from Eqs.
(1 1.16) and (1 1.17) to be Figure 11.5 Shape of rectangiilar pulse  Ti + 3Tl T2 'I2  6T"= ( 6E/No ) trapezoidal pulse \ / after passlng through a band-limited rec-  Time -+ tangular filter.
 When the trapezoidal pulse approaches in shape the rectangular pulse, that is, when TI g T2,  Eq.
( 1 1.2 1 ) becomes  The bandwidth B is approximately the reciprocal of the rise time T2, and if TI = r/2, where r is  the pulse width, the rms error is  which is the same as that derived previously for the bandwidth-limited rectangular pulse.
 By letting TI -, 0 in Eq.
(11.21), the time-delay error for a triangular-shaped pulse is  obtained.
Calling the width at the base of the triangle r, = 2Tz, the rms error is  8~~ =+ triangular pulse 12(2E/No)1'2  Consider a pulse described by the gaussian function  406INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS a.
E <l Time~Figure 11.5Shapt:ofrectangular pulst: afterpassingthrough aband-limit~d r~c­ tangular filter.
JThisisareasonably goodapproximation foralmostanyvalueofBt.Therefore thermserror inthetime-delay measurement fora"rectangular" pulseofwidtht,limitedtoabandwidth B, isapproximately (r)1/2 bTR~4BEINobandwidth-limited rectangular pulse (11.20) (11.22)Thepulsewidth tintheaboveexpression isthatoftheperfectly rectangular pulsebeforeband limiting.Itisagoodapproximation tothewidthoftheband-limited pulsewhenBtislarge.
Equation (11.20)isthesameasEq.(11.5)butisderivedinatotallydifferent manner.
This isaratherinteresting result,foritseemstoimplythatthevalueoftimedelayobtained witha straightforward method liketheleading-edge technique canbeasaccurate astheoptimum processing technique described above.Itwasassumed intheanalysisofabandwidth-limited pulsethatamatched filterwasemployed.
Ifthespectral widthofthe"rectangular" pulseis changed, thematched filtermustbechanged also.
Thermstime-delay errorforatrapezoidal-shaped pulseofwidth2T1acrossthetop,fiat portionandwithriseandfalltimesofT2maybeshownfromEqs.(11.16)and(11.17)tobe b'fJ=(Ti+3T1T2)1/2trapezoidal pulse (11.21) R6EINo Whenthetrapezoidal pulseapproaches inshapetherectangular pulse,thatis,whenT,~T2, Eq.(11.21)becomes bTR~(2i/~Jl/2 Thebandwidth Bisapproximately thereciprocal oftherisetimeT2,andifT1~t/2,wheretis thepulsewidth,thermserroris whichisthesameasthatderivedpreviously forthebandwidth-limited rectangular pulse.
BylettingT1-+0inEq.(11.21),thetime-delay errorforatriangular-shaped pulseis obtained.
CaIlingthewidthatthebaseofthetriangle tB=2Tl,thermserroris triangular pulseb'fJ_ tB R -jf2(2E/No)1/2 Consider apulsedescribed bythegaussian function (1.384t2 )s{t}=exp-r2(11.23) (11.24) IiX 1 KA('1 ION 01: INI.OHMA I ION AND WAVtll OHM LJESICiN 407  wtiere r is tlie Iinlf-power pulse width:TliC gaussi-an-shaped pulse is sor~ietirnes specified in  those applications wtiere interference with equipments operating at nearby frequencies is to be  avoided.
The gaussian pulse is well suited for this purpose since its spectrum decays rapidly on  either side of the carrier frequency.
Its rrns range error is  r - 1.18  ST R - - I.
18(iEii;jiii - njj(2Em;)ii? gaussian pulse  \vlicrc n is tlic tialf-power haridwidth of the gaussian-pulse spectruni.
 'I'lie effective baridwidtll of a waveforti1 with a uniform frequency spectrutn of width U is  /I = n~/ Jj.
The wavefortli which gives rise to a uniform frequency spectrum is of the forni  (sill .x)/.u, wtiere .u = nllr.
The rrns time-delay error is therefore  J3 67' - sin x  - rt B(~E/N~)"~ - waveform  X  The radar waveforni which yields the most accurate time-delay measurement, all other  factors being equal, is the one with tlie largest value ofeffective bandwidth 0.
If the bandwidth  is limited by external factors to a value B, the spectrum which produces the largest /I, and  llence the most accurate range measurement, would be one which crowded all its energy at the  two ends of the batid; that is,  where .fo is the carrier frequency and 6(x) is the delta function.
The corresponding time  waveform consists of two sine waves at frequencies fo +_ 812.
This is the two-frequency CW  radar waveform discussed in Sec.
3.5.
The two-frequency CW radar spectrum (and its corre-  sponding waveforni) are not always suitable in practice since they lead to ambiguous measure-  rnents if the frequency separation B between the two sine waves is greater than c/2Rb, where c  is the velocity of propagation and Rb is the maximum unambiguous range.
If the range  measurement is to be unambiguous, the spectrum must be continuous over the bandwidth B.
 Accuracy of frequency (doppler-velocity) measurement.
Using the method of inverse probabil-  , ity, Manassee showed that the minimum rms error in the measurement of frequency is  where  and s(t) is the input signal as a function of time.
Note the similarity between the definition of a  and /I, as defined in Eq.
(1 1.16).
as well as between the expressions for Sf and STR.
The  parameter a is called the efl'ective time duration of the signal, and (a/21t)~ is the normalized  second moment of s2(r) about the mean epoch, taken to be t = 0.
If the mean is not zero, but  sonie other value to, the integrand in the numerator of (1 1.28) would be (2n)*(t - to)*s2(t).
In  radar, the measurement error specified by Eq.
(11.27) is that of the doppler frequency shift.
 The value of a2 for a perfectly rectangular pulse of width T is n2r2/3; thus the rms  frequency error is  JJ a/= -- rectangular pulse  ~T(~E/N~)~~~  The longer the pulse width, the better the accuracy of the frequency measurement.
 EXIHACI\ON OFINFORMATION ANIJWAVEFORM DESIGN 407 whereristhehalf-powerpulscwidth:-The' gaussian-shaped pulseissumetimes specified in thoseapplications whereinterference withequipments operating atllearby frequencies istobe avoided.
Thegaussian pulseiswellsuitedforthispurpose sinceitsspectrum decaysrapidlyon eithersideofthecarrierfrequency.
Itsrmsrangeerroris r l.l8 ~IR=1.l8(iEIN~)ii2 =~B(2ElN~p12gaussian pulse (11.25) whereHisthehalf-power bandwidth ofthegaussian-pulse speclrum.
Thecrrective bandwidth ofawaveform withauniform frequency spectrum ofwidthBis {i=rrBlj!..
Thewaveform whichgivesrisetoauniform frequency spectrum isoftheform (sillx)/x.wherex=rrIJr.Therrnstime-delay erroristherefore .
.J3J1R=-----------rrB(2EINo)'f2SinX~-waveformx(11.26) Theradarwaveform whichyieldsthemostaccurate time-delay measurement, allother factorsbeingequal.istheonewiththelargestvalueoferrective bandwidth p.Ifthebandwidth islimitedbyexternal factorstoavalueB,thespectrum whichproduces thelargestp,and hencethemostaccurate rangemeasurement, wouldbeonewhichcrowded allitsenergyatthe twoendsoftheband;thatis, 5(J)=~(f-fo~B12)+~(f-Jo+812) wherefoisthecarrierfrequency and~(x)isthedeltafunction.
Thecorresponding time waveform consists oftwosinewavesatfrequencies fo±812.Thisisthetwo-frequency CW radarwaveform discussed inSec.3.5.Thetwo-frequency CWradarspectrum (anditscorre­ sponding waveform) arenotalwayssuitable inpractice sincetheyleadtoambiguous measure­ mentsifthefrequency separation 8between thetwosinewavesisgreaterthanc/2Rb,wherec isthevelocity ofpropagation andRbisthemaximum unambiguous range.Iftherange neasurement istobeunambiguous, thespectrum mustbecontinuous overthebandwidth B.
Accuracy offrequency (doppler-velocity) measurement.
Usingthemethodofinverseprobabil­ ity,Manasse8showed thattheminimum rmserrorinthemeasurement offrequency is (11.28)(11.27) where1 ¥=ex(2E/No)1/2 2f~<Xl(21tt)2s2(t)dtex=""'-------:------::---- J~<XlS2(t)dt ands(r)istheinputsignalasafunction oftime.Notethesimilarity between thedefinition ofex andfl.asdefined inEq.(11.16).
aswellasbetween theexpressions for{)fand{)TR•The parameter exiscalledtheeffective timeduration orthesignal,and(ex/21t)2isthenormalized secondmoment ofS2(t)aboutthemeanepoch,takentobet=O.Ifthemeanisnotzero,but someothervalueto.theintegrand inthenumerator of(I1.28) wouldbe(21t)2(t-lo)2S2(t).[n radar,themeasurement errorspecified byEq.(1l.27)isthatofthedoppler frequency shift.
Thevalueofex2foraperfectly rectangular pulseofwidthtis1t2t2/3;thustherms frequency erroris rectangular pulse -.j3 {)J-nt(2E7Noff/2 Thelongerthepulsewidth,thebettertheaccuracy ofthefrequency measurement.(11.29) 408 lNTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  For a bandwidth-limited "rectangular" pulse as described by Fig.
11.5, the value of a2 is  cos nBr - 3 8(cos nBr - 1) 2 sin nBr - -- - -  n2r2 nBr (n BT)~ (~BT)~ + Si (~BT)  a2 = -  3 Si (~BT) + (cos nBr - l)/nBr (1 1.30)  In the limit as Br -, co, the value of a2 approaches n2r2/3, which is the same as that obtained  for the perfectly rectangular pulse.
 The value of a2 for a perfectly rectangular pulse is finite even though its value of b2 is  infinite.
The value of cr2 will be infinite, however, for a waveform with a perfectly rectangular  frequency spectrum, corresponding to a (sin x)/x time waveform (x = nBt) of infinite duration.
 In practice, any waveform must be limited in time, and a2 will therefore be finite.
The  frequency error (or a2) for a waveform with rectangular spectrum may be found in a manner  similar to that employed for computing P2 for a bandwidth-limited rectangdlar pulse.
The  frequency error will be like that of Eq.
(1 1.20) but with the roles of B and T reversed.
 The rms error in the measurement of doppler frequency with a trapezoidal pulse is  Sf = (2T2/3 + 2T1)'"  TITI Ti 2T3 'I2 2E 'I2 trapezoidal pulse (1 1.3 1) 2n(F + -  3 +-+-) 15 3 (%)  This reduces to the expression for a rectangular pulse [Eq.
(1 1.29)) as the trapezoidal pulse  becomes more rectangular, that is, when TI = 212 % T2.
 For the triangular pulse, we set TI = 0 in Eq.
(1 1.3 1) and let 2T2 = T,.
The rms error is  (10)"" Sf = triangular pulse ?'CT~(~E/N~)~'~  The rms frequency error for a gaussian-shaped pulse is  1.18 Sf = - - B  ~T(~E/N~)"~- 1.
18(2E/No)li2 gaussian pulse  The time-delay and frequency-error expressions obtained in this section apply for a single  observation.
When more than one independent measurement is made, the resultant error may ,,  be found by combining the errors in the usual manner for gaussian statistics; that is, the  variance (square of 6for ST,) of the combined observations is equal to l/N of the variance of a  single observation, where N is the number of independent observations.
If /I2 or a2 remains the  same for each measurement, the expressions derived here still apply, but with E the total signal  energy involved in all N observations.
 Uncertainty relation.
The so-called "uncertainty" relation of radar states that the product of  the effective bandwidth /I occupied by a signal waveform and the effective time duration a must  be greater than or equal to n; that is,4  Equation (1 1.34), the radar " uncertainty " relationship, may be derived from the definitions of  /I and a given by Eqs.
(1 1.16) and (11.28) and by applying the Schwartz inequality.
It is a  consequence of the Fourier-transform relationship between a time waveform and its spectrum  and may be derived without recourse to noise considerations.
The use of the word " uncer-  tainty" is a misnomer, for there is nothing uncertain about the "uncertainty" relation of  Eq.
(1 1.34).
It states the well-known mathematical fact that a narrow waveform yields a wide  408INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS Forabandwidth-limited" rectangular" pulseasdescribed byFig.11.5,thevalueof(X2is.
cosnBr-3 nBr8(cosnBr-I)2sinnBr (nBr)3 -(nBrV-+Si(nBT) Si(nBr)+(cosnBr-1)/nBr(11.30) InthelimitasBr-+00,thevalueof(X2approaches n2r213,whichisthesameasthatobtained fortheperfectly rectangular pulse.
Thevalueof(X2foraperfectly rectangular pulseisfiniteeventhoughitsvalueoffJ2is infinite.Thevalueofa2willbeinfinite,however, forawaveform withaperfectly rectangular frequency spectrum, corresponding toa(sinx)lxtimewaveform (x=nBt)ofinfiniteduration.
Inpractice, anywaveform mustbelimitedintime,anda2willtherefore befinite.The frequency error(or(2)forawaveform withrectangular spectrum maybefoundinamanner similartothatemployed forcomputing fJ2forabandwidth-limited rectangrllar pulse.The frequency errorwillbelikethatofEq.(11.20)butwiththerolesofBandrreversed.
Thermserrorinthemeasurement ofdoppler frequency withatrapezoidal pulseis (11.31) trapezoidal pulseb_ (2T2/3+2T1)1/2 '1-(2TfT2TIT~ T~2Tl)1/2(2E)1/22n+--+- +- 0- 3 3 153No Thisreduces totheexpression forarectangular pulse[Eq.(11.29)]asthetrapezoidal pulse becomes morerectangular, thatis,whenT1=r/2~T2• Forthetriangular pulse,wesetT1=0inEq.(11.31)andlet2T2=rB'Thermserroris {1O)1/2 .
bf=1t'tB(2EIN O)1/2triangular pulse Thermsfrequency errorforagaussian-shaped pulseis(11.32) (11.33) gaussian pulse1.18 B bf=nr{2EINo)1/2,=1.18(2EIN o)1/2 Thetime-delay andfrequency-error expressions obtained inthissectionapplyforasingle observation.
Whenmorethanoneindependent measurement ismade,theresultant errormay befoundbycombining theerrorsintheusualmanner forgaussian statistics; thatis,the variance (squareoftJforbTR)ofthecombined observations isequaltoIINofthevariance ofa singleobservation, whereNisthenumberofindependent observations.
Ifp2ora2remains the sameforeachmeasurement, theexpressions derivedherestillapply,butwithEthetotalsignal energyinvolved inallNobservations.
Uncertainty relation.
Theso-called" uncertainty" relation ofradarstatesthattheproduct of theeffective bandwidth fJoccupied byasignalwaveform andtheeffective timeduration amust begreaterthanorequalton;thatis,4 ;pa~n (11.34) Equation (11.34),theradar"uncertainty" relationship, maybederivedfromthedefinitions of fJandIXgivenbyEqs.(11.16)and(11.28)andbyapplying theSchwartz inequality.
Itisa consequence oftheFourier-transform relationship between atimewaveform anditsspectrum andmaybederivedwithout recourse tonoiseconsiderations.
Theuseoftheword"uncer­ tainty"isamisnomer, forthereisnothing uncertain aboutthe"uncertainty" relation of Eq.(11.34).Itstatesthewell-known mathematical factthatanarrowwaveform yieldsawide spectrum and a wide waveforrn yields a narrow spectrum and both the time waveform and the  frequency spectrum cannot be rnade arbitrarily small simultaneously.
 The relation of Eq.
(1 1.34) is useful, however, as an indication of the accuracy with which  time delay and frequency may be measured simultaneously.
The product of the rms time-  delay error [Eq.
(1 1.17)] and ttie rrns frequency error [Eq.
(1 1.27)] is  Substituting the inequality of Eq.
(1 1.34) in the above gives  his states that the time delay and the frequency may be simrtltaneously measured to as small a  Iteoreticc~l error as orle desires by desigr~irig the radar to yield a suficiently large ratio of signal  $rtc>rqjo (E) to rtoise power per /~ertz (No), or $)r $xed E/No, to select a rndor waveforrtt whic/t  restrlts ir~ a large valrte oflla.
Large pa products require waveforms long in duration and of  wide baridwidth.
 The poorest waveform for obtaining accurate time-delay and frequency measurements  simultaneously is the one for which /?a = n.
It may be shown that this corresponds to the  gaussian-shaped pulse.
The triangular-shaped pulse is little better, since its Pa product is Xfn.
 The radar "uncertainty" relation seems to have the opposite interpretation of the uncer-  tainty principle of quantum mechanics.
The latter states that the position and the velocity of  an electron or other atomic particles cannot be simultaneously determined to any degree of  accuracy desired.
Precise determination of one parameter can be had only at the expense of the  other.
This is not so in radar.
Both position (range or time delay) and velocity (doppler  frequency) may in theory be determined simultaneously if the pa product and/or the  E/No ratio are sufficiently large.
The two uncertainty principles apply to different phenomena,  and the radar principle based on classical concepts shouldnot be confused with the physics  principle that describes quantum-mechanical effects.
In classical radar there is no theoretical  limit to the minimum value of the 6TR 6.f product since the radar systems designer is free to  choose as large a pa product (by proper selection of the waveform) and E/No ratio as he  desires.
or can afford.
His limits are practical ones, such as power limitations or the inability to  rneet tolerances.
In the quantum-mechanical case, on the other hand, the observer does not  have controlrover his system as does the radar designer since'the Pa product of a quantum  particle is fixed by nature and not by the observer.
 Angular accuracy.
The measurement of angular position is the measurement of the angle of  arrival of the equiphase wavefront of the echo signal.
The theoretical rms error of the angle  measurement may be derived in a manner similar to the derivations of time (range) and  frequency errors discussed above.
The analogy between the angular error and the time-delay  or frequency error comes about because the Fourier transform describes the relationship  between the radiation pattern and the aperture distribution of an antenna in a manner similar  to the relationship between the time waveform and its frequency spectrum.
 For simplicity the angular error in one coordinate plane only will be considered.
The  analysis can be extended to include angular errors in both planes, ifdesired.
It is assumed that  the signal-to-noise ratios are large and that the noise can be described by the gaussian  probability-density function.
 Consider a linear in-phase receiving antenna of length D, or a rectangular receiving  aperture of width D as shown in Fig.
11.6.
The amplitude distribution across the aperture as a  (11.35)EXTRACTION OFINFORMATION ANDWAVEFORM DESIGN409 spectrum andawidewaveform yieldsanarrowspectrum andboththetimewaveform andthe frequency spectrum cannotbemadearbitrarily smallsimultaneously.
TherelationofEq.(11.34)isuseful,however, asanindication oftheaccuracy withwhich timedelayandfrequency maybemeasured simultaneously.
Theproduct ofthermstime­ delayerror[Eq.(11.17)]andthermsfrequency error[Eq.(11.27)] is 1 (jTR(jf=7i~2E/No) Substituting theinequality ofEq.(11.34)intheabovegives , 1 (j1Rbfs~(2E7No)(11.36) Thisstatesthatthetimedelayandthefrequency maybesimultaneously measured toassmalla theoretical errorasonedesiresbydesigning theradartoyieldasufficiently largeratioofsignal c"era.\'(E)tonoisepowerperhertz(N()),orforfixedE/No,toselectaradarwaveform which resultsinalargevalueofIllX.LargePIXproducts requirewaveforms longinduration andof widebandwidth.
Thepoorestwaveform forobtaining accurate time-delay andfrequency measurements simultaneously istheoneforwhichPIX=n.Itmaybeshownthatthiscorresponds tothe gaussian-shaped pulse.Thetriangular-shaped pulseislittlebetter,sinceitsPIXproduct is~n.
Theradar"uncertainty" relationseemstohavetheopposite interpretation oftheuncer­ taintyprinciple ofquantum mechanics.
Thelatterstatesthattheposition andthevelocityof anelectron orotheratomicparticles cannotbesimultaneously determined toanydegreeof accuracy desired.Precisedetermination ofoneparameter canbehadonlyattheexpenseofthe other.Thisisnotsoinradar.Bothposition (rangeortimedelay)andvelocity (doppler frequency) mayintheorybedetermined simultaneously ifthePIXproduct and/orthe E/N0ratioaresurficiently large.Thetwouncertainty principles applytodifferent phenomena, andtheradarprinciple basedonclassical concepts shoulcf'not beconfused withthephysics principle thatdescribes quantum-mechanical effects.Inclassical radarthereisnotheoretical limittotheminimum valueofthe(jTR1>fproduct sincetheradarsystemsdesigner isfreeto chooseaslargeaPIXproduct (byproperselection ofthewaveform) andE/Noratioashe desires,orcanafford.Hislimitsarepractical ones,suchaspowerlimitations ortheinability to meettolerances.
Inthequantum-mechanical case,ontheotherhand,theobserver doesnot havecontroliover hissystemasdoestheradardesigner sincethePIXproductofaquantum particleisfixedbynatureandnotbytheobserver.
Angular accuracy.
Themeasurement ofangular position isthemeasurement oftheangleof arrivaloftheequiphase wavefront oftheechosignal.Thetheoretical rmserroroftheangle measurement maybederived inamanner similartothederivations oftime(range)and frequency errorsdiscussed above.Theanalogy between theangularerrorandthetime-delay orfrequency errorcomesaboutbecause theFourier transform describes therelationship between theradiation patternandtheaperture distribution ofanantenna inamannersimilar totherelationship between thetimewaveform anditsfrequency spectrum.
Forsimplicity theangularerrorinonecoordinate planeonlywillbeconsidered.
The analysiscanbeextended toincludeangularerrorsinbothplanes,ifdesired.Itisassumed that thesignal-to-noise ratiosarelargeandthatthenoisecanbedescribed bythegaussian probability-density function.
Consider alinearin-phase receiving antenna oflengthD,orarectangular receiving aperture ofwidthDasshowninFig.11.6.Theamplitude distribution acrosstheaperture asa Figure 11.6 Rectangular receiving  apcrtilrc of width D and arnplitudc  distribt~tion A(.r) giving rise to radiated  I pattern G,,(O)  function of x is denoted A(x).
The (voltage) gain as a function of the angle 0 (od-dimensional  radiation pattern) in the xz plane is proportional to  When the angle 0 is small, sin 0 0, and Eq.
(1 1.37) is recognized as an inverse Fourier  transform  This is analogous to the inverse Fourier transform relating the frequency spectrum S(/) and  the time waveform s(t), or  * 00  As the antenna scans at a uniform angular rate w,, the received signal voltage from a fixed  point source will be proportional to G,(0) = Gv(w,t) and may be considered a time waveform.
 If811 [in Eq.
(1 1.38)] is identified with t in Eq.
(1 1.39), and if x is identified withf, the theoretical  rms error can be obtained by analogy to the time-delay accuracy as given by Eq.
(1 1.17), or  where y is the effective aperture width defined by  - w Y2 =  j IA(x)IZdx  -03  The theoretical angular error of an antenna with a rectangular amplitude distribution  across the aperture is  The effective aperture width is 27t times the square root of the normalized second moment of  I A(x)lZ about the mean value of x, taken to be at x = 0.
The half-power beamwidth 8, of a  rectangular distribution is 0.88110, where 8, is in radians.
Therefore  410INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS y Figure 11.6Rectangular receiving aperture ofwidthDandamplitude distribution A(x)givingrisetoradiated patternG.,(O).
function ofxisdenotedA(x).The(voltage) gainasafunction oftheangle0(one-dimensional radiation pattern) inthexzplaneisproportional to rVI2(x)GiO)= .A(x)expj2n-isin0tlx •-V/2 I\.(11.37) Whentheangle0issmall,sin0~0,andEq.(11.37)isrecognized asaninverseFourier transform JV/2 j2nxO Gv(O)=A(x)exp---,dx -V/2 I\.(11.38) Thisisanalogous totheinverseFouriertransform relatingthefrequency spectrum S(f)and thetimewaveform s(t),or IX) s(t)=rS(f)exp(j2nft)({( • -ex>(11.39) Astheantenna scansatauniform angular ratews'thereceived signalvoltagefromafixed pointsourcewillbeproportional toGv(O)=Gv(wst)andmaybeconsidered atimewaveform.
HO/A.[in Eq.(11.38)]isidentified withtinEq.(11.39),andifxisidentified with!.thetheoretical rmserrorcanbeobtained byanalogy tothetime-delay accuracy asgivenbyEq.(11.17).or b(~)=Y(2E/~O)1/2 (11.40) whereyistheeffective aperture widthdefinedby 2J: oo(2nx)2IA(x)12dx y= (11.4l) Thetheoretical angularerrorofanantenna witharectangular amplitude distribution acrosstheaperture is j3,{ bO=nD(2E/No)1/2(11.42a) Theeffective aperture widthis2ntimesthesquarerootofthenormalized secondmoment of IA(x)12aboutthemeanvalueofx,takentobeatx=O.Thehalf-power beamwidth 08ofa rectangular distribution isO.88A/D, whereOsisinradians.
Therefore n~8~ ) bO=(2E/No)l/2 (11.42b EXTRAC110N 01: INFORMATION AND WAVEFORM DESIGN 411  where the units of 60 are the same as those of 0,.
The relative error (6e/eB) is a function of  EJN, only.
The angular error can be many times less than the beamwidth, depending upon  the value of EIN,.
The accuracy formulas derived previously for the time delay and the  frequency nlay be readily applied to the determination of the angular error for various aper-  ture distributions.
 The effective aperture width 11 for several aperture distributions which can be computed  ar~nlytic;~lly are giver1 below:  For A = O  nx D  A(x) = cos --- I x 1 < -- D 2  Inverse probability, likelihood ratio, and accuracy.
The m'ethod of inverse probability as  described by Woodward5 can be used as a basis for determining the theoretical accuracies  ,ssociated with radar measurements.
The likelihood function also can be used for deriving ' measurement acc~racy.~ Both methods result in accuracy expressions like that of Eq.
(1 1.17).
 11.4 AMBIGUITY DIAC;RAM~,'~-'  The ambiguity diagram represents the response of the matched filter to the signal for which it  is matched as well as to doppler-frequency-shifted (mismatched) signals.
Although it is seldom  used as a basis for practical radar system design, it provides an indication .of the limitations  and utility of particular classes of radar waveforms, and gives the radar designer general  guidelines for the selection of suitable waveforms for various applications.
 The output of the matched filter was shown in Sec.
10.2 to be equal to the cross correla-  tion between the received signal and the transmitted signal [Eq.
(10.18)].
When the received  echo signal from the target is large compared to noise, this may be written as  Output of the matched filter = sr(t)s*(t - TX) dt (1 1.46)  where sr(t) is the received signal, s(t) is the transmitted signal, s*(t) is its complex conjugate,  and Tk is the estimate of the time delay (considered a variable).
Complex notation is assumed  in Eq.
(1 1.46).
The transmitted signal expressed in complex form is ~(t)eJ~"*~', where u(t) is the  EXTRACTION OFINFORMATION ANDWAVEFORM DESIGN411 wheretheunitsofbOarethesameasthoseof0B'Therelativeerror(blJjlJB)isafunction of E/N0only.Theangularerrorcanbemanytimeslessthanthebeamwidth, depending upon thevalueofE/No.Theaccuracy formulasderived previously forthetimedelayandthe frequency maybereadilyappliedtothedetermination oftheangularerrorforvarious aper~ turedistributions.
ThcefTective apcrturc width)' forseveralaperture distributions whichcanbecomputed analytically arcgivcnbclow: 1'l1raho/ic distrih/ltioll 4(1-~)X2A(x)=I -jjI---- ForL\=0 For~=0.5 ForL\=1.0 Cosinedistriblltion Triangular distributioll1'2=0.863D2 1'2=1.88D2 1'2=3.287D2 1tX A(x)=cos7i 1'2=1.286D2IxID<-­2(11.43) (11.44) 2A(x)=1-jjIxl },2=0.986D2IxID<­2 (11.45) Inverse probability, likelihood ratio,andaccuracy_ Themethod ofinverseprobability as described byWoodward.5 canbeusedasabasisfordetermining thetheoretical accuracies Issociated withradarmeasurements.
Thelikelihood function alsocanbeusedforderiving measurement accuracy.9 Bothmethods resultinaccuracy expressions likethatofEq.(11.17).
11.4AMBI~UITY DIAGRAM5.10-12 Theambiguity diagram represents the response ofthematched filtertothesignalforwhichit ismatched aswellastodoppler-frequency-shifted (mismatched) signals.Although itisseldom usedasabasisforpractical radarsystemdesign,itprovides anindication ofthelimitations andutilityofparticular classesofradarwaveforms, andgivestheradardesigner general guidelines fortheselection ofsuitable waveforms forvariousapplications.
Theoutputofthematched filterwasshowninSec.10.2tobeequaltothecrosscorrela­ tionbetween thereceived signalandthetransmitted signal[Eq.(10.18)].
Whenthereceived echosignalfromthetargetislargecompared tonoise,thismaybewrittenas Outputofthematched filter=Ioo Sr(t)S·(t-TR)dt -00(11.46) wheresr(t)isthereceived signal,s(t)isthetransmitted signal,s·(t)isitscomplex conjugate, andTitistheestimate ofthetimedelay(considered avariable).
Complex notation isassumed inEq.(I1.46).Thetransmitted signalexpressed incomplex formisu(t)eJ2Iffot, whereu(t)isthe 412 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  complex-modulation function whose magnitude I tr(t) ( is the envelope of the real signal, and fo  is the carrier frequency.
The received echo signal is assumed to be the same as the transmitted  signal except for the time delay To and a doppler frequency shift fd.
Thus  (The change of amplitude of the echo signal is ignored here.) With these definitions the output  of the matched filter is  It is customary to set To = 0 and fo = 0, and to define To - T;( = - TR = TR.
The output of  the matched filter is then  00  x(TR, fd) = u(~)u*(L + dt (1 1.49) - 00  In this form a positive TR indicates a target beyond the reference delay To, and a positive fd  indicates an incoming targett3 The squared magnitude I z(TR, fd) l2 is called the amhiytriry  function and its plot is the ambiguity diagram.
 The ambiguity diagram has been used to assess the properties of the transmitted  waveform as regards its target resolution, measurement accuracy, ambiguity, and response to  clutter.
 Properties of the ambiguity diagram.
The function Iz(TR, fd)12 has the following properties:  Maximum value of I X(TR ,fd) I2 = Ix(O, 0) l2 = (2E)2 (1 1.50)  I x(- TR , -fd) l2 = I X(~R , fd) I (1 1.5 1)  The first equation given above, Eq.
(1 l.SO), states that the maximum value of the ambigu-  ity function occurs at the origin and its value is (2E)2, where E is the energy contained in the  echo signal.
Equation (1 1.51) is a symmetry relation.
Equations (1 1.52) and (1 1.53) describe  the behavior of the ambiguity function on the time-delay axis and the frequency axis, respec-  tively.
Along the TR axis the function x(TR ,fd) is the autocorrelation function of the modula-  tion u(t), and along the f, axis it is proportional to the spectrum of u2(r).
Equation (1 1.54)  states that the total volume under the ambiguity function is a constant equal to (2E)2.
 Ideal ambiguity diagram If there were no theoretical restrictions, the ideal ambiguity diagram  would consist of a single peak of infinitesimal 'thickness at the origin and be zero everywhere  else, as shown in Fig.
11.7.
The single spike eliminates any ambiguities, and its infinitesimal  412INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS complex-modulation function whosemagnitude Iu(e) 1istheenvelope oftherealsignal.andfo isthecarrierfrequency.
Thereceived echosignalisassumed tobethesameasthetransmitted signalexceptforthetimedelayToandadoppler frequency shiftfd'Thus (11.47) (Thechangeofamplitude oftheechosignalisignoredhere.)Withthesedefinitions theoutput ofthematched filteris et) Output=fu(e-To)ej27tUo+fdHI-To)[u(e -T~)ej2nJo(I-Till]* de -et) =fet)u(e-To)u*(e-T~)ej27tUo"'fdHI-To) e-j2nfo(I-TR) de -et) .
J(11.48) Itiscustomary tosetTo=0andfo=0,andtodefineTo-TR= -TR=TR.Theoutputof thematched filteristhen X(TR,fd)=fet)u(e)u*(e+TR)ei2xfdl de-et)(11.49) (11.54)InthisformapositiveTRindicates atargetbeyondthereference delayTo,andapositivefJ indicates anincoming target.l3Thesquared magnitude Ix(TR,fd)12iscalledtheambiguicy function anditsplotistheambiguity diagram.
Theambiguity diagram hasbeenusedtoassesstheproperties ofthetransmitted waveform asregardsitstargetresolution, measurement accuracy, ambiguity, andresponse to clutter.
Properties oftheambiguity diagram.
Thefunction IX(TR,fd)12hasthefollowing properties: Maximum valueofIX(TR,fd)12=IX(O,0)12=(2£)2 (11.50) IX(-T R,-!d) 12=Ix(TR,fd) 12(11.51) Ix(TR,0)12=Ifu(t)u*(e+TR)dtl2 (11.52) Ix(O,fd) 12=Ifu2(t)el2J<fdldt12 (11.53) IfIx(TR,1d)12dTRdfd=(2£)2 Thefirstequation givenabove,Eq.(11.50),statesthatthemaximum valueoftheambigu­ ityfunction occursattheoriginanditsvalueis(2£)2,where£istheenergycontained inthe echosignal.Equation (11.51)isasymmetry relation.
Equations (11.52)and(11.53)describe thebehavior oftheambiguity function onthetime-delay axisandthefrequency axis,respec­ tively.AlongtheTRaxisthefunction X(TR,fd)istheautocorrelation function ofthemodula­ tionu(t),andalongthe!daxisitisproportional tothespectrum ofu2(t).Equation (11.54) statesthatthetotalvolumeundertheambiguity function isaconstant equalto(2E)2.
Idealambiguity diagram.Iftherewerenotheoretical restrictions, theidealambiguity diagram wouldconsistofasinglepeakofinfinitesimal thickness attheoriginandbezeroeverywhere else,asshowninFig.11.7.Thesinglespikeeliminates anyambiguities, anditsinfinitesimal thickriess at the origiri perniits the frequency and the echo delay time to be determined  sirnultarieously to as high a degree of accuracy as desired.
It would also permit the resolution  / of two targets no matter how close together they were on the ambiguity diagram.
Naturally, it  is not surprising that such a desirable ambiguity diagram is not possible.
The fundamental  properties of the arribiguity function prohibit this type of idealized behavior.
The two chief  restrictions are that the rnaxinium height of the IX I2 function be (2~)~ and that the volume  under the surface be finite and equal (2E)2.
Therefore the peak at the origin is of fixed height  and the function encloses a fixed volume.
A reasonable approximation to the ideal ambiguity  diagram might appear as in Fig.
1 1.8.
This waveform does not result in ambiguities since there  is only one peak, but the single peak might be too broad to satisfy the requirements of  accuracy and resolution.
The peak might be narrowed, but in order to conserve the volume  under its surface.
the function rnust be raised elsewhere.
If the peak is made too narrow, the  requirenient for a constant volume might cause peaks to form at regions of the ambiguity  diagram other than the origin and give rise to ambiguities.
Th~s the requirements for accuracy  arid anlbiguity niay not always be possible to satisfy simul~aneously.
 r = signal durotion  B = signal bandwidth Figure 11.8 An approximation to the ideal ambiguity  diagram, taking account the restrictions imposed by the  requirement for a fixed value of (2E)2 at the origin and  a constant volume enclosed by the surface.
 EXTRACTION OFINFORMATION ANDWAVEFORM DESIGN413 I'i~urt·11.7Itleal,butunattainable, amhiguity diagram.
thickness attheongmpermits thefrequency andtheechodelaytimetobedetermined simultaneously toashighadegreeofaccuracy asdesired.Itwouldalsopermittheresolution joftwotargetsnomatterhowclosetogether theywereontheambiguity diagram.
Naturally, it isnotsurprising thatsuchadesirable ambiguity diagram isnotpossible.
Thefundamental properties oftheambiguity function prohibit thistypeofidealized behavior.
Thetwochief restrictions arethatthemaximum heightofthe IX12function be(2£)2andthatthevolume underthesurfacebefiniteandequal(2£)2.Therefore thepeakattheoriginisoffixedheight andthefunction encloses afixedvolume.
Areasonable approximation totheidealambiguity diagram mightappearasinFig.11.8.Thiswaveform doesnotresultinambiguities sincethere isonlyonepeak,butthesinglepeakmightbetoobroadtosatisfytherequirements of accuracy andresolution.
Thepeakmightbenarrowed, butinordertoconserve thevolume underitssurface.
thefunction mustberaisedelsewhere.
Ifthepeakismadetoonarrow, the requirement foraconstant volume mightcausepeakstoformatregionsoftheambiguity diagram otherthantheoriginandgiverisetoambiguities.
Thl.;Stherequirements foraccuracy andambiguity maynotalwaysbepossible tosatisfysimultaneously.
r=signalduration 8=signalbandwidthFigure11.8Anapproximation totheidealambiguity diagram, takingaccounttherestrictions imposed bythe requirement forafixedvalueof(2E)2attheoriginand aconstant volumeenclosed bytheI'lI2surface. The ambiguity diagram in three dimensions may be likened to a box of sand.
The total  amount of sand in the box is fixed and corresponds to a fixed signal energy.
No sand can be  added, and none can be removed.
The sand may be piled up at the center (origin) to as narrow  a pile as one would like, but its height can be no greater than a fixed amount (2E)2.
If the sand  in the center is in too narrow a pile, the sand which remains might find itself in one or more  additional piles, perhaps as big as the one at the center.
 The optimum waveform is one which has the desired ambiguity diagram for a given  amount of" sand " (energy).
The usual pulse radar or the usi~al CW radar, as we shall see, does  not result in an ideal'diagram.
To produce an ambiguity diagram such as that shown in  Fig.
11.8, the transmissions must be noiselike.
 The synthesis of the waveform required to satisfy the requirements of accuracy, ambigu-  ity, and resolution as determined by the ambiguity diagram is a difficult task.
The usual design J procedure is to compute the ambiguity diagram for the more common waveforms and to  observe its behavior.
Because of the limitations of synthesis, the ambiguity diagram has been  more a measure of the suitability of a selected waveform than a means of finding the optimum  waveform.
 Single pulse of sine wave.
The ambiguity diagram for a single rectangular pulse of sine wave is  shown in Fig.
11.9.
Contours for constant values of doppler frequency shift (velocity) are  shown in Fig.
11.9~.
The contour for zero velocity is triangular in shape and represents the  autocorrelation function of a rectangular pulse such as would be predicted from Eq.
(1 1.52).
 Contours for fixed values of time delay are shown in Fig.
11.9b.
The center contour corre-  sponding to TR = 0 is the spectrum of a rectangular pulse [Eq.
(1 1.53)].
The composite three-  dimensional ambiguity surface is shown in Fig.
11.9~.
 414INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS Theambiguity diagram inthreedimensions maybelikenedtoaboxofsand.Thetotal amount ofsandintheboxisfixedandcorresponds toafixedsignalenergy.Nosandcanbe added,andnonecanberemoved.
Thesandmaybepiledupatthecenter(origin)toasnarrow apileasonewouldlike,butitsheightcanbenogreaterthanafixedamount(2£)2.Irthesand inthecenterisintoonarrowapile,thesandwhichremains mightfinditselfinoneormore additional piles,perhaps asbigastheoneatthecenter.
Theoptimum waveform isonewhichhasthedesiredambiguity diagram foragiven amountof"sand"(energy).
TheusualpulseradarortheusualCWradar,asweshallsee,does notresultinanideal'diagram.
Toproduce anambiguity diagram suchasthatshownin Fig.11.8,thetransmissions mustbenoiselike.
Thesynthesis ofthewaveform required tosatisfytherequirements ofaccuracy, ambigu­ ity,andresolution asdetermined bytheambiguity diagram isadifficult task.Theusualdesign procedure istocompute theambiguity diagram forthemorecommon wav'eforms andto observe itsbehavior.
Because ofthelimitations ofsynthesis, theambiguity diagram hasbeen moreameasure ofthesuitability ofaselected waveform thanameansoffindingtheoptimum waveform.
Singlepulseofsinewave.Theambiguity diagram forasinglerectangular pulseofsinewaveis showninFig.11.9.Contours forconstant valuesofdoppler frequency shift(velocity) are showninFig.11.9a.Thecontour forzerovelocity istriangular inshapeandrepresents the autocorrelation function ofarectangular pulsesuchaswouldbepredicted fromEq.(11.52).
Contours forfixedvaluesoftimedelayareshowninFig.11.9b.Thecentercontour corre­ sponding toTR=0isthespectrum ofarectangular pulse[Eq.(11.53)].
Thecomposite three­ dimensional ambiguity surfaceisshowninFig.11.9c. Figure 11.9 Threedimensional plot of the ambiguity diagram for a single rectangular pulse.
(a) Contours  for constant dopppler frequency (velocity); (6) contours for constant time delay (range); (c) composite  surface.
(Courtesy S.
Applebaum and P.
W.
Howells, General Electric Co., Heavy Militmy Electronics Depart-  ment, Syracuse, N.
Y.)  EXTRACTION OFINFORMATION ANDWAVEFORM DESIGN415 Figure11.9Three-dimensional plotoftheambiguity diagram forasinglerectangular pulse.(a)Contours forconstant dopppler frequency (velocity); (b)contours forconstant timedelay(range);(c)composite surface.(Courtesy S.Applebaum andP.W.Howells,GeneralElectricCo.,HeavyMilitaryElectronics Depart­ ment,Syracuse, N.Y.) 416 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  Figure 11.10 Two-dimensional arn-  higuity diagriirn for a single pi~lse of  sine wave.
(a) Long pulse; (h) short  (b) pulse.
 d  It is usually inconvenient to draw a three-dimensional plot of the ambiguity diagram.
For  this reason a two-dimensional plot is often used to convey the salient features.
Figure 11.10 is  an example of the two-dimensional plot of the three-dimensional ambiguity diagram corre-  sponding to the single pulse of Fig.
11.9~.
Shading is used to give an indication of the regions  in which Jx(T,, &)I2 is large (completely shaded areas), regions where Izl2 is small but not  zero (lightly shaded areas), and regions where I x IZ is zero (no shading).
The plot for a single  pulse shows a single elliptically shaped region in which I x IZ is large.
This is what would have  been expected from our previous discussions since a single measurement does not result in  ambiguity if the threshold is chosen properly.
Range error is proportional to the pulse width 7,  while doppler error is proportional to l/r.
Shortening the pulse width improves the range  accuracy, but at the expense of the doppler-velocity accuracy.
Although the shape of the ellipse  can be as thin or as broad as one likes in either axis, the opposite will be true for the other axis.
 The region in the vicinity of the origin cannot be made as small as we wish along both axes  simultaneously without shifting some of the completely shaded region elsewhere in the  diagram.
 By letting 7 become very large (essentially infinite), Fig.
11.10 may also be used to repre-  sent a CW radar.
Similarly, by letting r be very small (infinitesimal), the diagram applies to an  impulse radar.
 Periodic pulse train.
Consider a sinusoid modulated by a train of five pulses, each of width T.
 The pulse-repetition period is T', and the duration of the pulse train is T, (Fig.
11.1 la).
The  ambiguity diagram is represented in Fig.
1 1.1 lb.
With a single pulse the time-delay- and  frequency-measurement accuracies depend on one another and are linked by the pulse width T.
 The periodic train of pulses, however,.does not suffer this limitation.
The time-delay error is  determined by the pulse width 7 as before, but the frequency accuracy is determined by the  total duration of the pulse train.
Thus the time- and frequency-measurement accuracies may  be made independent of one another.
 For the privilege of independently controlling the time and frequency accuracy with a  periodic waveform, additional peaks occur in the ambiguity diagram.
These peaks cause  ambiguities.
The total volume represented by the shaded areas of the ambiguity diagram for  the periodic waveform approximates the total volume of the ambiguity diagram of the single  pulse, assuming that the energy of the two waveforms are the same.
This follows from the  relationship expressed by Eq.
(11.54).
In practice, the radar designer attempts to select the  pulse-repetition period T, so that all targets of interest occur only in the vicinity of the central  peak, all other peaks being far removed from the region occupied by the targets.
The periodic-  pulse waveform is a good one from the point of view of accuracy if the radar application is  416INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS (al (b)Figure11.10Two-dimensional am­ biguitydiagrlim forasinglepulseof sinewave.(a)Longpulse;(0)short pulse.
.} Itisusuallyinconvenient todrawathree-dimensional plotoftheambiguity diagram.
For thisreasonatwo-dimensional plotisoftenusedtoconveythesalientfeatures.
Figure11.10is anexample ofthetwo-dimensional plotofthethree-dimensional ambiguity diagram corre­ sponding tothesinglepulseofFig.11.9c.Shading isusedtogiveanindication oftheregions inwhichIx(TR,14)12islarge(completely shadedareas),regionswhereIx12issmallbutnot zero(lightlyshadedareas),andregionswhere IX12iszero(noshading).
Theplotforasingle pulseshowsasingleelliptically shapedregioninwhich 1X12islarge.Thisiswhatwouldhave beenexpected fromourprevious discussions sinceasinglemeasurement doesnotresullin ambiguity ifthethreshold ischosenproperly.
Rangeerrorisproportional tothepulsewidthr, whiledoppler errorisproportional toI/r.Shortening thepulsewidthimproves therange accuracy, butattheexpenseofthedoppler-velocity accuracy.
Although theshapeoftheellipse canbeasthinorasbroadasonelikesineitheraxis,theopposite willbetruefortheotheraxis.
Theregioninthevicinityoftheorigincannotbemadeassmallaswewishalongbothaxes simultaneously without shifting someofthecompletely shadedregionelsewhere inthe diagram.
Bylettingrbecomeverylarge(essentially infinite), Fig.11.10mayalsobeusedtorepre­ sentaCWradar.Similarly, bylettingrbeverysmall(infinitesimal), thediagram appliestoan impulse radar.
Periodic pulsetrain.Consider asinusoid modulated byatrainoffivepulses,eachofwidthr.
Thepulse-repetition peri09isTp,andtheduration ofthepulsetrainis1d(Fig.1l.l1a).The ambiguity diagram isrepresented inFig.ll.llb.Withasinglepulsethetime-delay- and frequency-measurement accuracies dependononeanotherandarelinkedbythepulsewidthr.
Theperiodic trainofpulses,however,.does notsufferthislimitation.
Thetime-delay erroris determined bythepulsewidthrasbefore,butthefrequency accuracy isdetermined bythe totalduration ofthepulsetrain.Thusthetime-andfrequency-measurement a<:.curacies may bemadeindependent ofoneanother.
Fortheprivilege ofindependently controlling thetimeandfrequency accuracy witha periodic waveform, additional peaksoccurintheambiguity diagram.
Thesepeakscause ambiguities.
Thetotalvolumerepresented bytheshadedareasoftheambiguity diagram for theperiodic waveform approximates thetotalvolumeoftheambiguity diagram ofthesingle pulse,assuming thattheenergyofthetwowaveforms arethesame.Thisfollowsfromthe relationship expressed byEq.(11.54).Inpractice, theradardesigner attempts toselectthe pulse-repetition periodTpsothatalltargetsofinterestoccuronlyinthevicinityofthecentral peak,allotherpeaksbeingfarremoved fromtheregionoccupied bythetargets.Theperiodic­ pulsewaveform isagoodonefromthepointofviewofaccuracy iftheradarapplication is l:X I HAC'I ION 01' INI'URMA'I ION AND WAVE1:ORM DESIGN 417  Figure 11.11 (a) Pulse train con-  sisting of five pulses; (b) ambi-  (b) guity diagram for (a).
 such that it is possible to ignore or eliminate any ambiguities which arise.
The fact that most  .
practical radars employ this type of waveform attests to its usefulness far better than any  ,' theoretical analysis which might be presented here.
It is encouraging, however, when theoreti-  cal considerations substantiate the qualitative, intuitive reasoning upon which most practic~l  engineering decisions must usually be based, for lack of any better criterion.
 C  Single frequency-modulated puke.
Ambiguitie5 may be avoided with a single-pulse waveform  rather than a periodic-pulse waveform.
Although the accuracy of simultaneously measuring  time and frequency with a simple pulse-modulated sinusoid was seen to be limited, it is  possible to obtain simultaneous time and frequency measurements to as high a degree of  accuracy as desired by transmitting a pulse long enough to satisfy the desired frequency  accuracy and one with enough bandwidth to satisfy the time accuracy.
In other words, the  peak at the center of the ambiguity diagram may be narrowed by transmitting a pulse with a  large bandwidth times pulse-width product (large pa).
One method of increasing the bandwidth  of a pulse of duration T is to provide internal modulation.
The ambiguity diagram for a  frequency-modulated pulse is shown in Fig.
11.12.
The waveform is a single pulse of sine wave  whose frequency is decreased linearly from f, + Af /2 to fo - AJ 12 over the duration of the pulse  7'.
where f, is the carrier frequency and Af 2 B is the frequency excursion.
 The ambiguity diagram is elliptical, as for the single pulse of unmodulated sine wave.
 However, the axis of the ellipse is tilted at an angle to both the time and frequency axes.
This  -EXTRACTION OFINFORMATION ANDWAVEFORM DESIGN 417 - -- ---Td-----------------J (11) ; /.
>, 7R // " f~ t+---_2 _T --~~ (b)Figure11.11(a)Pulsetraincon­ sistingoffivepulses;(b)ambi­ guitydiagram for(a).
suchthatitispossible toignoreoreliminate anyambiguities whicharise.Thefactthatmost practical radarsemploythistypeofwaveform atteststoitsusefulness farbetterthanany theoretical analysiswhichmightbepresented here.Itisencouraging, however, whentheoreti­ calconsiderations substantiate thequalitative, intuitive reasoning uponwhichmostpractictll engineering decisions mustusuallybebased,forlackofanybettercriterion.
,.
Singlefrequency-modulated pulse.Ambiguitic'i maybeavoided withasingle-pulse waveform ratherthanaperiodic-pulse waveform.
Although theaccuracy ofsimultaneously measuring timeandfrequency withasimplepulse-modulated sinusoid wasseentobelimited,itis possible toobtainsimuItaneous timeandfrequency measurements toashighadegreeof accuracy asdesiredbytransmitting apuIselongenoughtosatisfythedesiredfrequency accuracy andonewithenoughbandwidth tosatisfythetimeaccuracy.
Inotherwords,the peakatthecenteroftheambiguity diagram maybenarrowed bytransmitting apulsewitha largebandwidth timespulse-width product.{large pa}.Onemethodofincreasing thebandwidth ofapulseofduration Tistoprovide internal modulation.
Theambiguity diagram fora frequency-modulated pulseisshowninFig.11.12.Thewaveform isasinglepulseofsinewave whosefrequency isdecreased linearlyfromJo+I!,.J/2toJo-!1//2overtheduration ofthepulse T.where10isthecarrierfrequency andI!,.J~Bisthefrequency excursion.
Theambiguity diagram iselliptical, asforthesinglepulseofunmodulated sinewave.
However, theaxisoftheellipseistiltedatanangletoboththetimeandfrequency axes.This 418 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  Figure 11.12 Ambiguity diagram for a single frequency-  modulated pulse.
(Also called the chirp pulp-compression  waveform.)  particular waveform is not entirely satisfactory.
The accuracy along either the time axis or the -  frequency axis can be made as good as desired.
However, the accuracy along the ellipse major  axis is relatively poor.
This is a consequence of the fact that both the time delay (range) and the  frequency (doppler) are both determined by measuring a frequency shift.
Thus neither  the range nor the velocity can be determined without knowledge of the other.
 This limitation can be overcome by transmitting a second FM pulse whose slope on the  ambiguity diagram is different from that of Fig.
11.12.
The second modulation might be a  linear frequency modulation which increases, rather than decreases, in frequency.
This is  analogous to the FM-CW radar of Chap.
3, in which the doppler frequency shift is extracted as  well as the range.
It will be recalled that the sawtooth frequency-modulated waveform of the  FM-CW radar was capable of determining the range as long as there was no doppler frequency  shift.
By using a triangular waveform instead of the sawtooth waveform it was possible to  measure both the range and the doppler frequency.
The same technique can be used with the  frequency-modulated pulse radar.
 Classes of ambiguity diagrams.
There are three general classes of ambiguity diagrams,  Fig.
1 1.13.
The knife edge, or ridge, is obtained with a single pulse of sine wave.
Its orientation  is along the time-delay axis for a long pulse, along the frequency axis for a short pulse, or it can  be rotated to any direction in the TR, f, plane by the application of linear frequency modula-  tion.
The bed of spikes in Fig.
11.136 is obtained with a periodic train of pulses.
The internal  structure of each of the major components, illustrated figuratively by the simple arrows,  depends on the waveform of the individual pulses.
The thumbtack ambiguity diagram,  Fig.
11.13c, is obtained with noise or pseudonoise waveforms.
The width of the spike at the  center can be made narrow along the time axis and along the frequency axis by increasing the  bandwidth and pulse duration, respectively.
However, the plateau which surrounds the spike is  more complex than illustrated in the simple sketch.
With real waveforms, the sidelobes in the  plateau region can be higher than might be desired.
Furthermore, the extent of the platform  increases as the spike is made narrower since the total volume of the ambiguity function must  be a constant, as was given'by Eq.
(1 1154).
There can be many variations of these three classes,  as illustrated in Ref.
11.
 I.
 Transmitted waveform and the ambiguity function.
The particular waveform transmitted by a  radar is chosen to.satisfy the requirements for (I) detection, (2) measurement accuracy,  (3) resolution, (4) ambiguity, and (5) clutter rejection.
The ambiguity function and its plot, the  418INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS Figure11.12Ambiguity diagram forasinglefrequency­ modulated pulse.(Alsocalledthechirppu""e-compression waveform.) particular waveform isnotentirelysatisfactory.
Theaccuracy alongeitherthetimeaxisorthe frequency axiscanbemadeasgoodasdesired.
However, theaccuracy alongtheellipsemajor axisisrelatively poor.Thisisaconsequence ofthefactthatboththetimedelay(range)andthe frequency (doppler) arebothdetermined bymeasuring afrequency shift.Thusneither therangenorthevelocity canbedetermined without knowledge oftheother.
Thislimitation canbeovercome bytransmitting asecondFMpulsewhoseslopeonthe ambiguity diagram isdifferent fromthatofFig.11.12.Thesecondmodulation mightbea linearfrequency modulation whichincreases, ratherthandecreases, infrequency.
Thisis analogous totheFM-CW radarofChap.3,inwhichthedopplerfrequency shiftisextracted as wellastherange.Itwillberecalledthatthesawtooth frequency-modulated waveform ofthe FM-CW radarwascapableofdetermining therangeas longastherewasnodopplerfrequency shift.Byusingatriangular waveform insteadofthesawtooth waveform itwaspossible to measure boththerangeandthedoppler frequency.
Thesametechnique canbeusedwiththe frequency-modulated pulseradar.
Classesofambiguity diagrams.
Therearethreegeneral classesofambiguity diagrams, Fig.11.13.Theknifeedge,orridge,isobtained withasinglepulseofsinewave.Itsorientation isalongthetime-delay axisforalongpulse,alongthefrequency axisforashortpulse,oritcan berotatedtoanydirection intheTR,Jdplanebytheapplication oflinearfrequency modula­ tion.ThebedofspikesinFig.11.13bisobtained withaperiodic trainofpulses.TheinternaI structure ofeach ~fthemajorcomponents, illustrated figuratively bythesimplearrows, depends onthewaveform oftheindividual pulses.Thethumbtack ambiguity diagram, Fig.11.13c,isobtained withnoiseorpseudonoise waveforms.
Thewidthofthespikeatthe centercanbemadenarrowalongthetimeaxisandalongthefrequency axisbyincreasing the bandwidth andpulseduration, respectively.
However, theplateauwhichsurrounds thespikeis morecomplex thanillustrated inthesimplesketch.Withrealwaveforms, thesidelobes inthe plateauregioncanbehigherthanmightbedesired.Furthermore, theextentoftheplatform increases asthespikeismadenarrower sincethetotalvolumeoftheambiguity function must beaconstant, aswasgiven'byEq.(1L54).Therecanbemanyvariations ofthesethreeclasses, asillustrated inRef.11.
' Transmitted waveform andtheambiguity function.
Theparticular waveform transmitted bya radarischosento·satisfytherequirements for(1)detection, (2)measurement accuracy, (3)resolution, (4)ambiguity, and(5)clutterrejection.
Theambiguity function anditsplot,the (0) Knife edge (ridqe) (b) Bed of s~ikes  Figure 11.13 Classes of ambiguity diagrams: (a) knife edge, or ridge; (b) bed of spikes,; (c) thumbtack.
 (From G.
).V.
Deley,12 Courtesy McGraw-Hill Book Company.)  ambiguity diagram, may be used to assess qualitatively how well a waveform can achieve these  requirements.
Each of these will be discussed briefly.
 If the receiver is designed as a matched filter for the particular transmitted waveform, the  probability 6f detection is independent of the shape of the waveform and depends only upon  EIN,, the ratio of the total energy E contained in the signal to the noise power per unit  bandwidth.
The requirements for detection do not place any demands on the shape of the  transmitted waveform except (1) that it be possible to achieve with practical radar transmit-  ters, and (2) that it is possible to construct the proper matched filter, or a reasonable approxi-  mation thereto.
The maximum value of the ambiguity function occurs at TR = O,/b = 0 and is  equal to (2~)~.
Thus the value IX(O, 0))' is an indication of the detection capabilities of the  radar.
Since the plot of the ambiguity function is often normalized so that IX(O, 0) l2 = 1, the  ambiguity diagram is seldom used to assess the detection capabilities of the waveform.
 The accuracy with which the range and the velocity can be measured by a particular  waveform depends on the width of the spike, centered at Ifl, 0)12, along the time and the  frequency axes.
The resolution is also related to the width of the central spike, but in order to  resolve two closely spaced targets the central spike must be isolated.
It cannot have any high  peaks nearby that can mask another target close to the desired target.
A waveform that yields  good resolution will also yield good accuracy, but the reverse is not always so.
 EXTHACTION OFINFORMATION ANDWAVEFORM DESIGN 419 (0)Knifeedge(ridge) Ie)Thumblock(b)Bedofspikes Figure11.13Classesofambiguity diagrams: (a)knifeedge,orridge;(b)bedofspikes;(c)thumbtack.
(FromG.W.Deley,12Courtesy McGraw-Hili BookCompany.) ambiguity diagram, maybeusedtoassessqualitatively howweIJawaveform canachievethese requirements.
Eachofthesewillbediscussed briefly.
Ifthereceiverisdesigned asamatched filterfortheparticular transmitted waveform, the probability 6rdetection isindependent oftheshapeofthewaveform anddepends onlyupon E/No,theratioorthetotalenergyEcontained inthesignaltothenoisepowerperunit bandwidth.
Therequirements fordetection donotplaceanydemands ontheshapeofthe transmitted waveform ex.cept(1)thatitbepossible toachievewithpractical radartransmit­ ters,and(2)thatitispossibletoconstruct thepropermatched filter,orareasonable approxi­ mationthereto.Themax.imum valueoftheambiguity function occursatTil=0./4=0andis equalto(2E)2.ThusthevalueIx(O,0)12isanindication ofthedetection capabilities ofthe radar.Sincetheplotoftheambiguity function isortennormalized sothatIx(O,0)12=I,the ambiguity diagram isseldomusedtoassessthedetection capabilities ofthewaveform.
Theaccuracy withwhichtherangeandthevelocitycanbemeasured byaparticular waveform depends onthewidthofthespike,centered atIx(O,0)12,alongthetimeandthe frequency axes.Theresolution isalsorelatedtothewidthofthecentralspike,butinorderto resolvetwocloselyspacedtargetsthecentralspikemustbeisolated.Itcannothaveanyhigh peaksnearbythatcanmaskanothertargetclosetothedesiredtarget.Awaveform thatyields goodresolution willalsoyieldgoodaccuracy, butthereverseisnotalwaysso. A continuous waveform (a single pulse) produces an ambiguity diagram with a single  peak.
A discontinuous waveform can result in peaks in the ambiguity diagram at other values  of TR , fd.
The pulse train (Fig.
11.11 or 11.13h) is an example.
The presence of additional  spikes can lead to ambiguity in the measurement of target parameters.
An ambiguous measure-  ment is one in which there is more than one choice available for the correct value of a  parameter, but only one choice is appropriate.
Thus the correct value is uncertain.
The  ambiguity diagram permits a visual indication of the ambiguities possible with a particular  waveform.
The ambiguity problem is characteristic of a single target, as is the detection and  accuracy requirements of a waveform, whereas resolution is concerned with multiple targets.
 The ambiguity diagram may be used to determine the ability of a waveform to reject  clutter by superimposing on the TR ,fd plane the regions where clutter is found.
If the trans-  mitted waveform is to have good clutter-rejection properties the ambiguity function should  have little or no response in the regions of clutter.
 The problem of synthesizing optimum waveforms based on a desired amb&uity diagram  specified by operational requirements is a difficult one.
The approach to selecting a waveform  with a suitable ambiguity diagram is generally by trial and error rather than by synthesis.
 In summary, this section has considered some of the factors which enter into the selection  of the proper transmitted waveform.
The problem of designing a waveform to achieve detec-  tion may be considered independently of the requirements of accuracy, ambiguity, resolution,  and clutter rejection.
A waveform satisfies the requirements of detection if its energy is  sufficiently large and if the receiver is designed in an optimum manner, such as a matched-filter  receiver.
Waveform shape is important only as it affects the practical design of the matched  filter.
The ability of a particular waveform to satisfy the requirements of accuracy, ambiguity,  resolution, and clutter rejection may be qualitatively determined from an examination of the  ambiguity diagram.
In general, periodic waveforms may be designed to satisfy the require-  ments of accuracy and resolution provided the resulting ambiguities can be tolerated.
A  waveform consisting of a single pulse of sinusoid avoids the ambiguity problem, but the time  delay and frequency cannot simultaneously be measured to as great an accuracy as might be  desired.
However, it is possible to determine simultaneously both the frequency and the time  delay to any degree of accuracy with a transmitted waveform containing a large bandwidth  pulse-width product (large pa product).
The problem of synthesizing optimum waveforms  from an ambiguity diagram specified by operational requirements is a difficult one and is often  approached by trial and error.
 The name ambiguity function for I X(T,, fd) I2 is somewhat misleading since this function  describes more about the waveform than just its ambiguity properties.
Woodwards coined the  name to demonstrate that the total volume under this function is a constant equal to (2~)',  independent of the shape of the transmitted waveform, [Eq.
(1 1.54)].
Thus the total area of  ambiguity, or uncertainty, is the same no matter how (z(TR, fd) I* is distributed over the TR, fd  plane, as illustrated by the sandbox analogy mentioned earlier in this section.
The reader is  advised not to be distracted by trying to understand why this function is described by the  ambiguous use of the term "ambiguity."  11.5 PULSE COMPRESSION  Pulse compression allows a radar to utilize a long pulse to achieve large radiated energy, but  simultaneously to obtain the range resolution of a short pulse.
It accomplishes this by employ-  ing frequency or phase modulation to widen the signal bandwidth.
(Amplitude modulation is  also possible, but is seldom used.) The received signal is processed in a matched filter that  420INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS Acontinuous waveform (asinglepulse)produces anambiguity diagram withasingle peak.Adiscontinuous waveform canresultinpeaksintheambiguity diagram atothervalues ofTR,fd'Thepulsetrain(Fig.11.11orII.J3b)isanexample.
Thepresence ofadditional spikescanleadtoambiguity inthemeasurement oftargetparameters.
Anambiguous measure­ mentisoneinwhichthereismorethanonechoiceavailable forthecorrect valueofa parameter, butonlyonechoiceisappropriate.
Thusthecorrect valueisuncertain.
The ambiguity diagram permits avisualindication oftheambiguities possible withaparticular waveform.
Theambiguity problem ischaracteristic ofasingletarget,asisthedetection and accuracy requirements ofawaverorm, whereas resolution isconcerned withmultiple targets.
Theambiguity diagram maybeusedtodetermine theabilityofawaveform toreject clutterbysuperimposing ontheTR,fdplanetheregions whereclutterisfound.Ifthetrans­ mittedwaveform istohavegoodclutter-rejection properties theambiguity function should havelittleornoresponse intheregionsofclutter.
Theproblem ofsynthesizing optimum waveforms basedonadesired amb~uity diagram specified byoperational requirements isadifficult one.Theapproach toselecting awaveform withasuitable ambiguity diagram isgenerally bytrialanderrorratherthanbysynthesis.
Insummary, thissectionhasconsidered someofthefactorswhichenterintotheselection ofthepropertransmitted waveform.
Theproblem ofdesigning awaveform toachievedetec­ tionmaybeconsidered independently oftherequirements ofaccuracy, ambiguity, resolution, andclutterrejection.
Awaveform satisfies therequirements ofdetection ifitsenergyis sufficiently largeandifthereceiver isdesigned inanoptimum manner, suchasamatched-filter receiver.
Waveform shapeisimportant onlyasitaffectsthepractical designofthematched filter.Theabilityofaparticular waveform tosatisfytherequirements ofaccuracy, ambiguity, resolution, andclutterrejection maybequalitatively determined fromanexamination ofthe ambiguity diagram.
Ingeneral, periodic waveforms maybedesigned tosatisfytherequire­ mentsofaccuracy andresolution provided theresulting ambiguities canbetolerated.
A waveform consisting ofasinglepulseofsinusoid avoidstheambiguity problem, butthetime delayandfrequency cannotsimultaneously bemeasured toasgreatanaccuracy asmight ~e desired.
However, itispossible todetermine simultaneously boththefrequency andthetime delaytoanydegreeofaccuracy withatransmitted waveform containing alargebandwidth pulse-width product (largepcx.product).
Theproblem ofsynthesizing optimum waveforms fromanambiguity diagram specified byoperational requirements isadifficultoneandisoften approached bytrialanderror.
Thenameambiguity function forIX(TR,fd)12issomewhat misleading sincethisfun,::tion describes moreaboutthewaveform thanjustitsambiguity properties.
Woodwardscoinedthe nametodemonstrate thatthetotalvolume underthisfunction isaconstant equalto(2E)2, independent oftheshapeofthetransmitted waveform, [Eq.(11.54)].
Thusthetotalareaof ambiguity, oruncertainty, isthesamenomatterhow'1X(TR,fd)12isdistributed overtheTR,fd plane,asillustrated bythesandbox analogy mentioned earlierinthissection.
Thereaderis advised nottobedistracted bytryingtounderstand whythisfunction isdescribed bythe ambiguous useoftheterm"ambiguity." 11.5PULSE COMPRESSION Pulsecompression allowsaradartoutilizealongpulsetoachieve largeradiated energy,but simultaneously toobtaintherangeresolution ofashortpulse.Itaccomplishes thisbyemploy­ ingfrequency orphasemodulation towidenthesignalbandwidth.
(Amplitude modulation is 'alsopossible, butisseldom used.)Thereceived signalisprocessed inamatched filterthat EXTRACTION OF INFORMATlON AND WAVEFORM DESIGN 421  conlpresses the lor~g pulse to a duration 1/8, where B is the tuodulated-pulse spectral band-  width.
Pulse compression is attractive when the peak power required of a short-pulse radar  cannol be achieved with practical transnlitters.
 Application of short pulse to radar.
A conventional short-pulse radar may be desired for the  following purposes:  Rarlge resolurior~.
It is usually easier to separate multiple targets in the range coordinate than  in angle.
 Rarrge accttracy.
If a radar is capable of good range-resolution it is also capable of good range  accuracy.
 ('lrtrrer retirccrior~.
A short pulse increases the target-to-clutter ratio by reducing the clutter  contained within the resolution cell with which the target competes.
 GIirtt retluctiort.
In a tracking radar, the angle and range errors introduced by a finite size target  are reduced with increased range-resolution since it permits individual scattering centers  to be resolved.
 hftrlripatlt resoluriort.
Sufficient range-resolution permits the separation of the desired target  echo from echoes that arrive via scattering from longer paths, or multipath.
 .4.linittlrttri range.
A short pulse allows the radar to operate with a short minimum range.
 7hryef classijicario~t.
The characteristic echo signal from a distributed target when observed  by a short pulse can be used to recognize one class of target from another.
 ECCM.
A short-pulse radar can negate the operation of certain electronic countermeasures  such as range-gate stealers and repeater jammers, if the response time of the ECM is  greater than the radar pulse duration.
The wide bandwidth of the short-pulse radar also  has some advantage against noise jammers.
 Doppler tolerartce.
With a single short pulse, the doppler frequency shift will be small  compared to the receiver bandwidth so that only one matched-filter is needed for detec-  tion, rather than a bank of matched filters with each filter tuned for a different doppler  shift.
 A short-pulse radar is not without its disadvantages.
It requires large bandwidth with the  possibility for interference to other users of the band.
The shorter the pulse the more informa-  tion there is available from the radar, and therefore the greater will be the demands on the  information processing and display.
In some high-resolution radars the number of resolution  cells might 6e greater than the capability of conventional displays to present the information  without overlap, so that a collapsing loss can result.
The wide bandwidth might also mean less  dynamic range in some radar designs.
If the radar transmitter is peak-power limited, the  shorter the pulse the less the energy transmitted.
This has resulted in short-pulse radars  i~sually being limited in range.
 Pulse co~npression is a method for achieving most of the benefits of a short pulse while  keeping within the practical constraints of the peakrpower limitation.
It is usually a suitable  substitute for the short-pulse waveform except when a long minimum range might be a problem  or when maximum immunity to repeater ECM isdesired.
Pulse compression radars, in addition  to overcoming the peak-power limitations, have an EMC (Electromagnetic Compatability)  advantage in that they can be made more tolerant to mutual interference.
This is achieved by  allowing each pulse-compression radar that operates within a given band to have its own  characteristic modulation and its own particular matched filter.
The pulse-compression radar,  although widely used as a substitute for a short-pulse radar, has some limitations of its own,  as will be discussed later in this section.
 EXTRACTION OFINFORMATION ANDWAVEFORM DESIGN421 compresses thelongpulsetoaduration 11H,whereBisthemodulated-pulse spectral band­ width.Pulsecompression isattractive whenthepeakpowerrequired ofashort-pulse radar cannotbeachieved withpractical transmitters.
Application ofshortpulsetoradar.Aconventional short-pulse radarmaybedesiredforthe following purposes: Rallge resolutioll.
Itisusuallyeasiertoseparate multiple targetsintherangecoordinate than inangle.
Rallgeaccuracy.
Ifaradariscapableofgoodrange-resolution itisalsocapableofgoodrange accuracy.
Cllittcrreductioll.
Ashortpulseincreases thetarget-to-clutter ratiobyreducing theclutter contained withintheresolution cellwithwhichthetargetcompetes.
Glilltreduction.
In atrackingradar,theangleandrangeerrorsintroduced byafinitesizetarget arereduced withincreased range-resolution sinceitpermitsindividual scattering centers toberesolved.
Multipatl1 resolution.
Sufficient range-resolution permitstheseparation ofthedesiredtarget echofromechoesthatarriveviascattering fromlongerpaths,ormultipath.
M;1I;I1lUI1lrallge.Ashortpulseallowstheradartooperatewithashortminimum range.
Targetclassification.
Thecharacteristic echosignalfromadistributed targetwhenobserved byashortpulsecanbeusedtorecognize oneclassoftargetfromanother.
ECCM.
1\short-pulse radarcannegatetheoperation ofcertainelectronic countermeasures suchasrange-gate stealersandrepeater jammers, iftheresponse timeoftheECMis greaterthantheradarpulseduration.
Thewidebandwidth oftheshort-pulse radaralso hassomeadvantage againstnoisejammers.
Doppler lolerance.
Withasingleshortpulse,thedoppler frequency shiftwillbesmall compared tothereceiver bandwidth sothatonlyonematched-filter isneededfordetec­ tion.ratherthanabankofmatched filterswitheachfiltertunedforadifferent doppler shift.
Ashort-pulse radarisnotwithoutitsdisadvantages.
Itrequires largebandwidth withthe possibility forinterference tootherusersoftheband.Theshorterthepulsethemoreinforma­ tionthereisavailable fromtheradar,andtherefore thegreaterwillbethedemands onthe information processing anddisplay.Insomehigh-resolution radarsthenumberofresolution cellsmight"egreaterthanthecapability ofconventional displays topresenttheinformation withoutoverlap, sothatacollapsing losscanresult.Thewidebandwidth mightalsomeanless dynamic rangeinsomeradardesigns.Iftheradartransmitter ispeak-power limited, the shorterthepulsethelesstheenergytransmitted.
Thishasresulted inshort-pulse radars llsuallybeinglimitedinrange.
Pulsecompression isamethodforachieving mostofthebenefitsofashortpulsewhile keepingwithinthepractical constraints ofthepeak~power limitation.
Itisusuallyasuitable substitute fortheshort-pulse waveform exceptwhenalongminimum rangemightbeaproblem orwhenmaximum immunity torepeaterECMisdesired.Pulsecompression radars,inaddition toovercoming thepeak-power limitations, haveanEMC(Electromagnetic Compatability) advantage inthattheycanbemademoretolerant tomutualinterference.
Thisisachieved by allowing eachpulse-compression radarthatoperates withinagivenbandtohaveitsown characteristic modulation anditsownparticular matched filter.Thepulse-compression radar, although widelyusedasasubstitute forashort-pulse radar,hassomelimitations ofitsown, aswillbediscussed laterinthissection. 422 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  There are at least two ways of describing the concept of a pulse-compression radar.
One is  based on an approach similar to that of the ambiguity function of Sec.
11.4.
A modulation of  some form is applied to the transmitted waveform and its response after passing through the  matched filter is examined.
For example, the frequency-niodulated pulse waveform whose  ambiguity diagram was shown in Fig.
1 1.12 is the widely used calrirp pulse-compression  waveform.
The other approach is to consider the modi~lation applied to a long pulse as  providing distinctive marks over the duration of the pulse.
For instance, the changing  frequency of a linearly frequency-modulated pulse is distributed along the pulse and thus  identifies each segment of the pulse.
By passing this modulated pulse through a delay line  whose delay time is a function of the frequency, each part of the pulse experiences a different  time delay so that it is possible to have the trailing edge of the pulse speeded up and the leading  edge slowed down so as to effect a time compression of the pulse.
 The pttlse co~npres.sion rario is a measure of the degree to which the pulse is co.mpressed.
It  is defined as the ratio of the uncompressed pulse width to the compressed pulse tidth, or the  product of the pulse spectral bandwidth B and the uncompressed pulse w~dth T.
Generally,  BT $ I.
The pulse compression ratio might be as small as 10 (13 is a more typical lower value)  or as large as 10' or greater.
Values from 100 to 300 might be considered as more ~ypical.
 There are many types of modulations used for pulse compression, but two that have seen wide  application are the linear frequency modulation and the phase-coded ptrlse.
 C-> pulse compression.
The basic concept of the linear frequency modulated (FM)  sinpression radar was described by R.
H.
Dicke, in a patent filed in 1945." Figure  11.14, which is derived from Dicke's patent, shows the block diagram of such a radar.
In this  version of a pulse-compression radar the transmitter is frequency modulated and the receiver  contains a pulse-compression filter (which is identical to a matched filter).
The transmitted  waveform consists ,of a rectangular pulse of constant amplitude A and of duration T  (Fig.
11.15a).
The frequency increases linearly from f, to f2 over the duration of the pulse,  Fig.
11.15b.
(Alternatively, the frequency could be linearly decreased with time rather than  increased.) The time waveform of the signal described by Fig.
11.15a and b is shown sche-  matically in Fig.
11.15~.
On reception, the frequency-modulated echo is passed through the  pulse-compression filter, which is designed so that the velocity of propagation through the  filter is proportional to frequency.
When the pulse-compression filter is thought of as a  dispersive delay line, its action can be described as speeding up the higher frequencies at the  trailing edge of the pulse relative to the lower frequencies at the leading edge so as to compress  the pulse to a width 1/B, where B = f2 - f, (Fig.
1 1.15d).
When the pulse compression filter is  considered as a matched filter, the output (neglecting noise) is the autocorrelation function of  Antenna  t To  IF Pulse  Mixer -+- amplifier - compression +  filter amplifier I :  Figure 11.14 Block diagram of an FM pulse compression radar.
I Frequency  modulator TR +  L Transmitter -  422INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS Thereareatleasttwowaysofdescribing theconcept ofapulse-compression radar.Oneis basedonanapproach similartothatoftheambiguity function ofSec.11.4.Amodulation of someformisapplied tothetransmitted waveform anditsresponse afterpassingthrough the matched filterisexamined.
Forexample, thefrequency-modulated pulsewaveform whose ambiguity diagram wasshown inFig.11.12isthewidelylIsedchirppulse-compression waveform.
Theotherapproach istoconsider themodulation applied toalongpulseas providing distinctive marksovertheduration ofthepulse.Forinstance, thechanging frequency ofalinearly frequency-modulated pulseisdistributed alongthepulseandthus identifies eachsegment ofthepulse.Bypassing thismodulated pulsethrough adelayline whosedelaytimeisafunction ofthefrequency, eachpartofthepulseexperiences adifferent timedelaysothatitispossible tohavethetrailingedgeofthepulsespeeded upandtheleading edgesloweddownsoastoeffectatimecompression ofthepulse.
Thepulsecompression ratioisameasure ofthedegreetowhichthepulseiscompressed.
It isdefined astheratiooftheuncompressed pulsewidthtothecompressed pulse\tidth,orthe product ofthepulsespectral bandwidth Bandtheuncompressed pulsewidthT.Generally, BT}>I.Thepulsecompression ratiomightbeassmallas10(13isamoretypicallowervalue) oraslargeaslOsorgreater, Valuesfrom100to300mightbeconsider~d asmoretypical.
Therearemanytypesofmodulations usedforpulsecompression, buttwothathaveseenwide application arethelinearfrequency modulation andthephase-coded pl/Ise.
~~~ pulsecompression.
Thebasic'concept ofthelinearfrequency modulated (FM) p~e---c6mpression radarwasdescribed byR.H.Dicke,inapatentfiledin1945.14Figure 11.14,whichisderived fromDicke'spatent,showstheblockdiagram ofsucharadar.Inthis versionofapulse-compression radarthetransmitter isfrequency modulated andthereceiver contains apulse-compression filter(whichisidentical toamatched filter).Thetransmitted waveform consistsofarectangular pulseofconstant amplitude Aandofduration T (Fig.II.15a).
Thefrequency increases linearly fromfltof2overtheduration ofthepulse, Fig.11.l5b.(Alternatively, thefrequency couldbelinearly decreased withtimeratherthan increased.) Thetimewaveform ofthesignaldescribed byFig.11.15aandbisshownsche­ matically inFig.I1.l5c.Onreception, thefrequency-modulated echoispassedthrough the pulse-compression filter,whichisdesigned sothatthevelocity ofpropagation through the filterisproportional tofrequency ..Whenthepulse-compression filteristhought ofasa dispersive delayline,itsactioncanbedescribed asspeeding upthehigherfrequencies atthe trailingedgeofthepulserelativetothelowerfrequencies attheleadingedgesoastocompress thepulsetoawidth1/B,whereB=f2-f.(Fig.11.l5d).Whenthepulsecompression filteris considered asamatched filter,theoutput(neglecting noise)istheautocorrelation function of Antenna Frequency modulator Pulse compression fillerTo indicator ~--~ Figure11.14Blockdiagram ofanFMpulsecompression radar. EX TRACTION OF INFORMATION AND WAVEFORM DESIGN 423  Figure 11.15 Linear FM pulse com-  C pression.
(a) Transmitted waveform;  al 3 (b) frequency of the transmitted u a waveform; (c) representation of the  time waveform; (d) output of the  1 pulse-compression filter; (e) same as *Time  (1 t2 (6) but with decreasing frequency  (el modulation.
 the modulated pulse, which is proportional to (sin nBt)/nBt.15 The peak power of the pulse is  increased by the pulse compression ratio BT after passage through the filter.
 The FM waveform in the block diagram of Fig.
11.14 is generated by directly modulating  the high-power transmitter.
It is not always convenient to directly modulate a transmitter in  this manner.
Alternatively, the waveform may be generated at a low-power level and amplified  in a power amplifier.
This is the more usual procedure.
The waveform may be generated by a  number of means including a voitage-controlled osciIIator whose frequency is made to vary  EXTRACTION OFINFORMATION ANDWAVEFORM DESIGN423 (a) :--(? u, OJ '-'o OJ ,~:/1 11I I 1 I I I- LI .LI--------'Jo-)o Time I, 12 (b) ,------- Time (e) -1C-- 1 BI _L_~ _ I------L.-I ----------ll------~)o Timet1 t2 (e)FiguretUSLinearFMpulsecom­ pression.(a)Transmitted waveform; (b)frequency ofthetransmitted waveform; (c)representation ofthe timewaveform; (d)outputofthe pulse-compression filter;(e)sameas (b)butwithdecreasing frequency modulation.
themodulated pulse,whichisproportional to(sinnBt}/nBt.
15Thepeakpowerofthepulseis increased bythepulsecompression ratioBTafterpassagethrough thefilter.
TheFMwaveform intheblockdiagram ofFig.11.14isgenerated bydirectlymodulating thehigh-power transmitter.
Itisnotalwaysconvenient todirectlymodulate atransmitter in thismanner.
Alternatively, thewaveform maybegenerated atalow-power levelandamplified inapoweramplifier.
Thisisthemoreusualprocedure.
Thewaveform maybegenerated bya number ofmeansincluding avoltage-controlled oscillator whosefrequency ismadetovary 424 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  with an applied voltage; the so-called serrasoiti motii~lator'~ which generates a qilatlratic  waveform and compares this with a repetitive sawtooth wave to generate pulses that have a t2  variation in spacing which are filtered to form a linear-FM waveform; a tapped delay-line with  nonuniform tap spacings determined by the positive-going zero crossings of the desired linear-  FM waveform, followed by a filter to form the output waveform; a synthesizer1' which  combines a staircase frequency waveform with the average desired slope, and a sawtooth  frequency waveform which fills-in the steps with a short linear FM; or by digital means in  which an algorithm performs a double integration to produce a phase at the output of the  generator which varies as the square of time, as required for a linear FM.I8 The digital  generator has the advantage of flexibility in the selection of bandwidth and time duration, as  well as good stability and low residual generation errors.
The above are sometimes called  actiue methods for generating waveforms.
 The linear FM waveform may also be generated by passitle methods such as by exciting a 3 dispersive delay line with an impulse.
The frequency-response function of the dispersive delay  line used for generating the transmitted waveform is the conjugate of that of the pulse-  compression filter.
In the special case of the linear FM waveform the same dispersive delay line  that generates the transmitted waveform may be used as the receiver matched filter if the  received waveform is mixed with an LO whose frequency is greater than that of the received  signal.
This results in a time inversion (it changes s(t) to s(- t)) by converting an increasing FM  to a decreasing FM, or vice versa.
 Dispersive delay lines.
There have been a number of devices used as dispersive delay lines, or  pulse-compression filters, for linear FM waveforms.16 They may be classed as ultrasonic,  electromagnetic, or digital.
Ultrasonic delay lines include those of aluminum or steel strip,  piezoelectric materials such as quartz with propagation taking place through the bulk (or  volume) of the material, piezoelectric materials with the propagation taking place along the  surface (surface acoustic wave), and YIG (yttrium-iron-garnet) crystals.
The all-pass, time  delay using bridged-T networks with either lumped-constant circuit elements or stripline; the  waveguide operated near its cutoff frequency; and the tapered folded-tape meander line are  examples of electromagnetic dispersive delay lines suitable for linear-FM pulse compression.
 The charge-coupled device has also been considered for application in pulse compre~sion.'~  Each of these delays lines has different characteristics and preferred regions of operation as  regards bandwidth and pulse duration.I6 Only the surface acoustic wave (SAW) device will be  described here as an illustration of a typical dispersive delay line suitable for radar application.20  The surface-acoustic-wave delay line, shown schematically in Fig.
11.16, consists of a  piezoelectric substrate such as a thin slice of quartz or lithium niobate with input ant1 oi11pt11  interdigital transducers (IDT) arranged on the surface.
The design of the II)T determines the  impulse response of the SAW delay line.
Efficient electric-to-acoustic coupling occurs when the  ~ihhl~ polished (  piezo-electric  surface Figure 11.16 Schematic of a simple surface  acoustic wave (SAW) delay line.
(From  Brisrol, l2 Courtesy Proc.
1 EEE.)  424INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS withanapplied voltage; theso-called serrasoid modulator 16whichgenerates aquadratic waveform andcompares thiswitharepetitive sawtooth wavetogenerate pulsesthathaveat1 variation inspacingwhicharefilteredtoformalinear-FM waveform; atappeddelay-line with nonuniform tapspa~ings determined bythe positive-going zerocrossings ofthedesiredlinear­ FMwaveform, followed byafiltertoformtheoutputwaveform; asynthesizer 17which combines astaircase frequency waveform withtheaverage desiredslope,andasawtooth frequency waveform whichfills-inthestepswithashortlinearFM;orbydigitalmeansin whichanalgorithm performs adoubleintegration toproduce aphaseattheoutputofthe generator whichvariesasthesquareoftime,asrequired foralinearFM.18Thedigital generator hastheadvantage offlexibility intheselection ofbandwidth andtimeduration, as wellasgoodstability andlowresidual generation errors.Theabovearesometimes called activemethods forgenerating waveforms.
ThelinearFMwaveform mayalsobegenerated bypassivemethods suchasbyexcitinga dispersive delaylinewithanimpulse.
Thefrequency-response function ofthedilpersive delay lineusedforgenerating thetransmitted waveform istheconjugate ofthatofthepulse­ compression filter.InthespecialcaseofthelinearFMwaveform thesamedispersive delayline thatgenerates thetransmitted waveform maybeusedasthereceiver matched filterifthe received waveform ismixedwithanLOwhosefrequency isgreaterthanthatofthereceived signal.Thisresultsinatimeinversion (itchangess(t)tos(-t))byconverting anincreasing FM toadecreasing FM,orviceversa.
Dispersive delaylines.Therehavebeenanumberofdevicesusedasdispersive delaylines,or pulse-compression filters,forlinearFMwaveforms.16Theymaybeclassedasultrasonic, electromagnetic, ordigital.Ultrasonic delaylinesincludethoseofaluminum orsteelstrip, piezoelectric materials suchasquartzwithpropagation takingplacethrough thebulk(or volume) ofthematerial, piezoelectric materials withthepropagation takingplacealongthe surface(surface acoustic wave),andYIG(yttrium-iron-garnet) crystals.
Theall-pass, time delayusingbridged-T networks witheitherlumped-constant circuitelements orstripline; the waveguide operated nearitscutofffrequency; andthetapered folded-tape meander lineare examples ofelectromagnetic dispersive delaylinessuitable forlinear-FM pulsecompression.
Thecharge-coupled devicehasalsobeenconsidered forapplication inpulsecompression.19 Eachofthesedelayslineshasdifferent characteristics andpreferred regionsofoperation as regardsbandwidth andpulseduration.16Onlythesurfaceacoustic wave(SAW)devicewillbe described hereasanillustration ofatypicaldispersive delaylinesuitableforradarapplicati0n.10 Thesurface-acoustic-wave delayline,shownschematically inFig.11.16,consists ofa piezoelectric substrate suchasathinsliceofquartzorlithiumniobatewithinputandoutput interdigital transducers (IDT)arranged onthesurface.ThedesignoftheIDTdetermines the impulseresponse oftheSAWdelayline.Efficient electric-to-acoustic coupling occurswhenthe.j -' Thermal compression ..
bondedAucontacts Interdlgltol electrode transducers Highlypolished piezo-electric surfaceFigure11.16Schematic ofasimplesurface acoustic wave(SAW)delayline.(From Briscol, 22Courtesy Proc.JEEE.) EX I KAC7'1ON 01: INFORMA? ION AND WAVEFORM DESICiN 425  - ll~lll~lllllll I I I I1 I1 I1 I1 I 1 I 1 I Oulpul 1 *--  Figure 11.17 Three basic forms of  SAW interdigital transducers for  linear FM pulse compression.
(a)  Dispersive delay line with dispersion  designed into one transducer; (h)  dispersion in both transducers, and  (c) a reflective array compressor  (RAC).
(From Maines and Paige,"  courtesy of Proc.
1 EEE.)  comb fingers, or electrodes, of the IDT are spaced one-half the wavelength of the acoustic  signal propagating along the SAW materiaLZ2 Thus the frequency response of the delay line  depends on the periodicity of the electrode spacings.
A dispersive delay line for linear FM  pulse compression is obtained with a variable electrode spacing, as illustrated in Fig.
11.17a or  b.
The duration of the resulting pulse is proportional to the length of the interdigital trans- .
 ducer.
Amplitude shaping can be controlled by varying the overlap of the electrodes, as in  Fig.
11.18.
This is sometimes called apodization.
Weighting of the amplitude, as discussed later  in this section, is sometimes desired so as to reduce the time sidelobes accompanying the  compressed waveform.
 The reflective-array compressor (RAC) form of SAW device, shown schematically in  Fig.
11.17c, is a geometry that provides better performance for large pulse-compression  ratios.22 Shallow grooves etched in the delay path result in SAW reflections to form a delay  that depends on the frequency.
The structure is less sensitive to fabrication tolerances than  conven tionlll transducers.
 A "typical" SAW dispersive delay line developed for linear FM pulse-compression radar  had a bandwidth of 500 Milz and all uncornpressed pulse width.of 0.46 The center  frequency was 1.3 GHz and the compressed pulse width was 3 ns.
Amplitude weighting of the  received signal reduced the higl~est sidelobe to -24 dB instead of - 13.2 dB without weight-  ing.
(The compressed pulse was widened because of the weighting.) The filter package  measured 0.5 by 1.5 by 2.25 in.
The maximum insertion loss was 40 dB.
Other designs have  resulted in pulse widths as long as 100 ps and pulse-compression ratios as high as 10,000.22  The SAW dispersive delay line is one of the more important of the many devices that have  beer] errlployed for pulse-compression radar.
They have been claimed to be simple, low cost,  Figure 11.18 Interdigital transducer (nondispersive) showing  overlap of comb fingers, or electrodes, to provide an amplitude  weighting along the pulse.
 EXTRACTION 01'INFORMATiON ANDWAVEFORM IJESION 425 [)IspersiveIransduccr.+.
Oulpul _.__.-..
/ (0) (b) (c)\ /Figure11.17Threebasicformsof SAWinterdigital transducers for linearFMpulsecompression.
(a) Dispersive delaylinewithdispersion designed intoonetransducer; (b) dispersion inbothtransducers.
and (c)areflective arraycompressor (RAe).(FromMaines andPaige.21 cOllrtes}'ofProc.IEEE.) combfingers,orelectrodes, ofthelOTarespacedone-half thewavelength oftheacoustic signalpropagating alongtheSAWmaterial.22Thusthefrequency response ofthedelayline depends ontheperiodicity oftheelectrode spacings.
Adispersive delaylineforlinearFM pulsecompression isobtained withavariable electrode spacing, asillustrated inFig.11.17aor b.Theduration oftheresulting pulseisproportional tothelengthoftheinterdigital trans­ ducer.Amplitude shaping canbecontrolled byvaryingtheoverlapoftheelectrodes, asin Fig.11.18.Thisissometimes calledapodizatioll.
Weighting oftheamplitude, asdiscussed later inthissection, issometimes desiredsoastoreducethetimesidelobes accompanying the compressed waveform.
Thereflective-array compressor (RAe)formofSAWdevice,shownschematically in Fig.11.17c,isageometry thatprovides betterperformance forlargepulse-compression ratios.22Shallow grooves etchedinthedelaypathresultinSAWreflections toformadelay thatdepends onthefrequency.
Thestructure islesssensitive tofabrication tolerances than convention~l transducers.
A..typical" SAWdispersive delaylinedeveloped forlinearFMpulse-compression radar hadabandwidth of500MHzandalluncompressed pulsewidth'of 0.46ILS.23Thecenter frequency was1.3GHzandthecompressed pulsewidthwas3ns.Amplitude weighting ofthe received signalreduced thehighestsidelobeto-24dBinsteadof-13.2dBwithoutweight­ ing.(Thecompressed pulsewaswidened because oftheweighting.) Thefilterpackage measured 0.5by1.5by2.25in.Themaximum insertion losswas40dB.Otherdesignshave resulted inpulsewidthsaslongas100/lSandpulse-compression ratiosashighas10,000.22 TheSAWdispersive delaylineisoneofthemoreimportant ofthemanydevicesthathave beenemployed forpulse-compression radar.Theyhavebeenclaimed tobesimple,lowcost, I IFigure1I.18Interdigital transducer (nondispersive) showing overlapofcombfingers,orelectrodes, toprovideanamplitude weighting alongthepulse. small size, and highly reproducible in manufacture.
The amplitude weighting to reduce  sidelobes can be integrated directly into the interdigital transducer design.
In addition to the  linear FM, they can bedesigned to operate with nonlinear frequency modulations, phase-coded  pulses, and the burst pulse.
 Time sidelobes and weighting.
The uniform amplitude of the linear FM waveform results in a  compressed pulse shape of the form (sin nBt)/nBr after passage through the matched filter, or  dispersive delay line, where B is the spectral band~idth.~' There are time, or range, sidelobes  to either side of the peak response with the first, and largest, sidelobe - 13.2 dB down from the  peak.
The large sidelobes are often objectionable since a large target might mask nearby, smaller  targets.
Also, near-in sidelobes might at times be mistaken for separate targets.
These sidelobes  can be reduced by amplitude weighting of the received-signal spectrum, just as the spatial  sidelobes of an antenna radiation pattern can be reduced by amplitude weightinj the illumina-  tion across the antenna aperture, as was described in Sec.
7.2.
The same illumination functions  used in antenna design to reduce spatial sidelobes can also be applied to the frequency domain  to reduce the time sidelobes in pulse compression.
A comparison of several types of spectral  weighting functions is shown in Table 1 1.
1.16*2Jb25 The Taylor weighting with n = 8 means the  peaks of the first 7 sidelobes (Ti - 1) are designed to be equal, after which they fall off as Ilt.
 The Dolph-Chebyshev weighting theoretically results in all sidelobes being equal.
It is of  academic interest only, since it is unrealizable.
The Taylor is a practical approximation to the  Dolph-Chebyshev.
A suitable waveform might be the cosine-squared on a pedestal, as in the  Hamming function, for example.
The effect of weighting the received-signal spectrum to lower  the sidelobes also widens the main lobe and reduces the peak signal-to-noise ratio compared  to the unweighted linear FM pulse compression.
This loss is due to the filter not being  matched to the received waveform; that is, the filter is said to be mismatched.
Thus to reduce  the sidelobes to a level of -30 to -40 dB results in a loss in peak signal-to-noise ratio of from  one to two dB.
For many applications the beam broadening and the loss in peak signal-to-  noise ratio due to mismatch are usually tolerated in order to achieve the benefits of the lower  sidelobes.
 Instead of weighting the received-signal spectrum to reduce the time sidelobes, it is  possible, in principle, toachieve the same affect by amplitude-weighting either the envelope of  transmitted FM signal or the received signal.
In the case of linear FM with large pulse-  compression ratio, the amplitude weighting applied to the time waveform is of the same form  as the weighting applied to the frequency spectrum, for the same output respo~se.~'  Amplitude-modulating the transmitted signal is not usually practical in high-power radar  Table 1 1.1 Properties of weighting functions  Peak Mainlobe Sidelobe  sidelobe Loss width decay  Weighting function dB dB (relative) function  Uniform - 13.2 0 1 .O I If  0.33 + 0.66 cosZ (nflB) - 25.7 0.55 1.23 111  cos2 (nf/B) -31.7 1.76 1.65 111'  Taylor (ii = 8) -40 1.14 1.4 1 I lt  Dolph-Chebyshev -40 .....
1.35 I  0.08 + 0.92 cos2 (7EflB) (Hamming) -42.8 1.34 1.50 I/[  R = bandwidth  426INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS smallsize,andhighlyreproducible inmanufacture.
Theamplitude weighting toreduce sidelobes canbeintegrated directly intotheinterdigital transducer design.Inaddition tothe linearFM,theycanbedesigned tooperatewithnonlinear frequency modulations, phase-coded pulses,andtheburstpulse.
Timesidelobes andweighting.
Theuniform amplitude ofthelinearFMwaveform resultsina compressed pulseshapeoftheform(sinnBt)/nBt afterpassage through thematched filter,or dispersive delayline,whereBisthespectral bandwidth.24Therearetime,orrange,sidelobes toeithersideofthepeakresponse withthefirst,andlargest,sidelobe -13.2dBdownfromthe peak.Thelargesidelobes areoftenobjectionable sincealargetargetmightmasknearby,smaller targets.Also,near-insidelobes mightattimesbemistaken forseparate targets.Thesesidelobes canbereduced byamplitude weighting ofthereceived-signal spectrum, justasthespatial sidelobes ofanantenna radiation patterncanbereduced byamplitude weightiflj theillumina­ tionacrosstheantenna aperture, aswasdescribed inSec.7.2.Thesameilluminalion funclions usedinantenna designtoreducespatialsidelobes canalsobeappliedtothefrequency domain toreducethetimesidelobes inpulsecompression.
Acomparison ofseveraltypesofspectraI weighting functions isshowninTableILL16,24.25TheTaylorweighting withiI=8meansthe peaksofthefirst7sidelobes (i1-1)aredesigned tobeequal,afterwhichtheyfallofTaslit.
TheDolph-Chebyshev weighting theoretically resultsinallsidelobes beingequal.Itisof academic interestonly,sinceitisunrealizable.
TheTaylorisapractical approximation tothe Dolph-Chebyshev.
Asuitable waveform mightbethecosine-squared onapedestal, asinthe Hamming function, forexample.
Theeffectofweighting thereceived-signal spectrum tolower thesidelobes alsowidensthemainlobeandreducesthepeaksignal-to-noise ratiocompared totheunweighted linearFMpulsecompression.
Thislossisduetothefilternotbeing matched tothereceived waveform; thatis,thefilterissaidtobemismatched.
Thustoreduce thesidelobes toalevelof-30to-40dBresultsinalossinpeaksignal-to-noise ratiooffrom onetotwodB.Formanyapplications thebeambroadening andthelossinpeaksignal-to­ noiseratioduetomismatch areusuallytolerated inordertoachievethebenefitsofthelower sidelobes.
Instead ofweighting thereceived-signal spectrum toreducethetimesidelobes,itis possible, inprinciple, to·achievethesameaffectbyamplitude-weighting eithertheenvelope of transmitted FMsignalorthereceived signal.InthecaseoflinearFMwithlargepulse­ compression ratio,theamplitude weighting appliedtothetimewaveform isofthesameform astheweighting applied tothefrequency spectrum, forthesameoutput response.24 Amplitude-modulating thetransmitted signalisnotusuallypractical inhigh-power radar Tabletl.tProperties ofweighting functions Peak Mainlobe Sidelobe sidelobe Loss width decay Weighting function dB dB (relative) function Uniform -13.2 0 1.0 IIt 0.33+0.66cos!(nfIB) -25.7 0.55 1.23 III cos!(nIlB) -31.7 1.76 1.65 litJ Taylor(n=8) -40 1.14 1.41 III Dolph-Chebyshev -40 1.35 I 0.08+0.92cos2(nflB)(Hamming) -42.8 1.34 1.50 lit B=bandwidth since most rnicrowave tubes should be operated saturated; i.e., either full-on or off.
Generally,  weighting of the received frequency spectrum has been preferred over either time-weighting  alternative.
 If it were practical to amplitude-weight the transmitted waveform to reduce the time  sidelobes, the receiver can be designed with the appropriate matched filter so that no theoreti-  cal loss in signal-to-noise will result.
This implies that the transrriitted signal energy is the sanie  with or without weighting, as follows from the discussion in Sec.
10.2 of the output signal-to-  noise ratio of a matclied filter.
However, when the transmitter is peak-power limited, it is  preferable to use a constant-amplitude transmitted signal and perform the weighting in the  receiver, in spite of the mismatched filter with its reduction in signal-to-noise ratio.25 In one  transmitting a linear-FM waveform with a gaussian envelope and a matched-filter  receiver to give -40 dB sidelobes resulted in 2.2 dB greater penalty in detection capability  than when a uniforni amplitude is transmitted with Hamming weighting on receive in a  niismatched filter.
 It is possible to achieve low time-sidelobes with uniform-amplitude transmitted wave-  forrris and no theoretical loss in signal-to-noise ratio by means of nonlinear FM, as dis-  cussed later in this section.
 Ilappler-tolerant waveforrn.
If an unknown doppler-frequency shift is experienced when a long  pulse, a noise-rriodulated pulse, or a pulse trait1 is reflected from a niovirig target, a receiver  tuned to the transmitted signal will not accept the echo signal if the doppler shift places the  echo frequency outside the band of the receiver rnatched filter.
That is, the receiver may not be  tuned to the correct frequency.
To circumvent this potential loss of signal, a bank of contig-  uous matched filters must be used to cover the range of expected doppler-frequency shifts.
It  is possible, however, with a suitable transmitted waveform to employ a single matched filter  that will accept doppler-shifted echoes with minimum degradation.
 It has been shown that the waveform which allows a single pulse-compression filter to be  rnatched for all doppler-frequency sfiifts (all target velocities) isZcZ8  The arriplitude A(t) of Eq.
(1 1.55) represents modulation by a rectangular pulse of width T.
 The band occupied by the signal is B, and the carrier frequency is fo.
This expression for the  doppler-talerant waveforrri is difficult to interpret as it stands, but if the natural-log factor is  expanded in a series, Eq.
(1 1.55) becomes  I~B~Z 27~~~t3 s(t) = A(!) cos 2rtfot -t + -- + ...
T 3fo T2  When terrns greater tliari the first two can be neglected (which applies when 2rtBZt3 @ 3fo T2),  Eq.
( 1 1.56) reduces to the classical linear FM waveform.
Thus the linear FM, or chirp, pulse-  con1pression waveform is a pract icol approximation to the theoretical doppler-toleran t  wavefornl.
I>ifTerentiating.
with respect to time, the argument of Eq.
(1 1.55) the frequency of  ttie doppler-tolerant waveform is found to be 2nf T/( f, T - Bt).
Inverting to obtain the  period, it can be seen that the doppler-tolerant waveform is one with, a linear period  ~~todtrlario~i.
 The short-pulse waveform also can tolerate unknown shifts in the doppler frequency  when using a single matched filter.
 EXTRACTION OFINFORMATION ANDWAVEFORM DESIGN427 sincemostmicrowave tubesshouldbeoperated saturated; i.e.,eitherfull-onorofr.Generally, weighting ofthereceived frequency spectrum hasbeenpreferred overeithertime-weighting alternative.
Ifitwerepractical toamplitude-weight thetransmitted waveform toreducethetime sidelohes, thereceiver canbedesigned withtheappropriate matched filtersothatnotheoreti­ callossinsignal-to-noise willresult.Thisimpliesthatthetransmitted signalener.gyisthesame withorwithout weighting, asfollowsfromthediscussion inSec.10.2oftheoutputsignal-to­ noiseratioofamatched filter.However, whenthetransmitter ispeak-power limited, itis preferable touseaconstant-amplitude transmitted signalandperform theweighting inthe receiver, inspiteofthemismatched filterwithitsreduction insignal-to-noise ratio.25Inone example,24 transmitting alinear-FM waveform withagaussian envelope andamatched-filter receiver togive-40dBsidelobes resulted in2.2dBgreaterpenalty indetection capability thanwhenauniform amplitude istransmitted withHamming weighting onreceiveina mismatched filter.
Itispossible toachieve lowtime-sidelobes withuniform-amplitude transmitted wave­ formsandnotheoretical lossinsignal-to-noise ratiobymeansofnonlinear FM,asdis­ cussedlaterinthissection.
Doppler-tolerant waveform.
Iranunknown doppler-frequency shiftisexperienced whenalong pulse,anoise-modulated pulse,orapulsetrainisreflected fromamoving target,areceiver tunedtothetransmitted signalwillnotaccepttheechosignalifthedoppler shiftplacesthe echofrequency outsidethebandofthereceiver matched filter.Thatis,thereceiver maynotbe tunedtothecorrectfrequency.
Tocircumvent thispotential lossofsignal,abankofcontig­ uousmatched filtersmustheusedtocovertherangeofexpected doppler-frequency shifts.It ispossible, however, withasuitable transmitted waveform toemploy asinglematched filter thatwillacceptdoppler-shifted echoeswithminimum degradation.
Ithasbeenshownthatthewaveform whichallowsasinglepulse-compression filtertobe matched foralldoppler-frequency shifts(alltargetvelocities) is2fr-28 [2rr.f02T(Bt)]s(r)=A(t)cos'--B- In1-l~T (11.55) Theamplitude A(t)ofEq.(11.55)represents modulation byarectangular pulseofwidthT.
Thebandoccupied bythesignalisB,andthecarrierfrequency isfo.Thisexpression forthe doppler-tQlerant waveform isdifficult tointerpret asitstands,butifthenatural-log factoris expanded inaseries,Eq.(11.55)becomes (11.56) Whentermsgreaterthanthefirsttwocanbeneglected (whichapplieswhen2rr.B2t3<{3foT2), Eq.(11.56)reduces totheclassical linearFMwaveform.
ThusthelinearFM,orchirp,pulse­ compression waveform isapractical approximation tothetheoretical doppler-tolerant waveform.
Differentiating, withrespecttotime,theargument ofEq.(11.55), thefrequency of thedoppler-tolerant waveform isfoundtobe2rr.f'5T/(foT-Bt).Inverting toobtainthe period, itcanbeseenthatthedoppler-tolerant waveform isonewithalinearperiod modulation.
Theshort-pulse waveform alsocantolerate unknown shiftsinthedoppler frequency whenusingasinglematched filter. Phase-coded pulse compression.
' 6-29.30s38 I n this form of pulse compression, a long pulse of  duration T is divided into N subpulses each of width r.
The phase ofeach subpulse is chosen to  be either 0 or n radians.
If the selection of the 0, n phase is made at random, the waveform  approximates a noise-modulated signal with a thumbtack ambiguity function, as in  Fig.
11.13~.
The output of the matched filter will be a spike of width r with an amplitude N  times greater than that of the long pulse.
The pulse-compression ratio is N = T/r = BT, where  B = llr = bandwidth.
The output waveform extends a distance T to either side of the peak  response, or central spike.
The portions of the output waveform other than the spike are called  tin~r sitlelobes.
 The binary choice of 0 or n phase for each subpulse may be made at random.
However,  some random selections may be better suited than others for radar application.66 One criterion  for the selection of a good "random" phase-coded waveform is that its autocorrelation func-  tion should have equal time-sidelobes.
(Recall from Sec.
10.2 that the output of the matched  filter is the autocorrelation of the input signal for which it is matched, if noise)can be neg-  lected.) The binary phase-coded sequence of 0, n values that result in equal sidelobes after  passage through the matched filter is called a Barker code.
An example is shown in Fig.
1 I.
1%.
 This is a Barker code of length 13.
The (+ ) indicates 0 phase and (- ) indicates x radians phase.
 The autocorrelation function, or output of the matched filter, is shown in (h).
There are six  equal time-sidelobes to either side of the peak, each at a level - 22.3 dB below the peak.
In (c)  Input to A Input for  qenerate matched  transm~l f~ller  waveform  width r Y  Figure 11.19 (a) Example of a phase-coded pulse with 13 equal subdivisions of either 0°(+) or 180°(-)  phase.
This is known as a Barker code of length 13.
(b) Autocorrelation function of (a), which is an  approximation to the output of the matched filter.
(c) Block diagram of the filter for generating the  transmitted waveform of (a) with the input on the left.
The same tapped delay line can be used as the  receiver matched filter by inserting the received echo at the opposite end (the right-hand side of the delay  line in this illustration).
 428INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS Phase-coded pulsecompression.16.29.30.38 Inthisformofpulsecompression, alongpulseof duration TisdividedintoNsubpulses eachofwidthr.Thephaseofeachsubpulse ischosento beeither0or1tradians.1f -theselection ofthe0,1tphaseismadeatrandom, thewaveform approximates anoise-modulated signalwithathumbtack ambiguity function, asin Fig.11.13c.Theoutputofthematched filterwillbeaspikeofwidthrwithanamplitude N timesgreaterthanthatofthelongpulse.Thepulse-compression ratioisN=Tlr=BT,where B=I/r=bandwidth.
Theoutputwaveform extends adistance Ttoeithersideofthepeak response, orcentralspike.Theportions oftheoutputwaveform otherthanthespikearecalled timesitlelobes.
Thebinarychoiceof0or1tphaseforeachsubpulse maybemadeatrandom.
However, somerandomselections maybebettersuitedthanothersforradarapplication.
66Onecriterion fortheselection ofagood"random" phase-coded waveform isthatitsautocorrelation func­ tionshouldhaveequaltime-sidelobes.
(RecallfromSec.10.2thattheoutputofthematched filleristheautocorrelation oftheinputsignalforwhichitismatched, ifnoisdcan beneg­ lected.)Thebinaryphase-coded sequence of0,1tvaluesthatresultinequalsidelobes after passagethrough thematched filteriscalledaBarkercode.Anexample isshowninFig.11.19a.
ThisisaBarkercodeoflength13.The(+-)indicates 0phaseand(-)indicates 1tradiansphase.
Theautocorrelation function, oroutputofthematched filter,isshownin(b).Therearesix equaltime-sidelobes toeithersideofthepeak,eachatalevel-22.3dBbelowthepeak.In(c) (a) (b) 13rI-r0r 1-----.-.---T----------1 ...------- T------.-1 Inputto1L generate transmit waveformInputfor matched ftlter (c) Fillermatched topulseof widthr Figure11.19(0)Example ofaphase-coded pulsewith13equatsubdivisions ofeitherDO(+)or180"(- ) phase.ThisisknownasaBarkercodeoflength13.(b)Autocorrelation function of(0),whichisan approximation totheoutputofthematched filter.(c)Blockdiagram ofthefilterforgenerating the transmitted waveform of(0)withtheinputontheleft.Thesametappeddelaylinecanbeusedasthe receivermatched filterbyinserting thereceived echoattheopposite end(theright-hand sideofthedelay lineinthisillustration). FXI RACI ION OF INFORMAT1ON AND WAVEFORM DESIGN 429  Table 11.2 Barker codes  ('ode lerigtli C'ode elernerits Sidelobe level.
dB  - -  t -, t + - 6.0  t t- - 9.5  1 t - 4.1 kt- - 12.0  III I - 14.0  III t- - 16.9  I I I I t- -- 20 8  IIII~ t I -t-t - 22.3  .
- -- --- -- - - -.
 is illtlst rated scherriatically a lapped delay line that generates this Barker-coded waveform  when an inipulse is incident at the left-hand terniinal.
The same tapped delay line can be used  as tlie receiver tilatched filter if the input is applied at the right-hand terminal.
 The known Uarker codes are shown in Table 11.2.
The longest is of length 13.
This is a  relatively low value for a practical pulse-compression waveform.
When a larger pulse-  conipression ratio is desired, solne form of pseudorandom code is usually used.
A popular  tecliriique is the generation of a linear recursive sequence using a shift register with feedback,  as in Fig.
1 1.20.
This device generates a binary pseudorandom code of zeros and ones of length  2" - 1, where 11 is the number of stages in the shift register.
Feedback is provided by taking the  output of the shift register and adding it, modulo two, to the output from one of the previous  stages of the shift register.
In the example of Fig.
11.20, the output of the 6th and 7th stage are  combined.
In nlodulo-two addition, the output is zero when the inputs are alike [(0, 0) or (1, l)]  and is one when the inputs are different.
It is equivalent to ordinary base-two addition with  only the least significant bit carried forward.
A modulo-two adder is also called an exclusive-or  gate.
An rr-stage shift register has a total of 2" different possible states.
However, it cannot have  the state in which all the stages contain zeros since the shift register would remain in this state  and produce all zeros thereafter.
Thus an n-stage shift register can generate a binary sequence  of length no greater than 2" - 1 before repeating.
The actual sequence obtained depends on  both the feedback connections and the initial loading of the register.
When the output se-  qucrlce of at1 t~-stage shift register is of period 2" - 1, it is called a maxintal lertgtll seqtcence, or  ??I-seqiter~ce.
These have also been called linear recursive sequences (LRS), pseudonoise (PN)  sequences, and binary-shift-register sequences.
Although the sequence is a series of zeros or  ones, for application to the phase-coded pulse-compression radar the zeros can be considered  as corresponding to zero phase and the ones to n radians phase.
 Since an m-sequence takes on all possible states except the zero state, the initial state of  the shift register does not affect the content of the sequence, but will define the starting point of  the sequence.
A different sequence is obtained with different feedback connections.
(The  number of stages connected modulo two must be even since an odd number of modulo-two  additions taken from the all-ones state will produce a one for the next term and the continued  generation of the all-ones state.
This generates a sequence of length 2" - 2 and is not an  m-sequence.57) Table 11.3 lists the number of possible m-sequences obtainable from an  11-st age shift register.
 I  1234567 Figure 11.20 Seven-bit shift-register for generating a pseudo-  outplf random linear recursive sequence of length 127.
 EXTRACTION OFINFORMATION ANDWAVEFORM DESIGN429 Table11.2Barkercodes Codelength 2 .\ 4 <; 7 II 1.1Codeclements +-.++ ++- 1-1--+.4++- 1 I I I! I I .1-- I!I! .I-I·-+-t·Sidelobelevel,dB -6.0 -9.5 -12.0 -14.0 -16.9 .-20.R -22,3 isillustraled schematically alappeddelaylinethat generates thisBarker-coded waveform whenanimpulse isincident attheleft-hand terminal.
Thesametappeddelaylinecanbeused asthereceiver matched filteriftheinputisappliedattheright-hand terminal.
TheknownHarkercodesareshowninTable11.2.Thelongestisoflength13.Thisisa relatively lowvalueforapractical pulse-compression waveform.
Whenalargerpulse­ compression ratioisdesired.
someformofpseudorandom codeisusuallyused.Apopular technique isthegeneration ofalinearrecursive sequence usingashiftregisterwithfeedback.
asinFig.11.20.Thisdevicegenerates abinarypseudorandom codeofzerosandonesoflength 2"-I,where IIisthenumberofstagesintheshiftregister.
Feedback isprovided bytakingthe outputoftheshiftregisterandaddingit.modulo two.totheoutputfromoneoftheprevious stagesoftheshiftregister.
Intheexample ofFig.11.20,theoutputofthe6thand7thstageare combined.
Inmodulo-two addition, theoutputiszerowhentheinputsarealike[(0,0)or(I,1)] andisonewhentheinputsaredifferent.Itisequivalent toordinary base-two addition with onlytheleastsignificant bitcarriedforward.
Amodulo-two adderisalsocalledanexclusive-or gate.AnII-stageshiftregisterhasatotalof2"different possible states.However, itcannothave thestateinwhichallthestagescontainzerossincetheshiftregisterwouldremaininthisstate andproduce allzerosthereafter.
Thusann-stageshiftregistercangenerate abinarysequence oflengthnogreaterthan2"- 1beforerepeating.
Theactualsequence obtained depends on boththefeedback connections andtheinitialloadingoftheregister.
Whentheoutputse­ qucnceofanII-stagcshiftregisterisofperiod2"-1,itiscalledamaximallengtlJ sequence, or m-sequellce.
Thesehavealsobeencalledlinearrecursive sequences (LRS),pseudonoise (PN) sequences.
andbinary-shift-register sequences.
Although thesequence isaseriesofzerosor ones.forapplication tothephase-coded pulse-compression radarthezeroscanbeconsidered ascorresponding tozerophaseandtheonesto1tradiansphase.
Sinceanm-sequence takesonallpossible statesexceptthezerostate,theinitialstateof theshiftregisterdoesnotaffectthecontentofthesequence, butwilldefinethestartingpointof thesequence.
Adifferent sequence isobtained withdifferent feedback connections.
(The number ofstagesconnected modulo twomustbeevensinceanoddnumber ofmodulo-two additions takenfromtheall-ones statewillproduce aoneforthenexttermandthecontinued generation oftheall-ones state.Thisgenerates asequence oflength2"- 2andisnotan m-sequence.57)Table11.3liststhenur:nber ofpossible m-sequences obtainable froman II-stageshiftregister.
Figure11.20Seven-bit shift-register forgenerating apseudo- Output random linearrecursive sequence oflength127. 430 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  Table 11.3 Number of rn-sequences obtainable from an 11-stage  shift register'  Example  Length of Number of feedback  Number of maximal sequence maximal stage  stages, n 2" - 1 sequences connect ions  For large 2" - 1 = N, the peak sidelobe is approximately l/N that of the maximum  response, measured in power.
The actual values vary with the particular sequence.
For exam-  ple, with N = 127, the peak sidelobe is between - 18 and - 19.8 dB, instead of the -21 dB  predicted on the basis of the code length.
For N = 255, the peak sidelobe varies from - 21.3 dB to - 22.6 dB, instead of the - 24 dB predi~ted.~'  The binary codes generated in this manner fit many of the tests for randomness.
(Ran-  domness, however, is not necessarily a desirable property of a code used for pulse compres-  sion.) The number of ones in each sequence differs from the number of zeros by at most one  (the balance property).
Among the runs of ones and zeros in each sequence, one-half of the  runs of each kind are of length one, one-fourth are of length two, one-eighth are of length three,  and so on (the run property).
If the sequence is compared term by term with any cyclic shift of  itself, the number of agreements differs from the number of disagreements by at most one (the  correlation property).
These sequences are called linear since they obey the superposition  theorem.
 The peak sidelobe levels of the linear recursive sequences and of Barker codes greater  than length 5 are lower than the - 13.2 dB of the linear FM waveform.
However, the sidelobes ,,I of the Barker codes can be further lowered by employing a mismatched filter and accepting a  slight loss in the peak signal-to-noise ratio.31  Comparison of linear FM and phase-coded puke compression.
Both of these waveforms have  their areas of application; but in the past, the linear FM, or chirp, pulse compression has  probably been more widely used.
The time sidelobes of the phase-coded pulse are of the order  of l/BT.
The peak sidelobe of the chirp waveform is generally higher, but at a slight sacrifice in  signal-to-noise ratio it can be made low by means of weighting networks.
The chirp waveforrn  is doppler-tolerant in that a single pulse-compression filter can be used, but it cannot provide  an independent range and doppler measurement.
With moving targets, the phase-coded pulse  might require a bank of contiguous matched filters covering the expected range of doppler  frequencies.
The sidelobes in the time-frequency plane of the ambiguity diagram are usually  larger than desired for good doppler resolution without ambiguity.
Although the ambiguity  diagram of the phase-coded pulse has a narrow spike, the wide plateau means that there can be  a large undesirable response from distributed clutter that extends in both the range and the  doppler domain, and the resolution performance will be poor in a dense-target environment or  when a small target is to be seen in the presence of much stronger echoes.
 430INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS Table1.1.3Number ofm-sequences obtainable froman,,-stage shiftregister 16 Example Lengthof Number offeedback Number ofmaximal sequence maximal stage stages,n 2ft -1 sequences connections 3 7 2 3,2 4 15 2 4,3 5 31 6 5,3 6 63 6 6,5 7 127 18 7,6 8 255 16 8,6,5,4 9 511 '48 ,9,5 10 1023 60 10,7 J 11 2047 176 11,9 Forlarge2"- 1=N,thepeaksidelobe isapproximately 1/Nthatofthemaximum response, measured inpower.Theactualvaluesvarywiththeparticular sequence.
Forexam­ ple,withN=127,thepeaksidelobe isbetween-18and-19.8dB,insteadofthe-21dB predicted onthebasisofthecodelength.ForN=255,thepeaksidelobe variesfrom -21.3dBto-22.6dB,insteadofthe-24dBpredicted.29 Thebinarycodesgenerated inthismanner fitmanyofthetestsforrandomness.
(Ran­ domness, however, isnotnecessari.ly adesirable property ofacodeusedforpulsecompres­ sion.)Thenumberofonesineachsequence dilTersfromthenumberofzerosbyatmostone (thebalanceproperty).
Amongtherunsofonesandzerosineachsequence, one-half ofthe runsofeachkindareoflength one,one-fourth areoflengthtwo,one-eighth areoflengththree, andsoon(therunproperty).Ifthesequence iscompared termbytermwithanycyclicshiftof itself,thenumberofagreements dilTersfromthenumberofdisagreements byatmostone(the correlation property).
Thesesequences arecalledlinearsincetheyobeythesuperposition theorem.
Thepeaksidelobe levelsofthelinearrecursive sequences andofBarkercodesgreater thanlength5arelowerthanthe-13.2dBofthelinearFMwaveform.
However, thesidelobes oftheBarkercodescanbefurtherlowered byemploying amismatched filterandaccepting a slightlossinthepeaksignal-to-noise ratio.31 Comparison oflinearFMandphase-coded pu~ecompression.
Bothofthesewaveforms have their areas ofapplication; butinthepast,thelinearFM,orchirp,pulsecompression has probably beenmorewidelyused.Thetimesidelobesofthephase-coded pulseareoftheorder of1/BT.Thepeaksidelobeofthechirpwaveform isgenerally higher,butataslightsacrifice in signal-to-noise ratioitcanbemadelowbymeansofweighting networks.
Thechirpwaveform isdoppler-tolerant inthatasinglepulse-compression filtercanbeused,butitcannotprovide anindependent rangeanddoppler measurement.
Withmovingtargets,thephase-coded pulse mightrequireabankofcontiguous matched filterscovering theexpected rangeofdoppler frequencies.
Thesidelobes inthetime-frequency planeoftheambiguity diagram areusually largerthandesiredforgooddoppler resolution without ambiguity.
Although theambiguity diagram ofthephase-coded pulsehasanarrowspike,thewideplateaumeansthattherecanbe alargeundesirable response fromdistributed clutterthatextends inboththerangeandthe dopplerdomain, andtheresolution performance willbepoorinadense-target environment or whenasmalltargetistobeseeninthepresence ofmuchstronger echoes. A different phase-coded sequence can be assigned to each radar so that a number of  radars can share the same spectrum.
In a military radar, the coding can be changed to help  counter repeater jammers that attempt to simulate the waveform.
The chirp waveform is more  vulnerable to repeater jamming than is the phase-coded pulse.
The chirp waveform is n~ore  likely to be used when a wide bandwidth, or very narrow compressed pulse, is required.
The  phase-coded pulse is rnore likely to be used when jamming or EMC is a problem, or when  long-duration waveforms are desired.
Generally, the implementation of the chirp pulse-  compression has been less conlplex than that of the phase-coded pulse.
 Although definite differences exist between these two basic waveforms, it would be  difficult to provide precise guidelines describing where one is preferred to the other.
Each  ap,)licatior~ riiust be exatninccf individually to determine the best form of pulse compression to  use.
 Other pulse-compression waveforms.
Other pulse-compression methods include nonlinear  FM, discrete freque~icy-shift, polyphase codes, compound Barker codes, code sequencing,  conlplernentary codes, pulse burst, and stretch.
Each will be discussed briefly.
 The rtonlinear-FM waveform with constant-amplitude time envelope provides a com-  pressed waveform with low time-sidelobes at the output of the receiver matched-filter without  the 1- to 2-dB penalty obtained with the linear-FM waveform and mismatched filter.
'6*24.32  The nonlinear variation of frequency with time has the same effect as amplitude-weighting the  transmitted-signal spectrum, while maintaining the rectangular pulse-shape desired for  efficient transmitter operation.
If the nonlinear FM is symmetrical in time, the ambiguity  diagram has a single peak rather than a ridge.
(A symmetrical waveform means the frequency  increases, or decreases, during the first half of the pulse and decreases, or increases, during the  second half.) The nonlinear FM is thus more sensitive to doppler-frequency shifts and is not  doppler-tolerant.
The surface-acoustic-wave delay line is one method for generating the non-  linear FM waveform and for acting as the matched filter.
 The discretejieqttency-sh@, or tinte$requency coded, waveform is generated by dividing a  long pulse into a series of contiguous subpulses and shifting the carrier frequency from  subpulse to ~ubpulse.'~.~~ The frequency steps are separated by the reciprocal of the subpuise  width.
A linear stepping of the frequency gives an ambiguity diagram more like the ridge of the  linear FM.
When the frequencies are selected at random, the result is a thumbtack ambiguity  diagram.
The number of subpulses N required to achieve a thumbtack ambiguity diagram  with randdln frequency stepping is far less than with the phase-coded pulse.
To achieve a total  bandwidth B, each subpulse need only have a bandwidth BIN.
The width of each subpulse is  thus NIB.
A given pulse-compression ratio BT can be obtained with N = T/(N/B) subpulses,  or N = TT, instead of the BT subpulses required for the phase-coded pulse.
Pulse-  compression ratios as high as 10' and bandwidths of several hundred megahertz have been  obtained.
33 With the proper frequency-shift sequence, the sideloba level on a power basis is  l/N2 down from the main response.j4 However on the doppler axis of the ambiguity function  the resulting sidelobes are 1/N rather than 1/N2, which is the result of only N = TT  su bpulses.
 According to Nathan~on,'~ the discrete frequency-shift waveforms are preferable instead  of linear FM when the pulse-compression ratio and the signal bandwidth are large.
The  resulting thumbtack ambiguity diagram means there will be no rangedoppler coupling to  cause erroneous measurements.
The order in which the discrete frequencies are transmitted  can be varied so that each radar can have its own code, and interference between radars will be  reduced.
The components in each channel need only have a bandwidth 1/N times the total  processing bandwidth.
Still another advantage of such systems is that a strong CW interfer-  EXTRACTION OFINFORMATION ANDWAVEFORM DESIGN431 Adifferent phase-coded sequence canbeassigned toeachradarsothatanumberof radarscansharethesamespectrum.
Inamilitary radar,thecodingcanbechanged tohelp counterrepeaterjammers thatattempttosimulate thewaveform.
Thechirpwaveform i'smore vulnerable torepeater jamming thanisthephase-coded pulse.Thechirpwaveform ismore likelytobeusedwhenawidebandwidth, orverynarrowcompressed pulse,isrequired.
The phase-coded pulseismorelikelytobeusedwhenjamming orEMCisaproblem, orwhen long-duration waveforms aredesired.
Generally, theimplementation ofthechirppulse­ compression hasbeenlesscomplex thanthatofthephase-coded pulse.
Although definite differences existbetween thesetwobasicwaveforms, itwouldbe difficult toprovide preciseguidelines describing whereoneispreferred totheother.Each apillicationmustheexamined individuallytodetermine thebestformofpulsecompression to use.
Otherpulse-compression waveforms.
Otherpulse-compression methods includenonlinear PM,discrete frequency-shift, polyphase codes,compound Barkercodes,codesequencing, complementary codes,pulseburst,andstretch.Eachwillbediscussed briefly.
TherlOnlinear-F Mwaveform withconstant-amplitude timeenvelope provides acom­ pressedwaveform withlowtime-sidelobes attheoutputofthereceivermatched-filter without the1-to2-d8penaltyobtained withthe.linear-FM waveform andmismatched filter.16.24.32 Thenonlinearvariation offrequency withtimehasthesameeffectasamplitude-weighting the transmitted-signal spectrum, whilemaintaining therectangular pulse-shape desired for efficient transmitter operation.
Ifthenonlinear FMissymmetrical intime,theambiguity diagram hasasinglepeakratherthanaridge.(Asymmetrical waveform meansthefrequency increases, ordecreases, duringthefirsthalfofthepulseanddecreases, orincreases, duringthe secondhalf.)Thenonlinear FMisthusmoresensitive todoppler-frequency shiftsandisnot doppler-tolerant.
Thesurface-acoustic-wave delaylineisonemethodforgenerating thenon­ linearFMwaveform andforactingasthematched filter.
Thediscretefrequency-shift, ortimefrequency coded,waveform isgenerated bydividing a longpulseintoaseriesofcontiguous subpulses andshiftingthecarrierfrequency from subpulse tosubpulse.16.33Thefrequency stepsareseparated bythereciprocal ofthe subpulse width.Alinearstepping ofthefrequency givesanambiguity diagram moreliketheridgeofthe linearFM.Whenthefrequencies areselectedatrandom, theresultisathumbtack ambiguity diagram.
Thenumber ofsubpulses Nrequired toachieveathumbtack ambiguity diagram withrandolnfrequency stepping isfarlessthanwiththephase-coded pulse.Toachieveatotal bandwidth B,eachsubpulse needonlyhaveabandwidth BIN.Thewidthofeachsubpulse is thusN/B.Agivenpulse-compression ratioBTcanbeobtained withN=T/{N/B) subpulses, orN=.jBT, insteadoftheBTsubpulses required forthephase-coded pulse.Pulse­ compression ratiosashighas105andbandwidths ofseveralhundred megahertz havebeen obtained.33Withtheproperfrequency-shift sequence, thesidelohe levelonapowerbasisis I/N2downfromthemainresponse.3'"However onthedoppleraxisoftheambiguity function theresulting sidelobes are1/Nratherthan1/N2,whichistheresultofonlyN=.jBT subpulses.
According toNathanson,33 thediscretefrequency-shift waveforms arepreferable instead oflinearFMwhenthepulse-compression ratioandthesignalbandwidth arelarge.The resulting thumbtack ambiguity diagram meanstherewillbenorange-doppler coupling to causeerroneous measurements.
Theorderinwhichthediscretefrequencies aretransmitted canbevariedsothateachradarcanhaveitsowncode,andinterference between radarswillbe reduced.
Thecomponents ineachchannel needonlyhaveabandwidth liNtimesthetotal processing bandwidth.
Stillanotheradvantage ofsuchsystems isthatastrongCWinterfer- 432 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  ence signal will only suppress the target signal in one of the N channels.
However, in a linear  FM system a strong CW signal anywhere in the total signal bandwidth can capture a limiting  receiver and cause suppression of the target echo.
 Instead of the 0, n binary phase shift, smaller increments of phase can be applied in the  phase-coded pulse compression waveform.
These are called polyphase  code^.'^.^' The time  sidelobes of a polyphase code can be lower than those of the binary phase-coded waveform of  similar However, the performance of polyphase codes deteriorates rapidly in the  presence of a doppler-frequency shift and therefore they have been limited to situations where  the doppler is negligible.
 Other binary coding met hods that have been considered for pulse compression include :'  (I) compound Barker codes for obtaining longer codes from the Barker series by coding seg-  ments of one Barker code with another Barker code (a length 13 Barker code compounded  within another length 13 code gives a pulse-compression ratio of 169 and a peaJ sidelobe of  - 22.3 dB); (2) code sequencing 018 successive PRF periods, in which a different code is used for  each transmission to produce random sidelobes which when N pulses are added to produce a fi improvement in mainlobe-to-sidelobe amplitude ratio, where N is the number of se-  quences employed; and (3) complementary codes in which a pair of equal-length codes have the  property that the time sidelobes of one code are the negative of the other so that if two codes of  a complementary pair are alternated on successive transmissions, the algebraic sum of the two  autocorrelation functions is zero except for the cental peak.36-37  A pulse burst is a waveform in which a series of pulses are transmitted as a group before  any of the echo signals are received.
It is used to obtain simultaneous range and doppler-  velocity resolution when the minimum range is relatively long; as for radars whose targets are  extraterrestrial, such as satellites and ballistic missiles.
Pulse compression might be applied to  each of the individual pulses of the burst for better range resolution, and amplitude weighting  of the pulse burst might be used to lower the doppler sidelobe level to improve the detection of  small doppler-shifted target echoes close in frequency to large clutter echoes.
 Stretch is a technique related to pulse compression that permits an exchange of signal-  time duration for signal band~idth.~~.~~ Its advantage is that high range-resolution can be  obtained with wideband transmitted signals, but without the usual wideband processing circ-  uitry.
However, only a portion of the range interval can be observed in this manner.
If a signal  occupies a time T and a bandwidth B, a change in time aT allows a change in bandwidth BIu.
 Thus if a signal is stretched in time, say by a factor.
a = 10, the bandwidth can be reduced by a  factor of 10, and the signal can be processed with more practical narrow band circuitry.
 However, only hth the total range interval can be processed.
This disadvantage may be  I~othersome in a surveillance radar, but it might be well suited to a tracking radar or to a  high-range-resolution radar used for target classification.
The technique uses elements similar  to those of the linear-FM pulse-compression radar.
A linear-FM waveform (chirp) of narrow  bandwidth Bl is mixed with a wideband chirp of bandwidth B2.
The radiated signal is a chirp  of bandwidth Bl + B2.
On receive, the signal is mixed with the same wideband chirp B2 to  give a chirp of narrow bandwidth Bt which is then processed as a normal pulse-compression  signal.
The mixing operation results in a time expansion of a = (B1 + B2)/Bl ; but the range-  resolution possible is that of a signal of bandwidth B1 + B2, using processing circuitry of  bandwidth B1.
 Compatibility with other processing.
Pulse-compression systems are sometimes used in con-  junction with MTI radar.39 The increased range resolution afforded by pulse compression  provides an increased target-to-clutter echo, as does the MTI processing.
If there exists,  however, inherent instabilities in the radar system there can result noiselike time-sidelobes  432INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS enoesignalwillonlysuppress thetargetsignalinoneoftheNchannels.
However, inalinear FMsystemastrongCWsignaLanywhere inthetotalsignalbandwidth cancapturealimiting receiver andcausesuppression ofthetargetecho.
Insteadofthe0,1tbinaryphaseshift,smallerincrements ofphasecanbeapplied inthe phase-coded pulsecompression waveform.
Thesearecalledpolyphase codes.16.24Thetime sidelobesofapolyphase codecanbelowerthanthoseofthebinaryphase-coded waveform of similarlength.63.64However, theperformance ofpolyphase codesdeteriorates rapidlyinthe presence ofadoppler-frequency shiftandtherefore theyhavebeenlimitedtosituations where thedoppler isnegligible.
Otherbinarycodingmethods thathavebeenconsidered forpulsecompression include:35 (1)compound Barkercodesforobtaining longercodesfromtheBarkerseriesbycodingseg­ mentsofoneBarkercodewithanother Barkercode(alength13Barkercodecompounded withinanotherlength13codegivesapulse-compression ratioof169andape¥sidelobe of -22.3dB);(2)codesequencing 011successive PRFperiods,inwhichaditTerent codeisusedfor eachtransmission toproduce randomsidelobeswhichwhenNpulsesareaddedtoproduce a J"Nimprovement inmainlobe-to-sidelobe amplitude ratio,whereNisthenumber ofse­ quencesemployed; and(3)complementary codesinwhichapairofequal-length codeshavethe property thatthetimesidelobesofonecodearethenegative oftheothersothatiftwocodesof acomplementary pairarealternated onsuccessive transmissions, thealgebraic sumofthetwo autocorrelation functions iszeroexceptforthecental peak~36.37 Apulseburstisawaveform inwhichaseriesofpulsesaretransmitted asagroupbefore anyoftheechosignalsarereceived.Itisusedtoobtainsimultaneous rangeanddoppler­ velocityresolution whentheminimum rangeisrelatively lon~;asforradarswhosetargetsare extraterrestrial, suchassatellites andballistic missiles.
Pulsecompression mightbeappliedto eachoftheindividual pulsesoftheburstforbetterrangeresolution, andamplitude weighting ofthepulseburstmightbeusedtolowerthedopplersidelobe leveltoimprove thedetection of smalldoppler-shifted targetechoescloseinfrequency tolargeclutterechoes.
Stretchisatechnique relatedtopulsecompression thatpermitsanexchange ofsignal­ timeduration forsignalbandwidth.58•59Itsadvantage isthathighrange-resolution canbe obtained withwideband transmitted signals,butwithouttheusualwidebandprocessing circ­ uitry.However, onlyaportionoftherangeintervalcanbeobserved inthismanner.Ifasignal occupies atimeTandabandwidth B,achangeintimeaTallowsachangeinbandwidth B/a.
Thusifasignalisstretched intime,saybyafactor.a=10,thebandwidth canbereduced bya factorof10,andthesignalcanbeprocessed withmorepractical narrowbandcircuitry.
However, only-roththetotalrangeinterval canbeprocessed.
Thisdisadvantage maybe bothersome inasurveillance radar,butitmightbewellsuitedtoatracking radarortoa high-range-resolution radarusedfortargetclassification.
Thetechnique useselements similar tothoseofthelinear-FM pulse-compression radar.Alinear-FM waveform (chirp)ofnarrow bandwidth B1ismixedwithawideband chirpofbandwidth B2•Theradiated signalisachirp ofbandwidth B1+B2•Onreceive,thesignalismixedwiththesamewideband chirpBzto give achirpofnarrowbandwidth B1whichisthenprocessed asanormalpulse-compression signal.Themixingoperation resultsinatimeexpansion ofa=(B1+Bz)/B1;buttherange­ resolution possible isthatofasignalofbandwidth B1+B2,usingprocessing circuitry of bandwidth B1• Compatibility withotherprocessing.
Pulse-compression systems aresometimes usedincon­ junction withMTIradar.39Theincreased rangeresolution afforded bypulsecompression provides anincreased target-to-clutter echo,asdoestheMTIprocessing.
Hthereexists, however, inherent instabilities intheradarsystemtherecanresultnoiseliketime-sidelobes EXTRACTION OF INFORMATION AND WAVEFORM DESIGN 433  accomparlying the pulse-compression wavefor-m.
Such system instabilities might be caused by  noise on local oscillators, noise on transmitter power supplies, transmitter time jitter, and  transmitter tube noise.
These noise sidelobes will not cancel in the MTI system and, if  suficiently large, they can result in uncancelled residue that will appear on the radar display.
 Thus when the system instabilities are high, the detection of targets in clutter can be seriously  degraded.
One approach for operating under such conditions is to use two limiters.39 One  limiter is placed before the pulse-compression filter and has an output dynamic range equal to  the difference between the peak transmitter power and transmitter noise in the system band-  width.
The other limiter is between the pulse-compression filter and the MTI and has a  dynamic range equal to the expected MTI improvement factor.
 The technology of pulse compression has been applied to radar with conventional, unmod-  ulated pulses to achieve CFAR (constant false alarm rate) performance better than that of the  log-FTC.
In one example,40 a dispersive delay line with a linear time-delay vs.
frequency  characteristic is followed by a hard limiter and by a second dispersive delay line with a  characteristic inverse to the first.
(If the limiter were omitted, the circuit would operate simply  as a linear riondispersive time delay.) It has been claimed that there was no discernible loss in  detectability with this CFAR, but that the detectability loss for log-FTC is about 3 dB.
 A variation of this technique has been applied to chirp pulse-compression radar to  achieve CFAR in conjunction with pulse compression.
Two dispersive delay lines are used  with a hard limiter between them to provide CFAR.
Both lines are of similar characteristics,  arld the total pulse-compression ratio is divided between the two.
In one design,41 the first  delay line cornpressed a 5 11s pulse to 1.6 ps, and the second delay line following the limiter  compressed the 1.6 11s pulse to 0.05 jts, for a total pulse-compression ratio of 100.
 When a limiter is used preceding the pulse-compression filter in conventional pulse-  cornpression radar for suppressing impulsive and other interference, the presence of multiple  targets can cause degraded performance.
If the uncompressed pulse has an amplitude less than  the rrns noise level, there is little degradation.
This situation will apply in many cases when the  pulse-compression ratio is large.
However, if two signals are present simultaneously, and if one  is much larger than the rms noise level at the limiter output, the weaker signal will be  suppressed by the stronger over the time interval that they overlap.
The result is that the  probability of detecting the weaker signal is degraded.42 The hard limiting of superimposed  echoes in pulse-compression radar may also cause the generation of false targets in addition to  small-signal suppres~ion.~~  Pulse pmpression has also been used in conjunction with frequency-scan radar to  achieve improved range res~lution.~~ This was discussed briefly in Sec.
8.4.
The frequency-scan  radar uses a linear-array antenna to scan a beam in one angular coordinate by changing the  frequency.
The use of the frequency domain for electronic beam scanning normally pre-  cludes the use of the frequency domain for range res6lution.
That is, pulse compression and  frequency scan are often not compatible.
However, if the entire angular region is swept within  a single pulse by a frequency-scan antenna, the response from a point target will be frequency-  modulated due to the finite beamwidth.
A dispersive time delay filter can cause the received  echo to be compressed so as to achieve better range resolution.
The amount of range-  resolution possible is limited by the finite time-delay of the signal propagating through the  frequency-scan feed network.
A bank of dispersive filters are needed to cover the angular  sector, as described in Sec.
8.4.
Each filter would be designed to accommodate the spread of  frequencies expected from a particular elevation angle.
 Limitations of puke compression.
Pulse compression is not without its disadvantages.
It re-  quires a transmitter that can be readily modulated and a receiver with a matched filter more  EXTRACTION OFINFORMATION ANDWAVEFORM DESIGN433 accompanying thepulse-compressionwavefoFffi; Suchsystem.instabilitiesmight becausedby noiseonlocaloscillators, noiseontransmitter powersupplies, transmitter timejitter,and transmitter tubenoise.Thesenoisesidelobes willnotcancelintheMTIsystemand,if sufficiently large,theycanresultinuncancelled residuethatwillappearontheradardisplay.
Thuswhenthesysteminstabilities arehigh,thedetection oftargetsincluttercanbeseriously degraded.
Oneapproach foroperating undersuchconditions istousetwolimiters.39One limiterisplacedbeforethepulse-compression filterandhasanoutputdynamic rangeequalto thedifference between thepeaktransmitter powerandtransmitter noiseinthesystemband­ width.Theotherlimiterisbetween thepulse-compression filterandtheMTIandhasa dynamic rangeequaltotheexpected MTIimprovement factor.
Thetechnology ofpulsecompression hasbeenappliedtoradarwithconventional, unmod­ ulatedpulsestoachieveCFAR(constant falsealarmrate)performance betterthanthatofthe log-FTC.
Inoneexample,40 adispersive delaylinewithalineartime-delay vs.frequency characteristic isfollowed byahardlimiterandbyaseconddispersive delaylinewitha characteristic inversetothefirst.(Ifthelimiterwereomitted, thecircuitwouldoperatesimply asalinearnondispersive timedelay.)Ithasbeenclaimedthattherewasnodiscernible lossin detectability withthisCFAR,butthatthedetectability lossforlog-FTC isabout3dB.
Avariation ofthistechnique hasbeenapplied tochirppulse-compression radarto achieveCFARinconjunction withpulsecompression.
Twodispersive delaylinesareused withahardlimiterbetween themtoprovideCFAR.Bothlinesareofsimilarcharacteristics, andthetotalpulse-compression ratioisdivided between thetwo.Inonedesign,41 thefirst delaylinecompressed a 5JLSpuIseto1.6/lS,andtheseconddelaylinefollowing thelimiter compressed the1.6JiSpulseto0.05JLS,foratotalpulse-compression ratioof100.
Whenalimiterisusedpreceding thepulse-compression filterinconventional pulse­ compression radarforsuppressing impulsive andotherinterference, thepresence ofmultiple targetscancausedegraded performance.
Iftheuncompressed pulsehasanamplitude lessthan thermsnoiselevel,thereislittledegradation.
Thissituation willapplyinmanycaseswhenthe pUlse-compression ratioislarge.However, iftwosignalsarepresentsimultaneously, andifone ismuchlargerthanthermsnoiselevelatthelimiteroutput, theweakersignalwillbe suppressed bythestronger overthetimeinterval thattheyoverlap.
Theresultisthatthe probability ofdetecting theweakersignalisdegraded.42Thehardlimitingofsuperimposed echoesinpulse-compression radarmayalsocausethegeneration offalsetargetsinaddition to small-signal suppression.43 Pulse ~mpression hasalsobeenusedinconjunction withfrequency-scan radarto achieveimproved rangeresolution.44Thiswasdiscussed brieflyinSec.8.4.Thefrequency-scan radarusesalinear-array antenna toscanabeaminoneangularcoordinate bychanging the frequency.
Theuseofthefrequency domain forelectronic beamscanning normally pre­ cludestheuseofthefrequency domain forrangeresolution.
Thatis,pulsecompression and frequency scanareoftennotcompatible.
However, iftheentireangularregionissweptwithin asinglepuIsebyafrequency-scan antenna, theresponse fromapointtargetwillbefrequency­ modulated duetothefinitebeamwidth.
Adispersive timedelayfiltercancausethereceived echotobecompressed soastoachieve betterrangeresolution.
Theamount ofrange­ resolution possible islimitedbythefinitetime-delay ofthesignalpropagating through the frequency-scan feednetwork.
Abankofdispersive filtersareneededtocovertheangular sector,asdescribed inSec.8.4.Eachfilterwouldbedesigned toaccommodate thespreadof frequencies expected fromaparticular elevation angle.
Limitations ofpulsecompression.
Pulsecompression isnotwithout itsdisadvantages.
Itre­ quiresatransmitter thatcanbereadilymodulated andareceiver withamatched filtermore 434 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  sophisticated than that of a conventional pulse radar.
Although it may be more complex than  a conventional long-pulse radar, the equipment for a high-power pulse compression radar is  more practical than would be required of a short-pulse radar with the same pulse energy.
The  time sidelobes accompanying the compressed pulse are objectionable since they can mask  desired targets or create false targets.
When limiting is employed, there can be small-target  suppression and possibly spurious false-targets as well.
The long uncornpressed pulse can  restrict the minimum range and the ability to detect close-in targets.
A conventional short  pulse at a different frequency might have to be generated at the end of the'long pulse to provide  coverage of the close-in range that is blanked by the long pulse.
Since it only has to cover the  range blanked by the long pulse, it need not be of large power.
A separate receiver, or matched  filter, might be needed for this short-range pulse.
A pulse-compression waveform does not  have the immunity to repeater jammers or range-gate stealers inherent in the short-pulse  radar.
By repeating a chirp signal with an offset frequency, the repeater can +pear at the  output of the pulse-compression filter ahead of the target skin-echo, thus making it harder to  separate the true signal from the repeater signal.
The frequency offset can compensate for the  finite timedelay required for a repeater to respond.
With a long coded-pulse signal, the  repeater can also put energy into the radar ahead of the compressed pulse, or coincident with  it, if sufficient power is used to overcome the mismatch of the repeater signal to the pulse-  compression filter.
 In spite of its limitations, pulse compression has been an important part of radar systems  technology.
 Spread spectrum.
Spread spectrum communication systems68 employ waveforms similar to  those of pulse compression radar.
The purpose of such waveforms in communications is to  allow multiple simultaneous use of the same frequency spectrum.
This is achieved by coding  each signal differently from the others.
In military applications, spread spectrum communi-  cations also has the capability of rejecting interference as well as reduce the probability of  intercept by a hostile elint receiver, Sometimes pulse compression radars have been called  spread spectrum radars.
This terminology is misleading since pulse compression is used in  radar for different reasons than spread spectrum is used in communications.
 1  11.6 CLASSIFICATION OF TARGETS WITH RADAR  In most radar applications, the only properties of the target that are measured are its location  in range and angle.
Such radars are sometimes called blob detectors since they recognize  targets only as "blobs" located somewhere in space.
It is possible, however, to extract more  information about the target.
Radar may be able to recognize one type of target from another;  that is, to determine that the target is a 747 aircraft and not a DC-10, or that a particular ship  is a tanker and not a freighter.
This capability is known as target classiJication.
When the target  is a spacecraft or satellite, the process is sometimes called SOI, or Space Object IdentHcation.
 In this section, several possible radar techniques that might be used for target classification  will be enumerated briefly.
Generally, target classification by radar involves examining the  detailed structure of the echo signal..It usually requires a larger signal-to-noise ratio than  normally needed for detection.; Thus the range at which target classification can be made is  often less than the range at which the target can be first detected.
 High-range-resolution.
A short-pulse, radar or a pulse-compression radar can provide  sufficient range-resolution to obtain a profile of the target shape, as determined by the target's  434INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS sophisticated thanthatofaconventional pulseradar.Although itmaybemorecomplex than aconventional long-pulse radar,theequipment forahigh-power pulsecompression radaris morepractical thanwouldberequired ofashort-pulse radarwiththesamepulseenergy.The timesidelobes accompanying thecompressed pulseareobjectionable sincetheycanmask desiredtargetsorcreatefalsetargets.Whenlimiting isemployed, therecanbesmall-target suppression andpossibly spurious false-targets aswell.Thelonguncompr-essed pulsecan restricttheminimum rangeandtheabilitytodetectclose-in targets.Aconventional short pulseatadifferent frequency mighthavetobegenerated attheendofthe'long pulsetoprovide coverage oftheclose-inrangethatisblankedbythelongpulse.Sinceitonlyhastocoverthe rangeblankedbythelongpulse,itneednotbeoflargepower.Aseparate ~eceiver,ormatched filter,mightbeneededforthisshort-range pulse.Apulse-compression waveform doesnot havetheimmunity torepeater jammers orrange-gate stealers inherent intheshort-pulse radar.Byrepeating achirpsignalwithanoffsetfrequency, therepeater canappearatthe outputofthepulse-compression filteraheadofthetargetskin-echo, thusmakingitharderto separate thetruesignalfromtherepeatersignal.Thefrequency offsetcancompensate forthe finitetime-delay required forarepeater torespond.
Withalongcoded-pulse signal,the repeatercanalsoputenergyintotheradaraheadofthecompressed pulse,orcoincident with it,ifsufficient powerisusedtoovercome themismatch oftherepeater signaltothepulse­ compression filter.
Inspiteofitslimitations, pulsecompression hasbeenanimportant partofradarsystems technology.
Spreadspectrum.
Spreadspectrum communication systems68employwaveforms similarto thoseofpulsecompression radar.Thepurpose ofsuchwaveforms incommunications isto allowmultiple simultaneous useofthesamefrequency spectrum.
Thisisachieved bycoding eachsignaldifferently fromtheothers.Inmilitaryapplications, spreadspectrum communi­ cationsalsohasthecapability ofrejecting interference aswellasreducetheprobability of intercept byahostileelintreceiver.
Sometimes pulsecompression radarshavebeencalled spreadspectrum radars.Thisterminology ismisleading sincepulsecompression isusedin radarfordifferent reasonsthanspreadspectrum isusedincommunications.
11.6CLASSIFICATION OFTARGETS WITHRADAR Inmostradarapplications, theonlyproperties ofthetargetthataremeasured areitslocation inrangeandangle.Suchradarsaresometimes calledblobdetectors sincetheyrecognize targetsonlyas"blobs" locatedsomewhere inspace.Itispossible, however, toextractmore information aboutthetarget.Radarmaybeabletorecognize onetypeoftargetfromanother; thatis,todetermine thatthetargetisa747aircraftandnotaDC-IO,orthataparticular ship isatankerandnotafreighter.
Thiscapability isknownastargetclassification.
Whenthetarget isaspacecraft orsatellite, theprocessissometimes calledSOl,orSpaceObjectIdentification.
Inthissection, several possible radartechniques thatmightbeusedfortargetclassification willbeenumerated briefly.Generally, targetclassification byradarinvolves examining the detailed structure oftheechosignal.·Itusuallyrequires alargersignal-to-noise ratiothan normally neededfordetection.' Thustherangeatwhichtargetclassification canbemadeis oftenlessthantherangeatwhichthetargetcanbefirstdetected.
High-range-resoludon.
Ashort-pulse.
radar.orapulse-compression radarcanprovide sufficient range-resolution toobtainaprofileofthetargetshape,asdetermined bythetarget's liX I IIA['I ION 01.
1NI:ORMATION AND WAVEFORM DESIGN 435  major scattering centers.
From this range profile, an estimate of the target size can be made.
 The profile obtained by the radar is the projection in the direction of propagation.
A complete  " image" of the target would require multiple looks from different directions.
If the trajectory  of the target is known from the measurement of the target track, it is possible to infer the  aspect of the radar projection.
A radar should not be expected to provide the same target  details as are seen visually.
An electromagnetic sensor, whether the eye or a radar, responds to  scattering from those details of the target which are comparable to the wavelength of observa-  tion Si~ice ttiere is sucli R large differerlce in wavelength between microwave radar and visual  sensors, the target details that are seen by radar can be quite different from what is seen  visually.
When attempting to measure target size with a high-range-resolution radar, an error  car1 be incurred since tllc cxtrenlities of the target are not always good scatterers.
Echoes from  the forward and rear portions of the target might be obscured in the noise, if the radar is not  sufficiently powerful.
 High-range-resolution with monopuke, The inclusion of a monopulse angle-measurement to a  high-range-resolution radar was mentioned briefly in Sec.
5.8.
Resolution in range of the  individual target scattering-centers permits an angle measurement of the scatterer without the  errors introduced by the glint caused by multiple scatterers within the same resolution cell.
 This provides a three-dimensional " imageT' of the target and thus presents more target infor-  mation from which to derive a classification than do& a conventional high-range-resolution  radar without monopulse.
The implementation of this measurement capability is more com-  plicated than a short-pulse radar without angle sensing.
Also, it cannot be employed when  the target angular extent is less than the sensitivity of the monopulse measurement.
 Engine modulations.
The radar echo from aircraft is modulated by the rotating propellers of  piston engines, and by the rotating compressor and turbine blades of jet engines.45 (The  compressor would be seen by a radar looking into the forward part of the jet aircraft and the  turbine when looking into the rear.) The characteristic modulations of the radar echoes from  aircraft can, in some cases, be used to recognize one type of aircraft from another; or more  correctly, one type of aircraft engine from another.
Aircraft jet-engine modulations are likely  to be of relatively high frequency (ten to twenty kilohertz perhaps) because of the high speed of  the engine components that cause the modulated echo.
The helicopter with its large rotating  blades also provides a distinctive modulation of the radar echo that distinguishes it from thc  echoes of otber aircraft.
A ship is less likely to give distinctive modulations, unless it has large  rotating radar antennas or rotating machinery within view of the radar.
 Cross-section fluctuations.
In the discussion of radar cross section in Sec.
2.8, it was stated that  the angular pattern of the cross section of targets has a many-lobed structure whose spacings  depend on the size and nature of the target.
As the target moves relative to the radar, its aspect  changes and the lobed pattern of the target cross section results in a fluctuating received signal.
 These amplitude fluctuations occur at a slow rate, compared with the much higher frequency  fluctuations of the engine modulations mentioned above.
The larger the size of the target the  narrower will be the lobes and the greater will be the fluctuation frequency for a given angular  rate of change of aspect.
In principle, the cross-section fluctuations might be able to provide  some information that can distinguish one type of target from another.
If the target is rotating,  as were some of the early unstabilized satellites, the amplitude fluctuations of the radar cross  section with time can provide information from which the shape of the target can be  determined.60 It has also been suggested that the complex echo-signal fluctuations (amplitude .
 and phase) can be employed for target classificati~n.~~  EXTRACIION 01'INFORMATION ANDWAVEFORM DESIGN435 majorscattering centers.Fromthisrangeprofile,anestimate ofthetargetsizecanbemade.
Theprofileobtained bytheradaristheprojection inthedirection ofpropagation.
Acomplete "image"ofthetargetwouldrequiremultiple looksfromdifferent directions.Ifthetrajectory ofthetargetisknownfromthemeasurement ofthetargettrack,itispossible toinferthe aspectoftheradarprojection.
Aradarshouldnotbeexpected toprovidethesametarget detailsasareseenvisually.
Anelectromagnetic sensor,whether theeyeoraradar,responds to scattering fromthosedetailsofthetargetwhicharecomparable tothewavelength ofobserva­ tion.Sincethereissuchalargedifference inwavelength between microwave radarandvisual sensors, thetargetdetailsthatareseenbyradarcanbequitedifferent fromwhatisseen visually.
Whenattempting tomeasure targetsizewithahigh-range-resolution radar, an error canbeincurred sincetheextremities ofthetargetarenotalwaysgoodscatterers.
Echoesfrom theforward andrearportions ofthetargetmightbeobscured inthenoise,iftheradarisnot surficiently powerful.
High-range-resolution withmonopuhe.
Theinclusion ofamonopulse angle-measurement toa high-range-resolution radarwasmentioned brieflyinSec.5.8.Resolution inrangeofthe individual targetscattering-centers permitsananglemeasurement ofthescatterer withoutthe errorsintroduced bytheglintcausedbymultiple scatterers withinthesameresolution cell.
Thisprovides athree-dimensional" image"ofthetar.getandthuspresents moretargetinfor­ mationfromwhichtoderiveaclassification thandoesaconventional high-range-resolution radarwithoutmonopulse.Theimplementation ofthismeasurement capability ismorecom­ plicated thanashort-pulse radarwithout anglesensing.
Also,itcannotbeemployed when thetargetangularextentislessthanthesensitivity ofthemonopulse measurement.
Enginemodulations.
Theradarechofromaircraftismodulated bytherotating propellers of pistonengines, andbytherotating compressor andturbinebladesofjetengines.45(The compressor wouldbeseenbyaradarlookingintotheforward partofthejetaircraftandthe turbinewhenlookingintotherear.)Thecharacteristic modulations oftheradarechoesfrom aircraftcan,insomecases,beusedtorecognize onetypeofaircraftfromanother; ormore correctly, onetypeofaircraftenginefromanother.
Aircraftjet-engine modulations arelikely tobeofrelatively highfrequency (tentotwentykilohertz perhaps) becauseofthehighspeedof theenginecomponents thatcausethemodulated echo.Thehelicopter withitslargerotating bladesalsoprovides adistinctive modulation oftheradarechothatdistinguishes itfromthe echoesofotqeraircraft.Ashipislesslikelytogivedistinctive modulations, unlessithaslarge rotating radarantennas orrotating machinery withinviewoftheradar.
Cross-section fluctuations.
Inthediscussion ofradarcrosssectioninSec.2.8,itwasstatedthat theangularpatternofthecrosssectionoftargetshasamany-lobed structure whosespacings dependonthesizeandnatureofthetarget.Asthetargetmovesrelativetotheradar,itsaspect changes andthelobedpatternofthetargetcrosssectionresultsinafluctuating received signal.
Theseamplitude fluctuations occurataslowrate,compared withthemuchhigherfrequency fluctuations oftheenginemodulations mentioned above.Thelargerthesizeofthetargetthe narrower willbethelobesandthegreaterwillbethefluctuation frequency foragivenangular rateofchangeofaspect.Inprinciple, thecross-section fluctuations mightbeabletoprovide someinformation thatcandistinguish onetypeoftargetfromanother.Ifthetargetisrotating, asweresomeoftheearlyunstabilized satellites, theamplitude fluctuations oftheradarcross sectionwithtimecanprovide information fromwhichtheshapeofthetargetcanbe determined.60Ithasalsobeensuggested thatthecomplex echo-signal fluctuations (amplitude andphase)canbeemployed fortargetcJassification.65 436 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  Synthetic aperture radar.
The synthetic aperture radar, which is discussed in Sec.
14.1, is a  radar in a moving vehicle that provides a high resolution image in both range and in a  direction parallel to the vehicle motion.
The latter dimension is sometimes called cross range  when the radar uses a side-looking antenna directed perpendicular to the direction of motion.
 The range resolution is obtained with either a conventional short-pulse or pulse-compression  waveform, and resolution in cross range is obtained by synthesizing the effect of a large  antenna aperture.
It is used chiefly for mapping of the ground and imaging of stationary  objects on the ground.
 Inverse synthetic aperture radar.
In the ordinary synthetic aperture radar the target is station-  ary and the radar is in motion.
The opposite will also permit target imaging; that is, the radar is  stationary and the target is in motion.
This is called inverse synthetic apertttre radar or delay-  doppler mapping.
Although the signal processing required is similar to that of thdconventional  synthetic aperture radar, the inverse synthetic aperture process can also be viewed as an  equivalent doppler filtering.
Each part of a moving target has a slightly different relative  velocity, or doppler-frequency shift.
Filtering thcse varioils dopplcr frequencies resolves the f  different parts of the target to provide an image.
Although the inverse synthetic aperture  results from relative motion of the target, just as does the cross-section amplitude fluctuations  mentioned previously, the processing of the inverse synthetic aperture radar signal requires a  coherent system (one that preserves phase).
In principle, inverse synthetic aperture radar can  be used to image moving targets such as aircraft and ships.
It has been applied in the past to  imaging of the moon and to mapping the surface below the clouds surrounding the planet  Ven~s.~'  P~larization.~~.~' The polarization of the radar backscattered energy depends on the target  properties and differs, in general, from the polarization of the energy incident on the target.
 This property can be used as a possible basis for discriminating one target from another.
For  example, a thin straight wire can be readily distinguished from a homogeneous sphere by  observing the variation of the echo signal amplitude as the polarization is rotated.
The echo  from the sphere will be unmodulated, and the echo signal from the wire will vary between a  maximum and a minimum at twice the rate at which the polarization is rotated.
The use of  circular polarization to reduce the radar echo from symmetrical raindrops relative to the echo i 4  from aircraft, as described in Sec.
13.8, takes advantage of the differences in target response to  different incident polarizations.
 For complete knowledge of the effect of polarization, the polarization matrix must be  determined.
If H stands for linear horizontal polarization, t/ for linear vertical, and if the first  letter of a two-letter grouping denotes the transmitted polarization and the second lzttzr  denotes the polarization of the received signal, then the polarization matrix requires knowl-  edge of the amplitudes and phase of the following components: HH, V V, H V and V H.
H V  and VH are sometimes called the cross polarization components.
In general H V = VH so that  only one need be determined.
Orthogonal circular-polarization components can also be used  to describe the polarization matrix.
By transmitting two orthogonal polarizations and measur-  ing the amplitude and phase of the received echoes on each polarization, as well as the  cross-polarization component, a means of target discrimination, or classification, can be  provided.
Some information about the target can be obtained from the amplitude only, and  not the phase, of theqpolarization components.
It has also been suggested that the cross-  polarized component of the backscattered echo from simple axially symmetric objects (such as  disks, cones, and cone-spheres) can provide an estimate of a transverse dimension of the body  and give an indication of the severity of the edges, or "edginess."47  436INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS Synthetic aperture radar.Thesyntheti<;: aperture radar,whichisdiscussed inSec.14.1,isa radarinamovingvehiclethatprovides ahighresolution imageinbothrangeandina direction paralleltothevehiclemotion.Thelatterdimension issometimes calledcrossrange whentheradaruses aside-looking antenna ~irected.
perpendicular tothedirection ofmotion.
Therangeresolution isobtained witheitheraconventional short-pulse orpulse-compression waveform, andresolution incrossrangeisobtained bysynthesizing theeffectofalarge antenna aperture.Itisusedchieflyformapping ofthegroundandimaging ofstationary objectsontheground.
Inversesynthetic aperture radar.Intheordinary synthetic aperture radarthetargetisstation­ aryandtheradarisinmotion.Theopposite willalsopermittargetimaging; thatis,theradaris stationary andthetargetisinmotion.Thisiscalledinversesynthetic aperture radarordelay­ dopplermapping.
Although thesignalprocessing required issimilartothatofthtfconventional synthetic aperture radar,theinversesynthetic aperture processcanalsobeviewedasan equivalent doppler filtering.
Eachpartofamoving targethasaslightly different relative velocity, ordoppler-frequency shift.Filtering thesevariousdoppler frequencies resolves the different partsofthetargettoprovide animage.Although theinversesynthetic aperture resultsfromrelativemotionofthetarget,justasdoesthecross-section amplitude fluctuations mentioned previously, theprocessing oftheinversesynthetic aperture radarsignalrequires a coherent system(onethatpreserves phase).Inprinciple, inversesynthetic aperture radarcan beusedtoimagemovingtargetssuchasaircraftandships.Ithasbeenappliedinthepastto imaging ofthemoonandtomapping thesurfacebelowthecloudssurrounding theplanet Venus.61 Polarization.
46,47Thepolarization oftheradarbackscattered energydepends onthetarget properties anddiffers,ingeneral, fromthepolarization oftheenergyincident onthetarget.
Thisproperty canbeusedasapossible basisfordiscriminating onetargetfromanother.
For example, athinstraight wirecanbereadilydistinguished fromahomogeneous sphereby observing thevariation oftheechosignalamplitude asthepolarization isrotated.Theecho fromthespherewillbeunmodulated, andtheechosignalfromthewirewillvarybetween a maximum andaminimum attwicetherateatwhichthepolarization isrotated.Theuseof circularpolarization toreducetheradarechofromsymmetrical raindrops relativetotheecho fromaircraft,asdescribed inSec.13.8,takesadvantage ofthedifferences intargetresponse to different incident polarizations.
.
Forcomplete knowledge oftheeffectofpolarization, thepolarization matrixmustbe determined.
IfHstandsforlinearhorizontal polarization, 'vforlinearvertical, andifthefirst letterofatwo-letter grouping denotes thetransmitted polarization andthesecondlctter denotes thepolarization ofthereceived signal,thenthepolarization matrixrequires knowl­ edgeoftheamplitudes andphaseofthefollowing components: HH,VV,HVandVH.HV andVHaresometimes calledthecrosspolarization components.
IngeneralHV=VHsothat onlyoneneedbedetermined.
Orthogonal circular-polarization components canalsobeused todescribe thepolarization matrix.Bytransmitting twoorthogonal polarizations andmeasur­ ingtheamplitude andphaseofthereceived echoesoneachpolarization, aswellasthe cross-polarization component, ameansoftargetdiscrimination, orclassification, canbe provided.
Someinformation aboutthetargetcanbeobtained fromtheamplitude only,and notthephase,ofthe·polarization components.
Ithasalsobeensuggested thatthecross­ polarized component ofthebackscattered echofromsimpleaxiallysymmetric objects(suchas disks,cones,and corie-spheres) canprovideanestimateofatransverse dimension ofthebody andgiveanindication oftheseverityoftheedges,or··edginess.'''~7 EXTRAC71ON OF INFORMATION AND WAVEFORM DESIGN 437  Nonlinear-contact effects (METKRA).~' When metals come in contact with each other it is  possible for their junctions to act as nonlinear diodes.
The nonlinear properties of such  junctions can be used to recognize metallic from nonmetallic reflectors when illuminated by  radar.
This technique lias sometimes been called METRRA, which stands for Metal Reradiat-  ing Radar.48 Most solid, meclianical, metal-to-metal bonds and properly made solder joints  do not show nonlinear effects.
However, if there is no molecular contact between the metals,  and the space between them is small (of the order of 100 A), then there can be discernible  nonlinear effects.
Such eflects are noted with loose metal-to-metal contacts.
 Tllere are two basic approaches for taking advantage of the nonlinearity of these metal  contacts.
In one approach a single frequency is transmitted and a harmonic of the transmitted  frequency is received.
The nature of tile nonlinearity of typical contacts is such that the third  llarmotlic is usually the greatest.
The other approach simultaneously transmits two frequencies  1; and f2.
and the receiver is tutied to a strong cross-product such as 2fi + fi.
When receiving  at a frcquetlcy different from that transmitted, care must be exercised to ensure that the  trarlsrnitter signal does not radiate a significant spectral component at the frequency to which  tlie receiver is tuned.
 'The arnourit of signal returned fro111 a nonlinear contact at a harmonic frequency is a  nonlinear function of the incident field strength.
Thus the nonlinear target cross section  depends on the power, and the normal radar equation does not apply.
In one system formula-  tion the range dependence varied as the sixth power instead of the fourth power.50 High peak  power is more important with such targets than is high average power.
 Similar techniques have also been proposed for cooperative targets by deliberately pro-  viding the target with a passive transponder employing microwave  diode^.^^*^^  Another related target effect that might be utilized for target recognition is the random  modulation of the scattered signal caused by the modification of the current distribution on  a metal target that results from intermittent contacts on the target.67 This modulation can  be detected by examining the frequency spectrum in the vicinity of the received carrier.
The  acronym RADAM, which stands for radar detection of agitated metals, has sometimes been  used to describe this effect.69  Inverse scattering.
In principle, the size and shape of a target can be found by measuring the  backscattered field, or radar cross section, at all frequencies and all aspects.
It is not possible,  of course, to obtain sucll complete information, but the process can be approximated by  measuring the backscatter at a finite number of frequencies and aspects.
The name inverse  sc.attcri,tg5'%as been used to describe this method for obtaining the target size and shape, and  tllus provide a means for target classification.
The use of high-range-resolution radar for  profiling a target, and tlie inverse synthetic aperture radar mentioned above are two practical  examples of target classification methods that might be called approximations of inverse  scattering.
 Instead of examining the radar echo as a function of frequency, the target response to an  impulse can give the equivalent information since the Fourier transform of the impulse con-  tains all frequencies.
(In the above, an impulse is an infinitesimally short pulse, and the target  response is the echo signal as a function of time.) This has been proposed as a means of target  clas~ification,~~ with the impulse being approximated by a short microwave pulse.
The short  pulse, with its high-frequency content, characterizes the finerdetail of the target.
Although this  can be used as a means of target classification, it has been suggested that the usual short-pulse  radar does not obtain important information about the target since its waveform does not  contain the lower frequencie~.~~-~~*~~ The lower frequencies that are suggested as being im-  portant are those corresponding to wavelengths from half the target size to wavelengths about  EXTRACTION OFINFORMATION ANDWAVEFORM DESIGN437 Nonlinear-<:ontact effects(METRRA).48 Whenmetalscomeincontactwitheachotheritis possible fortheirjunctions toact-asnonlinear ,diodes.Thenonlinear properties ofsuch junctions canbeusedtorecognize metallic fromnonmetallic reflectors whenilluminated by radar.Thistechnique hassometimes beencalledMETRRA, whichstandsforMetalReradiat­ ingRadar.48Mostsolid,mechanical, metal-to-metal bondsandproperly madesolderjoints donotshownonlinear errects.However, ifthereisnomolecular contactbetween themetals, andthespacebetween themissmall(oftheorderof100A),thentherecanbediscernible nonlinear effects.Sucheffectsarenotedwithloosemetal-to-metal contacts.
Therearetwobasicapproaches fortakingadvantage ofthenonlinearity ofthesemetal contacts.
Inoneapproach asinglefrequency istransmitted andaharmonic ofthetransmitted frequency isreceived.
Thenatureofthenonlinearity oftypicalcontacts issuchthatthethird harmonic isusuallythegreatest.
Theotherapproach simultaneously transmits twofrequencies ItandI2.andthereceiveristunedtoastrongcross-product suchas2ft±f2.Whenreceiving atafrequency different fromthattransmitted, caremustbeexercised toensurethatthe transmitter signaldoesnotradiateasignificant spectralcomponent atthefrequency towhich thereceiver istuned.
Theamount ofsignalreturned fromanonlinear contactataharmonic frequency isa nonlinear function oftheincident fieldstrength.
Thusthenonlinear targetcrosssection depends onthepower,andthenormalradarequation doesnotapply.Inonesystemformula­ tiontherangedependence variedasthesixthpowerinsteadofthefourthpower.soHighpeak powerismoreimportant withsuchtargetsthanishighaveragepower.
Similartechniques havealsobeenproposed forcooperative targetsbydeliberately pro­ vidingthetargetwithapassivetransponder employing microwave diodes.49•so Another relatedtargeteffectthatmightbeutilizedfortargetrecognition istherandom modulation ofthescattered signalcausedbythemodification ofthecurrentdistribution on ametaltargetthatresultsfromintermittent contacts onthetarget,67 Thismodulation can bedetected byexamining thefrequency spectrum inthevicinityofthereceived carrier.The acronym RADAM, whichstandsforradardetection ofagitated metals,hassometimes been usedtodescribe thiseffect.69 Inversescattering.
Inprinciple, thesizeandshapeofatargetcanbefoundbymeasuring the hackscattered field,orradarcrosssection,atallfrequencies andallaspects.Itisnotpossible, ofcourse,toobtainsuchcomplete information, buttheprocesscanbeapproximated by measuring thebackscatter atafinitenumberoffrequencies andaspects.Thenameinverse scatterillgSIf'hasheenusedtodescribe thismethodforobtaining thetargetsizeandshape,and thusprovide ameansfortargetclassification.
Theuseofhigh-range-resolution radarfor profiling atarget,andtheinversesynthetic aperture radarmentioned abovearetwopractical exampiesoftargetclassification methods thatmightbecalledapproximations ofinverse scattering.
Insteadofexamining theradarechoasafunction offrequency, thetargetresponse toan impulse cangivetheequivalent information sincetheFouriertransform oftheimpulsecon­ tainsallfrequencies.
(Intheabove,animpulseisaninfinitesimally shortpulse,andthetarget response istheechosignalasafunction oftime.)Thishasbeenproposed asameansoftarget c1assification,s2 withtheimpulsebeingapproximated byashortmicrowave pulse.Theshort pulse,withitshigh-frequency content, characterizes thefine,detailofthetarget.Although this canbeusedasameansoftargetclassification, ithasbeensuggested thattheusualshort-pulse radardoesnotobtainimportant information aboutthetargetsinceitswaveform doesnot containthelowerfrequencies.s3-5s.62 Thelowerfrequencies thataresuggested asbeingim­ portantarethosecorresponding towavelengths fromhalfthetargetsizetowavelengths about 438 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  ten times the target dimensions.
These correspond to frequencies in the Rayleigh and the  low-resonance regions.
The use of such frequencies is said to provide overall dimensions,  approximate shape, and material composition.
Instead of the impulse response, the response of  a target to a ramp function is sometimes more convenient to work with, especially when the  longer wavelengths are used to obtain target classification.
 The method of inverse scattering seems to require an examination of the target over a  large frequency range, perhaps as much as 10 to 1.
If the phase shift as well as the amplitude of  the echo are measured, fewer frequencies might be utilized than when amplitude alone is  obtained.56 Experiments with as many as 12 frequencies have been carried out for simple  scattering objects, but as few as four frequencies were said to be adequate for the discrimina-  tion of objects as complex as aircraft.53  Automatic target classification.
For practical utilization, most of the targetJclassification  methods described above require automatic processing.
Some method of signal recognition or  pattern recognition must be applied to be able to correctly estimate the type of target.
This can  be just as important a part of target classification as the sensor itself.
 Target track history.
The above methods of target classification depend on extracting some-  thing about the target other than its location.
However, the target track, which is obtained  from location data alone, can provide significant information that can be used in the  identification process, especially in a military situation.
The speed, course, and maneuver of a  target can indicate something about its intent; and therefore a form of target classification is  possible.
Automatic detection and tracking circuitry can aid in this form of discrimination  since it provides a method for obtaining the target track.
The long-range capability of HF  over-the-horizon radar (Sec.
14.2) is also useful for this purpose since it can observe a large  portion of the target track and might even be capable of observing where the target track  originates (airport or seaport), which can be an important classification clue in some  applications.
 REFERENCES  1.
Goldman, S.: "Frequency Analysis, Modulation, and Noise," p.
281, McGraw-Hill Book Company.
 New York, 1948.
 2.
Torrieri, D.
J.: Arrival Time Estimation by Adaptive Thresholding, IEEE Tram., vol.
AES-10, pp.
 178-184, March, 1974.
 3.
Mallinckrodt, A.
J., and T.
E.
Sollenberger: Optimum Pulse-Time Determination, IRE Trans., no.
 PGIT-3, pp.
151-159, March, 1954.
 4.
Gabor, D.: Theory of Communication, J.
IEE, pt.
111, vol.
93, pp.
429-441, 1946.
 5.
Woodward, P.
M.: "Probability and Information Theory, with Applications to Radar," chap.
6,  McGraw-Hill Book Co., New York, 1953.
 6.
Skolnik, M.
I.: Theoretical Accuracy of Radar Measurements, IRE Trans., vol.
ANE-7, pp.
123-129,  December, 1960.
.
.: ..: .
 7.
Barton, D.
K., and H.
R.
Ward: "Handbook of Radar Measurement," Prentice-Hall, Inc., N.J.
1969.
 8.
Manasse, R.: Range and Velocity Accuracy from Radar Measurements, unpublished internal report  dated February,' 1955, MIT Lincoln Laboratory, Lexington, Mass.
(Not generally available.)  9.
Slepian, D.: Estimation of Signal Parameters in the Presence of Noise, IRE Tram., no.
PGIT-3, pp.
 68-89, March, 1954.
.
.
.
 10.
Siebert, W.
McC.: A Radar Detection Philosophy, IRE Trans., vol.
IT-2, pp.
204-221, September,  1956.
 11.
Rihaczek, A.
w.:'" principles of ~i'~h-~esolution Radar," McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York,  1969.
 438INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS tentimesthetargetdimensions.
Thesecorrespond tofrequencies intheRayleigh andthe low-resonance regions.Theuseofsuchfrequencies issaidtoprovideoveralldimensions, approximate shape,andmaterialcomposition.
Insteadoftheimpulseresponse, theresponse of atargettoarampfunction issometimes moreconvenient toworkwith,especially whenthe longerwavelengths areusedtoobtaintargetclassification.
Themethodofinversescattering seemstorequireanexamination ofthetargetovera largefrequency range,perhapsasmuchas10to1.Hthephaseshiftaswellastheamplitude of theechoaremeasured, fewerfrequencies mightbeutilizedthanwhenamplitude aloneis obtained.s6Experiments withasmanyas12frequencies havebeencarriedoutforsimple scattering objects,butasfewasfourfrequencies weresaidtobeadequate forthediscrimina­ tionofobjectsascomplex asaircraft.
S3 Automatic targetclassification.
Forpractical utilization, mostofthetargetJclassification methods described aboverequireautomatic processing.
Somemethodofsignalrecognition or patternrecognition mustbeappliedtobeabletocorrectly estimate thetypeoftarget.Thiscan bejustasimportant apartoftargetclassification asthesensoritself.
Targettrackhistory.Theabovemethods oftargetclassification dependonextracting some­ thingaboutthetargetotherthanitslocation.
However, thetargettrack,whichisobtained fromlocation dataalone,canprovide significant information thatcanbeusedinthe identification process,especially inamilitarysituation.
Thespeed,course,andmaneuver ofa targetcanindicatesomething aboutitsintent;andtherefore aformoftargetclassification is possible.
Automatic detection andtracking circuitry canaidinthisformofdiscrimination sinceitprovides amethodforobtaining thetargettrack.Thelong-range capability ofHF over-the-horizon radar(Sec.14.2)isalsousefulforthispurpose sinceitcanobservealarge portionofthetargettrackandmightevenbecapableofobserving wherethetargettrack originates (airport orseaport), whichcanbeanimportant classification clueinsome applications.
REFERENCES 1.Goldman, S.:"Frequency Analysis, Modulation, andNoise,"p.281,McGraw-Hili BookCompany, NewYork,1948.
2.Torrieri, D.J.:ArrivalTimeEstimation byAdaptive Thresholding, IEEETrans.,vol.AES-I0.
pp.
178-184, March,1974.
3.Mallinckrodt, A.J.,andT.E.Sollenberger: Optimum Pulse-Time Determination, IRETrans.,no.
PGIT-3, pp.151-159, March,1954.
4.Gabor,D.:TheoryofCommunication, J.lEE,pI.III,vol.93,pp.429-441, 1946.
5.Woodward, P.M.:..Probability andInformation Theory, withApplications toRadar,"chap.6, McGraw-Hill BookCo.,NewYork,1953.
6.Skolnik, M.I.:Theoretical Accuracy ofRadarMeasurements, IRETrans.,vol.ANE·7,pp.123-129, December, 1960.
., 7.Barton,D.K.,andH.R.Ward:"Handbook ofRadarMeasurement," Prentice-HalL Inc.,N.J.1969.
8.Manasse, R.:RangeandVelocity Accuracy fromRadarMeasurements, unpublished internalreport datedFebruary,' 1955,MITLincolnLaboratory, Lexington, Mass.(Notgenerally available.) 9.Slepian, D.:Estimation ofSignalParameters inthePresence ofNoise,IRETrans.,no.PGIT·3, pp.
68-89,March,1954.' 10.Siebert,W.McC.:ARadarDetection Philosophy, IRETrans.,vol.IT·2,pp.204-221, September, 1956.
11.Rihaczek, A.W.:·"Principles ofHigh-Resolution Radar,"McGraw-Hill BookCompany, NewYork, 1969. EXTRACTION OF INFORMATION AND WAVEFORM DESIGN 439  12.
I)clcy, (i.
W.: Wavcforin I>csipt~.
cltap.
2 of " Ratl;~r Handbook." M.
I.
Skoltiik (cd.), McCiraw-ilill  Uook Cornpatiy.
Ncw York.
1970.
 I?.
Sinsky.
A.
I., arid C.
P.
Wang: Standar-dization of the Definition of the Radar Ambiguity Function,  lEEE Tratrs..
Vol.
AES-10, pp.
532 533.
July.
1974.
 14.
1)ickc.
R.
ri.: Ohjcct IJctcction System.
C1.S.
Patent no.
2,624,876.
issued Jan.
6, 1953.
 15.
Cook, C.
E.: Pulse Compression: Kcy to More Efficient Radar Transmission, Proc.
IRE, vol.
48.
pp.
 310 215.
March.
1960.
 16.
Farnett, E.
C., T.
B.
Howard, and G.
H.
Stevens: Pulse Compression, chap.
20 of "Radar Handbook,"  M.
I.
Skolnik (ed.).
McGraw-Hill Book Co..
New York, 1970.
 17.
Peebles.
P.
2..
Jr., and G.
H.
Stevens: A Technique for the Generation of Highly Linear FM Pulse  Radar Signals, IEEE Tra~rs., vol.
MIL-9, pp.
32-38, January, 1965.
 18.
Eher, L.
0..
and H.
H.
Soule.
Jr.: Digital Generation of Wideband LFM Waveforms, IEEE 1975  lnternational Radar CoMerence, pp.
170- 175, Apr.
2 1-23, 1975, IEEE Publication 75 CHO 938- 1  AES.
 19.
Upton, L.
O., and G.
J.
Mayer: Charge-coupled Devices and Radar Signal Processing.
RCA Engr., vol.
 21, no.
I, pp.
30-34, Junc/July, 1975.
 20.
Holland, M.
G., and L.
T.
Claiborne: Practical Surface Acoustic Wave Devices, Proc.
IEEE, vol.
62.
 pp.
582-61 1.
May, 1974.
 2 1.
Maines, J.
D., and E.
G.
S.
Paige: Surface-Acoustic-Wave Devices for Signal Processing Applications,  Proc.
IEEE, vol.
64, pp.
639-652, May, 1976.
 22.
Bristol, T.
W.: Surface Acoustic Wave Devices-Technology and Applications, IEEE 1976 WESCON  Prc~fessional Program, Los Angeles, Sept.
14- 17, 1976, paper 2411.
 23.
Lipka, M.: Pulse Compression Filter and Wideband Receiver Evaluation.
IEEE 1975 lnternational  Radar Co~(irettce, pp.
283-287, Apr.
21-23, 1975, IEEE Publication 75 CHO 938-1 AES.
 24.
Cook, C.
E., and M.
Bernfeld: "Radar Signals," Academic Press, New York, 1967.
 25.
Temes.
C.
L.: Sidelobe Suppression in a Range-Channel Pulse-Compression Radar, IRE Trans..
vol.
 MIL-6, pp.
162-169, April, 1962.
 26.
Thor, R.
C.: A Large Time-bandwidth Product Pulse-Compression Technique, IEEE Trans., vol.
 MIL-6.
pp.
169-173.
April.
1962.
 27.
Kroszcynski, J.
J.: Pulsecompression by Means of Linear-Period Modulation, Proc.
IEEE, vol.
57, pp.
 1260- 1266, July.
1969.
 28.
Rowlands, R.
0.: Detection of a Doppler-Invariant FM Signal by Means of a Tapped Delay Line, J.
 Acoust.
Sac.
Am., vol.
37, pp.
608-615, April, 1965.
 29.
Taylor, S.
A., and J.
L.
MacArthur: Digital Pulse Compression Radar Receiver, APL Technical Digest,  vol.
6.
pp.
2-10, MarchIApril, 1967.
r  30.
Golomb, S.
W.: " Digital Communications with Space Applications," Prentice-Hall, Englewood ClilTs,  N.J..
1964.
 31.
Ackroyd, M.
H., and F.
Ghani: Optimum Mismatch Filters for Sidelobe Suppression, IEEE Trans.,  vol.
AES-9, pp.
214-218, March, 1973.
 32.
Millett, R.
E.: A Matched-Filter Pulse-Compression System Using a Nonlinear FM Waveform, IEEE  Trans., vol.
AES-6, pp.
73-78, January, 1970.
 33.
Nathansdn, F.
E.: "Radar Design Principles," McGraw-Hill Book Co., New York, 1969.
 34.
Rihaczek, A.
W.: Radar Waveform Selection-A Simplified Approach, IEEE Trans., vol.
AES-7, pp.
 1078-1086, November, 1971.
 35.
Mutton, J.
0.: Advanced Pulse Compression Techniques, IEEE NAECON '75 Record, pp.
141-148.
 36.
Welti, G.
R.: Quaternary Codes for Pulsed Radar, IRE Trans., vol.
IT-6, pp.
400-408, June, 1960.
 37.
Golay, M.
J.
E.: Complementary Series, IRE Trans., vol.
IT-7, pp.
82-87, April, 1961.
 38.
MacWilliams, F.
J., and N.
J.
A.
Sloane: Pseudo-Random Sequences and Arrays, Proc.
I EEE, vol.
64.
 pp.
17 15 - 1729, December, 1976.
 39.
Shrader, W.
W.: MTI Radar, chap.
17 of" Radar Handbook," M.
I.
Skolnik (ed.), McGraw-Hill Book  Co..
New York, 1970.
 40.
Ward, H.
R.: Dispersive Constant False Alarm Rate Receiver, Proc.
IEEE, vol.
60, pp.
735--736, June,  1972.
 41.
Mortley, W.
S., and S.
N.
RadclifTe: Pulse Compression and Signal Processing, IEEE Cot$ Publica-  tion No.
105, " Radar-Present and Future," Oct.
23-25, 1973, pp.
292-296.
 42.
Bogotch, S.
E..
and C.
E.
Cook: Effects of Limiting on the Detectability of Partially Time Coincident  Pulse Compression Signals, IEEE Trans., vol.
MIL-9, pp.
17-24, January, 1965.
 43.
Woerrlein, H.
H.: Spurious Target Generation Due to Hard Limiting in Pulse Compression Radars,  IEEE Trans., vol.
AES-7, pp.
1170-1 178, November, 1971.
 44.
Milne, K.: The Combination of Pulse Compression with Frequency Scanning for Three-dimensional  Radars.
The Radio and Electronic Etlgr..
vol.
28, pp.
89-106, August.
1964.
 EXTRACTION OFINFORMATION ANDWAVEFORM DESIGN439 J2.llelcy,(j.W.:Wavcform Design.chap.3of"RadarHandbook," M,LSkolnik (cd.);McUraw-llill HookCompany, NewYork,197U.
13.Sinsky.A.L.andCP.Wang:Standardization oftheDefinition oftheRadarAmbiguity Function, IEEETraIlS..Vol.AES-IO, pp.5J2513,July,1974.
14Dicke.R.II.:ObjectDetection Systcm.
U.S.Patentno.2.624.876.
issuedJan.6.1953.
15.Cook.C'.E.:PulseCompression: KeytoMoreEfficient RadarTransmission.
Proc.IRE.vot.48.pp.
JIll315.March.1960.
16.Farnett.
E.C.T.B.Howard.
andG.H.Stevens: PulseCompression.
chap.20of"RadarHandbook." M.I.Skolnik (ed.).McGraw-Hili BookCo..NewYork.1970.
17.Peebles.
P.Z..Jr.andG.H.Stevens: ATechnique fortheGeneration ofHighlyLinearFMPulse RadarSignals,IEEETrails.,vol.MIL-9.pp.32-38.January.
1965.
.
IH.Eher.L.0..andH.H.Soule.Jr.:DigitalGeneration ofWideband LFMWaveforms.
IEEE1975 International RadarConference.
pp.170-175, Apr.21-23,1975,IEEEPublication 75CHO938-1 AES.
19.Upton,L.O.andG.J.Mayer:Charge-coupled DevicesandRadarSignalProcessing.
RCAEngr..vol.
21.no.I.pp.30-34.June/July, 1975.
20.Holland, M.G.,andL.T.Claiborne: Practical SurfaceAcoustic WaveDevices.
Proc.IEEE,vol.62, pp.582-611, May,1974.
2\.Maines.J.D..andE.G.S.Paige:Surface-Acoustic-Wave DevicesforSignalProcessing Applications.
Proc.IEEE,vol.64,pp.6J9-652.
May.1976.
22.Bristol,T.W.:SurfaceAcoustic WaveDevices-Technology andApplications, IEEE1976WESCON Professional Program.
LosAngeles.
Sept.14-17,1976,paper24/1.
23.Lipka.M.:PulseCompression FilterandWideband Receiver Evaluation.
IEEE1975International RadarConference, pp.283-287.
Apr.21-23.1975.IEEEPublication 75CHO938-1AES.
24.Cook.C.E.,andM.Bernfeld: "RadarSignals." Academic Press,NewYork,1967.
25.Ternes.C.L.:Sidelobe Suppression inaRange-Channel Pulse-Compression Radar,IRETrans..vol.
MIL-6.pp.162-169.
April.
1962.
26.Thor.R.c.:ALargeTime-bandwidth Product Pulse-Compression Technique, IEEETrans.,vol.
MIL-6.pp.169-173.
April.1962.
27.Kroszcynski,J.J.: PulseCompression byMeansofLinear-Period Modulation, Proc.IEEE,vol.57,pp.
126O-1266,July.1969.
28.Rowlands, R.0.:Detection ofaDoppler-Invariant FMSignalbyMeansofaTapped DelayLine.J.
Aroust.Soc.Am.,vol.37.pp.608-615.
April.1965.
29.Taylor,S.A.,andJ.L.MacArthur: DigitalPulseCompression RadarReceiver, APLTechnical Digest.
vol.6.pp.2-10.March/April, 1967.
,.
30.Golomb, S.W.:"DigitalCommunications withSpaceApplications," Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, N.J..1964.
3\.Ackroyd, M.H.,andF.Ghani:Optimum Mismatch FiltersforSidelobe Suppression, IEEETrans., vol.AES-9,pp.214-218.
March.1971 32.Millett,R.E.:AMatched-Filter Pulse-Compression SystemUsingaNonlinear FMWaveform, IEEE Trans.,vol.AES-6.pp.73-78,January, 1970.
33.Nathanson, F.E.:"Radar DesignPrinciples," McGraw-Hill BookCo.,NewYork,1969.
34.Rihaczek, A.W.:RadarWaveform Selection-A Simplified Approach, IEEETrans.,vol.AES-7,pp.
1078-1086, November.
1971.
35.Mutton, J.0.:Advanced PulseCompression Techniques, IEEENAECON '75Record,pp.141-148.
36.Welti,G.R.:Quaternary CodesforPulsedRadar,IRETrans.,vol.IT-6,pp.400-408, June,1960.
37.Golay,M.J.E.:Complementary Series,IRETrans.,vol.IT-7,pp.82-87,April,1961.
38.MacWilliams.
F.J.,andN.J.A.Sloane:Pseudo-Random Sequences andArrays,Proc.IEEE, vol.64, pp.1715-1729,December, 1976.
39.Shrader, W.W.:MTIRadar,chap.17of"RadarHandbook," M.I.Skolnik(ed.),McGraw-Hill Book Co..NewYork,1970.
4D.Ward.H.R.:Dispersive Constant FalseAlarmRateReceiver, Proc.IEEE,vol.60,pp.735-736.
June, 1972.
41.Mortley, W.S..andS.N.Radcliffe: PulseCompression andSignalProcessing, IEEECorif.Publica­ tionNo.105,"Radar-Present andFuture:' Oct.23-25,1973,pp.292-296.
42.Bogotch, S.E.,andC.E.Cook:EffectsofLimiting ontheDetectability ofPartially TimeCoincident PulseCompression Signals,IEEETrans.,vol.MIL-9,pp.17-24,January, 1965.
43.Woerrlein, H.H.:Spurious TargetGeneration DuetoHardLimiting inPulseCompression Radars, IEEETrans.,vol.AES-7,pp.1170-1178, November, 1971.
44.Milne,K.:TheCombination ofPulseCompression withFrequency Scanning forThree-dimensional Radars.TheRadioandElectronic Engr.,vol.28.pp.89-106.
Au~ust.
1964. 440 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  45.
Hynes, R., and R.
E.
Gardner: Doppler Spectra of S Band and X Band Signals, IEEE Tru~u.
Suppl,  vol.
AES-3, no.
6, pp.
356-365, Nov., 1967.
Also, Report of NRL Progress, pp.
1-10, January, 1968, PB  177017.
 46.
Copeland, J.
R.: Radar Target Classification by Polarization Properties, Proc.
IRE, vol.
48, pp.
 1290- 1296, July, 1960.
 47.
Knott, E.
F., and T.
B.
A.
Senior: Cross Polarization Diagnostics, IEEE Trans., vol AP-20, pp  223-224, March, 1972.
 48.
Optiz, C.
L.: Metaldetecting Radar Rejects Clutter Naturally, M~crowaves, vol.
15, pp.
12-14, August,  1976.
 49.
Shefer, J., and R.
J.
Klensch: Harmonic Radar Helps Autos Avoid Collisions, IEEE Spectrtrm, vol.
10,  pp.
38-45, May, 1973.
 50.
Davies, D.
E.
N., and H.
Makridis: Two-Frequency Secondary Radar Incorpordting Passive Trans-  ponders, Electronics Letters, vol.
9, no.
25, pp.
592-593, Dec.
13, 1973.
 51.
Lewis, R.
M.: Physical Optics Inverse Diffraction, IEEE Trans., vol.
AP-17, pp.
308-314, May, 1969  52.
Kennaugh, E.
M., and D.
L.
Moffatt: Transient and Impulse Response Approximations, Proc.
IEEE,  vol.
53, pp.
893-901, August, 1965.
3  53.
Ksienski, A.
A., Y.
T.
Lin, and L.
J.
White: Low-Frequency Approach to Target Identification, Proc  IEEE, vol.
63, pp.
1651-1660, December, 1975.
 54.
Moffatt, D.
L., and R.
K.
Mains: Detection and Discrimination of Radar Targets, lEEE Trans, vol  AP-23, pp.
358-367, May, 1975.
 55.
Chuang, C.
W., and D.
L.
Moffatt: Natural Resonances of Radar Targets via Prony's Method and  Target Discrimination, IEEE Trans., vol.
AES-12, pp.
583-589, November, 1976.
 56.
Goggins, W.
B., Jr., P.
Blacksmith, and C.
J.
Stetten: Phase Signature Radars, IEEE Trans., vol.
AP-22,  pp.
774-780, November, 1974.
 57.
Berrie, D.
W.: The Effects of Pseudo-Random Noise Upon Radar System Performance, Aeronaurrcul  Systems Division, Wright-Patterson Air Force Base, Ohio, ASD-TR-74-23, August, 1974.
(Subm~tted a  Ohio State University Dissertation), U.S.
Gov.
Printing Office: 1974657-0171347.
 58.
Caputi, W.
J., Jr.: Stretch: A Time-Transformation Technique, IEEE Trans., vol.
AES-7, pp 269-278,  March, 1971.
 59.
Hoft, D.
J., and M.
B.
Fishwick: Analog Waveform Generation and Processing, Electronic Progress,  vol.
17, no.
1, pp.
2-16, Spring, 1975.
(Published by Raytheon Co., Lexington, Mass.)  60.
Barton, D.
K.: Sputnik I1 as Observed by C-Band Radar, 1959 IRE National COIIV.
Rec., vol.
7, pt 5,  pp.
67-73.
 61.
Pettengill, G.
H.: Radar Astronomy, chap.
33 of "Radar Handbook," M.
I.
Skolnik (ed.), McGraw-  Hill Book Co., New York, 1970.
 62.
Lin, Y.-T., and A.
A.
Ksienski: Identification of Complex Geometrical Shapes by Means of Low-  Frequency Radar Returns, The Radio and Electronic Engineer, vol.
46, pp.
472-486, October, 1976.
 63.
Frank, R.
L.: Polyphase Codes with Good Nonperiodic Correlation Properties, IEEE Trans., vol  IT-9, pp.
43-45, January, 1963.
 64.
Cantrell, B.
H.: Sidelobe Reduction in Polyphase Codes, Naval Research Laboratory Report 8108,  Washington, D.C., Apr.
13, 1977.
 65.
von Schlachta, K.: A Contribution to Radar Target Classification, International Cot$erence  RADAR-77, Oct.
25-28, 1977, pp.
135-139, IEE (London) Conference Publication no.
155.
 66.
Lindner, J.: Binary Sequences Up to Length 40 with Best Possible Autocorrelation Function, Elec-  tronics Letters, vol.
11, no.
21, p.
507, Oct.
10, 1975.
 67.
Bahr, A.
J., and J.
P.
Petro: On the RF Frequency Dependence of the Scattered Spectral Energy  Produced by Intermittent Contacts Among Elements of aTarget, IEEE Trans., vol.
AP-26, pp.
618-62 1,  July, 1978.
 68.
Dixon, R.
C.: "Spread Spectrum Systems," Wiley Interscience, N.Y., 1976.
 69.
Newburgh, R.
G.: Basic Investigations of the RADAM Effect, Rome Air Development Center, New  York, Report RADC-TR-78-151, June, 1978, AD A058099.
(Approved for public release.)  440INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS 45.Hynes,R.,andR.E.Gardner: Doppler SpectraofSBandandXBandSignals,IEEETraIlS.SlIppl., vol.AES-3,no.6,pp.356-365, Nov.,1967.Also,ReportofNRLProgress, pp.1-10,January, 1968,PB 177017.
46.Copeland, J.R.:RadarTargetClassification byPolarization Properties, Proc.IRE,vol.48,pp.
1290-1296, July,1960.
47.Knott,E.F.,andT.B.A.Senior:CrossPolarization Diagnostics, IEEETrans.,vol.AP-20,pp.
223-224, March,1972.
48.Optiz,C.L.:Metal-detecting RadarRejectsClutterNaturally, Microwaves, vol.15,pp.12-14,August, 1976.
49.Shefer,J.,andR.1.Klensch: Harmonic RadarHelpsAutosAvoidCollisions, IEEESpectrum, vol.10, pp.38-45,May,1973.
50.Davies,D.E.N.,andH.Makridis: Two-Frequency Secondary RadarIncorporating PassiveTrans­ ponders, Electronics Letters,vol.9,no.25,pp.592-593, Dec.13,1973.
51.Lewis,R.M.:Physical OpticsInverseDiffraction, IEEETrans.,vol.AP-17,pp.308-314, May,1969.
52.Kennaugh, E.M.,andD.L.Moffatt: Transient andImpulse Response Approximations, Proc.IEEE, vol.53,pp.893-901, August,1965.
"J 53.Ksienski, A.A.,Y.T.Lin,andL.J.White:Low-Frequency Approach toTargetIdentification, Proc.
IEEE,vol.63,pp.1651-1660, December, 1975.
54.Moffatt, D.L.,andR.K.Mains:Detection andDiscrimination ofRadarTargets,IEEETrans.,vol.
AP-23,pp.358-367, May,1975.
55.Chuang, C.W.,andD.L.Moffatt: NaturalResonances ofRadarTargetsviaProny'sMethodand TargetDiscrimination, IEEETrans.,vol.AES-12.
pp.583-589, November, 1976.
56.Goggins, W.B.,Jr.,P.Blacksmith, andC.J.Sletten:PhaseSignature Radars,IEEETrans.,vol.AP-22, pp.774-780, November, 1974.
57.Berrie,D.W.:TheEffectsofPseudo-Random NoiseUponRadarSystemPerformance, Aeronautical SystemsDivision,Wright-Patterson AirForceBase,Ohio.ASD-TR-74-23, August,1974.(Submitted as OhioStateUniversity Dissertation), U.S.Gov.Printing Office:1974-657-017/347.
58.Caputi,W.1.,Jr.:Stretch:ATime-Transformation Technique,lEEE Trans.,vol.AES-7,pp.269-278, March,1971.
59.Hoft,D.J.,andM.B.Fishwick: AnalogWaveform Generation andProcessing.
Electronic Progress, vol.17,no.I,pp;2-16,Spring,1975.(Published byRaytheon Co.,Lexington.
Mass.) 60.Barton,D.K.:SputnikIIasObserved byC-BandRadar,1959IRENational COIIV.Rec.,vol.7,pt5, pp.67-73.
61.Pettengill, G.H.:RadarAstronomy, chap.33of"RadarHandbook," M.I.Skolnik(ed.):McGraw­ HillBookCo.,NewYork,1970.
62.Lin,Y.-T.,andA.A.Ksienski: Identification ofComplex Geometrical ShapesbyMeansofLow­ Frequency RadarReturns, TheRadioandElectronic Engineer, vol.46,pp.472-486, October, 1976.
63.Frank,R.L.:Polyphase CodeswithGoodNonperiodic Correlation Properties, IEEETrans.,vol.
IT-9,pp.43-45,January, 1963.
64.Cantrell.
B.H.:Sidelobe Reduction inPolyphase Codes,NavalResearch Laboratory Report8108, Washington, D.C.,Apr.13,1977.
65.vonSchlachta, K.:AContribution toRadarTargetClassification, International Conference RADAR-77, Oct.25-28,1977.pp.135-139, lEE(London) Conference Publication no.155.
66.Lindner, J.:BinarySequences UptoLength40withBestPossible Autocorrelation Function, Elec­ tronicsLetters,vol.11,no.21,p.507,Oct.10,1975.
67.Bahr,A.J.,andJ.P.Petro:OntheRFFrequency Dependence oftheScattered Spectral Energy Produced byIntermittent Contacts AmongElements ofaTarget.IEEETrans.,vol.AP-26,pp.618-621, July,1978.
68.Dixon,R.c.:"Spread Spectrum Systems," WileyInterscience, N.Y.,1976.
69.Newburgh, R.G.:BasicInvestigations oftheRADAM Effect,RomeAirDevelopment Cenrer,New York,ReportRADC-TR-78-151, June,1978,ADA058099.
(Approved forpublicrelease.) CHAPTER  TWELVE  PROPAGATION OF RADAR WAVES  12.1 INTRODUCTION  Tlie propagation of radar waves is affected by the earth's surface and its atmosphere.
Complete  analysis or prediction of radar performance must take into account propagation phenomena  sit~cc tilost radars do not opcratc ill " frcc space" as was assumed in the ideal formulation of  the radar equation in Chaps.
1 arid 2.
Free-space radar performance is modified by,scattrr.ir~y  of electrotnagnetic energy from the surface of the earth,-htiort caused by an inhomo-  pcneous at~~lospllere, and ~,~rer~~g~iorr by the gases constituting the atmosphere.
Also included  under the subject of propagation is the e.~ter.rlc~l rroise environment in which the radar finds  itself.
?'lie radar is also affected by tlic r.q//ectioir.
or backscatter, of energy from the earth's  surface and from rain, snow.
birds, and other clutter objects; but this subject is-reserved for  Chap.
13.
The effects of propagation will modify tlie free-space performance of the radar.
as  well as introduce errors in the radar measurements.
 It is usually convenient to distinguish between two different regions when considering  radar propagation.
One is the optical, or itrtet;fkrerrce, region, which is within the line of sight  (direct observation) of tlie radar.
The other is the difrractiort region, which lies beyond the line  of siglit, or beyond tlie horizon, of the radar.
Radar energy found in this region is usually due  to diffraction by the curvature of the earth or refraction by the earth's atmosphere.
 Although the basic theory of radar wave propagation may be well understood, accurate  quatititative predictions are not always easy to obtain because of the difficulty in acquiring the  necessary knowledge of the environment in which the radar operates.
In some respects, the  prediction of propagation phenomena is like predicting the weather.
Quite often the radar  system designer must be content with only a qualitative knowledge of" average" propagation  effects.
Nevertheless, it is important to know and understand how propagation phenomena  can influence radar performance since it can be a major factor in determining how well a radar  performs-in a particular application.
 44 1  441CHAPTER TWELVE PROPAGATION OFRADAR WAVES 12.1INTRODUCTION Thepropagation ofradarwavesisaffectedbytheearth'ssurfaceanditsatmosphere.
Complete analysis orprediction ofradarperformance musttakeintoaccount propagation phenomena sincemostradarsdonotoperate in..freespace"aswasass-umed intheidealformulation of theradarequation inChaps.Iand2.Free-space radarperformance ismodified byJ£11llf:ri/lg ofelectromagnetic energyfromthesurfaceoftheearth, ~~tioll causedbyaninhomo­ geneous atmosphere, andlli,elllwt;O/l bythegasesconstituting theatmosphere.
Alsoincluded underthesubjectofpropagation istheexterllal /loiseenvironment inwhichtheradarfinds itself.Theradarisalsoaffected bythere.ffectio/l, orbackscatter, ofenergyfromtheearth's surfaceandfromrain,snow,birds,andotherclutterobjects: butthissubjectis"reserved for Chap.13.Tjleeffectsofpropagation wil1modifythefree-space performance oftheradar.as wellasintroduce errorsintheradarmeasurements.
ItislIsuallyconvenient todistinguish between twodifferent regionswhenconsidering radarpropagation.
Oneistheoptical,orillte,/erellce, region,whichiswithinthelineofsight (directobservation) oftheradar.Theotheristhedurractioll region,whichliesbeyondtheline ofsight.orbeyondthehorizon, oftheradar.Radarenergyfoundinthisregionisusuallydue todiffraction bythecurvature oftheearthorrefraction bytheearth'satmosphere.
Although thebasictheoryofradarwavepropagation maybewellunderstood, accurate quantitative predictions arenotalwayseasytoobtainbecauseofthedifficulty inacquiring the necessary knowledge oftheenvironment inwhichtheradaroperates.
Insomerespects, the prediction ofpropagation phenomena islikepredicting theweather.
Quiteoftentheradar systemdesigner mustbecontent withonlyaqualitative knowledge of"average" propagation effects.Nevertheless, itisimportant toknowandunderstand howpropagation phenomena caninOuence radarperformance sinceitcanbeamajorfactorindetermining howwellaradar performs"in aparticular application. 442 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  12.2 PROPAGATION OVER A PLANE EARTH  Although there are but few situations where accurate predictions of radar propagation effects  can be made by assuming a flat rather than round earth, it is nevertheless instructive to  examine this special case.
The assumption of a flat earth simplifies the analysis and illustrates  the type of changes introduced in radar coverage by a reflecting ground or sea surface.
 Consider the earth to be a plane, flat, reflecting surface with the radar antenna located at  height ha.
The target is at a height h, and at a distance R from the radar.
Figure 12.1 illustrates  that energy radiated from the radar antenna arrives at the target via two separate paths.
One is  the direct path from radar to the target; the other is the path reflected from the surface of the  earth.
The echo signal reradiated by the target arrives back at the radar via the same two  paths.
Thus the received echo is composed of two components traveling separate paths.
The  magnitude of the resultant echo signal will depend upon the amplitudes and rlative phase  difference between the direct and the surface-reflected signals.
Modification of the field  strength (volts per meter) at the target caused by the presence of the surface may be expressed  by tile ratio  field strength at target in presence of surface  .- - " field strength at target if in free space  It is assumed in this analysis that the lengths of the direct and the reflected paths are almost  (but not quite) equal so that the amplitudes of the two signals are approximately the same  provided there is no loss suffered on reflection.
Hence, if the amplitudes of the two waves dilTer  from one another, it is assumed to be due to a surface-reflection coefficient less than unity.
 - Although the two paths are comparable in length, they are not exactly equal.
Any difference in  the relative phase between the direct and the reflected waves can be attributed to the difference  in the path length and the change in phase that occurs on reflection.
The reflection coefficient  of the surface may be considered as a complex quantity r = peM.
The real part p describes the  change in amplitude, while the argument $ describes the phase shift on reflection.
 It is further assumed in the present example that the reflection coefficient r = - 1.
The  reflected wave suffers no change is amplitude, but its phase is shifted 180".
A reflection  coefficient of - 1 applies at microwave frequencies to a smooth surface with good reflecting  properties if the radiation is horizontally polarized and the angle of incidence is small.
 ,I The effective radiation pattern of the radar located at A in Fig.
12.1 may be found in a  manner analogous to that of a two-element interferometer antenna formed by the radar  antenna at A and its image mirrored by the ground at A'.
The difference between the reflected  path AMB and the direct path AB (or AUMB) is A = 2ha sin c, when R % ha.
For < small, sin 5  may be replaced by (ha + h,)/R so  that'^ = 2ha(ha + h,)/R s 211.
h,/R.
The latter expression  Figure 12.1 Propagation over a plane reflecting surface.
 (12.1)442INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS 12.2PROPAGATION OVERAPLANE EARTH Although therearebutfewsituations whereaccurate predictions ofradarpropagation effects canbemadebyassuming aflatratherthanroundearth,itisnevertheless instructive to examine thisspecialcase.Theassumption ofaflatearthsimplifies theanalysis andillustrates thetypeofchanges introduced inradarcoverage byareflecting groundorseasurface.
Consider theearthtobeaplane,flat,reflecting surfacewiththeradarantenna locatedat heightha•Thetargetisataheighth,andatadistance Rfromtheradar.Figure12.1illustrates thatenergyradiated fromtheradarantenna arrivesatthetargetviatwoseparate paths.Oneis thedirectpathfromradartothetarget;theotheristhepathreflected fromthesurfaceofthe earth.Theechosignalreradiated bythetargetarrivesbackattheradarviathesametwo paths.Thusthereceived echoiscomposed oftwocomponents traveling separate paths.The magnitude oftheresultant echosignalwilldepe~dupontheamplitudes andrylativephase difference between thedirectandthesurface-reflected signals.
Modification ofthefield strength (voltspermeter)atthetargetcausedbythepresence ofthesurfacemaybeexpressed bytheratio fieldstrength attargetinpresence ofsurface rt=fieldstrength attargetifinfreespace-.
Itisassumed inthisanalysis thatthelengthsofthedirectandthereflected pathsarealmost (butnotquite)equalsothattheamplitudes ofthetwosignalsareapproximately thesame provided thereisnolosssufferedonreflection.
Hence,iftheamplitudes ofthetwowavesdiffer fromoneanother, itisassumed tobeduetoasurface-reflection coefficient lessthanunity.
Although thetwopathsarecomparable inlength,theyarenotexactlyequal.Anydifference in therelativephasebetween thedirectandthereflected ~avescanbeattributed tothedifference inthepathlengthandthechangeinphasethatoccursonreflection.
Thereflection coefficient ofthesurfacemaybeconsidered asacomplex quantityr=peN.Therealpartpdescribes the changeinamplitude, whiletheargument'" describes thephaseshiftonreflection.
Itisfurtherassumed inthepresentexample thatthereflection coefficientr= -1.The reflected wavesuffersnochangeinamplitude, butitsphaseisshifted180°.Areflection coefficient of- 1appliesatmicrowave frequencies toasmooth surfacewithgoodreflecting properties iftheradiation ishorizontally polarized andtheangleofincidence issmall.
Theeffective radiation patternoftheradarlocatedatAinFig.12.1maybefoundina manner analogous tothatofatwo-element interferometer antenna formedbytheradar antenna atAanditsimagemirrored bythegroundatA'.Thedifference between thereflected pathAMBandthedirectpathAB(orA"MB)isi\=2hasin~,whenR~ha•For~small,sin~ maybereplaced by(ha+h,)1Rsotha~'i\=2ha(ha+h,)1R::::::2hah,IR.Thelatterexpression 8~Target _~.-- ~D?!ir~e~ct~wo~v~e --:-:::::::;::::::1 Radar R Figure12.1Propagation overaplanereflecting surface. PROPAGATION OF RADAR WAVES 443  assurnes [flat 11, >) 11,.
'The phase difference corresponding to the path-length difference is  2n 2/1,/1, , - --- ---- radians  dl-A R  -1-0 this must be added the phase shift $, resulting from the reflection of the wave at M, which is  assumed to be n radians, or 180".
The total phase ditTerence between the direct and the ground-  reflected signals as measured at the target is  'l'l~c rcst~ltatit of two siprials.
each of unity a~nplitude but with phase difference $, is  [2(1 + cos I/I)]"~.
'i'tlerefore tlle ratio of the power incident on the target at B to that which  would be incident if tlie target were located in free space is  4n/la 11, 2~/1,h, 1 - cos ------ = 4 sin2 - AR AR  Because of reciprocity, the path from target to radar is the same as from radar to target.
The  power ratio at the radar is therefore  21c1ta1r, q4 = 16 sin --- AF!  The radar equation describing the received echo power must be modified by the propagation  factor q4 of Eq.
(12.5).
Since the sine varies in magnitude from 0 to 1, the factor q4 varies from  0 to 16.
The received signal strength also varies from 0 to 16; hence the fourth-power relation  between range and echo signal results in a variation of radar range from 0 to 2 limes the range  of the same radar in free space.
 The field strength is a maximum when the argument of the sine term in Eq.
(12.5) is equal  to n/2.
3x12, .
.
.
.
(211 + l)n/2, where rt = 0, 1, 2, ..
.
.
The maxima are therefore defined by  4h, 11, -- -  AR - 211 + 1 maxima  ?'he minima, or nulls, occur when the sine term is zero, or when  211, h, --  AR - n minima  Thus the presence of a plane reflecting surface causes the continuous elevation coverage to  break up into a lobed structure as indicated in Fig.
12.2.
A target located at the maximum of a  A/4% Figure 12.2 Vertical lobe structure caused by the presence  of a plane reflecting surface.
 PROPAGATION OFRADAR WAVES443 (12.2)assumes thath,~"0'Thephasedifference corresponding tothepath-length difference is 2rr.2ha1l,.11d=---~-radiansAR TothismustbeaddedthephaseshifttjJrresulting fromthereflection ofthewaveatM,whichis assumed toberr.radians,or180°.Thetotalphasedifference between thedirectandtheground­ reflected signalsasmeasured atthetargetis (12.3) (12.4)Theresultant oftwosignals, eachofunityamplitude butwithphasedifference tjJ.is [2(I+cosIII)J112.Therefore theratioofthepowerincident onthetargetatBtothatwhich wouldbeincident jfthetargetwerelocatedinfreespaceis 2 _2(_4rr.lzah')=4.22rr.lIall, '1- 1 cos).R SinAR Because ofreciprocity.
thepathfromtargettoradaristhesameasfromradartotarget.The powerratioattheradaristherefore (12.5) (12.6) maximaTheradarequation describing thereceived echopowermustbemodified bythepropagation factor t]4ofEq.(12.5).Sincethesinevariesinmagnitude from0to1,thefactor t]4variesfrom oto16.Thereceived signalstrength alsovariesfrom0to16;hencethefourth-power relation hetween rangeandechosignalresultsinavariation ofradarrangefrom0to2timestherange ofthesameradarinfreespace.
Thefieldstrength isamaximum whentheargument ofthesineterminEq.(12.5)isequal torr./2,3rr./2,...,(2/1+I)rr./2.where 11=0,1,2,....Themaxima aretherefore definedby 411a1l,=2H+1 ).R minimaTheminima, ornulls,occurwhenthesinetermiszero,orwhen 2hah,)jf=n (12.7) Thusthepresence ofaplanereflecting surfacecausesthecontinuous elevation coverage to breakupintoalobedstructure asindicated inFig.12.2.Atargetlocatedatthemaximum ofa Figure12.2Vertical.lobestructure causedbythepresence ofaplanereflecting surface. 444 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  particular lobe will be detected at a range twice that of the same radar located in free space.
 However, at other angles, the radar detection range can be less than the free-space range.
 When the target lies in the nulls, no echo signal is received.
 The angle (in radians) of the first (lowest) lobe is approximately equal to A/4ha.
If low-  angle coverage is desired, the radar antenna height should be high and the wavelength of the  radiated energy small.
The antenna pattern lobes caused by the presence of the ground might  sometimes be of advantage when the longest possible detection range is desired against low-  altitude targets and where continuous coverage is not required.
 The simple form of the radar equation [Eq.
(1.9)] may be written with the propagation  factor tl included to illustrate the effect of the plane earth:  P, ~~l~o 2nh, h, 41rP, G20(ha h,)4  Pr = (4n)'R4 - 16 sin4 - - lR 12R8 for small angles (12.8) 3  The received signal power for targets at low angles (on the lower side of the first lobe) varies as  the eighth power of the range instead of the more usual fourth power.
This phenomenon has  been experimentally verified for ship targets at short ranges where the plane-earth approxima-  tion has some validity.' Another difference between Eq.
(12.8) and the normal radar equation  is the factor CIA, which appears in place of the factor Gl.
 The analysis in this section is based on many simplifying assumptions; therefore care  should be exercised in adapting the results and conclusions to more realistic situations.
The  assumption of a perfectly reflecting plane earth applies in but a few cases.
Also assumed was an  omnidirectional antenna pattern in the elevation plane.
Since radars utilize directive antennas,  the idealized antenna lobe structure as given by Eq.
(12.4) must be appropriately modified to  account for the actual antenna radiation pattern.
Theoretically, the nulls in the lobe structure  are at zero field strength since the direct and reflected signals are assumed to be of equal  amplitude.
In practice, the nulls are "filled in" and the lobe maxima are reduced because of  nonperfect reflecting surfaces with reflection coefficients less than unity.
The nulls will also be  filled in if broadband signals are radiated by the radar.
 In the above example, the reflection coefficient of the ground was taken to be - 1, which  applies for horizontal polarization and a smooth reflecting surface.
The magnitude and phase  of the reflection coefficients of vertically polarized energy behave differently from waves with  horizontal polarization (Fig.
12.3~ and b).
The calculated amplitude and phase of the  reflection coefficient are plotted for a smooth sea surface at 100 and 3,000 MHz.
It is seen that  the reflection coefficient for vertically polarized energy is less than that for horizontally po-  larized energy.
The angle corresponding to the minimum reflection coefficient is called Brew-  ster's angle.
 The different reflection coefficients with the two polarizations result in different coverage  patterns.
The nulls are not as deep with vertical polarization, nor are the lobe maxima as great.
 Vertical polarization might be preferred when complete vertical coverage is required.
Horizon-  tal polarization might be specified when enhanced range capability is desired and complete  vertical coverage is not necessary.
The theoretical curves of Fig.
12.3 assume a smooth  reflecting surface.
In practice, this condition is seldom met, and the difference in the coverage  diagrams obtained with each of the two types of polarization is often not as pronounced as  might be expected on the basis of theoretical computations.
Roughness is more important than  the electrical properties in determining whether reflection is specular or not.
Measurements  have shown that the reflection coefficient for normal (nonsmooth) ground terrain is in the  range 0.2 to 0.4 and is seldom greater than 0.5.
at frequencies above 1500 MHz except for low  angles of incidence.2g3 ,, 8 &  444INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS particular lobewillbedetected atarangetwicethatofthesameradarlocatedinfreespace.
However, atotherangles,theradardetection rangecanbelessthanthefree-space range.
Whenthetargetliesinthenulls,noechosignalisreceived.
Theangle(inradians) ofthefirst(lowest) lobeisapproximately equalto,l./4h".Iflow­ anglecoverage isdesired,theradarantenna heightshouldbehighandthewavelength ofthe radiated energysmall.Theantenna patternlobescausedbythepresence ofthegroundmight sometimes beofadvantage whenthelongestpossible detection rangeisdesiredagainstlow­ altitudetargetsandwherecontinuous coverage isnotrequired.
Thesimpleformoftheradarequation [Eq.(1.9)]maybewrittenwiththepropagation factor'l included toillustrate theeffectoftheplaneearth: forsmallangles J(12.8) Thereceived signalpowerfortargetsatlowangles(onthelowersideofthefirstlobe)variesas theeighthpoweroftherangeinsteadofthemoreusualfourthpower.Thisphenomenon has beenexperimentally verifiedforshiptargetsatshortrangeswheretheplane-earth approxima­ tionhassomevalidity.! Another difference between Eq.(12.8)andthenormalradarequation isthefactorG/,l.,whichappears inplaceofthefactorGk Theanalysis inthissectionisbasedonmanysimplifying assumptions; therefore care shouldbeexercised inadapting theresultsandconclusions tomorerealisticsituations.
The assumption ofaperfectly reflecting planeearthappliesinbutafewcases.Alsoassumed wasan omnidirectional antenna patternintheelevation plane.Sinceradarsutilizedirective antennas, theidealized antenna lobestructure asgivenby Eq.(12.4)mustbeappropriately modified to account fortheactualantenna radiation pattern.Theoretically, thenuUsinthelobestructure areatzerofieldstrength sincethedirectandreflected signalsareassumed tobeofequal amplitude.
Inpractice, ~henullsare"filledin"andthelobemaxima arereduced becauseof nonperfectreflecting surfaces withreflection coefficients lessthanunity.Thenullswillalsobe filledinifbroadband signalsareradiated bytheradar.
Intheaboveexample, thereflection coefficient ofthegroundwastakentobe-1,which appliesforhorizontal polarization andasmoothreflecting surface.Themagnitude andphase ofthereflection coefficients ofvertically polarized energybehavedifferently fromwaveswith horizontal polarization (Fig.12.3aandb).Thecalculated amplitude andphaseofthe reflection coefficient areplottedforasmoothseasurfaceat100and3,000MHz.Itisseenthat thereflection coefficient forvertically polarized energyislessthanthatforhorizontally po­ larizedenergy.Theanglecorresponding totheminimum reflection coefficient iscalledBrew- ster'sangle.
.
Thedifferent reflection coefficients withthetwopolarizations resultindifferent coverage patterns.
Thenullsarenotasdeepwithverticalpolarization, norarethelobemaxima asgreat.
Verticalpolarization mightbepreferred whencomplete verticalcoverage isrequired.
Horizon­ talpolarization mightbespecified whenenhanced rangecapability isdesiredandcomplete vertical coverage isnotnecessary.
Thetheoretical curvesofFig.12.3assumeasmooth reflecting surface.Inpractice, thiscondition isseldommet,andthedifference inthecoverage diagrams obtained witheachofthetwotypesofpolarization isoftennotaspronounced as mightbeexpected onthebasisoftheoretical computations.
Roughness ismoreimportant than theelectrical properties indetermining whether reflection isspecular ornot.Measurements haveshownthatthereflection coefficient forn~rmal(nonsmooth) groundterrainisinthe range0.2to0.4andisseldomgreaterthanO.S.atfrequencies above1500MHzexceptforlow anglesofincidence.2•3'" .'.• PROPAGATION OF RADAR WAVES 445  700 I I I I I I I I  3,000 Mt+z  100  tlorizonlol polorizot~on 100 MHz  160 -  <f.
P)  '1 140 - C 2 2 120 A:-Verticol polorizotion - w 0 / u : I00  U a - 5 80 - 0 : 60  n  0 I I I I I I 1 I  0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90  Groz~nq angle, deq  Figtit-e 12.3 ((1) Mitgnitiide oT the reflection oocflicient as a function of the grazing angle (Tor sea-  water) (h) Phase of the reflection coeficient as a function of the grazing angle (for seawater).
Phase of  Illc rcflcclcd wave Iitg~ ~IIC I~I;I~C of the~irlcidcnt wave (Front Brrl.rorvs c11rc1 Artr~ood.~ caltrresy Acc~dr.rrric  /'rr*5x, Ir1c )  For a rougli, perfectly cotlducting surface, such as the sea, Ament70 derived the reflection  cocfficic~it as  po exp [ - 2k2p sfnZ $1  wtlere 9,, = complex rellectiot~ coefficient for a smooth su&ace  k = 2n/A  1 = wavelength  /I' = mean-square surface height (mean value of A = 0)  CI/ = grazing angle  Experimental data taken over the sea fit this expression well; except for large values of the  roughness hrarneter [(\I sin $)/A z lt!/~jA > 0.1 I], where the theory underestimates the experi-  mental ob~ervations.~  The rcflection of electromagnetic waves from the sea may be separated into a coherent and  an ~ttcolterettt component.7' 73 The coherent component has a reflection coefficient whose  amplitude and phase are fixed by a given geometry and sea state.
The term "reflection  coeffic~ent " as usually found in the literature is generally that of the coherent component.
The  incoherent, or fluctuating, component of a surface-scattered signal is characterized by a  random phase and amplitude.
The incoherent component of the forward-scattered signal from  a roirgh surface behaves differently from the coherent component as a function of roughness.
It  increases linearly with increasitlg surface-rougl~ness parameter (jt~,h/A), levels off to a maximum  and then decreases as the inverse square root of the roughness ~arameter.'~  The presence of a reflecting surface affects the measurement of low elevation angles as well  as the radar coverage.
When the target elevation angle is less than a beamwidth, the radar  receives both the direct and the ground-reflected waves, and the effective antenna pattern is  altered.
The radar sees the image as well as the target.
Height-finding radars which measure  Ver11(0' rrdorllOI'r"!fl' --- '"o ~06 9 U ~()~ o '"0~o 2 co rl'()~ u :" O? OJ o'Io102030405060708090 (,rOllnq anqlc,rleq (alPROPAGATION OFRADAR WAVES445 2001-,,--,---,---,-----.--,------,--,----,,---, 3.00(1M/{?"- lAOI-----------------~1\ Horizontal polarization 100MH?! ~160\ \ =.140 :i.120 ~.~-Verti(al polarization ~ .~ 8" g100 u '" ~80 0 '"nO ~ 1"n.
40-k 20_3,000 MIf? IOOMH?a I a102030405060708090 Grazingangle,deg fbI FigureILl(a)Magnitude ofthereflection coefllcient asafunction ofthegrazing angle(forsea­ water) (/1)Phaseofthereflection coefficient asafunction ofthegrazing angle(forseawater).
Phaseof thereflected wavelagsthephaseofthe/incident wave.(FromBurrows alldAttwood,S courresy Academic Press.l/le) Forarough,perfectly conducting surface,suchasthesea,Ament 70derivedthereflection coefficient as Poexp[-2k2hZsin2rJ;] wherepo=complex reflection coefficient forasmoothsurface k=2rr/}., ~=wavelength 112=mean-square surfaceheight(meanvalueofIt=0) t/J=grazingangle Experimental datatakenovertheseafitthisexpression well;exceptforlargevaluesofthe roughnessp;rameter [(Itsint/!)IA~Itt/!/A>0.11],wherethetheoryunderestimates theexperi­ mentalobservations,7ton Thereflection ofelectromagnetic wavesfromtheseamaybeseparated intoacoherent and an;lIcolrerellt component.
7\73Thecoherent component hasareflection coefficient whose amplitude andphasearefixedbyagivengeometry andseastate.Theterm"reflection coefficient" asusuallyfoundintheliterature isgenerally thatofthecoherent component.
The incoherent, orfluctuating, component ofasurface-scattered signalischaracterized bya random phaseandamplitude.
Theincoherent component oftheforward-scattered signalfrom aroughsurfacebehavesdifferently fromthecoherent component asafunctionofroughness.
It increases linearlywithincreasing surface-roughness parameter (/it/!/A),levelsofftoamaximum andthendecreases astheinversesquarerootoftheroughness parameter.74 Thepresence ofareflecting surfaceaffectsthemeasurement oflowelevation anglesaswell astheradarcoverage.
Whenthetargetelevation angleislessthanabeamwidth, theradar receives boththedirectandtheground-reflected waves,andtheeffective antenna patternis altered.Theradarseestheimageaswellasthetarget.Height-finding radarswhichmeasure 446 INTKODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  elevation angle of arrival by comparing the amplitudes of the signals received at two differcut  beam elevation angles (lobe comparison) can give erroneous and an~biguo~is mcasurenicnts at  low angles.".75 Elevation errors near the ground may be considerably reduced in magnit~rdc  and the ambiguities eliminated by surrounding the radar with a metallic fence to remove the  ground-reflected wave.
The fence replaces the ground-reflected wave with a diffracted wave of  lesser importance.
The diffraction fence also removes objectionable grot~rld clutter.
 Tracking radars also are affected at low elevation angles by the ground-reflected wavc  The tracker might give an erroneous angle measurement just as in tlie case of the height finder,  or it might track the " image" in the ground instead of the trirc tar get.
Tile ovcrall cikct on tile  tracker is somewl~at analogous to "glint" (Sec.
5.5).
 12.3 THE ROUND EARTH J  In general, the curvature of the earth cannot be neglected when predicting radar coverage.
This  is especially true for coverage at low elevation angles near the i~oriron.
The two regions of i in terest in radar propagation are the itlto.filr.etlcc region and the rliffj.trc.riorr region.
Tlw inter-  ference, or optical, region is located within line of sight of the radar.
The direct and retlccted  waves interfere to produce a lobed radiation pattern similar to that described for the plane  Free-space coveroge contour 1  ., , ! Range, nml  (a) horizontal polarization  Figure 12.4 Example of a vertical-plane coverage diagram for (a) horizontal polarization and (h) vertical  polarization.
Frequency = 1300 MHz, antenna height = 50 ft, antenna vertical beamwidth = 12" wit11  beam maximum pointing on the horizon, sea surface with 4 ft wave-height and a free space  range = 100 nmi.
 446INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS elevation angleofarrivalbycomparing theamplitudes ofthesignalsreceived attwodifferent beamelevation angles(lobecomparison) cangiveerroneollsandambiguollsmeasurements at lowangles:u5Elevation errorsnearthegroundmaybeconsiderably reducedinmagnitude andtheambiguities eliminated bysurrounding theradarwithametallicfencetoremovethe ground-reflected wave.ThefencereplacesthegroLlnd-reflected wavewithadiffracted waveof lesserimportance.
Thediffraction fencealsor~oves objectionable groundc1uller.
Tracking radarsalsoareaffectedatlowelevation angleshytheground-relkcted wave.
Thetrackermightgiveanerroneous anglemeasurement justasinthecaseoftheheightfinder.
oritmighttrackthe"image"inthegroundinsteadofthetruclargct.Theowralldfcctonthe trackerissomewhat analogous to..glint"(Sec.5.5).
12.3THEROUND EARTH .J Ingeneral.thecurvature oftheearthcannotbeneglected whenpredicting radarcoverage.
This isespecially trueforcoverage atlowelevation anglesnearthehorizon.
Thetworegionsof interestinradarpropagation aretheillte/.'(e/.'ellce regionandthedit/i'actiol/ region.Theinter­ ference.oroptical.regionislocatedwithinlineofsightoftheradar.Thedirectandrdkcled wavesinterfere toproduce alobedradiation patternsimilartoIhatdescribed fortheplane Free-spacecoverage contour 90°30°50,000T I45,000\ I .;:40'OOO-t 0"35,000 cc '"c30000 -- 0 '">0.025,000.
0 1: 0> V.c.20,000 Qj 0>aI-10° Range,nmi (a)horizontal polarization Figure12.4Exampleoravertical-plane coverage diagramfor(a)horizontal polarization and(b)vertical polarization.
Frequency=1300MHz,antennaheight=50ft,antennaverticalbeamwidth =12°with heammaximum pointing onthehorizon, seasurfacewith4flwave-height andafreespace range=100nmi.
. Free - space coveroge conlour -7 PROI'A(;A.I'ION 01.' RADAR WAVES 447  (b) vertical polarization  eartli.
Lobing.
Iiowever.
is not as pronounced in the case of the round earth: the minima are  not as deep nor are the maxima as great since a wave reflected from a curved surface is more  divergent than one reflected from a plane.
The other region of interest is that which lies just  beyond the interference region below the radar line of sight and is the diffraction.
or the  shadow.
region.
Here radar signals are rapidly attenuated.
Very few microwave radars have  the capability-of penetrating the diffraction region to any great extent because of the severe  iosses.
 The effect of the round eartli on radar coverage can be predicted by analytical means for  tile ideali7ed case of a "smooth" earth of known, uniform properties.
There exist in the  literature the necessary graphs and nomographs wliich simplify the computation of radar  coverage." Coniputers may be used to perform the calculations and to automatically plot the  coverage patterns by computer-controlled plotting machines.'' Figure 12.4 illustrates, for a  particular case.
the computed vertical-plane radar coverage patterns for (a) horizontal polari-  ratio11 and (17) vertical pola1i7atiori.
 Radio and radar waves travel in straight lines in free space.
However, electromagnetic waves  propagating within the earth's atmosphere do not travel in straight lines but are generally bent  or refracted.
One effect of refraction is to extend the distance to the horizon, thus increasing  PROPi\(iATION OFRAUAR WAVES447 a5°.~.I'Frpe-spacecoverage contour-7 /I' I ',,~,1.
300 /~f'10° II1 / I 'iII.}/I ;/1j I,j,Ii/ I / t~ { /1 .l,~l-d'_i )I' I Range,nm, (b)verticalpolarization Figure12.4(COII/i/lllecl) earth,Lohing.
however.
isnotaspronounced inthecaseoftheroundearth:theminimaare notasdeepnorarethemaxima asgreatsinceawavereRected fromacurvedsurfaceismore divergent thanonerenected fromaplane.Theotherregionofinterest isthatwhichliesjust heyond theinterference regionbelowtheradarlineofsightandisthediffraction.
orthe shadow.
region.Hereradarsignalsarerapidlyattenuated.
Veryfewmicrowave radarshave thecapahilit~of penetrating thediffraction regiontoanygreatextentbecause ofthesevere losses.
Theeffectoftheroundearthonradarcoverage canbepredicted byanalytical meansfor theidealized caseofa"smooth" earthofknown.
uniform properties.
Thereexistinthe literature thenecessary graphsandnomographs whichsimplify thecomputation ofradar coverage.59Computers maybeusedtoperform thecalculations andtoautomatically plotthe coverage patterns bycomputer-controlled plotting machines.! 0Figure12.4illustrates, fora particular case.thecomputed vertical-plane radarcoverage patterns for(a)horizontal polari­ lationand(II)vertical polarization.
12.4REFRACTION Radioandradarwavestravelinstraight linesinfreespace.However, electromagnetic waves propagating withintheearth'satmosphere donottravelinstraight linesbutaregenerally bent orrefracted.
Oneeffectofrefraction istoextendthedistance tothehorizon, thusincreasing Radar  sence ol refroct~on  Rodor horlzon in the  absence of refraction --  Radar hor~zon in the  presence of refraction  Apparent  torget  position /'- / /-  position  Figure 12.5 (a) Extension of the radar \~orizon dtrc to rcfraction of radar wavcs hy thc atrnospl\crc: (h)  angular error caused by refraction.
 th~ radar coverage (Fig.
12.5~).
Another effect is the introduction of errors in the measurement  of elevation angle (Fig.
12.5h).
Bending, or refraction, of radar waves in the atmosphere 1s  caused by the variation with altitude of the velocity of propagation, or the irldr~ of r.ef~.~rcrrot~.
 defined as the velocity of propagation in free space to that in the medium in question.
 At microwave frequencies, the index of refraction ti for air which contains watcr vapor  isl 1.12  where p = barometric pressure, mbar (1 mm Hg = 1.3332 mbar)  e = partial pressure of water 'vapor, mbar  T = absolute temperature, K  The parameter N = (n - 1)106 is the "scaled-up" index of refraction and is called refrctctrt~rty.
 It is often used in propagation work instead of n because it is a more convenient unit.
The  prime difference between optical and microwave refraction is that water vapor has a negligible  effect on the former; consequently the second term of Eq.
(12.9) may be neglected at optical  frequencies.
Since the barometric pressure p and the water-vapor content e decrease rapidly  with height, while the temperature T decreases slowly with height, the index of refraction  normally decreases with increasing altitude.
A typical value of the index of refraction near the  surface of the earth is 1.0003.
In a standard atmosphere the index decreases at the rate of about  4 x 10-'m-' ofaltitude.
1 .
, ,I ,:I ':,.
,.
 The decrease in refractive index1 with altitude means that the velocity of propagation  448INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS Radar(,,~~ /Radarrayinthepresence ofrefraction ___--..0.=.--_'_' <:..~//Radarroyintheabsence 01refraction Radarhorizon inthe abseneeofrefraetion-- Radarhorizon inthe presence ofrefraction..-/ (a) RadarApparent torget position ----~ ------------ AI-------./-Refracted raynguor -----L---- _ err~ --------=------- True f..
target , positionJ (12.9)(b) Figure12.5{(I)Extension oflheradarhorizonductorefraction ofradarwavcshylhcatmosph~r~: (h) angularerrorcausedbyrefraction.
thLradarcoverage (Fig.12.5a).Another effectistheintroduction oferrorsinthemeasurement ofelevation angle(Fig.12.5h).Bending, orrefraction, ofradarwavesintheatmosphere is causedbythevariation withaltitudeofthevelocityofpropagation.
ortheilldexofI'el;·(/ctioll.
definedasthevelocityofpropagation infreespacetothatinthemedium inquestion.
Atmicrowave frequencies.
theindexofrefraction IIforairwhichcontains watervapor is11.12 ('1)O~'-N_77.6p 3.73x10\' II-1 - - ------y-+--yr--- wherep=barometric pressure,mbar (1mmHg=1.3332mbar) e=partialpressure ofwaterVapor,mbar T=absolute temperature, K,_ Theparameter N=(n-1)106isthe"scaled-up" indexofrefraction andiscalledreji'£lctit1it y.
Itisoftenusedinpropagation workinsteadofnbecause itisamoreconvenient unit.The primedifference between opticalandmicrowave refraction isthatwatervaporhasanegligible effectontheformer;consequently thesecondtermofEq.(12.9)maybeneglected atoptical frequencies.
Sincethebarometric pressure pandthewater-vapor contentedecrease rapidly withheight,whilethetemperature Tdecreases slowlywithheight,theindexofrefraction normally decreases withincreasing altitude.
Atypicalvalueoftheindexofrefraction nearthe surfaceoftheearthis1.0003.Inastandard atmosphere theindexdecreases attherateofabout 4 x10-8m-1ofaltitude.
I.,,f,:1;,1;•• •- Thedecrease inrefractive index!withaltitude meansthatthevelocity ofpropagation PROPACIATION OF RADAR WAVES 449  increases with altitude, cai~sirig radio waves to bend downward.
The result is an increase in the  effective radar range as was illustrated in Fig.
12.5a.
(Variations of the refractive index in the  tiorizontal plarie may also exist, but they do not materially alter the bending.)  Refractio~i of radar waves in the atmosphere is atialogous to bending of light rays by an  optical prism.
The patli of the radar waves through the atmosphere may be plotted using  ray-tracing techtliqucs, provided the variation of refractive index is known.
 The classical method of accounting for atmospheric refraction in computations is by  replacing the actual earth of radius a (a = 3440 nautical miles) by an equivalent earth of radius  ka and by replacing tlie actual atniospliere by a homogeneous atrnospliere in wliicli elcctro-  magnetic waves propagate in straight lines rather than curved lines (Fig.
12.6).
It may be  shown from Snell's law in spherical geotnetry that the value of the factor k by which the earth's  radius must be multiplied in order to plot tile ray paths as straight lines is  wlicre dr~/cih is tile ratc of cliange ofrcfractive itidex 11 with heigl~t.~ The vertical gradieut of tlic  refractive index drr/d/r is nornially negative.
If it is assumed tliat this gradient is constant with  height and equal to a value of 39 x per meter, the value of k is 4.
The use of the 4 effective  earth's radius to account for the refraction of radio waves predates radar and, because of its  convenience, has been widely used in radio communications, propagation work, and radar.13  It is only an approximation, however, and may not yield correct results if precise radar  measuremetits are desired, as, for example, in a long-range height finder.
The term sttrr~dar.ci  refiactiorl is applied whet1 tlie index of refraction decreases uniformly with altitude in si~cll a  rnatirier that k = 4 (Ref.
14).
 The distance d to the horizon from a radar at height /I may be shown from simple  geometrical cotlsideratiorls to be approximately  where ka is the effective radius of the earth and h is assumed small compared with a.
For k = 8,  Eq.
(12.1 In) reduces to a particularly convenient relationship ifd and It are measured in statute  miles and feet, respectively.
 I----- d (statute miles) = ,,, 211(ft) (12.1 1h)  or.
f- d (nautical miles) = 1.23 m) (12.11~)  or.
d (km) = 130 ,/-) (12.1 1d)  Figure 12.6 (a) Bending of antenna beam due to refraction by the earth's atmosphere; (h) shape of beam in  equivalent-earth representation with radius &a.
 (12.10)PROPAGATION OFRADAR WAVES449 increases withaltitude, causingradiowavestobenddownward.
Theresultisanincrease inthe effective radarrangeaswasillustrated inFig.12.5a.(Variations oftherefractive indexinthe horizontal planemayalsoexist,buttheydonotmaterially alterthebending.) Refraction ofradarwavesintheatmosphere isanalogous tobendingoflightraysbyan opticalprism.Thepathoftheradarwavesthrough theatmosphere maybeplottedusing ray-tracing techniques, provided thevariation ofrefractive indexisknown.
Theclassical method ofaccounting foratmospheric refraction incomputations isby replacing theactualearthofradiusa(a=3440nauticalmiles)byanequivalent earthofradius kaandbyreplacing theactualatmosphere byahomogeneous atmosphere inwhichelectro­ magnetic wavespropagate instraight linesratherthancurvedlines(Fig.12.6).Itmaybe shownfromSnell'slawinspherical geometry thatthevalueofthefactorkbywhichtheearth's radiusmustbemultiplied inordertoplottheraypathsasstraight linesis k=__---,-I_~ 1+a(dfl/dIr) wheredll/dhistherateofchangeofrefractiveindexnwithheight.5Theverticalgradientofthe refractive indexdll/dhisnormally negative.Iritisassumed thatthisgradient isconstant with heightandequaltoavalueof39x10-6permeter,thevalueofkisj.Theuseofthe1effective earth'sradiustoaccount fortherefraction ofradiowavespredates radarand,becauseofits convenience, hasbeenwidelyusedinradiocommunications, propagation work,andradar.13 Itisonlyanapproximation, however, andmaynotyieldcorrectresultsifpreciseradar measurements aredesired, as,forexample, inalong-range heightfinder.Thetermstandard rlFaction isappliedwhentheindexofrefraction decreases uniformly withaltitudeinsucha mannerthatk=1(Ref.14).
Thedistance dtothehorizon fromaradaratheightIImaybeshownfromsimple geometrical considerations tobeapproximately d=J2kalr (12.1Ia) wherekaistheeffective radiusoftheearthandItisassumed smallcompared witha.Fork=t Eq.(I2.lla) reducestoaparticularly convenient relationship ifdandIraremeasured instatute milesandfeel,respectively.
---or, or, Radiusa1rr (a)d(statutemBes)=J2/1(rt) d(nautical miles)=1.23jh(ft) d(km)=130JIt(km) Radiuska 1 J(b)(12.11h) (12.llc) (12.lld) Figure12.6(0)Bendingofantenna beamduetorefraction bytheearth'satmosphere; (h)shapeofbeamin equivalent-earth representation withradiuska. 450 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  Equations (12.11) have been used at times as a measure of the line-of-sight coverage of a  ground-based radar viewing a target at a height h.
This may lead to incorrect results in some  cases since the optical line of sight does not necessarily correspond to the radar line of sight, as  explained in Sec.
12.6.
 The four-thirds earth approximation has several limitations.
It is only an average value  and should not be used for other than general computational purposes.
The correct value ofk  depends upon meteorological conditions.
Bean15.16 found that the average value of k  measured at an altitude of 1 km varies from 1.25 to 1.45 over the continental United States  during the month of February and from 1.25 to 1.90 during August.
In general, the higher  values of k occur in the southern part of the country.
Burrows and Attwood5 state that k lies  between f and 4 in arctic climates.
 The use of an effective earth's radius implies that dn/dh is constant with height, or in other  words, that n decreases linearly with height.
This assumption is in disagrezmcnt wit11 tlre  experimentally observed refractive-index structure of the atmosphere at heights above 1 km.'  The variation of refractivity with altitude is found to be described more nearly by an exponzn-  tial function of height rather than the linear variation assumed by the 4 earth model or any  model of constant effective earth's radius.
A more appropriate refractivity model is one in  which the refractivity varies exponentially with height,' 2*17  where N, = refractivity at surface of earth  h = altitude of target  h, = altitude of radar.
 c, = In (N,/N = a constant which depends upon value of N, and N the latter being refrac-  tively at altitude of 1 km  It is found that the exponential model gives a more accurate determination of the effects of  atmospheric refraction than does a linear model.
 The use of the correct atmospheric model is quite important in a height-finder radar;  especially for targets at long range~.l~*"*'~ Refraction causes the radar rays to bend, resulting  in an apparent elevation angle different from the true one.
In certain radar applications,  corrections must be made to the radar data to obtain a better estimate of elevation angle,  range, or height.lg Surface observations of refractivity often suffice for ascertaining the  effects of refra~tion.~~~~  Refraction is troublesome primarily at low angles of elevation, especially at or near the  horizon.
It can usually be neglected at angles greater than 3 to 5' in most radar applications.
 Although more refined models of atmospheric refraction must be considered where  precise radar measurements are important, the simplicity of the usual 4 earth approximation  makes it attractive for rough predictions.
 The above discussion of refraction has been directed primarily to the aircraft target  located within the lower portion of the atmosphere called the troposphere.
Targets such as  satellites and ballistic missiles operate above both the troposphere and the ionosphere.
The  effects of the entire atmosphere must be considered in such  case^.'^.^^  12.5 ANOMALOUS PROPAGATION  A decrease in atmospheric index of refraction with increasing altitude, as described in the  previous section, bends the radar rays so as to extend the coverage beyond that expected with  a uniform atmosphere.
If the gradient of the index of refraction is strong enough for the rays to  450INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS Equations (12.11)havebeenusedattimesasameasure oftheline-of-sight coverage ofa ground-based radarviewingatargetataheighth.Thismayleadtoincorrect resultsinsome casessincetheopticallineofsightdoesnotnecessarily correspond totheradarlineofsight,as explained inSec.12.6.
Thefour-thirds earthapproximation hasseverallimitations.
Itisonlyanaveragevalue andshouldnotbeusedforotherthangeneralcomputational purposes.
Thecorrectvalueofk depends uponmeteorological conditions.
Bean15.16foundthattheaverage valueofk measured atanaltitudeof1kmvariesfrom1.25to1.45overthecontinental UnitedStates duringthemonthofFebruary andfrom1.25to1.90duringAugust.
Ingeneral, thehigher valuesofkoccurinthesouthern partofthecountry.
Burrows andAttwood5statethatklies between ~and!inarcticclimates.
Theuseofaneffective earth'sradiusimpliesthatdn/dhisconstant withheight,orinother words,that"decreases linearlywithheight.Thisassumption isindisagr~cd1cnt withtht: experimentally observed refractive-index structure oftheatmosphere atheightsaboveIkm.17 Thevariation ofrefractivity withaltitudeisfoundtobedescribed morenearlybyanexponen­ tialfunction ofheightratherthanthelinearvariation assumed bythetearthmodelorany modelofconstant effective earth'sradius.Amoreappropriate refractivity modelisonein whichtherefractivity variesexponentially withheight,12.17 IN=N,exp[-ce(h-hs)] (12.12) where N,=refractivity atsurfaceofearth h=altitudeoftarget h,=altitudeofradar Ce=In(Ns/N1)=aconstant whichdepends uponvalueofNsandN1>thelatterbeingrefrac­ tivelyataltitudeof1km Itisfoundthattheexponential modelgivesamoreaccurate determination oftheeffectsof atmospheric refraction thandoesalinearmodel.
Theuseofthecorrectatmospheric modelisquiteimportant inaheight-finder radar,' especially fortargetsatlongranges.12,17,18Refraction causestheradarraystobend,resulting inanapparent elevation angledifferent fromthetrueone.Incertainradarapplications, corrections mustbemadetotheradardatatoobtainabetterestimate ofelevation angle, range,orheight.19Surface observations ofrefractivity oftensufficeforascertaining the effectsofrefraction.2Q-22 Refraction istroublesome primarily atlowanglesofelevation, especially atornearthe horizon.Itcanusuallybeneglected atanglesgreaterthan3to5°inmostradarapplications.
Although mo~erefinedmodelsofatmospheric refraction mustbeconsidered where preciseradarmeasurements areimportant, thesimplicity oftheusualtearthapproximation makesitattractive forroughpredictions.
Theabovediscussion ofrefraction hasbeendirected primarily totheaircrafttarget locatedwithinthelowerportionoftheatmosphere calledthetroposphere.
Targetssuchas satellites andballistic missilesoperateaboveboththetroposphere andtheionosphere.
The effectsoftheentireatmosphere mustbeconsidered insuchcases.23.14 12.5ANOMALOUS PROPAGATION Adecrease inatmospheric indexofrefraction withincreasing altitude, asdescribed inthe previous section,bendstheradarrayssoastoextendthecoverage beyondthatexpected with auniform atmosphere.
Ifthegradient oftheindexofrefraction isstrongenoughfortheraysto have the same curvature as tlie earth itself, it would be possible for initially horizontal rays to  bend around the surface of the earth.
From Eq.
12.10, a gradient dnldh = - 1.57 x m-'  will make tile effective earth's radius infiriite which allows initially horizontal rays to follow the  curvati~re of the eartl~.
IJnder sucli conditions, the radar range is significantly increased and  detectiori beyond tlie radar horizon can result.
 l'lie abnormal propagation of electromagnetic waves is called superreji-action, trapping,  dtrctirrq, or c~r~ott~rrlolts l~roptrgotio~l.
According to one defi~lition,~~ ttorn~ul atmosplreric refroc-  riot1 corresponds to the gradient ditldk varying from 0 to -0.787 x loF7 m-', or when the  eflective earth's radius (Eq.
12.10) varies from k = 1 to k = 2.
Superrefractiort corresponds to  dirldh from -0.787 x lo-' to - 1.57 x m-', or k = 2 to k = a.
Trapping, or ducting,  occurs when drrldh is greater than - 1.57 x m-'.
The radar ranges with ducted propaga-  tion are greatly extended.
Holes can also appear in the coverage.
If the atmospheric index of  refraction were to increase, rather than decrease, with increasing height, the rays would curve  upward and the radar range would be reduced as compared to normal conditions.
This is  called srthrefractiott.
Its occurrence is rare.
The term anomalous, or nonstandard, propagation  applies to any of the above propagation conditions other than normal; but it is almost always  used to describe those conditions where the radar range is extended well beyond normal.
 A superrefracting duct which lies close to the ground is called a ground-based duct, or a  surface duct.
Over water the surface duct is also called the evaporation duct, since it is the result  of water vapor evaporated from the sea.
A duct which lies above the surface is called an  eleuutcd drrct.
Surface ducts apparently are more usual than elevated ducts.
To propagate  energy within the duct, the angle the radar ray makes with the duct should be small, usually  less than one deg~-ee.'~*~~ Only those radar rays launched nearly parallel to the duct are  trapped.
With a surface-based radar, ducting is limited to low angles of elevation so that the  chief effect is to extend the surface coverage.
 Since the angle between the radar beam and the duct direction (as defined by the levels of  constant index of refraction) cannot be greater than about lo if power is to be coupled into an  elevated duct, the radar must usually be at an altitude that permits the required shallow  coupling angles to be achieved.
The radar in this case will be more sensitive to targets within  the duct than those outside it.
 The extension of the radar range within the duct results in a reduction of coverage in  other directions.
The regions with reduced coverage are called radar, or radio, holes.
If, for  example, the radar range is extended against surface targets by the presence of a surface duct,  air targets just above the duct that would normally be detected might be missed.
 Atmosfieric ducts are generally of the order of 10 or 20 meters in height, never more than  perhaps 150 to 200 meters.
Propagation within a surface duct is similar to propagation within  a waveguide with a "leaky top wall." A duct supports only certain modes of propagation and  does not readily support propagation below a critical wavelength.
A simplified approximate  model of propagation in atmospheric ducts gives the maximum wavelength that can be pro-  pagated in a surface duct of depth d as2"  wtiere A,,,, Ah, and d are in the same units.
For example, at X band (I,,, = 3 cm), Eq.
(12.13)  predicts that the duct must be at least 10 m thick; at S band (I = 10 cm) it must be 22 m; and  at UHF (A = 70 cm), the duct thickness must be at least 80 m thick.
(The value of -An/Ah  was taken as 1.57 x 10- m- I.) Since atmospheric ducts are not usually deep, extended range  propagation is more likely to be experienced at the higher microwave frequencies than at the  lower frequencies.
Unlike standard waveguide propagation, the cutoff wavelength for ducting  PROPAGATION OFRADAR WAVES451 havethesamecurvature astheearthitself,itwouldbepossible forinitiallyhorizontal raysto hendaroundthesurfaceofthe earth.
FromEq.12.10,agradient d1l/dh=-1.57x10-7m-I willmaketheeffective earth'sradiusinfinitewhichallowsinitiallyhorizontal raystofollowthe curvature oftheearth.Undersuchconditions, theradarrangeissignificantly increased and detection beyondtheradarhorizoncanresult.
Theabnormal propagation ofelectromagnetic wavesiscalledsuperrefraetio1l, trappi1lg, ductillY,orallomalollS l'rol'llyllt iml.Accordingtoonedefinition.25normalatmospheric refrac­ tiollcorresponds tothegradient dll/dlzvaryingfrom0to-0.787 X10-7m-I.orwhenthe effective earth'sradius(Eq.12.10)variesfromk=1tok=2.Superrefraction corresponds to dll/dlzfrom-0.787x10-7to-1.57 X10-7m-I•ork=2tok=00.Trapping, ordueting.
occurswhendll/dlzisgreaterthan-1.57x10-7m-I.Theradarrangeswithductedpropaga­ tionaregreatlyextended.
Holescanalsoappearinthecoverage.Iftheatmospheric indexof refraction weretoincrease.
ratherthandecrease.
withincreasing height.therayswouldcurve upward andtheradarrangewouldbereduced ascompared tonormalconditions.
Thisis calledsuhre(raction.
Itsoccurrence israre.Thetermanomalous.
ornonstandard.
propagation appliestoanyoftheabovepropagation conditions otherthannormal; butitisalmostalways usedtodescribe thoseconditions wheretheradarrangeisextended wellbeyondnormal.
Asuperrefracting ductwhichliesclosetothegroundiscalledaground-based duct.ora swfaceduct.Overwaterthesurfaceductisalsocalledtheevaporation duct,sinceitistheresult ofwatervaporevaporated fromthesea.Aductwhichliesabovethesurfaceiscalledan elevated duct.Surfaceductsapparently aremoreusualthanelevated ducts.Topropagate energywithintheduct.theangletheradarraymakeswiththeductshouldbesmall.usually lessthanonedegree.26•27Onlythoseradarrayslaunched nearlyparalleltotheductare trapped.
Withasurface-based radar.ducting islimitedtolowanglesofelevation sothatthe chiefeffectistoextendthesurfacecoverage.
Sincetheanglebetween theradarbeamandtheductdirection (asdefinedbythelevelsof constant indexofrefraction) cannotbegreaterthanabout10ifpoweristobecoupledintoan elevated duct.theradarmustusuallybeatanaltitude thatpermits therequired shallow coupling anglestobeachieved.
Theradarinthiscasewillbemoresensitive totargetswithin theductthanthoseoutsideit.
Theextension oftheradarrangewithintheductresultsinareduction ofcoverage in otherdirections.
Theregionswithreduced coverage arecalledradar,orradio,holes.If,for example.
theradarrangeisextended againstsurfacetargetsbythepresence ofasurfaceduct, airtargetsjustabovetheductthatwouldnormally bedetected mightbemissed.
AtmosPheric ductsaregenerally oftheorderof10or20metersinheight,nevermorethan perhaps 150to200meters.Propagation withinasurfaceductissimilartopropagation within awaveguide witha"leakytopwaiL"Aductsupports onlycertainmodesofpropagation and doesnotreadilysupport propagation belowacriticalwavelength.
Asimplified approximate modelofpropagation inatmospheric ductsgivesthemaximum wavelength· thatcanbepro­ pagated inasurfaceductufdepthdas28 (~n)1/2 Am.,.=2.5-~Itd3/2(12.13) whereAm.,.' ~It.anddareinthesameunits.Forexample, atXband(-l.max=3cm),Eq.(12.13) predicts thattheductmustbeatleast10mthick;atSband(A=10cm)itmustbe22m;and atUHF(A.=70em),theductthickness mustbeatleast80mthick.(Thevalueof-tJ.n/~h wastakenas1.57x10-7m-1.)Sinceatmospheric ductsarenotusuallydeep,extended range propagation ismorelikelytobeexperienced atthehighermicrowave frequencies thanatthe lowerfrequencies.
Unlikestandard waveguide propagation, thecutoffwavelength forducting ;/) f/1 '~ does not sharply divide the regions of propagation and no propagation, so that radiation  whose wavelength is several times the "cutoff wavelength" may be affected by tile dirct.
 A duct is produced when the index of refraction decreases with altitude at a rapid rate.
if  file index of refraction [Eq.
(12.9)] is to decrease with heigllt, 1111: temperature must i~~crcasr:  and/or the humidity (water-vapor content) must decrease with heigllt.
An increase of tempera-  ture w~th height is called a trmprratlrre ir~urrsion and occurs when the temperature of tlie sea or  land surface is appreciably less than that of the air.
A temperature inversion, by itself, must be  very pronounced in order to produce superrefraction.
Water-vapor gradients are more efkc-  tive than temperature gradients alone; thus superrefraction is usually more prominent over  oceans, especially in warm climates.
 Ducting occurs when the upper air is exceptionally warm and dry in comparison with the  air at the surface.
There are several meteorological conditions which may lead to the formation  of s~~perrefracting Over land, ducting is usually caused by radiatioaof heat from  the earth on clear nights, especially in the summer when the ground is moist.
The earth loses  heat.
and its surface temperature falls, but there is little or no change in tlie temperature of the  upper atmosphere.
This leads to conditions favorable to ducting, that is, a temperature inver-  slon at the ground and a sharp decrease in the moisture with height.
Therefore, over land  masses ducting is most noticeable at night and usually disappears during the warmest part of  the day.
 Another common cause of ducting is the movement of warm dry air, from land, over  cooler bodies of water.
Warm dry air blown out over the cooler sea is cooled at the lowest  layers and produces a temperature inversion.
At the same time, moisture is added from the sea  to produce a moisture gradient.
This form of anomalous propagation over the sea tends to be  more prominent on the leeward side of land masses.
Ducting occurs during either the day or  night and can last for long periods of time.
It is most likely to occur, however, In the late  afternoon and evening when the warm afternoon air drifts out over the sea."  Thus the character of ducting is likely to differ over land and sea.
Land masses change  temperature much more quickly thari'does the sea.
As a result.
there is much more of a diurnal  variation of ducting over land than over sea, where it is likely to be more continuous and  wide~pread.~'  .
Superrefracting ground ducts may also be produced by the diverging downdraft undcr a  tlii~nderstorm.~' The relatively cool air which spreads out from tlie base of a thunderstorm  results in a temperature inversion in the lowest few thousand feet.
The moisture gradient is  also appropriate for the formation of a duct.
Duct formation by thunderstorms may not tc as  frequent as other ducting mechanisms, but it is of importance since it may be used as a means  of detecting the presence of a storm.
An operator carefully watching a radar display can dctcct  the presence of a storm by the sudden increase in the number and range of ground targets.
The  conditions appropriate to thet formation'of a thunderstorm duct are short-lived and have a  time duration of the order of'perhaps 30 min to 1 h.
 With the exception of thunderstorms, ducting is essentially a fine-weather phenomenon  As tropical (but not equatorial) climates are noted for their fine weather, it is not sirrprising to  find the most intense ducting occurring 'in such regions.32 In temperate climates ducting is  more common in summer than in winter.
It does not occur when the atmospllere is well nlixcd,  a condition generally accompanying'poor weather.
When it is cold, rough, stormy, rainy, or  cloudy, the lower atmosphere is well'stii-red' up and propagation is likely to be normal.
Both  rough terrain and high winds tend to'iricrease atmospheric mixing, consequently reducing the  occurrence of ducting.
Radar propagation is normal whenever the upper air is unusually cold  in comparison with the earth's suiface'.'! -"' ,  ,  :,I ..
I~~JII~'~~,~~ I : ',[.
.
 452INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS doesnotsharply dividetheregionsofpropagation andnopropagation, sothatradiation whosewavelength isseveraltimesthe"cutoffwavelength" maybeaffected bytheduct.
Aductisproduced whentheindexofrefraction decreases withaltitude atarapidrate.If theindexofrefraction [Eq.(12.9)]istodecrease.with height,the(cmperature mustincrease and/orthehumidity (water-vapor content) mustdecrease withheight.Anincreaseoftcmpera­ turewithheightiscal.ledatemperatllre inversion andoccurswhenthetemperature oftheseaor landsurfaceisappreciably lessthanthatoftheair.Atemperature inversion, byitself,mustbe verypronounced inordertoproduce superrefraction.
Water-vapor gradients aremoreeffec­ tivethantemperature gradients alone;thussuperrefraction isusuallymoreprominent over oceans,especially inwarmclimates.
Ducting occurswhentheupperairisexceptionally warmanddryincomparison withthe airatthesurface.Thereareseveralmeteorological conditions whichmayleadtotheformation ofsupcrrefracting ducts.31.32Overland,ducting isusuallycausedbyradiatiorVof heatfrom theearthonclearnights,especially inthesummer whentheground ismoist.Theearthloses heat.anditssurfacetemperature falls,butthereislittleornochangeinthetemperature ofthe upperatmosphere.
Thisleadstoconditions favorable toducting, thatis,atemperature inver­ sionatthegroundandasharpdecrease inthemoisture withheight.Therefore, overland massesducting ismostnoticeable atnightandusuallydisappears duringthewarmest partof theday.
Another common causeofducting isthemovement ofwarmdryair,fromland,over coolerbodiesofwater.Warmdryairblownoutoverthecoolerseaiscooledatthelowest layersandproduces atemperature inversion.
Atthesametime,moisture isaddedfromthesea toproduce amoisture gradient.
Thisformofanomalous propagation overtheseatendstobe moreprominent ontheleeward sideoflandmasses.Ducting occursduringeitherthedayor nightandcanlastforlongperiodsoftime.Itismostlikelytooccur,however, inthelate afternoon andevening whenthewarmafternoon airdriftsoutoverthesea..B Thusthecharacter ofducting' islikelytodifferoverlandandsea.Landmasseschange temperature muchmorequickly than'does thesea.Asaresult,thereismuchmoreofadiurnal variation ofducting overlandthanoversea,whereitislikelytobemorecontinuous and widespread.32 .Superrefracting groundductsmayalsobeproduced bythediverging downdraft undera thunderstorm.3!Therelatively coolairwhichspreadsoutfromthebaseofathunderstorm resultsinatemperature inversion inthelowestfewthousand feet.Themoisture gradient is alsoappropriate fortheformation ofaduct.Ductformation bythunderstorms maynotbeas frequent asotherducting mechanisms, butitisofimportance sinceitmaybeusedasameans ofdetecting thepresence ofastorm.Anoperator carefully watching aradardisplaycanddcct thepresence ofastormbythesuddeninc'rease inthenumberandrangeofgroundtargets.The conditions appropriate tothe'formation Iofathunderstorm ductareshort-lived andhavea timeduration oftheorderof'perhaps 30minto1h.
Withtheexception ofthunderstorms, ducting isessentially afine-weather phenomenon.
Astropical (butnotequatorial) climates arenotedfortheirfineweather, itisnotsurprising to findthemostintenseducting occurring 'insuchregions.32Intemperate climates ducting is morecommon insummer thaninwinter.Itdoesnotoccurwhentheatmosphere iswellmixed, acondition generally accompanying'poor weather.
Whenitiscold,rough,stormy, rainy,or cloudy,theloweratmosphere isweillS'tirred~upandpropagation islikelytobenormal.
Both roughterrainandhighwindstendto'increase atmospheric mixi,ng,consequently reducing the occurrence ofducting.
Radarpropagation isnormalwhenever theupperairisunusually cold incomparison with·the earth'ssurfadC": I " ;; I'r..
.'~It,.)1J(..t~.r,{i·I : "l.. PROPAGATl(1N OF RADAR WAVES 453  Elevatcd ducts.
AII cxnnlplc of propag;~tion ill elevated ducts is foi~nd in tile " tr,adewitid  regiorl " l>etweeri [lie rnidoccaii.
Iiigil-pressure cells and tlie equatorial doldrums.
'I'wo sucli  tradewir~d areas that have been stildied lie between Brazil and the Ascension islandsz9 and  t,etween Soutl~err~ Califor~~ia and t iawaii." The tradewind ternperature itlversio~i is usually  foi~tid over tile caster11 portions of the tropical oceans.
In these regions, tfiere is a slow-sinking  of high-altitude air (large-scale subsiderice) which meets low-level maritime air flowing toward  tlie equator.
The general sinking of air from high altitudes results in adiabatic heating due to  conlprcssinn.
rrtitl ;I decrease ill tiioisture contetit.
Thus tliis warmer, drier air lies above the  coolct .
111oist :ti1 to oducc a tc11llwt.nt1l1.c i~ivc~.sio~i; i.c..
;\I\ iticrc;~se .ill tc~i~pc~,nti~ro wit11  tleiglit.
.I'tiis rcsilits in it strong duct along tlie i~iterface of the temperature inversion.
In sorne  c;~scs.
;I st I.;I~~IS clo~~d 1;lyer will fo1.111 i~t tile base of tile temperature in~ersion.~' T11t1s tlie duct  ;tltiti~dc call hc idcritificd by tlic licigl~t of tlie cloud tops tliat are suppsesscd by tlic tc~iii~cra-  turc iriversiorl.
Wlieri the temperature inversion occurs below the altitude at which clouds are  fbrr~ied, a l~azc Ii~ycr it1 the air below tl~e ternperature inversion can be observed.
The altitude  of [lie tradewi~id duct varies from hundreds of meters at the eastern part of the tropical oceans  to tiiousands of meters at the western end.
Thus, the height gradually rises in going from east  to west.
Tliere is also a general decrease of the refractivity gradients to the west.
Off the  soutlicrn California coast.
in (lie vicinity of San Diego, the boundary between moist and dry  air is relatively stable and exists at an average altitude of 300 to 500 meters.
Since the elevated  duct is due to meteorological effects there are seasonal, as well as diurnal, variations.
The  optirnunl seasori for duct formation in the tradewind region between Brazil and Ascension  islarids occurs in N~vernber.~~ It has been said, however, that elevated ducts giving rise to  strong persistent anomalous propagation occur throughout most of the year over at least  one-third of tile ocea~is.~'  To take maximum advantage of propagation in an elevated duct, the radar and target  slioi~ld he at an altitude tiear tliat of tlie duct.
This is found from both theory and measure-  metlts made by aircraft flying at various altitudes.
It was noted,jO however, that the propaga-  tion of clectrornagrietic energy from antennas well below the duct is greater than would be  predicted from classical ray theory.
One explanation postulated for explaining this  discreparicy is that energy can be scattered into and out of the elevated duct by irregularities in  the iridex-of-refractio~i profile.
 Evaporation duct.
Tlle evaporation duct that lies just above the surface of the sea is a result of  tlie water vapor.
or liumidity, evaporated from the sea.
The air in contact with the sea is  saturated 14tIi water vapor, wit11 a saturation vapor pressure appropriate to the temperature  of tl~e sea si~rface.'~ The air several meters above the sea is not usually saturated so there will  be a gradual decrease in water vapor pressure from the surface value to the ambient value well  above tlie surface.
The decrease in water vapor pressure is approximately logarithmic, which  contributes a logarithmic decreasing term to the index of refraction.
 The evaporation duct exists over the ocean, to some degree, almost all of the time.
The  lieigl~t of the duct, which is usually within the range from 6 to 30 m, varies with the geographic  location.
season, time of day, and the wind speed.
In the North Sea the mean duct thickness is  about 6 m while in tropical regions it is of the order 10 to 15 m.34 In the North Atlantic at  Weather Ship D (44"N, 41°W) the median value ofduct thickness (half the ducts have thickness  of lesser value) is I0 m in the summer and 30 m in the winter.35 In the area offshore of San Diego,  the medium value of the duct thickness as calculated from 5 years of meteorological data is  6 rtl.
and a similar calct~latio~i for the Mediterranean Sea is 10 m.36 Measurements made in the  Atla~itic tradewind area ofT of Antigua showed ducts averaging 6 to 15 m in height.j7 Tlie  PROPAGATION OFRADAR WAVES453 Elel'ated ducts.Anexample ofpropagation inelevated ductsisfoundinthc..tradcwind region" between themidocean.
high-prcssure cellsandtheequatorial doldrums.
Twosuch tradewind areasthathavebecnstudicd liebetween BrazilandtheAscension Islands29and betwccn Southcrn California andlIawaii."'o Thetradewind temperature inversion isusual1y foundovertheeasternportions ofthetropical oceans.Intheseregions,thereisaslow-sinking ofhigh-altitude air(large-scale subsidence) whichmeetslow-level maritime airflowingtoward theequator.
Thegeneralsinkingofairfromhighaltitudes resultsinadiabatic heatingdueto compression.
andadecreasc inmoisture content.
Thusthiswarmer, drierairliesabovethe coolet.Illoistail10plOduce aIcmperature inversion; i.e.,lUIincrease.ill tcmperature with height.Thisresultsinastrongductalongtheinterface ofthetemperature inversion.
Insome cases.astratuscloudlayerwillformatthebaseofthetemperature inversion.27Thustheduct altitude canbcidentified bythcheightofthecloudtopsthatarcsuppresscd bythetcmpcra­ turcinversion, Whcnthetemperature inversion occursbelowthealtitude atwhichcloudsare formed.
ahazclayerintheairbelowthetemperature inversion canbeobserved.
Thcaltitude ofthetradewind ductvariesfromhundreds ofmetersattheeasternpartofthetropical oceans tothousands ofmetersatthewestern end.Thus,theheightgradually risesingoingfromeast tov.'est,Thereisalsoageneral decrease oftherefractivity gradients tothewest.Offthe southern California coast.inthevicinityofSanDiego,theboundary between moistanddry airisrelatively stableandexistsatanaveragealtitude of300to500meters.Sincetheelevated ductisduetometeorological effectsthereareseasonal, aswellasdiurnal, variations.
The optimum seasonforductformation inthetradewind regionbetween BrazilandAscension IslandsoccursinNovember.29Ithasbeensaid,however, thatelevated ductsgivingriseto strongpersistent anomalous propagation occurthroughout mostoftheyearoveratleast one-third oftheoceans.27 Totakemaximum advantage ofpropagation inanelevated duct,theradarandtarget shouldbeatanaltitude ncarthatoftheduct.Thisisfoundfromboththeoryandmeasure­ mcntsmadebyaircraftOyingatvariousaltitudes.Itwasnoted,30 however, thatthepropaga­ tionofelectromagnetic energyfromantennas wel1belowtheductisgreaterthanwouldbe predictcdfromc1assicaIraytheory.
Oneexplanation postulated forexplaining this discrepancy isthatenergycanbescattered intoandoutoftheelevated ductbyirregularities in theindex-of-refraction profile.
El'aporation ducl.Theevaporation ductthatliesjustabovethesurfaceoftheseaisaresultof thewatervapor,orhumidity.
evaporated fromthesea.Theairincontact withtheseais saturated \~thwatervapor,withasaturation vaporpressure appropriate tothetemperature oftheseasurface.
34Theairseveralmetersabovetheseaisnotusuallysaturated sotherewill beagradual decrease inwatervaporpressure fromthesurfacevaluetotheambient valuewell abovethesurface.Thedecrease inwatervaporpressure isapproximately logarithmic, which contributes alogarithmic decreasing termtotheindexofrefraction.
Theevaporation ductexistsovertheocean,tosomedegree,almostallofthetime.The heightoftheduct,whichisusuallywithintherangefrom6to30m,varieswiththegeographic location.
season,timeofday,andthewindspeed.IntheNorthSeathemeanductthickness is about6 mwhileintropical regionsitisoftheorder10to15m.34IntheNorthAtlantic at Weather ShipD(44°N,4.OW)themedianvalueofductthickness (halftheductshavethickness oflesservalue)is10minthesummer and30minthewinter.
35IntheareaoffshoreofSanDiego, themedium valueoftheductthickness ascalculated from5yearsofmeteorological datais 6111.andasimilarcalculation fortheMediterranean Seais10m.36Measurements madeinthe Atlantic tradewind areaoffofAntigua showed ductsaveraging 6to15minheight.37The 454 IN ~H0I)lJCTION TO KAIIAK SYSTI.MS  liciglit and strength of the duct was found to vary with wind speed.
St rongcr winds gcricrally  resulted in stronger signals and lower attentlation rates.
Wind speeds from 8 to 15 knots  produced ii low, moderately strong duct, and winds from 20 to 30 knots produced a higher,  but weaker duct.
Passing squalls and rain showers did not wipe 0111 the duct or decrease  the propagated signals.
 The thicker the duct.
the lower the frcqircncy that can be propagated.
as can'be seen I'rom  Eq.
(12.13).
Tliirs tlic lower microwave frequencies (below L band) are not irsually strongly  affccted by the evaporation duct.
Thc ilppcr freqi~ency limit for di~cting is determined by the  increased attentlation dire to rouglincss of the sea and by absorption of clt'ctromagne!ic cncrgy  in the vicinity of tlie water vapor resonance at 22 GHr.
Tlii~s there is probably an nptinium  frequency for tlie i~tilization of ductcd propagation.
In a dirct with i'c~rlq)li~tc trapping of the  elcctromagnctic energy.
tlic cylindrical spreading of tlic energy rndiatcc' by a poillt source  rcsiilts in the power density decreasing as R - '.
where R = range, instead of R - as wit 11 free 3.
space propagation.
Tlie cncrgy is seldom completely trapped, howcvcr, and there IS attenua-  tion dire to tlic leaking of energy from tlie upper surface of the duct as well as by scattering and  absorption.
Energy is also scattered out of the duct because of a rough sea si~rface.~~ It has  been foiind cxperimcntally" that S-band radiation (10 cm wavclcngtl.1) is only partially  trapped by the evaporation duct, with attcnuation rates averaging about 0.85 dB/nmi.
Gcn-  erally, there is lcss attenuation at 'S band the liiglicr tlic radar antenna or tlie target  altiti~dc.~~~~' At S band (3 cm wavelength).
the coupling to the dirct is stronger and the  average (one-way) attenuation wits reported as 0.45 dR/11mi.'~ Unlike S band.
the atteniration  at A' band was lcss at low antenna,and target Iicights (3 to 5 m).
giving stronger signals and  greater ranges than antennas and targets at Iiciglits up to 30 m; wliich is a firrtlicr indication of  effective trapping at thc higlicr frcqucncies.
 It was observed that with a large cnougl~ duct more than one mode can be propagated  and there can be more than one antcnna liciglit suitable for low-loss propagation.
For  one set of ?(-band data sliowcd tlie minimum attenuation to occirr with an antcnna  height of 2 m.
Increasing tlic antcnna height incrcrtscd tlie loss to a maximum at about 10 m  height.
Further increase of I~eight decreased the attcnuation until a secondary minimi~m was  obtained at 20 m height, after which the attciiuation again increased (at least to a liciglit of  30 m).
On a ship it might not be practical to site a radar antenna 2 m over the sea.
Instead it  might be sited at 20 m Iieiglit.
with the slightly grcatcr loss being a price to pay for thc  convenience of the higher antenna location.
Tlie above values apply to a particular cxpcrimetit $  in a particular location.
Hence.
the optimum antcnna heights might vary.
 Theoretical models of propagation in evaporation ducts confirm tlic gcncral experimental  observations presented above.I7 When multiple modes of propagation arc trnppcd in thc i!t~cl.
 theory predicts considerable signal fades due to interference between tlie several modes.
Fades  can be of the order of 70 dB.
In one example.
it was shown that the fading is strongly  dependent on tlie radar and the target heights, and that for centimeter wavclcngtlls tlic lading  occurs at intervals of from two to three miles.
 Tlie lieight of the evaporation duct.
from wliich the propagation conditions can bc in-  ferred, can be readily calculated from measurements of the surface water tem pcrat ure and, at  some convenient height, the air temperature, relative humidity, and wind ~peed.~"TIiese four  measurements have been found sufficient for the description of ducting conditions.
 The above has been concerned withrpropagation beyond the normal horizon.
Within the  horizon, the refractive'effects of the 'duct can lead to a modification of the normal lobing  pattern caused by the interference of theldirect ray and the surface-reflected ray.
The relative  phase between the direct and reflected rays can be different in the presence of the duct, and  454INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSHMS heightandstrength oftheductwasfoundtovarywithwindspeed.Stronger windsgenerally resulted instronger signalsandlowerattenuation rates.Windspeedsfrom8to15knots produced alow,moderately strongduct,andwindsfrom20to30knolsproduct'd ahigher, butweakerduct.Passing squallsandrainshowers didnotwipeoultheductordecrease thepropagated signals.
Thethickertheduct,thelowerthefrequency thatcanhepropagated, ascanbeseenfrom Eq.(12.IJ).Thusthelowermicrowave frequencies (belowLband)arcnotusuallystrongly affected bytheevaporation duct.Theupperfrequency limitforducting isdetermined bythe increased attenuation duetoroughness oftheseaandhyahsorption ofekctromagne~ic energy inthevicinityofthcwatervaporresonance at22GHz.Thusthercisprobably annptintllm frequcncy fortheutilization ofductedpropagation.
Inaductwith('(lI/lI'Il't( tlapping ofthe electromagnetic energy.thecylindrical spreading oftheenergyradiatd hyapoi'llsource resultsinthepowerdensitydecreasing asR-I,whereR=range.insteadofR1aswithfree spacepropagation.
Theenergyisseldomcompletely trapped.
however.
andtheteisattenua­ tionduetotheleakingofenergyfromtheuppersurfaceoftheductaswellasbyscattering and absorption.
Energyisalsoscattered outoftheductbecause ofaroughseasurface.76Ilhas heenfoundexperimentallyJ7 thatS-hand radiation (10emwavelength) isonlypartially trapped bytheevaporation duct.withattenuation ratesavcraging ahoutO.H5dB/nmi.Gen­ erally,thereislessattenuation at,Sbandthehighertheradarantenna orthetarget altitude.36.J7AtXhand(Jcmwavelength).
thccoupling totheductisstronger andthe average (one-way) attenuation wasreported as0.45dB/nmi.J7UnlikeSband.theattenuation atXbandwaslessatlowantenna andtargetheights(Jto5m).givingstronger signalsand greaterrangesthanantennas andtargetsatheightsupto30m:whichisafurtherindication of effective trapping atthehigherfrequencies.
Itwasobserved thatwithalargeenoughductmorethanonemodecanhepropagated andtherecanbemorethanoneantenna heightsuitahle forlow-loss propagation.
For example.37onesetofX-banddatashowedtheminimum attenuation tooccurwithanantenna heightof2m.Increasing theantenna heightincreased thelosstoamaximum atabout10m height.Further increase ofheightdecreased theattenuation untilasecondary minimum was obtained at20mheight.afterwhichthcattcnuation againincreased (atleasttoaheightof 30m),Onashipitmightnothepractical tositearadarantenna 2moverthesea.Instead it mightbesitedat20mheight.withtheslightly greaterlossheingapricetopayrorthe convenience ofthehigherantenna location.
Theabovevaluesapplytoaparticular experiment inaparticular location.
Hence.theoptimum antenna heightsmightvary.
Theoretical modelsofpropagation inevaporation ductsconfirm thegenaalexperimental ohservations presented above.77Whenmultiple modesofpropagation an;trapped intheduct.
theorypredicts considerable signalfadesduetointerference between theseveralmodes.Fades canbeoftheorderof20dB,Inoneexample.
itwasshownthatthefadingisstrongly dependent ontheradarandthetargetheights,andthatforcentimeter wavelengths thefading occursatintervals offromtwotothreemiles.
Theheightoftheevaporation duct.fromwhichthepropagation conditions canhein­ ferred,canbereadilycalculated frommeasurements ofthesurfacewatertemperature and.at someconvenient height.theairtemp·erature.
relativehumidity, andwindspeed.?!! Thesefour measurements havebeenfoundsuffiCient forthedescription ofducting conditions.
Theabovehasbeenconcerned with'propagation beyondthenormalhorizon.
Withinthe horizon, therefractive' effectsofthe'ductcanleadtoamodification ofthenormal lobing patterncausedbytheinterference ofthe~direct rayandthesurface-reflected ray.Therelative phasebetween thedirectandreflected rayscanbedilTerent inthepresence oftheduct.and PROPAGATION OF RAI3AR WAVES 455  focusing can change the re!ative amplitltdes of the two components.
The focusing effect can  eyen cause the arnplitude of the surf;ice-reflected ray to sometimes exceed that of the direct  ray.JR Tlie effect of tlie duct on the title-of-siglit propagation is to reduce the angle of the lowest  lobe, br-ingtng it closer to tlie surface.
 Consequences of ducted propagation.
Although both the elevated and the surface (evaporation)  duct can result in extended radar ranges, tlie consequences of their presence are often bad  rattier tlian good.
Tlie presence of extended ranges cannot always be predicted in advance.
 Furtlierniore.
tiley cannot be depended upon.
Tlie extension of range along some propagation  paths means a decrease of range along others, or radio holes.
These lioles in the coverage can  seriously affect airborne surveillance radars as well as ground-based and ship-borne radars.
 Tlie extetided ranges during ducting conditions mean that ground clutter is likely to be present  at lotigcr ranges.
'Tliis cat1 pitt a severe burden on some MTI radars that are designed on the  assillnptiori tliat clirtter will not appear beyond a certain range.
This will be particularly bad  with radars wliich cannot cancel second-time-around clutter, such as those with pulse-to-pulse  staggered pulse repetitioti frequencies or those which use tnagtietroti transmitters with random  startirig pliase pitlse to pulse.
Tlie accuracy of precision range measuring systems that utilize  pliase mensurements, as in the Tellurorneter (Sec.
3.5), also can be amected by the evaporation  dact." On the positive side, the evaporation duct, when used with a properly sited antenna,  car1 provide extended range against surface targets or low-flying aircraft considerably beyond  tliat wliich would be expected from a uniform atmosphere.
 Prediction of refractive effects.
The effect of atmospheric refraction on electromagnetic propa-  gation can be determined from a knowledge of the variation of index of refraction with altitude  over tlie path of propagation.
From profiles of index of refraction, classical ray tracingz8 can  be applied to determine how the rays propagate.
Generally, it is reasonable to assume that the  properties of the atmosphere vary only with height.
This assumption is made to simplify the  coniputations.
One of thr: most accurate methods for obtaining the atmospheric profile of  tlie index of refraction is with an airborne microwave refract~meter.~~'~' In one version,39 two  precision microwave transmission cavities are employed, one of which is open to collect a  saniple of the atmospliere.
The other is hermetically sealed and acts as a reference.
The two  caviticg arc fed by tlie same microwave source which is swept in frequency.
The measured  difference in the resonant frequencies of the two cavities is due to the different dielectric  properties (or index of refraction) of ttie gases within the two cavities.
This frequency difference  can be calibfared in terms of the index of refraction of the atmosphere in the sampling cavity.
 Although the airborne refractotneter may give excellent data on the variation or the index of  refrnctioti, it is riot always suitable for Inany applications since it requires an aircraft or  lielicopter  The index of refraction profile can also be determined by measuring the pressure, temper-  ature.
arid humidity as a function of altitude and using Eq.
(12.9) to compute the refrac-  tivity.
The radiosonde is a balloon-borne package of instruments for obtaining such  ~neasurements.~~ Tlie data is telemetered back to the ground.
One drawback of the radiosonde  is that it is generally a slow-response instrument, and is not always able to detect with  stlrficietit accuracy tlie significant refractive index gradients needed for obtaining an accurate  description or the ray patlls.
 in some applicatioris a complete ray trace is not necessary; instead, only the amount by  which tlie rays are bent might be desired, or the error in elevation angle which occurs.
A  correctioti to tile measured elevation angle can be made using only the value of the index of  PROPAGATION OFRADAR WAVES455 focusing canchangetherelativeamplitudes ofthetwocomponents.
Thefocusing effectcan evencausetheamplitude ofthcsurface-rellected raytosometimes exceedthatofthedirect ray.,'!lTheeffectoftheductonthelinc-of-sight propagation istoreducetheangleofthelowest lobe.bringing itclosertothesurface.
Consequences ofduetedpropagation.
Although boththeelevated andthesurface(evaporation) ductcanresultinextended radarranges.theconsequences oftheirpresence areoftenbad ratherthangood.Thepresence ofextended rangescannotalwaysbepredicted inadvance.
Furthcrmore.
theycannotbedepended upon.Theextension ofrangealongsomepropagation pathsmeansadecrease ofrangealongothers.orradioholes.Theseholesinthecoverage can seriously affectairborne surveillance radarsaswellasground-based andship-borne radars.
Theextended rangesduringductingconditions meanthatgroundclutterislikelytobepresent atlongerranges.ThiscanputasevereburdenonsomeMTIradarsthataredesigned onthe assumption thatclutterwillnotappearbeyondacertainrange.Thiswillbeparticularly bad withradarswhichcannotcancelsecond-time-around clutter.suchasthosewithpulse-to-pulse staggered pulserepetition frequencies orthosewhichusemagnetron transmitters withrandom starting phasepulsetopulse.Theaccuracy ofprecision rangemeasuring systems thatutilize phasemeasurements.
asintheTellurometer (Sec.3.5).alsocanbeaffected bytheevaporation dtICt.JROnthepositive side.theevaporation duct,whenusedwithaproperly sitedantenna, canprovideextended rangeagainstsurfacetargetsorlow-llying aircraftconsiderably beyond that\vhichwouldbeexpected fromauniform atmosphere.
Prediction ofrefractive effects.Theeffectofatmospheric refraction onelectromagnetic propa­ gationcanbedetermined fromaknowledge ofthevariation ofindexofrefraction withaltitude overthepathofpropag~tion.
Fromprofilesofindexofrefraction.
classical raytracing2Bcan beappliedtodetermine howtherayspropagate.
Generally, itisreasonable toassumethatthe properties oftheatmosphere varyonlywith height.
Thisassumption ismadetosimplify the computations.
Oneofthemostaccurate methods forobtaining theatmospheric profileof theindexofrefraction iswithanairborne microwave refractometer.40.41Inoneversion,39 two precision microwave transmission cavities areemployed, oneofwhichisopentocollecta sampleoftheatmosphere.
Theotherishermetically sealedandactsasareference.
Thetwo cavities arcfedhytheseunemicrowave sourcewhichissweptinfrequency.
Themeasured difference intheresonant frequencies ofthetwocavities isduetothedifferent dielectric properties (orindexofrefraction) ofthegaseswithinthetwocavities.
Thisfrequency difference canbecalibfilted intermsoftheindexofrefraction oftheatmosphere inthesampling cavity.
Although theairborne refractometer maygiveexcellent dataonthevariation oftheindexof refraction.
itisnotalwayssuitable formanyapplications sinceitrequires anaircraftor helicopter.
Theindexofrefraction profilecanalsobedetermined bymeasuring thepressure, temper­ ature.andhumidity asafunction ofaltitude andusingEq.(12.9)tocompute therefrac­ tivity.Theradiosonde isaballoon-borne package ofinstruments forobtaining such measurements.40Thedataistelemetered backtotheground.Onedrawback oftheradiosonde isthatitisgenerally aslow-response instrument, andisnotalwaysabletodetectwith surtlcient accuracy thesignificant refractive indexgradients neededforobtaining anaccurate description oftheraypaths.
Insomeapplications acomplete raytraceisnotnecessary; instead, onlytheamount by whichtheraysarebentmightbedesired, ortheerrorinelevation anglewhichoccurs.A correction tothemeasured elevation anglecanbemadeusingonlythevalueoftheindexof 456 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  refraction at the surface,20." obtained with either a microwave refractometer or from meteor-  ological measurements of temperature, pressure, and humidity.
An improvement to the eleva-  tion angle correction can be had by making a measurement of the brightness temperature of  the atmosphere with a microwave radiometer, along with a surface refractive-index  rneasi~rernent.~~ Since refractive bending and radiometric bright ness-temperat i~rc measure-  ments both depend on the atmospheric profile, the use of the radiometer provides information  that aids in the correction of elevation angle.
It has been estimated that the brightness-  temperature measurement made with a radiometer operating near the water vapor absorption  line of 22 GHz, along with a measurement ofsurface refractivity, can result in an improvcrnent  in angle accuracy of almost 50 percent 'as co~npared with a surface refractivity mcasurcmcnt  alone.22 The ground-based microwave radiometer can also be used to provide a correction for  the error in time delay introduced by the atmosphere, by making briglitness-temperal~~re  measitrements near the 22-GHz water vapor absorption line and the ~O-CHL absorption line  of oxygen." J  If no other information is available, a correction for the elevation angle can be had on the  basis of the yearly statistics of the meteorological data that enters into Eq.
(12.9) for determin-  ing the index of refra~tion.'~  It is possible to automate, by means of a computer, the necessary calculations for deter-  mining the refractive effects of the atmosphere on the coverage of the radar.
Such computa-  tions could be made at the radar site to provide the operator with the information needed to  know how a radar is affected by the natural environment.
One implementation for naval  application, known as IREPS (Integrated Refraction Effects Prediction System), uses a mini-  computer and interactive graphic display terminal to provide (1) plots of refractivity as a  function of altitude (which indicate the location of ducts); (2) a plain language narrative  description of the propagation effects that can be expected over surface-to-surface, surhce-to-  air, and air-to-air paths; (3) vertical coverage diagrams for specific equipments; (4) display of  path loss with range; and (5) a ray-trace used primarily to assess the performance of airborne  systern~.'~." Input data for IREPS can be obtained from balloon-borne radiosonde measitrc-  ments of upper air temperature, pressure, and humidity.
Alternatively, an aircraft-bornt:  microwave refractometer can be used.
Inputs are obtained from surface meteorological  measurements made on board the ship on which the IREPS is located.
When no other input  data is available, the IREPS utilizes a stored library of historic refractivity and clinlatology  statistics as a function of the latitude, longitude, season, and time of day.
When historic data  is used the output is a prediction of propagation performance in probabilistic terms.
Also  stored are the necessary system parameters for the various electromagnetic systems whose  predicted propagation performance is desired.
 12.6 DIFFRACTION  In free space, electromagnetic waves travel in straight lines.
In the earth's atmosphere, radar  waves can propagate beyond the geometrical horizon by refraction.
Another mechanism that  permits radar coverage to be extended beyond the geometrical horizon is djffractio,~.
Radar  waves are diffracted around the curved earth in the same manner that light is diffracted by a  straight edge.
The ability of electromagnetic waves to propagate around the earth's curvature  by diffraction depends upon the frequency, or more precisely, upon the size of the object  compared with the wavelength.
The lower the frequency, the more the wave is diffracted.
The  mechanism of diffraction is especially important at very low frequencies (VLF) where it  provides world-wide communications.
However, at radar frequencies the wavelength is small  456INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS refraction atthesurface,20.21 obtained witheitheramicrowave refractometer orfrommeteor­ ological measurements oftemperature, pressure, andhumidity.
Animprovement totheeleva­ tionanglecorrection canbehadbymakingameasurement ofthebrightness temperature of theatmosphere withamicrowave radiometer, alongwithasurface refractive-index measurement.22Sincerefractive bending andradiometric brightness-temperature measure­ mentsbothdependontheatmospheric profile,theuseoftheradiometer provides information thataidsinthecorrection ofelevation angle.Ithasbeenestimated thatthebrightness­ temperature measurement madewitharadiometer operating nearthewatervaporabsorption lineof22GHz,alongwithameasurement ofsurfacerefractivity, canresultinanimprovement inangleaccuracy ofalmost50percent'ascompared withasurfacerefractivity measurement alone.22Theground-based microwave radiometer canalsobeusedtoprovideacorrection for theerrorintimedelayintroduced bytheatmosphere, hymaking hrightness-temperature measurements nearthe22-GHzwatervaporabsorption lineandthe60-GHza3sorption line ofoxygen.42 Ifnootherinformation isavailable, acorrection fortheelevation anglecanbehadonthe hasisoftheyearlystatistics ofthemeteorological datathatentersintoEq.(12.9)fordetermin­ ingtheindexofrefraction.22 Itispossible toautomate, bymeansofacomputer, thenecessary calculations fordeter­ miningtherefractive effectsoftheatmosphere onthecoverage oftheradar.Suchcomputa­ tionscouldbemadeattheradarsitetoprovidetheoperator withtheinformation neededto knowhowaradarisaffected bythenaturalenvironment.
Oneimplementation fornaval application, knownasIREPS(lntegrated Refraction EffectsPrediction System), usesamini­ computer andinteractive graphic displayterminal toprovide (I)plotsofrefractivity asa function ofaltitude (whichindicate thelocation ofducts);(2)aplainlanguage narrative description ofthepropagation effectsthatcanbeexpected oversurface-to-surface, surface-to­ air,andair-to-air paths;(3)verticalcoverage diagrams forspecificequipments; (4)displayof pathlosswithrange;and(5)aray-trace usedprimarily toassesstheperformance ofairborne systems.79.110InputdataforIREPScanbeobtained fromballoon-borne radiosonde measure­ mentsofupperairtemperature, pressure.
andhumidity.
Alternatively, anaircraft-horne microwave refractometer canbeused.Inputsareobtained fromsurface meteorological measurements madeonboardtheshiponwhichtheIREPSislocated.
Whennootherinput dataisavailable, theIREPSutilizesastoredlibraryofhistoric refractivity andclimatology statistics asafunction ofthelatitude, longitude, season,andtimeofday.Whenhistoricdata isusedtheoutputisaprediction ofpropagation performance inprobabilistic terms.Also storedarethenecessary systemparameters forthevarious electromagnetic systems whose predicted propagation performance isdesired.
12.6DIFFRACTION Infreespace,electromagnetic wavestravelinstraight lines.Intheearth'satmosphere, radar wavescanpropagate beyondthegeometrical horizon byrefraction.
Another mechanism that permitsradarcoverage tobeextended beyondthegeometrical horizon isdUfractioll.
Radar wavesarediffracted aroundthecurvedearthinthesamemannerthatlightisdiffracted bya straight edge.Theabilityofelectromagnetic wavestopropagate aroundtheearth'scurvature bydiffraction depends uponthefrequency, ormoreprecisely, uponthesizeoftheobject compared withthewavelength.
Thelowerthefrequency, themOrethewaveisdiffracted.
The mechanism ofdiffraction isespecially importan~ atverylowfrequencies (VLF)whereit provides world-wide communications.
However, atradarfrequencies thewavelength issmall PROPAGATlON OF RADAR WAVES 457  cornpa1 cd with tlic cat tli's dinic~isions arid little energy is diffracted.
I'llus radar coverage  cannot he extended nit~cli bcyo~id tlie li~ie of siglit by this niechatiism.
 1,'igrlrc 12 7 is ;I plot of (lie clcct~ ic liclti stlctigtli (relative lo free sl,;tcc) at the target ;IS a  furlctiorl of the distarlce from t11e trarisrnitti~ig antenna.
Botli the radar antenna and the target  arc assunled to he ;~t a fixed liciglit (100 n~ it1 tliis exan~ple).
Tllc cornputed curves apply to  propagatio~i over an ide:1li7cd s~iiootli eartli iri the absence of a11 atmospiiere.
The line of siglit  is tlic straiglit-titie dist,ince betweeti radar and target that is just tangent to the surface of tlie  earth.
The distarice between radar and target along the line of sight is  ri,, = J~k~lh, t JZ& (12.14)  wliere 11,.
11, = lieiglits of radar antenna and target, respectively  tr = eartli's radius  k = factor discussed in Sec.
12.4, accounting for refraction due to a uniform gra-  dient of refractivity  -2) .
Tlie point of tangency of tlie line of sight with the earth is tlie geoint.tr.ical, or optical, /roi.i:ori.
 At optical frequcticies (A 2 0) the field strength within the interference region (tliat is,  l~etwceti tlie radar arid tlie geometrical horizon) is essentially the same as in free space.
Tile  field docs (lot ~wrictr;ite beyorid tlie Iiorizori.
Thus, for optical freqi~ericies or very sliort radar  Figure 12.7 Theoretical field strength (relative to free-space field strength) as a function of the distance  from the transmitting antenna.
Vertical polarization, h, = h, = 100 m, k = 1, ground conductivity =  10- mlio/rn, dielectric corlstatit = 4.
(Alier B~oro\~s NII~ Attwo~d.~ colrrrrsy Acadtwic Press.
lac.)  PROPAGATION OFRADAR WAVES457 compared withthecarth'sdimcnsions andlittlccnergyisdiffracted.
Thusradarcovcragc cannotheextendcd muchbeyondthelineofsightbythismechanism.
Figure12.7isaplotoftheelectricfieldstrength (relative tofreespace)atthetargetasa function ofthedistance fromthetransmitting antenna.
Boththeradarantenna andthetarget arcassumcd tohcatafixedheight(100IIIinthisexample).
Thecomputed curvesapplyto propagation ovcranidealized smoothcarthintheabsenceofanatmosphcre.
Thelincofsight isthcstraight-line distance nctween radarandtargetthatisjusttangenttothesurfaceofthe earth.Thedistance between radarandtargetalongthelineofsightis do=/2kah,+/2ka"z (12.14) where"1'"z=heightsofradarantenna andtarget.respectively a=earth'sradius k=factordiscussed inSec.12.4,accounting forrefraction duetoauniform gra­ dientofrefractivity Thepointoftangency ofthelineofsightwiththeearthisthegeometrical, oroptical,IIori:::oll.
Atopticalfrequencies ()::::::0)thefieldstrength withintheinterference region(thatis, between theradarandthegeometrical horizon) isessentially thesameasinfreespace.The fielddocsnotpenctrate heyondthehorizon.
Thus,foropticalfrequencies orveryshortradar 10090 800001__--.-L -l-_---.-J ---l 30 40 50 60 70 Distonce, km50 2.0 1.0 (1) u0.5a Q V> (1) (1) .:=0.2 0 (lJ >0.1-- a (lJ "-005(".c +-- t:::ry<::>c'"(1)i:::"-002+-- <::>,n -<:: 'D ---..
(lJ <::> LL001--- -S!-~ ~ ~ 0.005<::> ~ ~ 0002>..=0 Figure12.7Theoretical fieldstrength (relative tofree-space fieldstrength) asafunction ofthedistance fromthetransmitting antenna.
Vertical polarization, II"=h,=100m,k=I,ground conductivity = 10-2mho/m.
dielectric constant=4.(Afier B!I"~ows alldAttwood,S cOllrtesy Academic Press.fllc.) 458 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  wavelengths, the geometrical horizon represents the approximate boundary between the re-  gions of propagation and no propagation.
As the frequency decreases (increasing wavelength),  Fig.
12.7 indicates that more and more energy propagates beyond the geometrical horiron.
 However, the field strength at, and just within, the geometrical hori~on decreases with decreas-  ing frequency.
 It is concluded that if low-altitude radar coverage is desired beyond the geometrical  horizon in the diffraction region, the frequency should be as low as possible.
If, on the other  hand, low-altitude coverage is to be optimized within the interference region and if there is no  concern for coverage beyond the horizon, the radar frequency should be as high as possible.
 (This assumes the absence of ducting.)  The formula for the distance along the line of sight [Eq.
(12.14)] should not be used as a  measure of the radar coverage without some reservation.
Figure 12.7 shows that a target  located at the geometrical horizon is not in free space but is definitely within the diffraction  region of the radar.
The field strength for a target on the radar line of sight might vary from 10  to 30 dB below that in free space.43 The loss of signal strength in the diffraction region can be  quite high.
At a frequency of 500 MHz, the one-way propagation loss is roughly 1 dB/mi at  low altitudes.
It can be even greater at higher frequencies.
Therefore, to penetrate 10 miles  within the diffraction region, the radar power at 500 MHz must be increased by at least 20 dB  over that required for free-space propagation.
 The decrease in radar coverage due to the attenuation of electromagnetic energy in the  diffraction region is illustrated by Fig.
12.8 for a radar operating at a frequency of 500 MHz.
 These curves are theoretical contours of constant radar coverage.
The radar height is assumed  to be 200 ft above the curved earth.
Curve 1 represents the locus of the geometrical line of sight  as defined by Eq.
(12.14) for k = 4.
Curve 2 is the constant signal contour in the diffraction  region for a signal strength equal to the free-space signal that would be received from a range  of approximately 220 nautical miles; that is, if the radar is to detect a target that lies along this  contour, it must be capable of detecting the same target in free space at a range of 220 nautical  miles.
If the target were at an altitude of 200 ft, the rnaxinl~in detection range would be  reduced from 220 to about 35 nautical miles.
Curves 3,4, and 5 are similar to curve 2, except  that they apply to a free-space signal of 110, 55, and 27.5 nautical miles, respectively.
Curve 6  Figure 12.8 Contours of "radar  coverage" for radar height of 200 ft  above curved earth.
(1) Geometrical  line-of-sight contour for k = 3; (2)  constant-radar-signal contour in the  diffraction region, assuming a radar  capable of a free-space range of 220  nrni, vertical polarization, seawater,  k = j,f= 500 MHz; (3) same as (2),  but for 110 nrni free-space range;  (4) same as (2).
but for 55 nmi free-  space range; (5) same as (2), but for  27.5 nrni free-space range; (6)contour  defining start of diffraction region.
 (Courtesy Proc.
IRE.)  458INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS wavelengths, thegeometrical horizon represents theapproximate boundary between there­ gionsofpropagation andnopropagation.
Asthefrequency decreases (increasing wavelength), Fig.12.7indicates thatmoreandmoreenergypropagates beyondthegeometrical horizon.
However, thefieldstrength at,andjustwithin,thegeometrical horizondecreases withdecreas­ ingfrequency.
Itisconcluded thatiflow-altitude radarcoverage isdesiredbeyondthegeometrical horizon inthediffraction region,thefrequency shouldbeaslowaspossible.If,ontheother hand,low-altitude coverage istobeoptimized withintheinterference regionandifthereisno concern forcoverage beyondthehorizon, theradarfrequency shouldbeashighaspossible.
(Thisassumes theabsenceofducting.) Theformula forthedistance alongthelineofsight[Eq.(12.14)]shouldnotbeusedasa measure oftheradarcoverage without somereservation.
Figure12.7showsthatatarget locatedatthegeometrical horizon isnotinfreespacebutisdefinitely withinUlediffraction regionofthera~ar.Thefieldstrength foratargetontheradarlineofsightmightvaryfrom10 to30dBbelowthatinfreespace.43Thelossofsignalstrength inthediffraction regioncanbe quitehigh.Atafrequency of500MHz,theone-way propagation lossisroughly 1 dB/miat lowaltitudes.Itcanbeevengreaterathigherfrequencies.
Therefore, topenetrate 10miles withinthediffraction region,theradarpowerat500MHzmustbeincreased byatleast20dB overthatrequired forfree-space propagation.
Thedecrease inradarcoverage duetotheattenuation ofelectromagnetic energyinthe diffraction regionisillustrated byFig.12.8foraradaroperating atafrequency of500MHz.
Thesecurvesaretheoretical contours ofconstant radarcoverage.
Theradarheightisassumed tobe200ftabovethecurvedearth.Curve1represents thelocusofthegeometrical lineofsight asdefinedbyEq.(12.14)fork=lCurv~2istheconstant signalcontour inthediffraction regionforasignalstrength equaltothefree-space signalthatwouldbereceived fromarange ofapproximately 220nautical miles;thatis,iftheradaristodetectatargetthatliesalongthis contour, itmustbecapableofdetecting thesametargetinfreespaceatarangeof220nautical miles.Ifthetargetwereatanaltitudeof200ft,themaximum detection rangewouldbe reduced from220toabout35nautical·miles.
Curves3,4,and5aresimilartocurve2,except thattheyapplytoafree-space signalof110,55,and27.5nautical miles,respectively.
Curve6 500.------,.----.----------,,------,---,,,--.,.------, 400 4i300-0 :2:;:.
o +­ l1> ~200- oI-Figure 12.8Contours of..radar coverage" forradarheightof200ft abovecurvedearth.(I)Geometrical line-or-sight contour fork=!;(2) constant-radar-signal contour inthe diffraction region,assuming aradar capableofafree-space rangeof220 nmi,vertical polarization, seawater, k=1.1=500MHz;(3)sameas(2), butfor110nmifree-space range; (4)sameas(2),butfor55nmifree­ spacerange;(5)sameas(2),butfor oL..
l.- I.--__ ---J ---J ---'27.5nmifree-space range;(6)contour o 10 20 30 40 50defining startofdiffraction region.
Range,nauticalmiles (Courtesy Proc.IRE.)100+­...... PROPAGATION OF RADAR WAVES 459  represents the approximate boundary between the interference region and diffraction region.
 Ally target to ttie riglit of curve 6 may be considered to be within the diffraction region.
This  illustrates wliy most radars operating at microwave or UHF frequencies are limited to cover-  age wittiin the geometrical line of sight.
 12.7 A'ITENUATION BY ATMOSPHERIC GASES~.'~.~~  Tlle attenuation of radar energy in a clear atmosphere in tlie absence of precipitation is due to  tlie presence of oxygen arid water vapor.
Attenuation results when a portion of the energy  incident on tlie molecules of these atmosptieric gases is absorbed as heat and is lost.
The  reduction in radar signal power when propagating over a distance R and back (two-way path)  may be expressed as exp ( - 2aR), wlicre u is tlie (one-way) attenuation coefficient measured in  units of (distance)- l.
Instead of plotting a, it is more usual to plot the one-way attenuation in  ctecibels per unit distance.
This is equivalent to plotting the quantity 4.34a, where the constant  - accourits for tlie conversion from ttie natural logarithm to the base 10 logarithm.
 Attenuation by oxygen and water vapor is shown in Fig.
12.9.44,45 Resonance peaks for  water vapor occur at 22.24 GHz (1.35 cm wavelength) and at about 184 GHz, while the  2 4 6 10 20 40 60 100 200  Frequency, GHz  Figure 12.9 Attenuation of electromagnetic energy by atmospheric gases in an atmosphere at 76 cm  pressure.
Dashed curve is absorption due to water vapor in an atmosphere containing 1 percent water  vapor molecules (7.5 g water/m3).
The solid curve is the absorption due to oxygen.
(From Burrows ar~d  Attwoods ard Straiton nttd ~olhert.~~)  PROPAGATION OFRADAR WAVES459 represents theapproximate boundary between theinterference regionanddiffraction region.
Anytargettotherightofcurve6maybeconsidered tobewithinthediffraction region.This illustrates whymostradarsoperating atmicrowave orUHFfrequencies arelimitedtocover­ agewithinthegeometrical lincofsight.
12.7A'n'ENUATION BYATMOSPHERIC GASES5.12.28 Theattenuation ofradarenergyinaclearatmosphere intheabsenceofprecipitation isdueto thepresence ofoxygenandwatervapor.Attenuation resultswhenaportionoftheenergy incident onthemolecules oftheseatmospheric gasesisabsorbed asheatandislost.The reduction inradarsignalpowerwhenpropagating overadistance Randback(two-way path) maybeexpressed asexp(-2exR),whereexisthe(one-way) attenuation coefficient measured in unitsof(distance) -'.Insteadofplotting ex,itismoreusualtoplottheone-way attenuation in decibels perunitdistance.
Thisisequivalent toplotting thequantity 4.34ex,wheretheconstant accounts fortheconversion fromthenaturallogarithm tothebase10logarithm.
Attenuation byoxygenandwatervaporisshowninFig.12.9.44•45Resonance peaksfor watervaporoccurat22.24GHz(1.35cmwavelength) andatabout184GHz,whilethe 10-- E.x.........
CDu c0.1 "0 += 0 :J C ~ <1 0.01 0001--n I \ I \ / / / / / / / / / / 24 6 10204060100 Frequency.
GHz200 Figure12.9Attenuation ofelectromagnetic energybyatmospheric gasesinanatmosphere at76em pressure.
Dashedcurveisabsorption duetowatervaporinanatmosphere containing 1percentwater vapormolecules (7.5gwater/mJ).Thesolidcurveistheabsorption duetooxygen.(FromBurrowsarid Artwood5andStraiton andTolbert.46) 460 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  Radar-to-target distance, nmi  (a)  1 .I  10 10,000  0 9  08 5000  m 3000  07 2 000  i  I? + 0 1000 2 06 900 u 800  700  $05 600  ? 500 0 5 0.4 400  0.3 300  0.2 200  0 1 ,100  0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200 220 240 260 280 300  Radar- to-target d~stonce, nmi  (6)  Figure 12.10 Attenuation for two-way, radar propagation as a function of range and frequency for  elevation angle and (b) 5" elevation angle.
(From Blake?') , (a) zero  460INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS 10,000 5000 3000 2000 N I ~ >; uc ~0' ! 2003005"0o 500a:100 900 800 700 600 400---~./ /V 1/ / V--......---f-- v::::::----~/ ~./ /~VV'e::::::/ .......-:;~ I -/~'/%e::--~- -/~l---~V---1/~~/..-~/~~ ~--~.-"l--- /~~~~r::::V--~--~yf...--l--- ~~c::::-~v-v-e--- ::::---:~~::.--- 1206.0 1.5 05455.0 1.05.5 00 o20406080100120140160180200220 240 260280300 Radar-Io-Iarget distance, nmiCD40 "0 C235c:>c Q) 1520 >- ~b2.5 ~I- (a) o"0 Ca:0,000 300 1002005000 3000 2000 400N I 1000 ~ 900800700600 5001 ~---./ /V /---'"""/~---~./I---V~::::---/:--/~~:::::-- --- ~-0---w:&,~:::----- J---./'".---/!lI~%'/vl----V- ~~/',/""f----....-~ ~~~~~--.-.-.--09 0.1CD ~07 .Qo206 Q) E ~05 ~ Io ~0.40.8 0.31.1 1.0 0.2 a20406080100120140160180200 220 240260 280 300 Radar-Io-targel dislance, nmi (b) Figure11.10Attenuation fortwo-way, radarpropagation asafunctionofrangeandfrequency for(a)zero elevation angleand(b)S°elevation angle.(FromBlake.·') oxygerl tnolcc~~lc Ilas resotlatices at 60 (;11~ (0.5 cril wavelctigth) and 118 GHz.~~ At frequen-  cies below about 1 C; tiz (L bard) tlie effect of atmospheric attenuation is negligible.
Above  10 Gf 17.
it ~CCOII~CS ilicr~asi~~gly ir~lj~ort;tl~t.
TIIC large attertuations experienced at millimeter  wavele~~gtlis is onc of the cllief reasons long-range, ground-based radars are seldom found  above 35 (;Hz (K, hand).
 The attenuation of the attnospheric gases decreases with increasing altitude.
Thus the  altct~t~atiorl cxpcricr~cccl fly a r;itl;ir will del~erld oti the altitude of the target as well as the  range.
With a ground-based radar the attenuation is greatest when the antenna points to  the Iiorirorl, atid it is least wlicn it points to the zenith.
Figure 12.10 gives examples of  the two-way atterluation for elevation angles of 0 and 5".
 12.8 ENVIRONkIENrrAL NOISE  At n~icrowave frequencies the normal noise level is relatively low and thesensitivity of conven-  ,j tional radar receivers is usually determined by internal noise.
However, radar receivers with  vcry low ~ioise i~tpilt stages sornetit~les cat1 he affected by the ambient noise from the natural  environment.
This is more likely to occur at both the upper and lower extremes of the micro-  wave frequency region.
Several sources of ambient, or external, noise are described in this  sectiorl.
 Cosmic There is a continuous background of noiselike electromagnetic radiation  which arrives from such extraterrestrial sources as our own galaxy (the Milky Way), extraga-  lactic sources, and " radio stars." In general, cosmic noise decreases with increasing frequency  arid can usually be neglected at frequencies above L band.
It can be a serious limitation,  Iiowever.
to those radars operating at VHF or lower.
The magnitude of cosmic noise depends  upon the portion of the celestial sphere in which the antenna points.
It is a maximum when  looking toward the center of our own galaxy, and it is a minimum .vhen observing along the  pole about which the galaxy revolves.
A plot of the maximum and minimum cosmic-noise  brigl~trtess tentperattire as a function of frequency is shown by the dashed curves of Fig.
12.11.
 The brightness temperature of an extended source of radiation is the temperature of a black-  body which yields the same noise power at the receiver.
A highly directive antenna viewing a  distributed source of radiation under " ideal " conditions would receive a noise power equal to  kTB B, where k = Boltzmann's constant, TB = brightness temperature of the source, and  B = bandwidlh of the receiver.
By "ideal" conditions is meant an antenna with negligible  sidelobes and negligible resistive losses, and which looks at a distributed source of brightness  teuiperature (the cosmic noise) in the absence of the earth's atmosphere or any other  source of noise.
For a practical antenna the antenna temperature is defined as the integral  of the brightness temperature over all angles, weighted by the antenna pattern.
 Atmospheric absorption noise.
It is known from the theory of blackbody radiation that any  body wliicli absorbs energy radiates the same amount of energy that it absorbs, else certain  portions would increase in temperature and the temperature of other portions would  de~rease.'~ Therefore a lossy transmission line absorbs a certain amount of energy and rera-  diates it as noise.
The same is true of tlie atmosphere since it also attenuates or absorbs  microwave energy.
The radiation arising in the atmosphere (or any other absorbing body)  must just compensate for the partial absorption of the blackbody radiation.
 Consider an absorbing atmosphere at an ambient temperature T, surrounded by an  imaginary blackbody at the same temperature.
The loss L is the factor by which energy is  PROPAGATION OFRADAR WAVES461 oxygcnmolcculc hasresonanccs at60GlI!.(0.5cmwavelength) and118GHZ.46Atfrequen­ ciesbelowahoutIGHz(Lband)theeffectofatmospheric attenuation isnegligible.
Above 10Gllz.itbecomes increasingly important.
Thelargcattcnuations experienced atmillimeter wavclcngths isoneofthcchiefrcasons long-range, ground-based radarsareseldomfound above35GHz(Kahand).
Theattenuation oftheatmospheric gasesdecreases withincreasing altitude.
Thusthe attenuation experienced hyaradarwilldcpcndallthealtitudeofthetargetaswellasthe rangc.Withaground-based radartheattcnuation isgreatest whentheantenna pointsto thehori/on, anditislcastwhenitpointstothezenith.Figure12.10givesexamples of thetwo-way attenuation forelevation anglesof0and5°.
12.8ENVIRONl\lENTAL NOISE ;\tmicrowave frequencies thenormalnoiselevelisrelatively lowandthesensitivity ofconven­ tionalradarreceivers isusuallydetermined byinternal noise.However, radarreceivers with verylownoiseinputstagessometimes canbeaffected bytheambient noisefromthenatural environment.
Thisismorelikelytooccuratboththeupperandlowerextremes ofthemicro­ wavefrequency region.Severalsourcesofambient, orexternal, noisearede~cribed inthis section.
Cosmicnoise48.49Thereisacontinuous background ofnoiselike electromagnetic radiation whicharrivesfromsuch extraterrestrial sourcesasourowngalaxy(theMilkyWay),extraga­ lacticsources,and"radiostars."Ingeneral, cosmicnoisedecreases withincreasing frequency andcanusuallybeneglected atfrequencies aboveLband.Itcanbeaseriouslimitation, however.
tothoseradarsoperating atVHForlower.Themagnitude ofcosmicnoisedepends upontheportion ofthecelestial sphereinwhichtheantenna points.Itisamaximum when lookingtowardthecenterofourowngalaxy,anditisaminimum 'vhenobserving alongthe poleaboutwhichthegalaxyrevolves.
Aplotofthemaximum andminimum cosmic-noise brightlless temperature asafunction offrequency isshownbythedashedcurvesofFig.12.11.
Thebrightness temperature ofanextended sourceofradiation isthetemperature ofablack­ bodywhichyieldsthesamenoisepoweratthereceiver.
Ahighlydirective antenna viewinga distributed sourceofradiation under"ideal"conditions wouldreceiveanoisepowerequalto kTRB,wherek=Boltzmann's constant, TR=brightness temperature ofthesource,and B=bandwidth ofthereceiver.
By"ideal"conditions ismeantanantenna withnegligible sidelobes andnegligible resistive losses,andwhichlooksatadistributed sourceofbrightness temperature (thecosmicnoise)intheabsence oftheearth'satmosphere oranyother sourceofnoise.Forapractical antenna theantenna temperature isdefined astheintegral ofthebrightness temperature overallangles,weighted bytheantenna pattern.
Atmospheric absorption noise.Itisknownfromthetheoryofblackbody radiation thatany bodywhichabsorbs energyradiates thesameamountofenergythatitabsorbs, elsecertain portions wouldincrease intemperature andthetemperature ofotherportions would decrease.56Therefore alossytransmission lineabsorbs acertainamountofenergyandrera­ diatesitasnoise.Thesameistrueoftheatmosphere sinceitalsoattenuates orabsorbs microwave energy.Theradiation arisingintheatmosphere (oranyotherabsorbing body) mustjustcompensate forthepartialabsorption oftheblackbody radiation.
Consider anabsorbing atmosphere atanambient temperature 1;,surrounded byan imaginary blackbody atthesametemperature.
ThelossListhefactorbywhichenergyis 462 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  Frequency, MHz  Figure 12.11 Maximum and minimum brightness temperatures of the sky as seen by an ideal single-  polarization antenna on earth.
(Ajier Greene and Lebenba~m,~' Microwave J.)  attenuated in passing through the atmosphere.
The noise power available over a bandwidth B,  from the imaginary blackbody is kT, B,.
The noise power after passing through the atmos-  phere is kT, B JL.
Thus the amount of power absorbed by the atmosphere is kT, B,(1 - IIL)  and is equal to the noise power AN radiated by the atmosphere itself.
From the definition of  effective noise temperature and the fact that l/L is the "gain" (less than unity), the following ,  equation is obtained:  Hence Te = T,(L - 1 ) (12.15)  If the atmospheric loss were 1 dB at a temperature of 260 K, the effective noise tempera-  ture would be 68 K; a 3-dB loss results in Te = 260 K, while a 10-dB loss gives Te = 1340 K.
 A plot of the single-polarization bright'ness temperature or space temperature due to both  cosmic noise and atmospheric absorption is shown by the solid curves of Fig.
12.1 1.
An  ambient temperature of 260 K is' assumed in the computation of atmospheric-absorption  noise.
At the higher frequencies (X band or above) atmospheric absorption is the predominant  contributor to the brightness tem+rature, while at the lower frequencies (L band or lower),  the cosmic noise predominates.' There'exids a broad minimum in the brightness temperature  extending from about 1,000 to 10,000 MHz.
It is in this region that it is advantageous to  operate low-noise receivers to achieve' maximum system sensitivity.
The minimum atmo-  spheric absorption occurs when the antenna 'is vertical (pointed at the zenith), while the  462INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS x 0 .c-L ~0 LJJ E \0MaximumL\.....
c100\ '"'"'"\ '"a '" \L ::J\"5 L '" \a.
E '" \....
Ii)'\\ua10a.\\ '"L ..9-\Minimum '"'" \\ '"c....\\Cosmicnoisefrom.cCosmicnoise 0' Lfromgoloctic \ \ galacticcenterco pole \\ 1 100 ',000 10,000 100,000 Frequency, MHz Figure12.11Maximum andminimum brightness temperatures oftheskyasseenbyanidealsingle­ polarization antenna onearth.(AfterGreeneandLebenbaum,so Microwave J.) attenuated inpassingthroughtheatmosphere.
Thenoisepoweravailable overabandwidth Bn fromtheimaginary blackbody iskJ:aBII"Thenoisepowerafterpassingthrough theatmos­ phereiskJ:aB,jL.Thustheamountofpowerabsorbed bytheatmosphere iskTjIBII(1-1/L) andisequaltothenoisepower ~Nradiated bytheatmosphere itself.Fromthedefinition of effective noisetemperature andthefactthatt/Listhe"gain"(lessthanunity),thefollowing equation isobtained: Hence!!N=kT.BG=kTeB"=kTB(1-!)ell, L anL Te=TlI(L-1) (12.15) Iftheatmospheric losswere1dBatatemperature of260K,theeffective noisetempera­ turewouldbe68K;a3-dBlossresultsinTe=260K,whileato-dBlossgivesTe=1340K.
Aplotofthesingle-polarization brightness temperature orspacetemperature duetoboth cosmicnoiseandatmospheric' absorption 'isshownbythesolidcurvesofFig.12.11.An ambient temperature of260Kis'assumed inthecomputation ofatmospheric-absorption noise.Atthehigherfrequencies (Xbandorabove)atmospheric absorption isthepredominant contributor tothebrightness temperature,while atthelowerfrequencies (Lbandorlower), thecosmicnoisepredominates.; There"existsabroadminimum inthebrightness temperature extending fromabout1,000to"1O,000'.MHz.
Itisinthisregionthatitisadvantageous to operatelow-noise receivers to'achieve' maximum systemsensitivity.
Theminimum atmo­ sphericabsorption occurswhenthe"antenna'is vertical(pointed atthezenith),whilethe maxirntlni occurs wlien the alltentla is directed along the horizon.
The noise is greater along  the liorizoti than at the zenith since tlie antenna "sees" more atmosphere.
The antenna beams  must be oriented at elevation angles greater tllari about' 5" to avoid excessive atmospheric-  absorption noise in tlie main beam.
 l'l~e cornpitted briglittiess temperatures of Fig.
12.1 1 do not agree in detail with tliose  prcsctited by otli~rs.~'~~l~~~ 7'11~ fact tliat SLIC~~ cot~iputations made by different ar~thors do not  nlwitys ngrcc precisely riccd r~ot be a liniitatiori to tlie radar systems engineer.
Disagreements  oftcri rcsi~lt f1oti1 tllc ovc~.sirilplifyitlg tiatilrc of tlie assuniptions or in tlie rnodel itsed it1  formulating tlie calculations.
A good radar design is one whicli is not overly sensitive to small  v;lrintions it1 tl~c rriodcl or tlie assunlptions.
 Atmospheric and urban noise.
A single lightning stroke radiates considerable RF noise  power.
At any one moment there are an average of 1800 thunderstorms in progress in different  parts of tlie world.
From all these storms about 100 lightning flashes take place every  The combined effect of all tlie lightning strokes gives rise to a noise spectrum which is  especially large at broadcast and short-wave radio frequencies.
Noise that arises from  lightning-stroke radiation is called atnlosplzeric r~oise (not to be confused with noise produced  by atmospheric absorption as described previously).
The spectrum of atmospheric noise falls  of rapidly with increasing frequency and is usually of little consequence above 50 MHzs4  Hence atmospheric noise is seldom an important consideration in radar design, except, per-  haps, for tadars in the lower VHF region.
 Another source of noise predominant at the lower radar frequencies is urban noise, also  known as man-made noise.
Noise from automobile ignition, electric razors, power tools, and  fluorescent lights are examples.
It is of little concern at UHF or higher frequen~ies.~~  Solar noise.
The sun is a strollg emitter of electromagnetic radiation, the intensity of which  varies with time.
The minimum level of solar noise is due to blackbody radiation at a tempera-  ture of about 6000 K.56-57 The solar noise is unlike most other noise mechanisms in that its  power increases with increasing frequency.
Solar storms (sunspots and flares) can increase the  solar-noise level several orders of magnitude over that of the "quiet," or undisturbed sun.
 The solar noise can sometimes be of significant magnitude to affect the sensitivity of low-noise  radar receivers from energy received in the antenna sidelobes.
The sun also can be used  as a source to calibrate the beam-pointing (boresight) of large  antenna^.'^ Discrete radio  sources, call& radio stars, are too weak at radar frequencies to be a serious source of interfer-  ence, but they have been used in conjunction with sensitive receivers to determine pointing and  focusing corrections for large antennas.59  System noise temperature.
Figure 12.12 illustrates some of the sources of noise which generally  must be considered when computing the system effective noise temperature.
The antenna sees  the cosmic noise at a temperature T, with an intervening absorbing atmosphere at a tempera-  ture T,, and a loss L,, .
The atmosphere may be characterized for present purposes by a single  temperature and a single loss, but it can be subdivided, if desired, into an ionospheric compo-  nent, an oxygen component, and a water-vapor component.
The combined temperature of  cosmic noise and atmospheric noise [T, + (L,, - l)T,,] is called the space temperature, the  hriglttrress temperature, or the artterzrta temperature of an ideal antenna.
The RF losses L,[  indicated in the figure are meant to include the antenna, radome, and duplexer losses, as well  as transmission-line loss.
The effective noise temperature of the receiver is denoted T, .
 If it is assumed that the noise contributions enter the receiver via the main beam only, the  PROPAGATION OFRADAR WAVES463 maximum occurswhentheantenna isdirected alongthehorizon.
Thenoiseisgreateralong thehorizonthanatthezenithsincetheantenna" sees"m.oreatmosphere.
Theantenna beams mustbeoriented atelevation anglesgreaterthanabout5°toavoidexcessive atmospheric­ ahsorption noiseinthemainbeam.
Thecomputed hrightness temperatures ofFig.12.11donotagreeindetailwiththose presented byothers.47.5U2Thefactthatsuchcomputations madebydifferent authorsdonot alwaysagreeprecisely neednothealimitation totheradarsystemsengineer.
Disagreements oftenresullfromtheoYersimplifying natureoftheassumptions orinthemodellIsedin formulating thecalculations.
Agoodradardesignisonewhichisnotoverlysensitive tosmall variations inthemodelortheassumptions.
Atmospheric andurbannoise.Asinglelightning strokeradiates considerable RFnoise power.Atanyone moment thereareanaverageof1800thunderstorms inprogress indifferent partsoftheworld.Fromallthesestormsabout100lightning flashestakeplaceeverysecond.53 Thecombined effectofallthelightning strokesgivesrisetoanoisespectrum whichis especially largeatbroadcast andshort-wave radiofrequencies.
Noisethatarisesfrom lightning-stroke radiation iscalledatmospheric noise(nottobeconfused withnoiseproduced byatmospheric absorption asdescribed previously).
Thespectrum ofatmospheric noisefalls ofrapidlywithincreasing frequency andisusuallyoflittleconsequence above50MHz.54 Henceatmospheric noiseisseldomanimportant consideration inradardesign,except,per­ haps,forradarsinthelowerVHFregion.
Another sourceofnoisepredominant atthelowerradarfrequencies isurbannoise,also knownasman-made noise.Noisefromautomobile ignition, electricrazors,powertools,and fluorescent lightsareexamples.
Itisoflittleconcern atUHForhigherfrequencies.55 Solarnoise.Thesunisastrongemitterofelectromagnetic radiation, theintensity ofwhich varieswithtime.Theminimum levelofsolarnoiseisduetoblackbody radiation atatempera­ tureofabout6000K.56.57Thesolarnoiseisunlikemostothernoisemechanisms inthatits powerincreases withincreasing frequency.
Solarstorms(sunspots andflares)canincrease the solar-noise levelseveralordersofmagnitude overthatofthe"quiet,"orundisturbed sun.
Thesolarnoisecansometimes beofsignificant magnitude toaffectthesensitivity oflow-noise radarreceivers fromenergyreceived intheantenna sidelobes.
Thesunalsocanbeused asasourcetocalibrate thebeam-pointing (boresight) oflargeantennas.58Discrete radio sources, call&lradiostars,aretooweakatradarfrequencies tobeaserioussourceofinterfer­ ence,buttheyhavebeenusedinconjunction withsensitive receivers todetermine pointing and focusing corrections forlargeantennas.59 Systemnoisetemperature.
Figure12.12illustrates someofthesourcesofnoisewhichgenerally mustbeconsidered whencomputing thesystemeffective noisetemperature.
Theantenna sees thecosmicnoiseatatemperature Tcwithanintervening absorbing atmosphere atatempera­ ture1'.1andalossL.l•Theatmosphere maybecharacterized forpresentpurposes byasingle temperature andasingleloss,butitcanbesubdivided, ifdesired,intoanionospheric compo­ nent,anoxygencomponent, andawater-vapor component.
Thecombined temperature of cosmicnoiseandatmospheric noise[1;+(Lal-1)'r..]iscalledthespacetemperature, the brightness temperature, orthearltemta temperature ofanidealantenna.
TheRFlossesLrr indicated inthefigurearemeanttoincludetheantenna, radome, andduplexer losses,aswell astransmission-line loss.Theeffective noisetemperature ofthereceiver isdenoted 1;e.
Ifitisassumed thatthenoisecontributions enterthereceiverviathemainbeamonly,the Cosmic noise  rc Absorbing  atmosphere  Gtt Lat Antenna  'sidelobe and bock -lobe radiation GL  I I  Figure 12.12 Contributions to the total system effective noise temperat tire.
 effect of the sidelobes may be neglected, and the total system effective noise iempcraturr.
7:.
 may be found from a straightforward application of Eq.
(9.10); therefore ' = K + (La, - 1)Kt + (Lrr - l)T,tLat + T,e LrfLAt (12.16)  Note that T,, T,,, and T,[ are actual temperatures while T, and T,, are effective noisc:  temperatures.
 In general, the contributions to the total effective system noise temperature may he  divided into three categories: (1) the effective space noise temperature, (2) the effective noise-  temperature contributions due to RF lossy components, and (3) the effective noise tempera-  ture of the receiver itself.
 Equation (12.16) applies to an ideal antenna with no sidelobes.
In a practical antenna the  noise which appears at the antenna terminals enters via the sidelobe radiation as well as from  the main beam.
In many cases the total noise power due to the sidelobes can be greater than  the noise power in the main beam.
This is especially true when the main beam views the  rel~tively "cool" sky but the sidelobes view the "hot" earth.
A portion of the main beam  might also view the relatively "hot" earth if pointed at or near the horizon.
 The amount of noise which enters the antenna depends upon the entire antenna radiation  pattern, including the sidelobes and the type of objects they illuminate.
Land is almost a  complete absorber; hence those portions of the radiation pattern which illuminate the ground  see a noise source at the ambient temperature.
Perfectly reflecting sources, such as a smooth sea J/  or a road, act as a mirror to reflect the'radiation from the sky or other objects.
Thus the sea or  a metallic object may appear very cold if it is oriented to reflect radiation from the sky to the  antenna.
The choice of polarization also influences the ainount of sea or land absorption.
 Vertical polarization is absorbed more than horizontal.
 The total antenna temperature can be found by integrating the temperature "seen " by the  antenna, weighted by the antenna gain over the entire sphere.60  where dR = solid angle given by sin 0 d6 d4.
The brightness temperature TB(O, 4) is often a  complicated function, and T, must be approximated by numerical means.
The antenna tempera-  ture is an average value of the brightness, or space, temperature in the field of the antenna  pattern.
.
.., ,I .\.
(I .(  Figure 12.13 gives the antenna,noise temperature computed for a typical 10-ft-diameter  parabolic reflector operatingat 1000 MHz as a function of the antenna elevation angle.6' These  data assume (1) vertical polarization, (2) the antenna located on a seacoast and looking over  464INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS Antenno Cosmic noise TcAbsorbing atmosphere Tat.LatRFtransmission line,etc.
\ .
Tri'Lrf Sidelabe andback-lobe radiation TEJL Figure12.12Contributions tothetotalsystemeffective noisetemperatu re.
effectofthesidelobes maybeneglected, andthetotalsystemeffective noiseTemperature 1;.
maybefoundfromastraightforward application ofEq.(9.10);therefore (11.16) (12.17)NotethatTclTal'and4rareactualtemperatures whileT"andTrcareeffective noise temperatures.
Ingeneral, thecontributions tothetotaleffective systemnoisetemperature maybe dividedintothreecategories: (l)theeffective spacenoisetemperature, (2)theeffective noisc­ temperature contributions duetoRFlossycomponents, and(3)theeffective noisetempera­ tureofthereceiver itself.
Equation (12.16)appliestoanidealantenna withnosidelobes.
Inapractical antenna the noisewhichappearsattheantenna terminals entersviathesidelobe radiation aswellasfrom themainbeam.Inmanycasesthetotalnoisepowerduetothesidelobes canbegreaterthan thenoisepowerinthemainbeam.Thisisespecially truewhenthemainbeamviewsthe rel:'tively "cool"skybutthesidelobes viewthe"hot"earth.Aportionofthemainbeam mightalsoviewtherelatively" hot"earthifpointedatornearthehorizon.
Theamountofnoisewhichenterstheantenna depends upontheentireantenna radiation pattern, including thesidelobes andthetypeofobjectstheyilluminate.
Landisalmosta complete absorber; hencethoseportions oftheradiation patternwhichilluminate theground seeanoisesourceattheambient temperature.
Perfectly reflecting sources,suchasasmoothsea ../ oraroad,actasamirrortoreflectthe'nidiation fromtheskyorotherobjects.Thustheseaor ametallic objectmayappearverycoldifitisoriented toreflectradiation fromtheskytothe antenna.
Thechoiceofpolarization alsoinfluences thea'mount ofseaorlandabsorption.
Vertical polarization isabsorbed morethanhorizontal.
Thetotalantenna temperature canbefoundbyintegrating thetemperature" seen"bythe antenna, weighted bytheantenna gainovertheentiresphere.60 '7:~'f78(0,c/J)G(O,c/J)dO.
g-JG(O,c/J)do.
wheredQ=solidanglegivenbysin0dOdc/J.Thebrightness temperature T8(0,4»isoftena complicated function, and1;,mustbeapproximated bynumerical means.Theantenna tempera­ tureisanaveragevalueofthebrightness, orspace,temperature inthefieldoftheantenna pattern.
......'".,'.
,.! Figure12.13gives.theantenna, noisetemperature computed foratypicallO·ft-diameter parabolic reflector operating at1000MH2:asafunction oftheantenna elevation angle.61These dataassume(1)verticalpolarization, (2)theantenna locatedonaseacoast andlookingover -10 9 +10 + 20  Antenna elevation angle, deg Figure 12.13 Computed antenna noise-temperature as a  function of elevation angle for a 10-ft-diameter (3 m)  parabolic-reflector antenna operating at a frequency of  1 GHz.
(Afrer ~reene,~' courtesy Airborne Insrr~rtnen~s  Laboratory.)  the sea, (3) the antenna always pointing at the galactic center (4) no intense radio stars in the  antenna pattern, (5) resistive losses in the reflector, feed, and transmission line absorbing 2  percent of the incident power, and (6) the feed producing a parabolic illumination taper.
 12.9 MICROWAVE-RADIATION HAZARDS  High power microwave energy can produce spectacular effects.
It has been reported for  example, that 50 kW of UHF power radiating from the open end of a 6- by 15-in.
waveguide  will cause ordinary light bulbs to explode, fluorescent lamps many feet away to light up, and a  piece of steel wool to explode into arcs.62 It is not surprising, therefore, that microwave  energy, if of sufficient intensity, is a health hazard and can produce biological damage  n humans.
 Heating is the chief effect of microwave radiation on living tissue.
In controlled dosages,  radiation heating is beneficial and forms the basis of diathermy, a therapeutic heating of the  tissue beneath the .skin.
Frequencies ranging from HF to microwaves have been used for  diathermy.",Xhe heating eflects of microwave radiation have also been applied commercially  in the form of microwave ovens, used for cooking food rapidly.
 Harmful effects of excessive microwave radiation result from either a general rise in the  total body temperature or from selective heating of sensitive parts of the body.
Exposure of the  whole body will cause the internal temperature to rise and produce fever.
An increase in  the total body temperature of 1°C is considered excessive,64 and prolonged exposure or too  high a temperature rise can be fatal.
Discomfort resulting from a general rise in body tempera-  ture can be perceived by the victim and serve as a warning.
 The danger of localized heating depends upon whether compensating cooling mechan-  isms exist to dissipate the heat generated at the radiated part of the body.
For example,  localized heating is least serious in muscle tissue which is well equipped with blood vessels  capable of dissipating heat.
Heating is more dangerous in the brain, the testes, the hollow  iscera, and the eyes, where there is little opportunity for the exchange of heat with the  urrounding tissue.
 Many instances have been reported where cataracts have been deliberately formed in the  eyes of animals by exposure to microwave radiation.
The viscous material of the eyeball is  PROPAGATION OFRADAR WAVES465 200 '"3150--o L- '"0- E '" l1J100-- Vl oc Figure12.13Computed antenna noise-temperature asa function ofelevation anglefora10-ft-diameter (3m) parabolic-reflector antenna operating atafrequency of 1GHz.(AfterGreene,61 courtesy Airborne lllstrllmellts Laboratory.
)Asymptote IJ+10 +20 Antenna elevation angle.deg0'--__-'-__---' -'-_----" -10oc ~50- c <r thesea,(3)theantenna alwayspointingatthegalacticcenter(4)nointenseradiostarsinthe antenna pattern, (5)resistive lossesinthereflector, feed,andtransmission lineabsorbing 2 percentoftheincident power,and(6)thefeedproducing aparabolic illumination taper.
12.9MICROWAVE-RADIATION HAZARDS Highpowermicrowave energycanproduce spectacular effects.Ithasbeenreported for example, that50kWofUHFpowerradiating fromtheopenendofa6-byis-in.waveguide willcauseordinary lightbulbstoexplode, fluorescent lampsmanyfeetawaytolightup,anda pieceofsteelwooltoexplode intoarcs.62Itisnotsurprising, therefore, thatmicrowave energy, ifofsufficient intensity, isahealthhazardandcanproduce biological damage inhumans.
.
Heating isthechiefeffectofmicrowave radiation onlivingtissue.Incontrolled dosages, radiation heatingisbeneficial andformsthebasisofdiathermy, atherapeutic heatingofthe tissuebeneath theskin.Frequencies ranging fromHFtomicrowaves havebeenusedfor diathermy.631he heatingeffectsofmicrowave radiation havealsobeenappliedcommercially intheformofmicrowave ovens,usedforcooking foodrapidly.
Harmful effectsofexcessive microwave radiation resultfromeitherageneralriseinthe totalbodytemperature orfromselective heatingofsensitive partsofthebody.Exposure ofthe wholebodywillcausetheinternal temperature toriseandproduce fever.Anincrease in thetotalbodytemperature of1°Cisconsidered excessive,64 andprolonged exposure ortoo highatemperature risecanbefatal.Discomfort resulting fromageneralriseinbodytempera­ turecanbeperceived bythevictimandserveasawarning.
Thedangeroflocalized heatingdepends uponwhether compensating coolingmechan­ ismsexisttodissipate theheatgenerated attheradiated partofthebody.Forexample, localized heatingisleastseriousinmuscletissuewhichiswellequipped withbloodvessels capableofdissipating heat.Heating ismoredangerous inthebrain,thetestes,thehollow viscera,andtheeyes,wherethereislittleopportunity fortheexchange ofheatwiththe surrounding tissue.
Manyinstances havebeenreported wherecataracts havebeendeliberately formedinthe eyesofanimals byexposure tomicrowave radiation.
Theviscousmaterial oftheeyeballis 466 INTKODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  affected by heat in much the same manner as the white of an egg.
It is transparent at room  temperature but becomes opaque if its temperature is raised excessively.
The process is an  irreversible one.
Although the testes are apparently more sensitive to heat than the eye,  testicular damage is often temporary and re~ersible.~~.~'  At frequencies below 400 and above 3000 MHz, the body absorbs less than half the  incident energy.
Lower frequencies pass through, and higher frequencies are reflected at the  skin's surface.
Between 1000 and 3000 MHz the percentage of radiation absorbed can  approach 100 percent, depending on the thickness of skin and subcutaneous layers of fat.6s  If the whole body is immersed in microwave radiation, a rise in temperatiire or a scnsa-  tion of warmth serves as a warning before damage to localized parts of the body beconles  severe.
However, if only parts of the body are exposed, there may or may not be a serlsation of  warmth, depending upon the frequency.
Heating caused by frequencies penetrating the  interior of the body can be of concern'because the sparsity of sensory nerves may make it  imperceptible.
Higher frequencies absorbed at or close to the surface of the dody are more  likely to be perceived than interior heating.
 There have been few authenticated incidents where radiations llavc been tile cause of  biological damage in humans.
However, as radar powers increase, the likelihood of biological  damage becomes greater, and if serious harm is to be avoided, proper safety precautions must  be observed.
The United States armed services have e~tablished~'.~' the maximum safe con-  tinuous exposure level to be an average power density of 10 mW/cm2.
There has been sub-  stantial basis for setting this limit.
However, when working under conditions of moderate to  severe heat stress the maximum exposure level should be reduced appr~priately.~~  The criterion of 10 mW/cm2 is based on the experimental observation that thermal effects  are dominant.
However, there is evidence indicating that nonthermal biological effects also  occur from exposure to microwave radiation.68 Pulsed power can produce biological change  not obtained with CW power of the same average value.
Therefore, the possibility of dan-  gerous effects with excessively high peak 'powers should not be overlooked even if the average  power is less than the safe threshold.
There has been, however, no direct link made between  biological effects attributed to nonthermal microwave origin and an adverse effect in humans.
 The assumption of hazardous nonthermal effects at low densities of radiation is a fear that has  not been ~ubstantiated.~' The demonstration of a biological effect due to microwaves does not  of necessity demonstrate a peril.
Confusion also can result at times between microwaves and  other more harmful radiations.
Microwave radiation is nonionizing and is vastly different Y'  from ionizing radiations such as X rays.
 As a safety precaution, areas of high power density should be fenced off, locked, or  otherwise made inaccessible when transmitting.
Personnel should never look into an open  waveglide or antenna feed horn connected to energized transmitters.
When personnel must  work in areas where the power density is at a dangerous level, they shoilld be protected with  screened enclosures or with protective apparel made from reflective material.
 Another potential safety hazaid in working with high power is the generation of X rays  when high voltages are used to opera& RF power tubes.
Tubes must be properly shielded with  lead, and X-ray safety badges worn by operating personnel to warn of excessive dosage.
.
>,  REFERENCES  I.
Ridenour, L.
N.: "Radar System Engirieering," MIT Radiation Laboratory Series, voi.
I, sec.
2.12,  McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York, 1947.
 2.
Bachynski, M.
P.: Microwave Propagation over Rough Surfaces, RCA Rev., vol.
20, pp.
308-335,  June, 1959.
, , .
b , *,,  466INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS affected byheatinmuchthesamemanner asthewhiteofanegg.Itistransparent atroom temperature butbecomes opaque ifitstemperature israisedexcessively.
Theprocess isan irreversible one.Although thetestesareapparently morcsensitive toheatthantheeye, testicular damage isoftentemporary andreversible.63.65 Atfrequencies below400andabove3000MHz,thebodyabsorbs lessthanhalfthe incident energy.
Lowerfrequencies passthrough, andhigherfrequencies arereflected atthe skin'ssurface.
Between 1000and3000MHzthepercentage ofradiation absorbed can approach 100percent, depending onthethickness ofskinandsubcutaneous layersoffat.6s Ifthewholebodyisimmersed inmicrowave radiation, ariseintemperature orasensa­ tionofwarmth servesasawarning beforedamage tolocalized partsofthebodybecomes severe.However, ifonlypartsofthebodyareexposed, theremayormaynotbeasensation of warmth, depending uponthefrequency.
Heating caused byfrequencies penetrating the interiorofthebodycanbeofconcern ·because thesparsity ofsensory nervesmaymakeit imperceptible.
Higherfrequencies absorbed atorclosetothesurfaceofthe60dyaremore likelytobeperceived thaninterior heating.
Therehavebeenfewauthenticated incidents whereradiations havebeenthecauseof biological damage inhumans.
However, asradarpowersincrease, thelikelihood ofbiological damage becomes greater,andifseriousharmistobeavoided, propersafetyprecautions must beobserved.
TheUnitedStatesarmedservices haveestablished63.67themaximum safecon­ tinuousexposure leveltobeanaverage powerdensityof10mW/cm2.Therehasbeensub­ stantial basisforsettingthislimit.However, whenworking underconditions ofmoderate to severeheatstressthemaximum exposure levelshouldbereduced appropriately.66 Thecriterion of10mWIcm1isbasedontheexperimental observation thatthermal effects aredominant.
However, thereisevidence indicating thatnonthermal biological effectsalso occurfromexposure tomicrowave radiation.6BPulsedpowercanproduce biological change notobtained withCWpowerofthesameaverage value.Therefore, thepossibility ofdan­ gerouseffectswithexcessively highpeak'powersshouldnotbeoverlooked eveniftheaverage powerislessthanthesafethreshold.
Therehasbeen,however, nodirectlinkmadebetween biological effectsattributed tononthermal microwave originandanadverse effectinhumans.
Theassumption ofhazardous nontherma·1 effectsatlowdensities ofradiation isafearthathas notbeensubstantiated.69Thedemonstration ofabiological effectduetomicrowaves doesnot ofnecessity demonstrate aperil.Confusion alsocanresultattimesbetwecn microwaves and othermoreharmful radiations.
Microwave radiation isnonionizing andisvastlydifferent fromionizing radiations suchasXrays.
Asasafetyprecaution, areasofhighpowerdensity shouldbcfencedoff,locked,or otherwise madeinaccessible whentransmitting.
Personnel shouldneverlookintoanopen waveguide orantenna feedhornconnected toenergized transmitters.
Whenpersonnel mllst workinareaswherethepower·density isatadangerous level,theyshouldbeprotected with screened enclosures orwithprotective apparelmadefromreflective material.
Another potential safetyhazardinworking withhighpoweristhegeneration ofXrays whenhighvoltages areusedtooperai~RFpowertubes.Tubesmustbe-properly shielded with lead,andX-raysafetybadgeswornbyoperating personnel towarnofexcessive dosage.
!I":iJ·;.I REFERENCES I.Ridenour, L.N.:..RadarSystemEngirieering," MITRadiation Laboratory Series.vol.I.sec.2.12, McGraw-Hili BookCompany, NewYork,1947.
2.Bachynski, M.P.:Microwave Propagation overRoughSurfaces.
RCARev.,vol.20,pp.308-335, June,1959.
.~;l:,"t. I~IIOI~AC;AI.ION 01: KADAK WAVES 467  3.
Shcrwood.
E.
M., arid E.
L.
Ciiriztori: Reflectiori (.'oefiicients of Irregular Terrain at 10 Cln, Proc..
IR1:'.
 vol.
43.
pp.
877 878.
July.
1955.
 4.
1 ley.
J.
S..
;tnd S.
J.
P;II.SOIIS: -f'l~e H;itI;i~.
MC;ISIII.CIIICII~ of LOW ArigIes of Elevation, Pt.oc.
1'11~s.
So(.
..
 scr.
11, vol.
69, 1111.
321 328, 1950.
 5.
Burrows.
C.
R..
arid S.
S.
Attwood: "Radio Wave Propagation," Academic Press.
Inc..
New York.
 1949.
 6.
Reed.
ti.
R..
arid C'.
M.
Russell: " Clltra High Frequency Propagation." Jolin Wiley & Sons, Inc..
New  York.
1953.
 7.
Nortori.
W A,: .l'lie ('alculatioti of (;round-wave Field Intensity over a Finitely Conducting Spltericul  Eartli.
I'r.oc..
IRE.
vol.
29.
pp.
623 639.
Dec..
1941.
 X.
1)ornh.
C'..
arid M.
11.
L.
Pryce: The Calculation of Field Strengths over a Spllerical Eartli.
J.
IEE.
 \,ol.
94.
pt.
111, 1717.
325 339.
1947.
 9.
Senior.
T.
H.
A,: Ratiio Propagation over a Discontinuity in the Earth's Electrical Properties.
Proi..
 IEE.
lit.
C'.
\.ol.
104, pi'.
43 52.
139 .147.
Mar..
1957.
 10.
13l;ikc.
L.
V.: Macliinc Plotting of Radio/Radar Vertical-Plane Coverage Diagrams.
Nar~~l Rrscur.i~lr  L~rl~or.utor.!~.
Il'clslrirrgtorr.
V.C..
Ropor.t 7098.
June 25, 1970 (AD 709897).
 1.
Smith.
1:.
K..
and S.
Weintraub: Tile Constants in tlie Equation for Atmospheric Refractive Index at  Radio Frequencies.
Pro(*.
I RE, vol.
41, pp.
1035- 1037, August, 1953.
 2.
Hcan.
R.
R..
E.
J.
I>utton.
and R.
11.
Warner: Weather Effects on Radar, chap.
24 of" Radar Hand-  hook." M.
I.
Skolnik (cd.), Mc(iraw-Hill llook Company.
New York.
1970.
 13.
Scliellirlg.
J.
C'..
C'.
K.
I%rirrows, and 1.
13.
I--e~.rcll: Ultra-short Wave Propagation, 1'r.oc..
IRE.
vol.
21.
 pp.
427 463.
Mnrcll.
1933.
 14.
Jay.
1:.
(editor in chief): "IEEE Standard Dictionary of Electrical and Electronic Terms," 2d ed.
John  Wiley Rr Sons, Inc., New York, 1977.
 15.
Hcari.
B.
R.: 7'lic C;eograpliical and Height Distribution of the Gradient of Refractive Index, 1'r.oc.
 IRE.
vol.
41.
pp.
549 55O.
April.
1953.
 Ih.
Ileart.
H.
K..
11.
A.
Calioon.
C.
A.
Samson.
and G.
D.
Thayer: "A World Atlas of Atmospheric Radio  Refractivity." L1.S.
Dept.
of Commerce.
ESSA hlorlogruplt 1, 1966.
 17.
flcan.
U.
R..
and G.
I).
Thayer: Models of Atn~osplteric Radio Refractive Index, Proc.
IRE, vol.
47,  pp.
740 755, May, 1959.
 18.
Farinin.
R.
h2..
arid K.
H.
Jelin: A Study of Radar Elevation-arigle Errors Due to Atmospheric  Refractinri.
IRE Trarrs..
vol.
AP-5.
pp.
71 -77.
January, 1957.
 19.
Rlake.
L.
V.: Ray fleiglit Computation for a Continuous Nonlinear Atmospheric Refractive-Index  Profile.
Rrldio S(~ic~trc~c~.
vol.
1.
pp.
85 92, January.
1968.
 20.
flcan.
1%.
R..
and H.
A.
Cahoon: Tlic Use of Surface Weather Observations Lo Predict the Total  Atmosplieric Rending of Radio Rays at Snlall Elevation Angles, Proc.
IRE, voi.
45, pp.
1545--1546,  Novernher.
1957.
 1.
Bean.
13.
R..
G.
D.
Thayer.
and R.
A.
Cahoon: Methods of Predicting the Atmospheric Bending of  Radio Rays.
Nurl.
B~tr..
Srurrdirrds (U.S.) J.
Research, vol.
64D.
pp.
487-492.
September/October, 1960.
 22.
Gallop, M.
A., Jr., and L.
E.
Telford: Estimation of Tropospheric Refractive Bending from Atmos-  pheric Emission Measurements.
Radio Sciertce, vol.
8, pp.
819-827, October, 1973.
 23.
hlillman.
.
H.: Attnospltcric Effects on VHF and UHF Propagation, Proc.
IRE, vol.
46.
 pp.
1492 1 F 01.
August.
1958.
 24.
Crane.
R.
K.: Ioriosplieric Scintillation.
Proc.
IEEE.
vol.
65.
pp.
180-199.
February, 1977.
 25.
hfcteorological Aspects of Radio-Radar Propagation.
Nary Weather Researclt Facility, Norfolk, VA,  N W R F 3 1-0660-035.
1960.
 26.
Rattan.
L.
J.: " Radar Meteorology." Uttiversity of Chicago Press.
Chicago, 1959.
 27.
Purves.
c.
(i.: Geophysical Aspects of Atrnosplieric Refraction, Naval Researcl~ Laboratory.
Washing-  ton.
U.C.
Report 7725.
June 7.
1974.
 2%.
Kcrr.
I).
E.
(ed.): " Propagation of Sliort Radio Waves," MIT Radiation Laboratory Series, vol.
13,  Mcciraw-Ilill l3ook Conipa~iy, New York.
1951.
 29.
Ringwalt.
D.
L..
and F.
C.
Macdonald: Elevated Duct Propagation in the Tradewinds, IRE Trat~s.,  vol.
AP-9.
pp.
277-383.
July.
1961.
 30.
Citlinnrd.
N.
W..
J.
Ransone, D.
Randall.
C.
Purves.
and P.
Watkins: Propagation Throi~gli an  I!lcvated Duct: Tradewinds 11 I, IEEE Trurts., vol.
AP- 12, pp.
479-490, July, 1964.
 I.
Rattan.
L.
J.: " Radar Observation of the Atmosphere." University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 1973.
 2.
Ijooker, ti.
G.: Elemetits of Radio Meteorology: How Weather and Climate Cause Unorthodox  Radar Vision beyond the Geometrical Horizon, J.
IEE, vol.
93, pt.
IIIA, pp.
69-78, 1946.
 '3.
Saxton.
J.
A,: The lnfli~ence of Atmospheric Conditioris'on Radar Performance, J.
ltrst.
Nar~igation  (Lorldo~r).
vol.
l I.
pp.
290 -202.
1958.
 I'IWI'AGATION OFRADAR WAVES467 ).Sherwood.
E.M.•andE.L.Ginzlon: Reflection Coeflkients ofIrregular Terrainat10Cm,Proc.IRE.
vol.43.pp.R771'7X.July.1955 4.lIey.J.S..andS.J.Parsons: TheRadarMeasurement orLowAnglesofElevation, 1'1'0('.I'hys.Soc, ser.n,vol,69,pp..121.'2X,I(}56.
5.Burrows.
CR.,andS.S.Attwood: "RadioWavePropagation," Academic Press.Inc..NewYork.
1949.
6.Reed.H,R..andC.M.Russell:" UltraHighFrequency Propagation." JohnWiley&Sons.Inc..New York.
195.~.
7.Norton.KA.:The('alculatioll ofGroulld-wave Fiekl1ntensity overaFinitclyConducting Spherical Earth.I'/(}cIRE.vol.29.pp.62.\6.19,Dec.,1941.
X.IJomh.C,andMII.L.Pryce:TheCalculation ofFieldStrengths overaSpherical Earth.J.lEE.
vol.94.pIIIr,pp..125 .~39.1947.
9.Senior.T.B.A.:RadioPropagation overaDiscontinuity intheEarth'sElectrical Properties.
Pmc.
IfE.pIC.vol.104.pp.4.15.1.1.19·147.Mar..1957.
J(lBlah.L.V.:Machinc Plotting orRadio/Radar Vertical-Plane Coverage Diagrams.
Nl/!'alResearch Lahoratory.
Washillf/toll.
D.C..Report709R.June25,1970(AD709897).
11.Smith.E.K..andS.Weintraub: TheConstants intheEquation rorAtmospheric Refractive Indexat RadioFrequencies.
Proc.IRE,vol.41.pp.1035-1037.
August,1953.
12Bean.B.R.E.J.Dutton.andB.D.Warner: Weather EffectsonRadar,chap.24of"RadarHand­ hook."M.1.Skolnik(cd.),McGraw-HilI BookCompany, NewYork,1970.
I),Schelling.
J.C.CR.Burrows.
andF.n.Ferrell:Ultra-short WavePropagation.
I'roc.IRE.vol.21.
pp42746).March.19)).
14.Jay.F.(editorinchief):"IEEEStandard Dictionary ofElectrical andElectronic Terms,"2ded.John Wiley&Sons,Inc.,NewYork,1977.
15.Bean.B.R.:TheGeographical andHcightDistribution ortheGradient ofRefractive Index.Proc.
IRE.voL41.pp549550.April.1953.
16.Bean.B.R..B.A.Cahoon.
C.A.Samson.
andG.D.Thayer:"AWorldAtlasorAtmospheric Radio Rerractivity." US.Dept.ofCommerce.
ESSAf\,follogral'h I.1966.
17.Bean.B.R..andG.D.Thayer: ModelsorAtmospheric RadioRefractive Index.Proc.IRE.vol.47.
pp.740755.May.1959.
.
IX.Fannin.
B.M..andK.H.Jehn:AStudyofRadarElevation-angle ErrorsDuetoAtmospheric Rerraction.
IRETrailS..vol.AP-5.pp.71-77.January, 1957.
19.Rlake.L.V.:RayHei~htComputation foraContinuous Nonlinear Atmospheric Refractive-Index Profile.Radio SC;I'II('I'.vol.).pp.R592,January.
1968.
20.Bean.B.R.andB.A.Cahoon: TheUseofSurfaceWeather Observations toPredicttheTotal Atmospheric Bending ofRadioRaysatSmallElevation Angles,Proc.IRE,vol.45,pp.1545-1546, November.
1957.
21.Bean.B.R.G.D.Thayer.andR.A.Cahoon: Methods orPredicting theAtmospheric Bending of RadioRays.Natl.Bur.Stalldards (U.S.)J.Research.
vol.64D,pp.487-492, September/October.
1960.
22.Gallop,M.A.,Jr.,andL.E.Telford: Estimation ofTropospheric Refractive Bending fromAtmos- phericEmission Measurements, RadioScience,vol.8,pp.819-827, October, 1973..
2.1.Millman.9.H.:Atmospheric EffectsonVHFandUHFPropagation, Proc.IRE,vol.46.
pp.14921~01.August.
I95R.
24.Crane.R.K.:Ionospheric Scintillation.
Proc.IEEE.vol.65,pp.180-199, February, 1977.
25Meteorological AspectsofRadio-Radar Propagation, NaryWeather Research Facility, Norfolk, VA, NWRF31-0660-tU5.
1960.
26Battan.L.J.:"RadarMeteorology." University ofChicago Press,Chicago, 1959.
27.Purves.C.G.:Geophysical AspectsorAtmospheric Refraction, NavalResearch Laboratory, Washing­ ton.D.C.Report7725.June7.1974.
2X.Kerr.D.E.(ed.):"Propagation ofShortRadioWaves," MITRadiation Laboratory Series,vol.U.
Met,raw-Hill BookCompany, NewYork,1951.
29.Ringwalt.
D.L..andF.C.Macdonald: Elevated DuctPropagation intheTradewinds, IRETrailS., vol.AP-9,pp.377-383, July,1961.
.~O.('\linard.
N.W..1.Ransone.
D.Randall.
C.Purves,andP.Watkins: Propagation Through an F1cvated Duct:Tradewinds III,IEEETraIlS.,vol.AP-12,pp.479-490, July,1964.
.~I.Rattan.L.J.:"RadarObservation oftheAtmosphere:' University ofChicago Press,Chicago.
1973.
.~2.Booker, H.G.:Elements ofRadioMeteorology: HowWeather andClimate CauseUnorthodox RadarVisionbeyondtheGeometrical Horizon, J.lEE,vol.93.pI.lIlA,pp.69-78,1946 .
.~3.Saxton,J.A.:TheInnuence ofAtmospheric Conditions 'onRadarPerformance, J.11Ist.Navigation (Lc)/JdOlI).
vol.II.pp.290303, 195R. 34.
Rotheram; S.: Radiowave Propagation in the Evaporation Duct, The Marcon1 Review, vol 37,  pp.
18-40, First Quarter, 1974.
 35.
Schneider, A.: Oversea Radar Propagation Within a Surface Duct, IEEE Truns., vol AP-17,  pp.
254-255, March, 1969.
 36.
Hitney, H.
V.: Radar Detection Range Under Atmospheric Ducting Conditions, IEEE 1975 lt~tert~u-  tional Radar Conference, Arlington, Va., pp.
241-243, IEEE Publication 75 CHO 938-1 AES.
 37.
Katzin, M., R.
W.
Bauchman, and W.
Binnian: 3- and 9-Centimeter Propagation in Low Ocean Ducts,  Proc.
IRE, vol.
35, pp.
891-905, September, 1947.
 38.
Friichtenicht, H.
W.: Notes on Duct Influences on Line-of-Sight Propagation, IEEE Trans,  vol.
AP-22, pp.
295-302, March, 1974.
 39.
Stewart, C.
H., and G.
J.
Vincent: Radar-Tracking Accuracy increased, Elcclronrcs, vol 37, pp 73 75,  May 4, 1964.
 40.
Bean, B.
R., and E.
J.
Dutton: "Radio Meteorology," National Bureau of Standards Monograph 92,  Mar.
1, 1966.
 41.
Crain, C.
M.: Survey of Airborne Microwave Refractometer Measurements, Proc.
IRE, vol 43,  pp.
1405-141 1, October, 1955.
 42.
Schaper, L.
W., Jr., D.
H.
Staelin, and J.
W.
Waters: The Estimation of ~roposphedc Electrical Path  Length by Microwave Radiometry, Proc.
IEEE, vol.
58, pp.
272-273, February, 1970.
 43.
Skolnik, M.
I.: Radar Horizon and Propagation Loss, Proc.
IRE, vol.
45, pp.
697-698, May, 1957  44.
Van Vleck, J.
H.: The Absorption of Microwaves by Oxygen, Phys.
Rev., vol.
71, pp.
413 424, Apr I,  1947.
 45.
Van Vleck, J.
H.: The Absorption of Microwaves by Uncondensed Water Vapor, PIlys.
Reo, vol 71,  pp.
425-433, Apr.
1, 1947.
 46.
Straiton, A.
W., and C.
W.
Tolbert: Anomalies in the Absorption of Radio Waves by Atmospheric  Gases, Proc.
IRE, vol.
48, pp.
898-903, May, 1960.
 47.
Blake, L.
V.: Prediction of Radar Range, chap.
2 of" Radar Handbook," M.
I.
Skolnik (ed ), McGraw-  Hill Book Company, New York, 1970.
 48.
KO, H.
C.: The Distribution ofcosmic Radio Background Radiation, Proc.
IRE, vol.
46, pp.
208-2 15,  January, 1958.
 49.
Menzel, D.
H.: "The Radio Noise Spectrum," Harvard University Press, Cambridge, Mass., 1960  50.
Greene, 3.
C., and M.
T.
Lebenbaum: Letter in Microwave J., vol.
2, pp.
13- 14, October, 1959.
 51.
Hogg, D.
C.: Effective Antenna Temperature Due to Oxygen and Water Vapor in the Atmosphere, J  Appl.
Phys., vol.
30, pp.
1417-1419, September, 1959.
 52.
Hogg, D.
C., and W.
W.
Mumford: The Effective Noise Temperature of the Sky, Aficrowuve J , vol 3,  pp.
80-84, March, 1960.
 53.
Schonland, B.
F.
J.: "The Flight of Thunderbolts," 2d ed., Oxford, Ciarendon Press, London, 1964  54.
Crichlow, W.
Q., D.
F.
Smith, R.
N.
Morton, and W.
R.
Corliss: Worldwide Radio Noise Levek  Expected in the, Frequency Band 10 Kilocycles to 100 Megacycles, Natl.
Blcr.
Statulurds (U.S.) CI~L  557, Aug.
25, 1955.
 55.
Spaulding, A.
D.: The Electromagnetic Interference Environment: Man-Made Noise, pt.
1: Est~ma  tion of Business, Residential and Rural Areas, Office of Telecommltnicatiotls, U.S.
Department oj  Commerce, 1974.
 56.
Pawsey, J.
L., and R.
N.
Bracewell: "Radio Astronomy," Oxford University Press, London, 1955.
 57.
Wild, J.
P.: Observational Radio Astronomy, Advances in Electronics and Electrot1 Phys~cs, vol 7,  1955.
 58.
Graf, W., R.
N.
Bracewell, J.
H.
Deuter, and J.
S.
Rutherford: The Sun as a Test Source for Boresight  Calibration of Microwave Antennas, IEEE Trans., vol.
AP-19, pp.
606-612, September, 1971.
 59.
Baars, J.
W.
M.: The Measurement of Large Antennas with Cosmic Radio Sources," IEEE Trans.,  vol.
AP-21, pp.
461-474, July, 1973.
 60.
Staelin, D.
H.: Passive Remote Sensing at Microwave Wavelengths, Proc.
IEEE, vol.
57, pp.
427-439,  April, 1969.
 61.
Greene, J.: Antenna Noise Temperature, AIL Advertisement, Proc.
IRE, vol.
46, p.
2a, May, 1958  62.
Salisbury, W.
W.: The Resnatron, Electronics, vol.
19, pp.
92-97, February, 1946.
 63.
Mumford, W.
W.: Some Technical Aspects of Microwave Radiation Hazards, Proc.
IRE, vol.
49,  pp.
427-447, February, 1961.
 64.
Schwan, H.
P., and K.
Li: Hazards Due to Total Body Irradiation by Radar, Proc.
IRE, vol.
44,  pp.
1572-158 1, November, 1956.
 65.
Leary, F.: Researching Microwave Health Hazards, Electronics, vol.
32, no.
7, pp.
49-53, Feb.
20,  1959.
 468INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS 34.Rotheranr, S.:Radiowave Propagation intheEvaporation Duct,TheMarconi Review, vol.37, pp.18-40,FirstQuarter, 1974.
35.Schneider, A.:Oversea RadarPropagation WithinaSurface Duct,IEEETrans.,vol.AP·17, pp.254-255, March,1969.
36.Hitney,H.V.:RadarDetection RangeUnderAtmospheric Ducting Conditions, IEEE1975-/lltema· tionalRadarConference, Arlington, Va.,pp.241-243, iEEEPublication 75CHO938-1AES.
37.Katzin,M.,R.W.Bauchman, andW.Binnian: 3-and9-Centimeter Propagation inLowOceanDucts, Proc.IRE,vol.35,pp.891-905, September, 1947.
38.Friichtenicht, H.W.:NotesonDuctInfluences onLine-or-Sight Propagation, IEEETrails., vol.Ap·22,pro295-302, March,1974.
39.Stewart, C.H.,andG.J.Vincent: Radar-Tracking Accuracy Incn:ased, Electrollics, vol.37,pp.7375, May4,1964.
40.Bean,B.R.,andE.J.Dutton:"RadioMeteorology," National BureauofStandards Monograph 92, Mar.I,1966.
41.Crain,CM.:SurveyofAirborne Microwave Refractometer Measurements, Proc.IRE,vol.43, pp.1405-1411, October, 1955.
42.Schaper,L.W.,Jr.,D.H.StaeHn,andJ.W.Waters:TheEstimation ofTropospherlc Electrical Path LengthbyMicrowave Radiometry, Proc.IEEE,vol.58,pp.272-273, February, 1970.
43.Skolnik, M.I.:RadarHorizon andPropagation Loss,Proc.IRE,vol.45,pp.697-698, May,1957.
44.VanVleck,J.H.:TheAbsorption ofMicrowaves byOxygen, Phys.Rev.,vol.71,pp.413424, Apr.I.
1947.
45.VanVleck,J.H.:TheAbsorption ofMicrowaves byUncondenscd WaterVapor,Phys.Rev.,vol.71.
pp.425-433, Apr.1,1947.
46.Straiton, A.W.,andCW.Tolbert: Anomalies intheAbsorption ofRadioWavesbyAtmospheric Gases,Proc.IRE,vol.48,pp.898-903, May,1960.
47.Blake,L.V.:Prediction ofRadarRange,chap.2of"RadarHandbook," M.1.Skolnik (ed.),McGraw­ HillBookCompany, NewYork,1970.
48.Ko,H.C.:TheDistribution ofCosmicRadioBackground Radiation, Proc.IRE,vol.46,pp.208-215, January, 1958.
49.Menzel, D.H.:"TheRadioNoiseSpectrum," Harvard University Press,Cambridge, Mass.,1960 50.Greene,1.C,andM.T.Lebenbaum: LetterinMicrowave J.,vol.2,pp.13-14,October, 1959.
51.Hogg,D.C:Effective Antenna Temperature DuetoOxygen andWaterVaporintheAtmosphere.
J Appl.Phys.,vol.30,pp.1417-1419, September, 1959.
52.Hogg,D.C,andW.W.Mumford: TheEffective NoiseTemperature oftheSky,Microwave J,vol.3.
pp.80-84,March,1960.
53.Schonland, B.F.J.:..TheFlightofThunderbolts," 2dcd.,Oxford, Clarendon Press,London, 1964 54.Crichlow, W.Q.,D.F.Smith,R.N.Morton, andW.R.Corliss: Worldwide RadioNoiseLcvds Expected inthe,Frequency BandtoKilocycles to100Megacycles, Natl.Bllr.Standards (U.S.)eire 557,Aug.25,1955.
55.Spaulding, A.D.:TheElectromagnetic Interference Environment: Man-Made Noise,pI.I:Estima tionofBusiness, Residential andRuralAreas,OfficeofTelecommlwicatiollS, u.s.Department of Commerce, 1974.
56.Pawsey,1.
L.,andR.N.Bracewell: "Radio Astronomy," OxfordUniversity Press,London, 1955.
57.Wild,J.P.:Observational RadioAstronomy, Advances inElectronics andElectron Physics, vol.7, 1955.
58.Graf,W.,R.N.Bracewell, J.H.Deuter,andJ.S.Rutherford: TheSunasaTestSourceforBoresight Calibration ofMicrowave Antennas, IEEETraIlS.,vol.AP-19,pp.606-612, September, 1971.
59.Baars,J.W.M.:TheMeasurement ofLargeAntennas withCosmicRadioSources," IEEETrans., vol.AP-21,pp.461-474, July,1973.
60.StaeHn,D.H.:PassiveRemoteSensingatMicrowave Wavelengths, Proc.IEEE,vol.57,pp.427-439, April,1969.
61.Greene,1.:Antenna NoiseTemperature, AILAdvertisement, Proc.IRE,vol.46,p.2a,May,1958.
62.Salisbury, W.W.:TheResnatron, Electronics, vol.19,pp.92-97,February, 1946.
63.Mumford, W.W.:SomeTechnical Aspects ofMicrowave Radiation Hazards, Proc.IRE,vol.49, pp.427-447, February, 1961.
64.Schwan, H.P.,andK.Li:Hazards DuetoTotalBodyIrradiation byRadar,Proc.IRE,vol.44, pp.1572-1581, November, 1956.
65.Leary,F.:Researching Microwave HealthHazards, Electronics, vol.32,no.7,pp.49-53,Feb.20, 1959. 66.
Mumford, W.
W.: Heat Stress Due to RF Radiation, Proc.
IEEE, vol.
57, pp.
171-178, February,  1969.
 67.
Setter.
I,.
R..
I).
R.
Snavely, L3.
L.
Solem, and R.
F.
Van Wye: " Regulations, Standards, and Guides for  Microwaves.
llltraviolet Radiation, and Radiation from Lasers and Television Receivers-An An-  rlotated flihliograplly." [J.S.
Ijcpt.
of Health, Education, and Welfare, Public Health Service Publica-  tion no.
999-RH-35, April.
1969.
 hH Special Issr~c or1 iliological Effects of Micrownvcs.
IEEE Tratrs., vol.
MTT-19, February.
1971.
 69.
JI~SICSCII.
I) R.: 1)i;ttllernly Vcrsi~s 1111' Microw;tves and Otlicr Radio-freqi~ency Radiations: A Rose by  Atlothcr Nnnle is a C'nhhngc.
Rtrtiio Scicvlc.il, vol.
12, pp.
355.
364, May--June.
1977.
 70.
Atnetit, W.
S.: 'I'oward a 'I'lieory of Reflection by a Rough Surface, Proc.
IRE, vol.
41, pp.
142 146,  Jnrtrrary, 1953.
 71.
Ikard, t'.
I..
I.
Kat7, arid L.
M.
Spetner: Phenomenological Vector Model of Microwave Reflection  frorn tile Ocean, IRE Trans., vol.
AP-4, pp.
162-167, April, 1956.
 72.
Heard.
C.
I.: Coherent and Incoherent Scattering of Microwaves from the Ocean, IRE Trans.,  vol.
AP-9, pp.
470-483, Sept., 1961.
 73.
Beard.
C.
I., D.
L.
Drake, and C.
M.
Morrow: Measurements of Microwave Forward Scattering from  the Oceari at L- Band, IEEE N A ECON '74 Record, pp.
269-274, 1974.
 74.
Spetner, L.
M.: Incoherent Scattering of Microwaves from the Ocean, Radio Sciertce, vol.
10.
 pp.
585-587.
June, 1975.
 75.
Brown, R.
P.: Radar Height Finding, chap.
22 of" Radar Handbook," M.
I.
Skolnik (ed.), McGraw-  Hill Book Company.
New York, 1970.
 76.
Kanevskii, M.
R.: The Propagation of Millimeter and Centimeter Waves in Tropospheric Waveguides  Close to the Sea, Soviet Radioplrysics, vol.
9, no.
5, pp.
867-875, 1966.
 77.
Joseph, R.
I., and G.
I).
Smith: Propagation in an Evaporation Duct: Results in Some Simple Analytic  Models.
Radio Science, voi.
7, pp.
433-441, April, 1972.
 78.
Richter, J.
H..
and H.
V.
Hitney: The Effect of the Evaporation Duct on Microwave Propagation,  Narwl Electro~tics Laboratory Certter, San Diego, California, Technical Report 1949, Apr., I7 1975.
 79.
Hitney.
H.
V..
and J.
H.
Richter: Integrated Refractive Effects Prediction System (IREPS), Naval  Elrginc9crs Jorrrtrnl, vol.
2, pp.
257 262, April.
1976.
 80.
Hitney, kl.
V., and J.
!I.
Richter: Integrated Refractive Eflects Prediction System (IREPS), URSI  Commission F Open Symposiutn, Propagation in Non-Ionized Media, La Baule, France, Apr.
28 to  May 6, 1977.
 6H (,1) 70.
71.
72.
D.
74.
/75.
76.
77.
7R.
79.
RO.PROPAGATION OFRADAR WAVES469 66.Mumford, WW:HeatStressDuetoRFRadiation, Proc.IEEE;vol.57,pp.I71-178, February, 1969.
67.Setter.LR.,D.R.Snavely, D.LSolem,andR.F.VanWye:"Regulations, Standards, andGuidesfor Microwaves.
Ultraviolet Radiation.
andRadiation fromLasersandTelevision Receivers-An An­ notatedBihliography," USDept.ofHealth,Education, andWelfare, PublicHealthServicePublica­ tionno.999-RH-35.April.1969.
SpecialIsmeonBiological EffectsofMicrowaves, IEEETrailS.,vol.MTf-I9, February.
1971.
Justesen.
[)R.:Diathermy VersustheMicrowaves andOtherRadio-frequency Radiations: ARoseby Another NameisaCabbage.
RadioSciellce, vol.12.pp.355364, May--June.
1977.
Ament.W.S.:Toward aTheoryofReflection byaRoughSurface, Proc.IRE,vol.41,pp.142146, Jant/ary.
195.1.
Beard.C.I..I.Kat?andLM.Spetner: Phenomenological VectorModelofMicrowave Reflection fromtheOcean,IRETrans.,vol.AP-4,pp.162-167, April,1956.
Beard.C.I.:Coherent andIncoherent Scattering ofMicrowaves fromtheOcean,IRETrailS.• vol.AP-9,pp.470-483, Sept.,1961.
Beard.C.I.,D.L.Drake,andC.M.Morrow: Measurements ofMicrowave Forward Scattering from theOceanatL-Band.
IEEENAECON '74Record,pp.269-274,1974.
Spetner, LM.:Incoherent Scattering ofMicrowaves fromtheOcean,RadioSciellce, vol.10, pr.585-587, June,1975.
Brown,B.P.:RadarHeightFinding, chap.22of"RadarHandbook," M.I.Skolnik(ed.),McGraw­ HillBookCompany.
NewYork.1970.
Kanevskii, M.B.:ThePropagation ofMillimeter andCentimeter WavesinTropospheric Waveguides ClosetotheSea,SOl'ietRadiophysics, vol.9,no.5,pp.867-875, 1966.
Joseph,R.I.,andG.D.Smith:Propagation inanEvaporation Duct:ResultsinSomeSimpleAnalytic Models.
RadioSciellce,vol.7.pp.433-441, April,1972.
Richter, J.H.,andH.V.Hitney:TheEffectoftheEvaporation DuctonMicrowave Propagation, Nal'alElectronics Lahoratory Center,SanDiego,California, Technical Report1949,Apr.,171975.
Hitney.H.V..andJ.H.Richter: Integrated Refractive EffectsPrediction System(IREPS), Naval Engi/H'l'rs JO!lntal, vol.2,pp.257262,April,1976.
Hitney,H.V.,andJ.H.Richter: Integrated Refractive EffectsPrediction System(IREPS), URSI Commission FOpenSymposium, Propagation inNon-Ionized Media,LaBaule,France,Apr.28to May6,1977.
{ CHAPTER  THIRTEEN  RADAR CLUTTER  13.1 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR CLUTI'ER  Clutter may be defined as any unwanted radar echo.
Its name is descriptive of the fact that  such echoes can "clutter" the radar output and make difficult the detection of wanted targets.
 Examples of unwanted echoes, or clutter, in a radar designed to detect aircraft include the  reflections from land, sea, rain, birds, insects, and chaff.
Unwanted echoes might also be  obtained from clear-air turbulence and other atmospheric effects, as well as from ionized  media such as the aurora and meteor trails.
Clutter is generally distributed in spatial extent, in  that it is usually much larger in physical size than the radar resolution cell.
There are also  "point" clutter echoes, such as towers, poles, and similar objects.
The echo from a single  bird is also an example of point clutter.
When clutter echoes are sufficiently intense and  extensive, they can limit the sensitivity of a radar receiver, and thus determine the range  performance.
In such circumstances, the optimum radar waveform and receiver design can be  quite different than when receiver noise alone is the dominant effect.
 Radar echoes from land, sea, rain, birds, and other such objects are not always undesired.
 Reflections from storm clouds, for example, can be a bother to a radar that must see aircraft.
 but storm clouds are what the radar meteorologist wants to see in order to measure rainfall  rate over a large area.
The backscatter echoes from land can degrade the performance of many  radars; but it is the target of interest for a ground-mapping radar, for remote sensing of the  earth resources, and for most synthetic-aperture radars.
Thus the same object might be the  desired target in one application, and the undesired clutter echo in another.
 In this chapter, the echoes from land, sea, and weather will be considered only for their  harmful effects; that is, as clutter to be avoided or eliminated.
The characteristics of clutter will  be described as well as the various methods for reducing their harmful effects when they  interfere with the detection of desired targets.
 Echoes from the land or the sea are known as surface clutter, and echoes from rain or  other atmospheric phenomena are known as volume clutter.
Because of its distributed nature,  the measure of the backscattering echo from such clutter is generally given in terms of a  CHAPTER THIRTEEN RADAR CLUTTER .) 13.1INTRODUCTION TORADAR CLUTfER Cluttermaybedefinedasanyunwanted radarecho.Itsnameisdescriptive ofthefactthat suchechoescan"clutter"theradaroutputandmakedifficultthedetection ofwantedtargets.
Examples ofunwanted echoes,orclutter,inaradardesigned todetectaircraftincludethe reflections fromland,sea,rain,birds,insects,andchaff.Unwanted echoesmightalsobe obtained fromclear-air turbulence andotheratmospheric effects,aswellasfromionized mediasuchastheauroraandmeteortrails.Clutterisgenerally distributed inspatialextent,in thatitisusuallymuchlargerinphysical sizethantheradarresolution cell.Therearealso "point" clutterechoes,suchastowers,poles,andsimilarobjects.Theechofromasingle birdisalsoanexample ofpointclutter.Whenclutterechoesaresufficiently intenseand extensive, theycanlimitthesensitivity ofaradarreceiver, andthusdetermine therange performance.
Insuchcircumstances, theoptimum radarwaveform andreceiverdesigncanbe quitedifferent thanwhenreceivernoisealoneisthedominant effect.
Radarechoesfromland,sea,rain,birds,andothersuchobjectsarenotalwaysundesired.
Reflections fromstormclouds,forexample, canbeabothertoaradarthatmustseeaircraft, butstormcloudsarewhattheradarmeteorologist wantstoseeinordertomeasure rainfall rateoveralargearea.Thebackscatter echoesfromlandcandegradetheperformance ofmany radars;butitisthetargetofinterestforaground-mapping radar,forremotesensingofthe earthresources, andformostsynthetic-aperture radars.Thusthesameobjectmightbethe desiredtargetinoneapplication, andtheundesired clutterechoinanother.
Inthischapter, theechoesfromland,sea,andweatherwillbeconsidered onlyfortheir harmfuleffects;thatis,ascluttertobeavoidedoreliminated.
Thecharacteristics ofclutterwill bedescribed aswellasthevariousmethods forreducing theirharmful effectswhenthey interfere withthedetection ofdesiredtargets.
Echoesfromthelandortheseaareknownassurfaceclutter,andechoesfromrainor otheratmospheric phenomena areknownasvolumeclutter.Becauseofitsdistributed nature, themeasure ofthebackscattering echofromsuchclutterisgenerally givenintermsofa 470 radar-cross-scctioli cl~+rt~ity rntlier tliali tlic r;1C1;1r cross st'cfioli as was described for convcn-  tiorla1 targets in Scc.
2 7 1.01- strrl'r~cc clutter a cross section per irr~it area is defined as  where n, is tlie radar cross scctiori fr-or11 tlic ;Ircii .dl,.
Tlic symhol no is spoken.
and sometimes  written.
as siqttrtr :c,I.o.
.i'lic advar~tagc of irsilig at1 ixl>ression slicli as Eq.
(13.1) to describe  distributed surface clutter is tliat it is i~sually independent of tlic area A,.
For volurne dis-  tributed clutter a cross sectiori per r~liit volilnic.
or reflectivity.
is defined as  wliere n, 111 this C~IFC is t11c radar cross section from tile volume V,  /  13.2 SURI'ACE-CLU'I'I'EU RADAR EQUATIONS  Corisider the geometry of Fig.
13.1 wliicll depicts a radar illuminating the surface at a grazing  angle 4.
It is assumed that ttie width of the area A, is determined by the azimuth beamwidth  0,.
but that the dimension in the range ditiiension is detern~iricd by the radar pulse width r  rather than the elevation beamwidth.
Using the simple radar equation of Sec.
1.2, the power  C received from tlie clutter is  Figure 13.1 Geometry of radar clutter.
(a) Elevation view showing the extent of the surface intercepted by  the radar pulse, (6) plan view showing clutter patch consisting of individual, independent scatterers.
 RADAR CLUTHR 471 radar-crass-section dellsityratherthantheradarcrosssectionaswasdescribed forconven­ tionaltargetsinSec.2.7.Forsurfaceclutll:racrosssectionperunitareaisdefined as (I (J= (tJ.l) where (Jeistheradarcrosssectionrromthearea:Ie•Thesymbol (J0isspoken.
andsometimes written.
assiqllw :l'/'O.Theadvantage orusinganexpression suchasEq.(13.1)todescribe distributcd surraccc1uttcristhatitisusuallyindependcnt orthearcatie.Forvolume dis­ tributed clutteracrosssectionperunitvolume.
orreflectivity, isdefined as (Je 'T=I' ( where (Jeinthiscaseistheradarcrosssectionrromthevolumev,..
13.2SURFACE-CLUTI'ER RADAR EQUATIONS(tJ,2) Consider thegeometry orFig.13.1whichdepictsaradarilluminating thesurraceatagrazing angle<p.Itisassumcd thatthewidthoftheareaI1cisdetermined bytheazimuth beamwidth On,butthatthedimension intherangcdimension isdetermined bytheradarpulsewidthr ratherthantheelcvation beamwidth.
Usingthesimpleradarequation ofSec.1.2,thepower Creccivcd fromthccluttcris (13.3) Radarr; (al Clutter 00 Radar 00 ~88000 00o00o00 (blR8e Figurel3.1Geometry ofradarclutter.(a)Elevation viewshowing theextentofthesurfaceintercepted by theradarpulse,(b)planviewshowing clutterpatchconsisting ofindividual.
independent scatterers. 472 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  where P, = transmitter power  G = antenna gain  A, = antenna effective aperture  R = range  a, = clutter cross-section, which is equal to  ac = aOA, = a0ROB(cr/2) sec 4  where c = velocity of propagation.
With this substitution the radar equation for surfact: clutter  is  P, G/l,(rOO,(~-r/2) scc 4 c = - - - ..
.
- - - - - .
- - - - - - .
.
 (4n)'R '  Thus the echo from surface clutter varies inversely as the cube of the rang$ ratllcr than  inversely as the fourth power as is the case for point targets.
 The signal power S returned from a target with cross section a, is  Combining Eqs.
(13.5) and (13.6), the signal-to-clutter ratio for a target in a background of  surface clutter at low grazing angle is  S - - d,  C - a0ROB(cr/2) sec 4  If the maximum range R,,, corresponds to the minimum discernible signal-to-clutter ratio  then the radar equation can be written  In this equation, the clutter power C is assumed large compared to receiver noise power.
This  is an entirely different form of the radar equation than when the target detection is dominated  by receiver noise alone.
The range in Eq.
(13.8) appears as the first power ratller than as tllc  fourth power in the usual radar equation of Eq.
(13.6).
This means there is likely to be greater  variation in the maximum range of a clutter-dominated radar than a noise-dominated radar.
 For example, if the target cross section in Eq.
(13.8) were to vary by a factor of two, the  maximum range would also vary by a factor of two.
However, the same variation in target  cross section would only cause a variation in range of a factor of 1.2 when the radar perfor-  mance is determined by receiver noise.
 There are other significant differences in Eq.
(13.8) that should be noted.
The transmitter  power does not appear explicitly.
Increasing the transmitter power will indeed increase the  target signal, but it will also cause a corresponding increase in clutter.
Thus there is no net gain  in the delectability of desired targets.
The only demand on the transmitter power is that it be  great enough to cause the clutter power at the radar receiver to be large compared to receiver  noise.
If otherwise, Eq.
(13.8) would not apply.
 The antenna gain does not enter, except as it is affected by the azimuth beamwidth 0,.
 The narrower the pulse width the greater the range.
This is just opposite to the case of  conventional radar detection of targets in noise.
A long pulse is desired when the radar is  limited by noise in order to increase the signal-to-noise ratio.
When clutter dominates noise, a  long pulse decreases the signal-to-clutter ratio.
(When pulse compression is used, the pulse  472INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS wherePt=transmitter power G=antenna gain At.'=antenna effective aperture R=range ac=cluttercross-section, whichisequal10 ac=aOAc=aOROB(cr/2)sec¢ (13.4) (13.5) (13.6)rathathanwherec=velocityofpropagation.
Withthissubstitution theradarequation forsurfaceclutter IS C=~!gA~:r~~(!~{~r/2) sec<f! (4rr)2R3 Thustheechofromsurfacecluttervariesinversely asthecuoeoftherangi!, inversely asthefourthpowerasisthecaseforpointtargets.
ThesignalpowerSreturned fromatargetwithcrosssectionatis S_~tGA ...a! -(4n)2R4- Combining Eqs.(13.5)and(13.6),thesignal-to-clutter ratioforatargetinabackground of surfaceclutteratlowgrazingangleis S a, C=aOROB(cr/2)sec¢(13.7) Ifthemaximum rangeRma"corresponds totheminimum discernible signal-to-clutter ratio (S/C)min, thentheradarequation canbewritten a, Rmax= ( ) 00) SICminaB(cr/2sec4>(I3.X) Inthisequation, theclutterpowerCisassumed largecompared toreceiver noisepower.This isanentirelydifferent formoftheradarequation thanwhenthetargetdetection isdominated byreceiver noisealone.TherangeinEq.(13.8)appears asthefirstpowerratherthanasthe fourthpowerintheusualradarequation ofEq.(13.6).Thismeansthereislikelytobegreater variation inthemaximum rangeofaclutter-dominated radarthananoise-dominated radar.
Forexample, ifthetargetcrosssectioninEq.(13.8)weretovarybyafactoroftwo,the maximum rangewouldalsovarybyafactoroftwo.However, thesamevariation intarget crosssectionwouldonlycauseavariation inrangeofafactorof1.2whentheradarperfor­ manceisdetermined byreceiver noise.
Thereareothersignificant differences inEq.(13.8)thatshouldbenoted.Thetransmitter powerdoesnotappearexplicitly.
Increasing thetransmitter powerwillindeedincrease the targetsignal,butitwillalsocauseacorresponding increase inclutter.Thusthereisnonetgain inthedetectability ofdesiredtargets.Theonlydemand onthetransmitter poweristhatitbe greatenoughtocausetheclutterpowerattheradarreceiver tobelargecompared toreceiver noise.Ifotherwise, Eq.(13.8)wouldnotapply.
Theantenna gaindoesnotenter,exceptasItisaffected bytheazimuth beamwidth0B' Thenarrower thepulsewidththegreatertherange.Thisisjustopposite tothecaseof conventional radardetection oftargetsinnoise.Alongpulseisdesiredwhentheradaris limitedbynoiseinordertoincrease thesignal-to-noise ratio.Whenclutterdominates noise,a longpulsedecreases thesignal-to-clutter ratio.(Whenpulsecompression isused,thepul'ie KADAR CLUITER 473  wldtll r rr, Eq.
(13.8) is that of tile co~rt~resscd'~t~lse.)~~f the statistics of the clutter eclloes arc  s~rnilar to the statistics of receiver noise, then the signal-to-clutter ratio in Eq.
(13.8) can be  selected sirnilar to that for sigrial-to-rloise ratio as described in Chap.
2.
(It will be seen in  Scc 13.3 that a dccrcase 111 pulse width call cllangc tlie nature of the clutter statistics it1 sorlie  cases arld niiglit negate tile benefits of tile greater signal-to-clutter ratio obtained with the  sllort pulse.) The improvement in range due to tile integration of 11 pulses is not indicated in  tlliq ccli~atiotl.
.l'llcre call t,c a co~~sidcrahle diffcrcncc in the integration irnprover~~etlt wlle~l  clutter-limited from when noise-limited.
Clutter echoes, unlike receiver noise, might be cor-  related pulse to pi~lse, especially if the clutter is stationary relative to the radar.
Receiver noise  is i~cilally decorrelated ill a tinie equal to l/B, where B = receiver (IF) bandwidth.
The decor-  relation time of clutter is usually much greater than this.
 Next consider the case where tile radar observes surface clutter near perpendicular  irlcidence.
(At perpendicular incidence the grazing angle 4 is 90°.) The clutter area viewed by  the radar will be determined by tlie antenna beamwidths Us and q5B in the two principal planes.
 Tlie area A, in Eq.
(13.1) is (n/4)ROBR4, sin 4, where 4 = grazing angle.
The factor n/4  accounts for the elliptical shape of the area.
Substituting A, into Eq.
(13.3) and taking  ti = n2/OB 4B,h9 the clutter radar equation is  IIP,A,~' C = --  64R2 sin 4  The clutter power is seen to vary inversely as the square of the range.
Equation (13.9) applies.
 for example, to the signal received from the ground by a radar altimeter.
An equation for  detecting a target in this type of clutter background could be derived, but it is a situation not  often found in practice.
 In describing the geometry of surface clutter, the incidence angle and the depression angle  are sometimes used instead of the grazing angle.
These are shown in Fig.
13.2.
Tlie iticsic1t~tlc.r  angle is defined relative to the normal to the surface; the grazing angle is defined with respect to  ttie tangent to the surface, and the depressiot~ ar~gle is define@ with respect to the local horizon-  tal at the radar.
When the earth's surface can be considered Rat, the depression angle and the  grazing angle are the same.
When the earth's curvature must be considered, these two angles  , are not equal.
Tlie incidence angle is preferred when considering earth backscatter effects from  near perpendicular incidence, as in the case of the altimeter.
The grazing angle is the preferred  measure in most of the other radar applications, and will be the angle used in this chapter,  Descri#ions presented in this chapter of radar scattering from the land and the sea are by  no means complete.
Perhaps the chief difficulty in trying to understand the nature ofclutter is  the lack of adequate quantitative descriptions of the nature of the scattering objects.
In this  respect, the information regarding radar scattering from the sea is probably better understood  than radar scattering from the land.
The state of the sea is determined primarily by the  Depression  Rodor 6 onqle  4  \  ,-- lnctdence angle  Figure 13.2 Angles used in describing geometry of  the radar and surface clutter.
 (13.9)RADAR CLUTIER 473 widthrillEq.(l.lX)isthatofthecompresscJ'pulsc.pfthe statistics ofthedullerechoesare similartothestatistics ofreceiver noise,thenthesignal-to-clutter ratioinEq.(13.8)canbe selected similartothatforsignal-to-noise ratioasdescribed inChap.2.(Itwillbeseenin Sec.13.3thatadecrease inpulsewidthcanchangethenatureoftheclutterstatistics insOll1e casesandmightnegatethebenefits ofthegreatersignal-to-clutter ratioobtained withthe shortpulse.)Theimprovement inrangeduetotheintegration of/Ipulsesisnotindicated in thisequation.
Therecanbeaconsiderahle difference intheintegration improvement when clutter-limited fromwhennoise-limited.
Clutter echoes, unlikereceiver noise,mightbecor­ relatedpulsetopulse.especially iftheclutterisstationary relativetotheradar.Receiver noise isusuallydecorrelated inatimeequaltol/B,whereB=receiver (IF)bandwidth.
Thedecor­ relation timeofe1utterisusuallymuchgreaterthanthis.
Nextconsider thecasewheretheradarobserves surface clutternearperpendicular incidence.
(Atperpendicular incidence the'grazing angle</>is900.)Theclutterareaviewedby theradarwillbedetermined bytheantenna beamwidths 08and</>8inthetwoprincipal planes.
TheareaAcinEq.(13.1)is(n/4)ROsR</>8 sin4>,where4>=grazing angle.Thefactornj4 accounts fortheelliptical shapeofthearea.Substituting AcintoEq.(13.3)andtaking G=n2jOs4>8,69theclutterradarequation is C='nPIAe(Jo 64R2sin4> Theclutterpowerisseentovaryinversely asthesquareoftherange.Equation (13.9)applies.
forexample, tothesignalreceived fromtheground byaradaraltimeter.
Anequation for detecting atargetinthistypeofclullerbackground couldbederived, butitisasituation not oftenfoundinpractice.
Indescribing thegeometry ofsurfaceclutter,theincidence angleandthedepression angle aresometimes lIsedinsteadofthegrazing angle.TheseareshowninFig.13.2.Theincidence angleisdefinedrelative tothenormaltothesurface; thegrazingangleisdefined withrespectto thetangent tothesurface, andthedepressiofl angleisdefinegwithrespecttothelocalhorizon­ talattheradar.Whentheearth'ssurfacecanbeconsidered flat,thedepression angleandthe grazing anglearethesame.Whentheearth'scurvature mustbeconsidered, thesetwoangles arenotequal.Theincidence angleispreferred whenconsidering earthbackscatter effectsfrom nearperpendicular incidence, asinthecaseofthealtimeter.
Thegrazingangleisthepreferred measure inmostoftheotherradarapplications, andwillbetheangleusedinthischapter.
Descrintions presented inthischapterofradarscattering fromthelandandtheseaareby nomeanscomplete.
Perhaps thechiefdifficulty intryingtounderstand thenatureofclutteris thelackofadequate quantitative descriptions ofthenatureofthescattering objects.
Inthis respect, theinformation regarding radarscattering fromtheseaisprobably betterunderstood thanradarscattering fromtheland.Thestateoftheseaisdetermined primarily bythe Radorr<DepreSSIon angle ""', '" Graling"", angle'-, Incidence angle Figure13.2Anglesusedindescribing geometry of theradarandsurraceclutter. 474 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  strength of the wind and thedistance and time over wllicll tlle wind has been blowing.
Tlii~s ttle  sea in the North Atlantic is not that muchdifferent from the sea in the South Pacific if the wind  conditions are the same.
Land clutter, on the other Iiand, is lligllly ~L'I)L'I~CICII~ i)ri (tic IlitItl1.C 01'  the terrain and the local conditions.
Urban areas, cultivated fields, forests, mountains, desert,  and tundra all can produce different radar echoes.
Furthermore, radar scattering from land is  affected by rain, snow cover, the type of vegetation or crops, the time of year, the presence of  streams and lakes, and man-made objects interspersed among the terrain.
There can he  considerable variability in both land and sea clutter.
This inherent variability must be under-  stood and properly accounted for in radar system design.
 13.3 SEA CLUTTER 3  The echo from the surface of the sea is dependent upon the wave height, wind speed, the length  of time and the distance (fetch) over which the wind has been blowing, direction of the waves  relative to that of the radar beam, whether the sea is building up or is decreasing, the presence  of swell as well as sea waves, and the presence of contaminants that might affect the surface  tension.
The sea echo also depends on such radar parameters as frequency, polarization.
 grazing angle, and, to some extent, the size of the area under observation.
Although there is  much that is known about the nature of sea clutter, the quantitative, and sometimes even t11c  qualitative, effects of many of the above factors are not known to the degree often desired.
The  relative uniformity of the sea over the oceans of the world makes it easier to deal with sea  clutter than with land clutter, but it is difficult to collect data at sea under the controlled and  reproducible conditions necessary to establish quantitative causal relationships.
In spite of the  limitations, there does exist a body of information regarding the radar echo from the sea, somc  of which will be reviewed briefly in this section.
 Average value of a'.
A composite average of sea clutter data is shown in Fig.
13.3.' This is a  plot of the mean cross section per unit area, a', as a function of grazing angle for various  frequencies and polarizations.
It does not correspond to any particular set of experimental  data, but it represents what mighi be i)pi&l of "average" conditions.
It was derived from a 2  body of data that extended from 10- to 20-knot wind speeds.
(The uncertainty of the data  ought to have been indicated in thiq figure by making the vertical thickness of each curve at  least +3 dB wide.
This was not doqe so as to avoid the confusion that would be caused by the  wide overlap of the curves.)  The sea state is a measure of the wave height, as shown in Table 13.1.
Although the sea  state is commonly used to describe radar sea-clutter measurements, it is not a complete  measure in itself since, as mentioned above, the radar sea echo depends on many other factors.
 Sea clutter is also sometimes described by the wind speed, but likewise it is not a suitable  measure by itself.
Unfortunately, the reporting of radar sea echo measurements is seldom  accompanied by a complete description of the sea and wind conditions.
 Variation with grazing angle.
There are usually identified three scattering regions according  to the grazing angle.
At near vertical incidence (4 % 90") the radar echo is relatively large.
 This is called the quasi-specular region and seems to be the result of specular scatter from  facetlike surfaces oriented perpendicular to the direction of the radar.
At the other extreme,  when the grazing angles are low, of the order of several degrees or less, 0' decreases very  rapidly with decreasing angle.
.This is called the interference region since the direct wave and  474INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS strength ofthewindandthedistance andtimeoverwhichthewindhasbeenblowing.
Thusthe seaintheNorthAtlantic isnotthatmuchdifferent fromtheseaintheSouthPacificifthe wind conditions arethesame.Landclutter,ontheotherhand,ishighlydependent onthenatureof theterrainandthelocalconditions.
Urbanareas,cultivated fields,forests,mountains, desert, andtundraallcanproduce different radarechoes.Furthermore, radarscattering fromlandis affected byrain,snowcover,thetypeofvegetation orcrops,thetimeofyear,thepresence of streams andlakes,andman-made objectsinterspersed amongtheterrain.Therecanbe considerable variability inbothlandandseaclutter.Thisinherent variability mustbeunder­ stoodandproperly accounted forinradarsystemdesign.
13.3SEACLUTTER Theechofromthesurfaceoftheseaisdependent uponthewaveheight,windspeed,thelength oftimeandthedistance (fetch)overwhichthewindhasbeenblowing, direction ofthewaves relativetothatoftheradarbeam,whether theseaisbuilding uporisdecreasing, thepresence ofswellaswellasseawaves,andthepresence ofcontaminants thatmightaffectthesurface tension.
Theseaechoalsodepends onsuchradarparameters asfrequency, polarization, grazingangle,and,tosomeextent,thesizeoftheareaunderobservation.
Although thereis muchthatisknownaboutthenatureofseaclutter,thequantitative, andsometimes eventhe qualitative, effectsofmanyofthe'abovefactorsarenotknowntothedegreeoftendesired.The relativeuniformity oftheseaovertheoceansoftheworldmakesiteasiertodealwithsea clutterthanwithlandclutter,butitisdifficulttocollectdataatseaunderthecontrolled and reproducible conditions necessary toestablish quantitative causalrelationships.
Inspiteofthe limitations, there does existabodyofinformation regarding theradarechofromthesea,some ofwhichwillbereviewed brieflyinthissection.
Average valueof0'0.Acomposite averageofseaclutterdataisshowninFig.13.3.1Thisisa plotofthemeancrosssectionperunitarea,0'0,asafunction ofgrazingangleforvarious frequencies andpolarizations.
Itdoesnotcorrespond toanyparticular setofexperimental II " Idata,butitrepresents whatmightbetypicalof"average" conditions.
Itwasderivedfroma bodyofdatathatextended from)O~ to20-knot windspeeds.(Theuncertainty ofthedata oughttohavebeenindicated illtlli&figure bymakingtheverticalthickness ofeachcurveat least±3dBwide.Th~swasnotdonesoastoavoidtheconfusion thatwouldbecausedbythe wideoverlapofthecurv~s.) ..
Theseastateisameasure o(thewaveheight,asshowninTable13.1.Although thesea stateiscommonly usedtodescribe radarsea-clutter measurements, itisnotacomplete measure initselfsince,as'mentioned above,theradarseaechodepends onmanyotherfactors.
Seaclutterisalsosometimes described bythewindspeed,butlikewise itisnotasuitable measure byitself.Unfortunately, thereporting ofradarseaechomeasurements isseldom accompanied byacomplete description oftheseaandwindconditions.
Variation withgrazingangle.Thereareusuallyidentified threescattering regionsaccording tothegrazingangle.Atnearverticalincidence (4)~90°)theradarechoisrelatively large.
Thisiscalledthequasi-specular regionandseemstobetheresultofspecular scatterfrom facetlike surfaces oriented perpendicular tothedirection oftheradar.Attheotherextreme, whenthegrazinganglesare.lowt' oftheorderofseveraldegreesorless,0'0decreases very rapidlywithdecreasing angle.Thisiscalledtheinterference regionsincethedirectwaveand RADAR CLUTTER 475  X AND L  (VERT.
AND HOR.
POL.)  \ /'  X(HOR.POL.)  L(HOR.
POL.)  220MHz (HOR.
POL.)  50MHz (HOR.
POL )  10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90  GRAZING ANGLE (deqrees)  Figure 13.3 Composite of no data for average conditiorls with wind speeds ranging from 10 to 20 knots  the wave scattered from the sea surface are out of phase and produce destructive interference.
 (The interference region is not well defined at the highefmicrowave frequencies plotted in  1'1g 17.3.) The angular region between the interference region and the quasi-specular region  ic the plnr~c~tr, or tiiflitse, regiot~.
The chief scatterers are those components of the sea that are  of a dimension cotllparable to the radar wavelength (Bragg scatter).
Scattering in this region  ic s~tnilar to that froin a rough surface.
 C  Table 13.1 World hleteorological Organization sea  state  Wave height  Sea state Feet Meters Descriptive term  0  0  !--If  2 -4  4 -8  8 -13  1 3 - 20  20 30  30 -45  over 45 0  0 -0.1  0.1 0.5  0.6- 1.2  1.2-2.4  2.4-4.0  4.0-6.0  6.0 9.0  9.0-14  over 14 Calm, glassy  Calm, rippled  Smooth, wavelets  Slight  Moderate  Rough  Very rough  High  Very high  Phenomenal  RADAR CLUTTER 475 10 XANDL IVERT.ANOH7 X(HOR.POL) L(HOR.POL.) 220MHz (HOR.POL,) 50MHz(HOR.POL) _l-__~__--,-_ ,I _l _~L.-_-'- __--' 102030405060708090 GRAZING ANGLE(degrees)o -10 -40 -50- -70-60_-20 rn .:~ C) b -30--LL_-~ Figurel.l3Composite of(Todataforaverage conditions withwindspeedsranging from10to20knots.
thewavescattered fromtheseasurfaceareoutofphaseandproduce destructive interference.
(Theinterference regionisnotwelldefined atthehighermicrowave frequencies plotted in Fig.1.\..1.)Theangular regionhetween theinterference regionandthequasi-specular region istheplateau, orcliflil.~e,reyilm.Thechiefscatterers arethosecomponents oftheseathatare ofadimension comparable totheradarwavelength (Braggscatter).
Scattering inthisregion i<;similartothatfromaroughsurface.
f Table13.1WorldMeteorological' Organization sea state Waveheight Seaslale Feet Meters Descriptive term 0 0() Calm,glassy 1 ()! 0-0.1 Calm,rippled 2 ~"I!n.IO.5 Smooth, wavelets .I 24 0.6-1.2 Slight 4 48 1.2-2.4 Moderate 5 8132.4-4.0 Rough 6 1320 4.0-6.0 Veryrough 7 20306.09.0 High R 30-45 9.0-14 Veryhigh 9 over45over14Phenomenal 476 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  Variation with frequency and polarization.
From Fig.
13.3, the value of a0 is seen to be  essentially independent of frequency for vertical polarization, except at low grazing angles.
 With horizontal polarization, the clutter echo decreases with decreasing frequency.
This is  most pronounced at the lower grazing angles.
The effect of polarization on a0 also depends on  the wind, as mentioned below.
 Variation with wind.Iw4 Except at grazing angles near normal incidence, the value of a0  increases with increasing wind speed.
The backscatter is quite low with winds less than about  5 knots, increases rapidly with wind speeds from about 5 to about 20 knots, and increases  less rapidly at higher wind speeds.' An example is shown in Fig.
13.4.3 This is a composite'  plot of experimental X-band data obtained at three different locations and at three different  times for a grazing angle of 10".
(The data represented by the solid circles were obtained  in the Bermuda area; the x's in the North Atlantic; and the triangles, off Puerto Rico.)  The dashed curve in each figure is drawn as if all three sets of data were from a single  population.
This curve is of the form exp (-c/U) where c is an arbitrary constant and U is  the wind speed.
When all three sets of data are considered as one, the dashed curve shows a  saturation of a0 with wind speed above about 20 knots.
However, conclusions drawn from  viewing the three sets of data as a whole may not be fully valid because of the accuracy with  Wtnd velocity (knots)  (a)  -20 I I I I I I 7 I I  I  -70; I I I I I I I I I I 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50  Wind velocity (knots)  (b)  Figure 13.4 Median value of a0 as a function of wind speed, for X band and 10" grazing angle.
(a) Vertical  polarization, (b) horizontal polarization.
(Afrer Daley, et al.')  476INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS Variation withfrequency andpolarization.
FromFig.13.3,thevalueof0'0isseentobe essentially independent offrequency forvertical polarization, exceptatlowgrazing angles.
Withhorizontal polarization, theclutterechodecreases withdecreasing frequency.
Thisis mostpronounced atthelowergrazingangles.Theeffectofpolarization on0'0alsodepends on thewind,asmentioned below.
Variation withwind.!-4 Exceptatgrazing anglesnearnormal incidence, thevalueof0'0 increases withincreasing windspeed.Thebackscatter isquitelowwithwindslessthanabout 5knots,increases rapidlywithwindspeedsfromabout5toabout20knots,andincreases lessrapidlyathigherwindspeeds.! Anexample isshowninFig.13.4.3Thisisacomposite' plotofexperimental X-band dataobtained atthreedifferent locations andatthreedifferent timesforagrazing angleoftoO,(Thedatarepresented bythesolidcircleswereobtained intheBermuda area;thex'sintheNorthAtlantic; andthetriangles, off.puerto Rico.) Thedashedcurveineachfigureisdrawnasifallthreesetsofdatawerefromasingle population.
Thiscurveisoftheformexp(-c/U)wherecisanarbitrary constant andUis thewindspeed.Whenallthreesetsofdataareconsidered asone,thedashedcurveshowsa saturation of0'0withwindspeedaboveabout20knots.However, conclusions drawnfrom viewingthethreesetsofdataasawholemaynotbefullyvalidbecause oftheaccuracy with - 20,------.---.,---,------.--...-----.---,-----r---,---,.,/ -30- -40iii "0 o b-50 -60_--e-----'-x-x- ..eJt x xx x -700=-----:5:-----:-10'::---:-'15=---2='0=-------:2::-'::5:------:3=-'=0:-------:3=-=5:---4:':0:---4:':5:-----='50 Windvelocity(knots) (0) - 20,----.,---.,---,---,---,-------.---.,-----,---,-,--, - --30f- -40 CD "0 t5'-50 -60- 66 X 66 6__----- ....-"---X-X---X-X-----X-- ....--.
• X 6"- 6//.,.
/./x I dI.
I 6, I-700':-----:5:----:-'10=----:-':15=----:::-20=-------:2='=5:------:3='=0::------:3:':5:---4="=0:----::4"=5----='50 Windvelocity(knots) (b) Figure13.4Medianvalueof0'0asafunctionofwindspeed,forXbandand10°grazingangle.(a)Vertical polarizarion, (b)horizontal polarization.
(AfterDaley,etal.J) which such measuretnetlts cat1 be made.
I'tie solid curves of Fig.
13.4~.
therefore, are drawn  for each separate set of data.
(A siniilar set could be drawn for (b).) There is also a saturation  efTect evident when the three sets of data are considered separately, but it is not as  pronounced as when the three sets of data are considered as one.
Over the range from 10  to 20 knots.
a0 increases at a rate of about 0.5 dB/kn.
Above 30 knots the increase is about  0.1 dB/kn.
Similar beliavior is exhibited at 30" grazing angle.
The effect of wind at C band is  like that at X band.
At lower frequencies, however, the variation of o0 with wind is less  pronoitr~ced.
 The eticrgy backscattercd fro111 tile sea will depend on tlie direction of the wind relative  to the directiori of the radar anteritia beam.
It is generally higher when the radar beam looks  into the wind than when lookitig dowtiward or crosswind.
There might be from 5 to 10 dB  variatioti it1 n" as the atitetlna scatis 360" it1 azitnutli.
It lias been found4 that tlie backscatter  is more sensitive to wirid direction at the higher radar frequencies than at the lower frequencies,  that horizontal polarization is more sensitive to wind direction than is vertical polarization,  that the ratio of rrO measured upwind to that measured downwind decreases with increasing  grn7irig atigle and sen stittc.
:trlil tI1:tt at UIiF the backscatter is practically insensitive to  wind direction at grazing atigles greater than ten degrees.
 Wlietl viewing the sea at or near vertical incidence the backscatter is greatest with a calm  sea a~id decreases will1 increasing witid.
Orle set of data5 gives the value of o0 at short wave-  lengths to be proportional to U-' 6, where U is the wind speed.
 'T'hc wiriti has been assunled liere to be a driving force in determining tlie radar back-  scatter frotri tlie sea.
It is itldccd, but tllc relation between the wind and the sea conditions is  cotnplex: Iiencc, so will be the relation between the'wind and the radar backscatter.
The  capillary waves and the short gravity waves build up quickly with the wind so that the value  of rrO measured with radars at the higher microwave frequencies should be quite responsive to  wind conditions.
The loriger gravity waves require a finite time to build up and reach  saturation: lietice, tlie wind alone might not be a true measure of sea conditions unless account  is taken of the length of time and the distance (fetch) over wtiic~~ the wind has been blowing.
 Thus radars at the lower frequencies which are more resphsive to the longer gravity waves  might experience a value of rro that does not seem responsive to the immediate value of wind  speed.
Another complicating factor is tlie breaking of waves and the generation of spray, foam,  or whitecaps which have an effect on the radar backscatter.
The presence of swell waves  alorig with the wind-driveti sea can also affect the radar backscatter.
Still another important  factor when attempting to understand the effect of the wind on sea clutter is the difficulty  C in acct~rately estimating witid speed at sea.6  Effect of pulse width.
In principle, the value of a', the sea backscatter per unit area, is  iridcpetldcnt of tl~c illutriitiatcd area.
Iti practice, the area illuminated by the radar does affect  the nature of the backscatter.
This is especially so with short-pulse radars.
When the radar  resolution is sufliciently small it is found that the sea echo is not spatially uniform, but is  corn posed of "occasional" individual targetlike echoes of short duration that result in a spiky  appearance on a radar display.
On an A-scope display it is found that sea clutter appears more  spiky for horizontal than for vertical polarization, when the radar looks up or downwind  rattier than crosswind, at low radar freqitcticies rather than for high, and for low grazing angles  rather tliarl for high grazing  angle^.^ To resolve the individual spikes tlie radar pulse widtli  should be several tells of nanoseconds ratlier than microseconds.
An individual spike might  have a radar cross section at X band of the order of magnitude of one square meter (tnore  or less).
atid can often last for several se~onds.~ lo Spikes can give rise to excessive false  alart~is in some radar applications.
These spikes seem to be associated with breaking waves.
 RADAR CLtJn'F.R 477 whichsuchmeasurements canbemade.ThesolidcurvesofFig.13.4a,therefore, aredrawn foreachseparate setofdata.(Asimilarsetcouldbedrawnfor(b).)Thereisalsoasaturation effectevident whenthethreesetsofdataareconsidered separately, butitisnotas pronounced aswhenthethreesetsofdataareconsidered asone.Overtherangefrom10 to20knots, (f0increases atarateofabout0.5dB/kn,Above30knotstheincrease isabout O.ldB/kn.Similarbehavior isexhibited at30°grazing angle.TheeffectofwindatCbandis likethatatXband.Atlowerfrequencies, however, thevariation of(f0withwindisless pronollllced.
Theenergybackscattered frollltheseawilldependonthedirection ofthewindrelative tothedirection oftheradarantenlla beam.Itisgenerally higherwhentheradarbeamlooks intothewindthanwhenlooking downward orcrosswind.
Theremightbefrom5to10dB variation in(10astheantenna scans)60"inazimuth.
Ithasbeenfound4thatthebackscatter ismoresensitive towinddirection atthehigherradarfrequencies thanatthelowerfrequencies, thathorizontal polarization ismoresensitive towinddirection thanisvertical polarization, thattheratioof(10measured upwind tothatmeasured downwind decreases withincreasing grazing angleandseastate,andthatatUHFthebackscatter ispractically insensitive to winddirection atgrazing anglesgreaterthantendegrees, Whenviewing theseaatornearverticalincidence thebackscatter isgreatest withacalm seaanddecreases withincreasing wind.OllesetofdataSgivesthevalueof(f0atshortwave­ lengthstobeproportional toU-0.6,whereUisthewindspeed.
Thewindhasheenassumed heretoheadriving forceindetermining theradarback­ scatterfromthesea.Itisindeed,huttherelation between thewindandtheseaconditions is complex; hence,sowillbetherelation between the'windandtheradarbackscatter.
The capillary wavesandtheshortgravitywavesbuildupquickly withthewindsothat'the value of(10measured withradarsatthehighermicrowave frequencies shouldbequiteresponsive to windconditions.
Thelongergravity wavesrequire afinitetimetobuildupandreach saturation: hence,thewindalonemightnotbeatruemeasure ofseaconditions unlessaccount istakenofthelengthoftimeandthedistance (fetch)overwhicilthewindhasbeenblowing.
Thusradarsatthelowerfrequencies whicharemoreresponsive tothelongergravitywaves mightexperience avalueofrrothatdoesnotseemresponsive totheimmediate valueofwind speed.Another complicating factoristilebreaking ofwavesandthegeneration ofspray,foam, orwhitecaps whichhaveaneffectontheradarbackscatter.
Thepresence ofswellwaves alongwiththewind-driven seacanalsoaffecttheradarbackscatter.
Stillanother important factorwhenattempting tounderstand theeffectofthewindonseaclutteris·thedifficulty inaccuratel~ estimating windspeedatsea.6.
Effectofpulsewidth.Inprinciple, thevalueof0-°,theseabackscatter perunitarea,is independent ofl.heilluminated area.Inpractice, theareailluminated bytheradardoesaffect lhenatureofthebackscatter.
Thisisespecially sowithshort-pulse radars.Whentheradar resolution issufliciently smallitisfoundthattheseaechoisnotspatially uniform, butis composed of"occasional "individual targetlike echoesofshortduration thatresultinaspiky appearance onaradardisplay.OnanA-scope displayitisfoundthatseaclutterappears more spikyforhorizontal thanforvertical polarization, whentheradarlooksupordownwind ratherthancrosswind, atlowradarfrequencies ratherthanforhigh,andforlowgrazingangles ratherthanforhighgrazing angles.? Toresolvetheindividual spikesthe'radar pulsewidth shouldheseveraltensofnanoseconds ratherthanmicroseconds.
Anindividual spikemight havearadarcrosssectionatXhandoftheorderofmagnitude ofonesquaremeter(more orless).andcanoftenlastforseveralseconds.s10Spikescangiverisetoexcessive false alarmsinsomeradarapplicati<.'ns.
Thesespikesseemtoheassociated withhreaking waves. According to Longg about half the time the whitecap forms either simultaneously with  the appearance of a radar spike or a fraction of a second thereafter, leading to the conclusion  that the whitecap occurs after the radar spike develops.
The greater the duration of the sp~ke,  the greater the size and duration of the whitecap.
A spike echo can appear without the  presence of a whitecap, but no whitecap is observed in the absence of a spike.
The spike echo  at A' band is amplitude modulated with frequencies of the order of 50 HL and with a li~gh  modulation index.
The spiky nature of sea echo indicates that the breaking of water waves  plays an important role in producing ba~kscatter.''~  In addition to changes in clutter characteristics with narrow pulse widths, changes are  also noted with narrow beamwidths.
It has been reported'' that at X band, small ships stand  out much better with a 2" horizontal beamwidth antenna than when illuminated by a 0.85"  beamwidth antenna.
This is contrary to what would normally be expected if the clutter were  uniform.
3  Thus, as the resolution cell size is decreased the nature of the sea clutter changes.
The  changes can have a profound effect on radar performance.
The individual resolved spikes can  cause false alarms.
Raising the receiver threshold level to reduce the false alarms can result  in a significant loss in sensitivity to desired targets.
This negates the benefit of the increased  signal-to-clutter ratio achieved by high resolution as expressed by Eq.
(13.8) for the detection  of targets in clutter.
(As will be discussed in Sec.
13.4 there are techniques for receiver  detector-design that can avoid much of this loss.) A corollary consequence of high resolution  is a change in the probability dknsity function of the sea echo, as described next.
 , '  Probability density function of sea clutter.
The amplitude of sea clutter is characterized by  statistical fluctuations which8must4be described.iri terms of the probability density function.
 When the echo from the sea can be modeled as that from a number of independent, random  scatterers, with no one individual scatterer producing an echo of magnitude conlmensurate  with the resultant echo from all scatterers, then the amplitude fluctuations of the sea echo is  described by the gaussian probability density function.
[Eq.
(2.15)).
The statistical Ructiiat ions  of the envelope v of such an echo at the output of the envelope detector in the radar receiver  is given by the Rayleigh probability density function (pdf), which is  where a is the standard deviation of the envelo u, which for the Rayleigh pdf is proport~onal  to the mean value.
(The median value is s" In 2 o.) Clutter which conforms to this model is  called Rayleigh clutter.
The Rayleigh pdf applies to sea clutter when the resolution cell, or  area illuminated by the radar, is relatively large.
Experimental data show, however, that this  distribution does not apply with a high-resolution radar which illuminates only a small area  of the sea.
The probability density furiction deviates from Rayleigh when the area illuminated  by the radar has a dimension (usually the dimension determined by the pulse width) which  is comparable to, or smaller than, the water wavelength.13 There does not seem to exist any  single analytical form of probability density function that fits all the observed data.
The actual  form of the pdf will depend on the,size of the radar ,resolution cell and the sea state.
An  example of sea clutter statistics is shown 'in Fig.
13.5, which plots the probability that the  clutter will exceed the abscissa, rather than the probability density function.
(The two are  related, however.) It is seen that actual clutter has a greater probability of a large value of sea  clutter than does Rayleigh clutter,: Stated in other terms, the actual distribution has higher  "tails" than the Rayleigh..This means that clutter seen by a high-resolution radar will have a  greater likelihood of false alarm' than Rayleigh clutter if the receiver is designed in the  (13.10)478INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS According toLong,9abouthalfthetimethewhitecap formseithersimultaneously with theappearance ofaradarspikeorafractionofasecondthereafter, leadingtotheconclusion thatthewhitecap occursaftertheradarspikedevelops.
Thegreatertheduration ofthespike, thegreaterthesizeandduration ofthewhitecap.
Aspikeechocanappearwithout the presence ofawhitecap, butnowhitecap isobserved intheabsenceofaspike.Thespikeecho atXbandisamplitude modulated withfrequencies oftheorderof50Hzandwithahigh modulation index.Thespikynatureofseaechoindicates thatthebreaking ofwaterwaves playsanimportant roleinproducing backscatter.
I19 1naddition tochanges incluttercharacteristics withnarrowpulsewidths,changes are alsonotedwithnarrowbeamwidths.
Ithasbeenreported IIthatatXhand,smallshipsstand outmuchbetterwitharhorizontal beamwidth antenna thanwhenilluminated bya0.85° beamwidth antenna.
Thisiscontrary towhatwouldnormally beexpected iftheclutterwere uniform.
J Thus,astheresolution cellsizeisdecreased thenatureoftheseaclutterchanges.
The changescanhaveaprofound effectonradarperformance.
Theindividual resolved spikescan causefalsealarms.Raisingthereceiverthreshold leveltoreducethefalsealarmscanresult inasignificant lossinsensitivity todesiredtargets.Thisnegatesthebenefitoftheincreased signal-to-clutter ratio achieved byhighresolution asexpressed byEq.(13.8)forthedetection oftargetsinclutter.(Aswillbediscussed inSec.13.4therearetechniques forreceiver detector-design thatcanavoid ~uchofthisloss.)Acorollary consequence ofhighresolution isachangeintheprobability densityfunction oftheseaecho,asdescribed next.
Probability densityfunction ofsea.clutter.Theamplitude ofseaclutterischaracterized by statistical fluctuations which,must:be described.in termsoftheprobability densityfunction.
Whentheechofromtheseacanbe.modeled asthatfromanumberofindependent, random scatterers, withnooneindividual scatterer producing anechoofmagnitude commensurate withtheresultant echofromallscatterers, thentheamplitude fluctuations oftheseaechois described bythegaussian probability densityfunction, [Eq.(2.15)].Thestatistical fluctuations oftheenvelope vofsuchanechoattheoutputoftheenvelope detector intheradarreceiver isgivenbytheRayleigh probability densityfunction (pdf),whichis , .2v'(v2)p(v)=2exp-2 'J,(J .(J where (Jisthestandard deviation oftheenve~ v,whichfortheRayleigh pdfisproportional tothemeanvalue.(ThemedianvalueisVln2(J.)Clutterwhichconforms tothismodelis calledRayleigh clutter.TheRayleigh pdfappliestoseaclutterwhentheresolution cell,or areailluminated bytheradar,is'relatively large.Experimental datashow,however, thatthis distribution doesnotapplywithahigh-resolution radarwhichilluminates onlyasmallarea ofthesea.Theprobability densityfunction deviates fromRayleigh whentheareailluminated bytheradarhasadimension (usually thedimension determined bythepulsewidth)which iscomparableto,orsmaller'than;thewaterwavelength.! JTheredoesnotseemtoexistany singleanalytical formofprobability densityfunction thatfitsalltheobserved data.Theactual formofthepdfwilldependonthe-sizeofthe'radar.resolution cellandtheseastate.An example ofseaclutter·statistics isshown:inFig.13.5,whichplotstheprobability thatthe clutterwillexceedtheabscissa, ratherthantheprobability densityfunction.
(Thetwoare related,however.)Itisseenthatactualclutterhasagreaterprobability ofalargevalueofsea clutterthandoes'Rayleigh clutter~Stated inotherterms,theactualdistribution hashigher "tails"thantheRayleigh.;This meansthatclutterseenbyahigh-resolution radarwillhavea greaterlikelihood offalsealarm'than·.Rayleigh clutterifthereceiver· isdesigned inthe RADAR CLUTTER 479  Clutter cross secl~on in dB lo on orb~trory scale  1  - ,,I Figure 13.5 Experimetltal statistics of vertical polarization, X-band sea clutter for two sea states.
Pulse  width = 20 ns.
beamwidth = 0.5".
grazing angle = 4.7".
range = 2 nmi.
The Rayleigh distribution is  shown for comparison.
Dashed curve shows attempt to fit the sea state 2-3 data to log-normal distrihu-  tion.
(:l/ic7r Trrttrk cz~rd (;rorgc.' 2,  custorrlary way based on gaussian noise.
To avoid false alarms, the threshold detector at the  output of such a teceiver must be set to a higher value than when the clutter is Rayleigh.
 The increased threshold needed to avoid false alarms is significant (10 to 20 dB, or more, in  some cases).
 I'tte log-normal probability density function has been proposed to model the clutter  echo with very high-resolution radar and at the higher sea states.
If the clutter cross section  is log normal, the probability density function describing its statistics is  1 1 p(ac)= .
exp[-i(ln)2 aC>0 (13.1 la)  J2n on,  1 where a, = clutter cross section  a, = median value of a,  a = s-tandard deviation of In a, (natural logarithm)  The probability density function that describes the statistics of the voltage amplitude at the  output of the envelope detector when Eq.
(13.1 la) is the clutter input, is given by  where rt, is the rnedian value of v and a remains the standard deviation of In A fit  of the log-normal probability density function with a = 6 dB to actual data for sea state 2  to 3 is shown in Fig.
13.5.12 The median value of the theoretical distribution in this case  was equated to the median of the actual data and the a was selected to minimize the maximum  difTerence in dB between the theoretical curve and the actual data.
 With niany radars that operate in the presence of sea clutter the Rayleigh pdf generally  uriderestiniates the range of values obtained from real clutter, and the log-normal pdf tends to  overestimate the range of variation.
Several other analytical probability density functions that  lie between these two extremes have been suggested for modeling the actual statistical  RADAR CLUTIER 479 Log--normo!o5~-"----'---T--'-1 ~----.,---,-----.-----r---''---''----' 04 03 02 0001 0L..-.-..L 2--4L--.-L---L.-----l--L---'-----,-L--:",----,,-L---"22oIII III U III.0o 0'Ol-c iii0054.1u)( 4.1OO? o >-001 1i0005o ~0002 a..0001 0005 Fi~Uf{'13.5Experimental statistics orvertical polarization, X-bandseaclutterrortwoseastates.Pulse width=20ns,beamwidth =0.5°,grazing angle=4.7°,range=2nmi.TheRayleigh distribution is shownrorcomparison.
Dashed curveshowsattempt tofittheseastate2-3datatolog-normal distrihu­ tion.(AlierTrullk (lIldGeorge.
'2) customary waybasedongaussian noise,Toavoidfalsealarms,thethreshold detector atthe outputofsuchareceiver mustbesettoahighervaluethanwhentheclutterisRayleigh.
Theincreased threshold neededtoavoidfalsealarmsissignificant (toto20dB,ormore,in somecases).
Thelog-normal probability densityfunction hasbeenproposed tomodeltheclutter echowithveryhigh-resolution radarandatthehigherseastates,Ifthecluttercrosssection islognormal, theprobability densityfunction describing itsstatistics is (13.11a) p(oJ=-~_.exp[----~2(In(Je)2j .J'21T.(J(je 2(J (J1n whereac=cluttercrosssection am=medianvalueofae a=itandard deviation ofInae(natural logarithm) Theprobability densityfunction thatdescribes thestatistics ofthevoltageamplitude atthe outputoftheenvelope detector whenEq.(13.11a) istheclutterinput,isgivenby p(l')=---=;---exp[-~(21n~)21 (13.1Ib)j2nav 2(J Vln where I'misthemedian valueofvand(Jremains thestandard deviation ofIn(Je.t14Afit ofthelog-normal probability densityfunction with(]=6dBtoactualdataforseastate2 toJisshowninFig.13.5.12Themedian valueofthetheoretical distribution inthiscase wasequated tothemedianoftheactualdataandthe(Jwasselected tominimize themaximum difference indBbetween thetheoretical curveandtheactualdata.
Withmanyradarsthatoperate inthepresence ofseacluttertheRayleigh pdfgenerally underestimates therangeofvaluesobtained fromrealclutter,andthelog-normal pdftendsto overestimate therangeofvariation.
Severalotheranalytical probability densityfunctions that liebetween thesetwoextremes havebeensuggested formodeling theactualstatistical 480 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  variations received from clutter.
One of these is the contan~inateti-norrnal pdf which consists  of the sum of two gaussian pdfs of different standard deviations and different relative  weightings.12 This pdf can be fitted to the data of Fig.
13.5 for sea state 1 by proper  selection of the parameters.
Other pdf's that have been suggested for approximating non-  Rayleigh sea clutter include the Ricean13 [Eq.
(2.27)], the chi-square1 [Eq.
(2.40)], and a class  of pdf's called the " K-distributions" based on modeling the clutter as a finite two-dimensional  random walk." The Weibull pdf has also been examined for modeling sea c~utter.~~.'~ It is a  two-parameter pdf, like the log normal, but is intermediate between the Rayleigh and the  log normal.
In the Weibull clutter model the amplitude probability density function of the  voltage v out of the envelope detector is  p = a n 2) exp 1 -In 2(,::)']  where a is a parameter that relates to the skewness of the distribution (sometimes called the  Weibull parameter), and v, is the median value of the distribution.
By appropriately adjusting  its parameters, the Weibull can be made to approach either the Rayleigh or the log-normal  distributions.
The Rayleigh is actually a member of the Weibull family, and results when  a = 2.
The exponential pdf is also a member of the Weibull family when a = I.
(Further  discussion of the Weibull pdf is given in Sec.
13.5.)  A knowledge of the statistics of the clutter is important in order to properly design a  CFAR (constant false-alarm rate) recei~erl'~ and to avoid the loss associated with a receiver  detector designed on the basis of the improper statistical model of clutter.
 Theory of sea clutter.
In the past, attempts were made to explair, the mechanism of sea clutter  by reflection from a corrugated surface,16 by backscatter from the droplets of spray thrown by  the wind into the air above the sea s~rface,'~.'~ or by backscattering from small facets, or  patches, on the sea surface." None of these models were able to explain adequately the  eAperimental observations.
The composite surface model, in which the sea is recognized as  composed of a number of waves of different wavelengths and amplitudes, has been more  successful than previous models for describing the mechanism of sea ~lutter.'~~~~~' la It is based  on the application of classical scattering theory to a "slightly rough surface" which is  described by the mean-squared-height spectrum of the sea surface.
(By a slightly rough surface li  is meant one whose height variations are small compared to the radar wavelength and whose  slopes are small with respect to unity.) The resultant radar backscatter can be interpreted as  that obtained from the component of the sea spectrum which is "resonant" with the radar  wavelength.
That is, the radar wavelength A, is related to the water wavelength A, by the  relation  I, = 2A, cos 4 (13.13)  where 4 = grazing angle.
This is sometimes called the Bragg backscattering resorlarlce condi-  tion because of its similarity to the X-ray scattering in crystals as observed by Bragg.' Thus  the radar is responsive only to those water waves which satisfy Eq.
(13.13).
An X-band radar  (A = 3 cm) at zero degrees grazing angle would backscatter from water waves of length 1.5 cm.
 These short water waves are known as capillary waves.
An X-band radar when viewing large  swell waves at low grazing angles in the absence of wind would receive little or no back-  scatter since there would be no capillary waves present, even though the swell might be  large.
As soon as wind appears, capillaries are formed, and the X-band radar will see back-  scatter since water waves are now present that are resonant to the X-band wavelength.
A  480INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS variations received fromclutter.Oneoftheseisthecontaminaled-normal pdfwhichconsists ofthesumoftwogaussian pdfsofdifferent standard deviations anddifferent relative weightings.12ThispdfcanbefittedtothedataofFig.13.5forseastateIbyproper selection oftheparameters.
Otherpdf'sthathavebeensuggested forapproximating non­ Rayleigh seaclutterincludetheRicean13[Eq.(2.27)],thechi-square13[Eq.(2.40)],andaclass ofpdf'scalledthe"K-distributions" basedonmodeling theclutterasafinitetwo-dimensional random walk.29TheWeibullpdfhasalsobeenexamined formodeling seaclutter.14.15Itisa two-parameter pdf,likethelognormal, butisintermediate between theRayleigh andthe lognormal.
IntheWeibull cluttermodeltheamplitude probability densityfunction ofthe voltagevoutoftheenvelope detector is P(v)=exln2C~r-1 exp[-ln2C~r] (13.12) .} where exisaparameter thatrelatestotheskewness ofthedistribution (sometimes called the Weibullparameter), andVmisthemedianvalueofthedistribution.
Byappropriately adjusting itsparameters, theWeibull canbemadetoapproach eithertheRayleigh orthelog-normal distributions.
TheRayleigh isactually amember oftheWeibullfamily,andresultswhen ex=2.Theexponential pdfisalsoamember oftheWeibull familywhen ex=1.(Further discussion oftheWeibull pdfisgiveninSec.13.5.) Aknowledge ofthestatistics oftheclutterisimportant inordertoproperly designa CFAR(constant false-alarm rate)receiver 115andtoavoidthelossassociated withareceiver detector designed onthebasisoftheimproper statistical modelofclutter.
Theoryofseaclutter.Inthepast,attempts weremadetoexplair:themechanism ofseaclutter byreflection fromacorrugated surface, 16bybackscatter fromthedroplets ofspraythrownby thewindintotheairabovetheseasurface, 16.17orbybackscattering fromsmallfacets,or patches, ontheseasurface!8 Noneofthesemodelswereabletoexplain adequately the eAperimental observations.
Thecomposite surfacemodel,inwhichtheseaisrecognized as composed ofanumber ofwavesofdifferent wavelengths andamplitudes, hasbeenmore successful thanprevious modelsfordescribing themechanism ofseaclutter.19.20.118 Itisbased ontheapplication ofclassical scattering theorytoa"slightly roughsurface" whichis described bythemean-sQuared-height spectrum oftheseasurface.(Byaslightlyroughsurface ismeantonewhoseheightvariations aresmallcompared totheradarwavelength andwhose slopesaresmallwithrespecttounity.)Theresultant radarbackscatter canbeinterpreted as thatobtained fromthecomponent oftheseaspectrum whichis"resonant" withtheradar wavelength.
Thatis,theradarwavelength 1,isrelatedtothewaterwavelength .A.wbythe relation (13.13) where¢=grazingangle.Thisissometimes calledtheBraggbackscattering resollallce condi­ tionbecauseofitssimilarity totheX-rayscattering incrystals asobserved byBragg.2Thus theradarisresponsive onlytothosewaterwaveswhichsatisfyEq.(13.13).AnX-bandradar (1=3cm)atzerodegreesgrazinganglewouldbackscatter fromwaterwavesoflength1.5em.
Theseshortwaterwavesareknownascapillary waves.AnX-bandradarwhenviewing large swellwavesatlowgrazinganglesintheabsence ofwindwouldreceivelittleornoback­ scattersincetherewouldbenocapillary wavespresent, eventhoughtheswellmightbe large.Assoonaswindappears, capillaries areformed,andtheX-bandradarwillseeback­ scattersincewaterwavesarenowpresentthatareresonant totheX-bandwavelength.
A Figure 13.6 Composite rough-surface model of tile sea  with the small resonant water waves riding on top of tile  larger water waves, resulting in a tilting of the resonant  , waves from the horizontal.
 UHF radar (A = 70 cm) at zero degrees grazing angle responds to water waves of length  35 cm.
These are known as grat~ity waves.
 The effect of the large water waves is to cause a tilting of the scattering surface of the  smaller water waves, as in Fig.
13.6.
The radar wavelengths are usually too short to be  responsive to these lorig water waves, but the effect of such waves is noted by the tilting  of the snialler water waves which are resonant with the incident radar energy.
The tilting  effect of the large waves is especially important at low grazing angles since the grazing arigle  is deterniiried not only by tile arigle the radar energy makes with the mean sea surface, but  also by the angle of the resonant waves that ride on the large wave structure.
 1 The composite-model theory of sea clutter seems to account for the experimental results  obtained witti vertical polarization better than with horizotital polarizatio~i.'~ Also, it is tnore  applicable to the midrange of grazing angles than to very low grazing angles or to near nornial  ir~cidcrice.
 There are other effects that should probably be part of any complete theory of sea  clutter.
Such factors include: the shadowing of the waves when the surface is viewed at low  grazing angle; the specular reflection from plane facets when viewed at near normal incidence;  the effect of breaking waves, whitecaps, and foam, especially when the winds are greater than  about 15 to 20 knots; and the presence of refraction effects, such as that due to the evaporation  duct over the surface of the sea, which enhance the propagation of radar waves near zero  grazing angle so that sea clutter is increased at the longer ranges compared to normal  propagation conditions.
 Backscatter from sea ice.
At low grazing angles, as might occur with a shipboard radar, there  is little backscattered energy from smooth, flat ice.
On a PPI or similar display the areas of  ice will be dark except perhaps at the edges.
If areas of water are present along with the ice,  the sea clutter seen on the display will be relatively bright in contrast to the ice.
Backscatter  from rough ice, such as floes and pack ice, can produce an effect on the radar display similar  to sea clutter.
However, the backscatter from rough ice can be distinguished from sea cluttcr  since its ~affern on the display will remain stationary from scan to scan but the sea clutter  pattern will change with time.33 Measurements made over ice fields in the region of Thule,  Gree~~land,~' indicated the radar backscatter (a0) to vary linearly with frequency over a range  of grazing arlgles from 1 to 10".
It was also found that o0 was proportional to the elevation  angle over grazing angles from 2" to lo0, but was inversely proportional to grazing angle over  the regiori from 1" to 2".
(The increase of a0 with decreasing grazing angle is similar to the  behavior of land clutter but not sea clutter.) The scatterometer, a radar which measures a0 as  a function of incidence angle in the region near vertical incidence, has been used as an ice sensor  and to differen tiate between first-year and multi-year ice.6s  Radar can also detect large icebergs, especially if they have faces that are nearly per-  pendicular to the radar direction of pr~pagation.~~ Icebergs with sloping faces can have a  small echo even though they may be large in size.
Growlers, which are small icebergs large  enough to be of danger to ships, are poor radar targets because of their small size and shape.
 They seem to be more detectable with radar having a moderate resolution rather than a high  RADAR CLUTTER 481 Figure13.6Composite rough-surface modelofthesea withthesmallresonant waterwavesridingontopofthe largerwaterwaves,resulting inatiltingoftheresonant wavesfromthehorizontal.
UHFradar(A.=70cm)atzerodegreesgrazingangleresponds towaterwavesoflength 35cm.Theseareknownasgrauitywaves.
Theeffectofthelargewaterwavesistocauseatiltingofthescattering surfaceofthe smallerwaterwaves,asinFig.13.6.Theradarwavelengths areusuallytooshorttobe responsive totheselongwaterwaves,buttheeffectofsuchwavesisnotedbythetilting ofthesmallerwaterwaveswhichareresonant withtheincident radarenergy.Thetilting effectofthelargewavesisespecially important atlowgrazinganglessincethegrazingangle isdetermined notonlybytheangletheradarenergymakeswiththemeanseasurface,but alsobytheangleoftheresonant wavesthatrideonthelargewavestructure.
Thecomposite-model theoryofseaclutterseemstoaccount fortheexperimental results obtained withverticalpolarization betterthanwithhorizontal polarization.
I9Also,itismorc applicable tothemidrange ofgrazinganglesthantoverylowgrazinganglesortonearnormal incidence.
Thereareothereffectsthatshouldprobably bepartofanycomplete theoryofsea c1utter.Suchfactorsinclude: theshadowing ofthewaveswhenthesurfaceisviewedatlow grazingangle;thespecular reflection fromplanefacetswhenviewedatnearnormalincidence; theeffectofbreaking waves,whitecaps, andfoam,especially whenthewindsaregreaterthan about15to20knots;andthepresence ofrefraction effects,suchasthatduetotheevaporation ductoverthesurfaceofthesea,whichenhance thepropagation ofradarwavesnearzero grazing anglesothatseaclutterisincreased atthelongerrangescompared tonormal propagation conditions.
Backscatter fromseaice.Atlowgrazingangles,asmightoccurwithashipbo~~d radar,there islittlebackscattered energyfromsmooth, flatice.OnaPPIorsimilardisplaytheareasof icewillbedarkexceptperhaps attheedges.Ifareasofwaterarepresentalongwiththeice, '\theseaclutterseenonthedisplaywillberelatively brightincontrast totheice.Backscatter fromroughice,suchasfloesandpackice,canproduce aneffectontheradardisplaysimilar toseaclutter.However, thebackscatter fromroughicecanbedistinguished fromseaclutter sinceitspafTernonthedisplaywillremainstationary fromscantoscanbuttheseaclutter patternwillchangewithtime.33Measurements madeovericefieldsintheregionofThule, Greenland,41 indicated theradarbackscatter (0-°)tovarylinearlywithfrequency overarange ofgrazinganglesfromIto10°.Itwasalsofoundthat0-°wasproportional totheelevation angleovergrazinganglesfrom2°to10°,butwasinversely proportional tograzingangleover theregionfrom1°to2°.(Theincrease of0-°withdecreasing grazingangleissimilartothe behavior oflandclutterbutnotseaclutter.)Thescatterometer, aradarwhIchmeasures 0-°as afunctionofincidence angleintheregionnearverticalincidence, hasbeenusedasanicesensor andtodifferentiate between first-year andmulti-year ice.6s Radarcanalsodetectlargeicebergs, especially iftheyhavefacesthatarenearlyper­ pendicular totheradardirection ofpropagation.33Icebergs withslopingfacescanhavea smallechoeventhoughtheymaybelargeinsize.Growlers, whicharesmallicebergs large enoughtobeofdangertoships,arepoorradartargetsbecauseoftheirsmallsizeandshape.
Theyseemtobemoredetectable withradarhavingamoderate resolution ratherthanahigh resolution.66 482 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  The backscatter from ice at high grazing angles is complicated by the relative ease of  penetration of radar energy into the ice.
The reflection from the air-ice interface may be  accompanied by a reflection from the underlying ice-water or ice-land interface.
These reflec-  tions from the two interfaces, as well as multiple internal reflections, can result in radar back-  scatter that varies with the ice thickness, water content of the ice, and radar wavelength.
The  penetration properties of radar energy in ice and snow, especially at UHF or lower frequencies,  can result in serious errors in the height measurement of radar  altimeter^.^' Under some  conditions, there might be no echo from the top surface of the ice, anti if the ice is thick enough  there might be no reflection from the bottom.
When there is a recognizable reflection from  the bottom, the distance measured by an altimeter calibrated on the assumption that propaga-  tion is in air, can be erroneous because the velocity of propagation in ice is 0.535 times that in  air, and in snow it is less by a factor of 0.fJU6' Altimeters at the higher microwave frequencies  are less affected by penetration into the ice and are more likely to indicate the air-ice inier-  face than UHF altimeters.
J  I,  Oil slicks.
Oil on the surface of the sea has a smoothing effect on breaking waves, and damps  out the capillary and short gravity waves normally generated by the wind.
Thus oil slicks  appear dark on a radar PPI compared to the surrounding sea and are readily detectable.
 ~igh:resolution X-band radar, for example, can sometimes detect the oil leaking from the  engine of a small boat at anchor.
Airborne synthetic-aperture radar has been demonstrated to  locate and map oil slicks over a large area.
It is found that vertical polarization produces  higher contrast than horizontal polarization.
At low sea-state and wind it is possible to image  an oil spill of less than 400 liters durini the period of spillage.68  13.4 DETECTION OF TARGETS IN SEA CLUTTER  The ability of a radar to detect targets on or above the sea can be limited by sea clutter as well  as by receiver noise.
The magnitude and extent of the sea clutter seen by the radar will depend  not only on the sea state and wind, but on the radar height.
Radar is used to detect at least  three different classes of targets over the sea: aircraft, ships, and small objects such as buoys.
 (Navigation radars must also see land-sea boundaries in addition to buoys.) The detection of  such targets in the presence of sea clutter generally requires a different design approach for ,S  each, although there are similarities among them.
In brief, a radar required to detect aircraft in  the presence of sea clutter would likely employ MTI (moving target indication); a radar for the  detection of buoys and other small objects on the sea would generally be of high resolution  and employ techniques to prevent receiver saturation by large clutter; and a radar designed to  detect ships could be of moderate resolution since the radar cross section of ships is relatively  large.
in the remainder of the section, the various techniques for detecting targets in clutter will  be reviewed.
 MTI.
As mentioned, MTI can be used to separate the moving aircraft targets from the  relatively stationary sea clutter.
Except for some naval applications for the detection of very  low-flying aircraft, the normal detection of aircraft over the sea does not usually represent a  severe MTI design'problem.
Sea clutter is not as strong and does not usually extend to as great  a range as does land clutter.
Thus high-flying aircraft over the sea can be detected at long range  with relatively conventional radar with only a minimal MTI, or even with no MTI in some  cases.
A more severe problem occurs 'when a seaborne radar must operate near land.
Land  clutter can be so large that clutter echoes might enter the radar receiver via the antennd  482INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS Thebackscatter fromiceathighgrazinganglesiscomplicated bytherelativeeaseof penetration ofradarenergyintotheice.Thereflection fromtheair-iceinterface maybe accompanied byareflection fromtheunderlying ice-water orice-·land interface.
Thesereflec­ tionsfromthetwointerfaces, aswellasmultiple internalreOections, canresultinradarback­ scatterthatvarieswiththeicethickness, watercontentoftheice,andradarwavelength.
The penetration properties ofradarenergyiniceandsnow,especially atUHForlowerfrequencies, canresultinseriouserrorsintheheightmeasurement ofradaraltimeters.67Undersome conditions,theremightbenoechofromthetopsurfaceoftheice,andiftheiceisthickenough theremightbenoreflection fromthebottom.
Whenthereisarecognizable reflection from thebottom,thedistance measured byanaltimeter calibrated ontheassumption thatpropaga­ tionisinair,canbeerroneous becausethevelocityofpropagation iniceis0.535timesthatin air,andinsnowitislessbyaf~ctorof0.8.67Altimeters atthehighermicrowave frequencies arelessaffectedbypenetration intotheiceandaremorelikelytoindicate theair-iceinter- facethanUHFaltimeters.
.J Oilslicks.Oilonthesurfaceoftheseahasasmoothing effectonbreaking waves,anddamps outthecapillary andshortgravitywavesnormally generated bythewind.Thusoilslicks appeardarkonaradarPPIcompared tothesurrounding seaandarereadilydetectable.
High~resolution X-band radar,forexample, cansometimes detecttheoilleakingfromthe engineofasmallboatatanchor.Airborne synthetic-aperture radarhasbeendemonstrated to locateandmapoBslicksoveralargearea.Itisfoundthatverticalpolarization produces highercontrast thanhorizontal polarization.
Atlowsea-state andwinditispossible toimage anoilspilloflessthan400litersduringtheperiodofspillage.68 13.4DETECTION OFTARGETS INSEACLUTTER Theabilityofaradartodetecttargetsonorabovetheseacanbelimitedbyseaclutteraswell asbyreceivernoise.Themagnitude andextentoftheseaclutterseenbytheradarwilldepend notonlyontheseastateandwind,butontheradarheight.Radarisusedtodetectatkast threedilTerent classesoftargetsoverthesea:aircraft,ships,andsmallobjectssuchasbuoys.
(Navigation radarsmustalsoseeland-sea boundaries inaddition tobuoys.)Thedetection of suchtargetsinthepresence ofseacluttergenerally requires adilTerent designapproach for each,although therearesimilarities amongthem.Inbrief, aradarrequired todetectaircraftin thepresence ofseaclutterwouldlikelyemployMTI(moving targetindication); aradarforthe detection ofbuoysandothersmallobjectsontheseawouldgenerally beofhighresolution andemploytechniques topreventreceiversaturation bylargeclutter;andaradardesigned to detectshipscouldbeofmoderate resolution sincetheradarcrosssectionofshipsisrelatively large.Intheremainder ofthesection,thevarioustechniques fordetecting targetsinclutterwill bereviewed.
MTI.Asmentioned, MTIcanbeusedtoseparate themoving aircrafttargetsfromthe relatively stationary seaclutter.Exceptforsomenavalapplications forthedetection ofvery low-flying aircraft,thenormaldetection ofaircraftovertheseadoesnotusuallyrepresent a severeMTIdesign'problem.
Seaclutterisnotasstronganddoesnotusuallyextendtoasgreat arangeasdoeslandclutter.Thushigh-flying aircraftovertheseacanbedetected atlongrange withrelatively conventional radarwithonlyaminimal MTI,orevenwithnoMTIinsome cases.Amoresevereproblem occurs'when aseaborne radarmustoperatenearland.Land cluttercanbesolargethatclutterechoesmightentertheradarreceiver viatheantenn.t sidelobes.
In this case, when strong land clutter is a problem, a good MTI or pulse-doppler  radar is required.
MTI or pulse-doppler radar is also necessary in radar carried by high-flying  aircraft that must detect other aircraft masked by sea clutter.
 Altliougli sllips arc rnoving targets that miglit be candidates for MTI radar, it is not often  that MI'I is ticeded for this application.
'Tile large cross section of ships generally results in  sititable target-to-oluttcr ratios with convetltio~lal radars.
 Frequency.
I'lie plot of 0" vs.
gra7ing angle for various freqilencies (Fig.
13.3) indicates that  the lo\r;c~ tllc I~cqr~c~~cy.
tllc less tile sea cluttcr.
I'llis applies at tlrc lower grazing ailgles and  with hori7or1tal polarization.
Thus, to reduce clutter, the radar sl~ould be at a low frequency.
 l'llcrc arc somc resetvatio~~s, Ilowever.
that woi~ld tend to favor the higher frequencies in many  applications.
Tile lower the frequency, tile more difficult it is to direct the radar energy at low  a~~glcs ?'his is illustrated it1 Sec.
12.2, wllicl~ gives the elevatio~l angle of the lowest iiiterfere~lce  lobe as A/411,, where A = wavelength and /I, = antenna height.
Thus if targets low on the water  are to be seen, higher frequencies may be preferred even if the clutter is greater.
Another  ,t reason for preferring the liigller frcquetlcics in some applications, in spite of the larger clutter,  is that greater range-resolution and azimuth-resolution (shorter pulse width and narrower  beanlwidths) are easier to obtain than at lower frequencies.
The higher resolution usually  results iri greater target-to-clutter ratio.
Civil marine radars are available at both S band  (10 cln wavelength) and X band (3 cm).
Although both bands have distinctive advantages for  ship application, when only a single radar is employed it is usually at X band for the reasons  give11 above." I'hus the fact that sea clutter is less at the lower frequencies is but one of several  factors to be collsidered in the selection of the optimum frequency for a particular radar  application.
 Polarization.
Figure 13.3 indicates that horizontal polarization results in less sea clutter than  vertical, for the sea conditions whicl~ apply to that data.
The majority of radars that operate  ovnr the sea usually employ horizontal polarization.
Air-surveillance radars with horizontal  polarization achieve greater range than with vertical polarization because of the higher  reflection coefficient of horizontal polarization (Sec.
12.2).
A firm conclusion in favor of one  polarizatioll or the other is difficult to make for a civil marine radar, but most sets use  .
horizontal polarizati~n.~' At high sea states the difference between horizontal and vertical  I polarization is said to disappear.22  Horizontal polarization, as was mentioned in Sec.
13.3, has a probability density functicn  which deviates from Rayleigh more than does vertical polarization when the pulse widths are  short.
The non-Rayleigh nature of the clutter must be properly considered in the detector  design if large increases in the minimum detectable signal-to-clutter ratios are to be avoided.
 Pulse width.
The radar equation that applies to the detection of targets in surface clutter at low  grazing angles (Eq.
13.8) shows that, all other factors remaining constant, the shorter the pulse  width the greater will be the maximum' range.
Decreasing the pulse width decreases the  amount of clutter with which the target must compete.
There are three cautions to remember,  however, when considering the use of Eq.
(13.8).
First, the clutter echo power must be large  compared to the receiver noise power for Eq.
(13.8) to be valid.
Thus the energy within the  pulse must not be too low.
If the peak power is limited, a short pulse might not have enough  energy to make clutter, rather than receiver noise, dominate.
Pulse compression (Sec.
11.5) can  overcome this limitation of a short pulse since it can achieve a resolution equivalent to that of  a short pulse, but with tlic energy of a long pulse.
Second, the required signal-to-clutter ratio  depends on the pulse width because of the change in clutter statistics (probability density  RADAR CLUTTER 483 sidelobes.
Inthiscase,whenstronglandclutterisaproblem, agoodMTIorpulse-doppler radarisrequired.
MTIorpulse-doppler radarisalsonecessary inradarcarried byhigh-nying aircraftthatmustdetectotheraircraftmasked byseaclutter.
Although shipsaremovingtargetsthatmightbecandidates forMTIradar,itisnotoften thatMTIisneededforthisapplication.
Thelargecrosssectionofshipsgenerally resultsin suitah1c target-to-clutter ratioswithconventional radars.
Frequenq.
TheplotoraOvs.grazingangleforvariousfrequencies (Fig.13.3)indicates that thclo\':crthcfrcqlIcncy.tilelesstheseacIu!ler.Thisappliesatthelowergrazinganglesand withhorizontal polarization.
Thus,toreduceclutter,theradarshouldbeatalowfrequency.
Therearcsomereservations, however.
thatwouldtendtofavorthehigherfrequencies inmany applications.
Thelowerthefrequency, themoredifficult itistodirecttheradarenergyatlow angles.Thisisillustrated inSec.12.2,whichgivestheelevation angleofthelowestinterference lobeasA;4fta,where A.=wavelength andIra=antenna height.Thusiftargetslowonthewater aretobeseen,higherfrequencies maybepreferred eveniftheclutterisgreater.
Another reasonforpreferring thehigherfrequencies insomeapplications, inspiteofthelargerclutter, isthatgreaterrange-resolution andazimuth-resolution (shorter pulsewidthandnarrower beamwidths) areeasiertoobtainthanatlowerfrequencies.
Thehigherresolution usually resultsingreatertarget-to-clutter ratio.Civilmarineradarsareavailable atbothSband (10emwavelength) andXband(3em).Although bothbandshavedistinctive advantages for shipapplication, whenonlyasi~gleradarisemployed itisusuallyatXbandforthereasons givenabove.
2\Thusthefactthatseaclutterislessatthelowerfrequencies isbutoneofseveral factorstobeconsidered intheselection oftheoptimum frequency foraparticular radar application.
Polarization.
Figure13.3indicates thathorizontal polarization resultsinlessseaclutterthan vertical, fortheseaconditions whichapplytothatdata.Themajority ofradarsthatoperate ov~rtheseausuallyemployhorizontal polarization.
Air-surveillance radarswithhorizontal polarization achieve greater rangethanwithvertical polarization because ofthehigher renection coefficient ofhorizontal polarization (Sec.12.2).Afirmconclusion infavorofone polarization ortheotherisdifficult tomakeforacivilmarineradar,butmostsetsuse horizontal polarization.21Athighseastatesthedifference between horizontal andvertical polarization issaidtodisappear.22 Horizontal polarization, aswasmentioned inSec.13.3,hasaprobability densityfuncticn whichdeviates fromRayleigh morethandoesverticalpolarization whenthepulsewidthsare short.Thenon-Rayleigh natureofthecluttermustbeproperly considered inthedetector designiflargeincreases intheminimum detectable signal-to-clutter ratiosaretobeavoided, Pulsewidth.Theradarequation thatappliestothedetection oftargetsinsurfaceclutteratlow grazingangles(Eq.13.8)showsthat,allotherfactorsremaining constant, theshorterthepulse widththegreaterwillbethemaximum' range.Decreasing thepulsewidthdecreases the amount ofclutterwithwhichthetargetmustcompete.
Therearethreecautions toremember, however, whenconsidering theuseofEq.(13.8).First,theclutterechopowermustbelarge compared tothereceiver noisepowerforEq.(13.8)tobevalid.Thustheenergywithinthe pulsemustnotbetoolow.Ifthepeakpowerislimited,ashortpulsemightnothaveenough energytomakeclutter,ratherthanreceiver noise,dominate.
Pulsecompression (Sec.11.5)can overcome thislimitation ofashortpulsesinceitcanachievearesolution equivalent tothatof ashortpUlse.butwiththeenergyofalongpulse.Second,therequired signal-to-clutter ratio depends onthepulsewidthbecause ofthechangeinclutterstatistics (probability density 484 [NTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  function) with short pulse widths, as discussed in Sec.
13.3.
The changes in clutter statistics  must be accounted for in the detector design, else the large signal-to-clutter ratios required of a  conventional threshold detector might negate any benefit of the shortened pulse.
As mentioned  previously, a radar with a very short pulse (or narrow beamwidth) might prove to be worse  than one with a longer pulse (or a wider beamwidth) because of the change in clutter  statistics.
(Receiver detection-criteria for compensating the effects of a change in clutter sta-  tistics with high resolution are discussed later in this section.) Third, if the pulse is too short, it  might encompass only part of a large target such as a ship, and the target cross section might  be reduced.
However, if the echoes from the various parts of a large target are displayed  without collapsing loss and if the operator knows the general shape of the target, there will be  little, if any, loss in detectability.
 Antenna beamwidth.
The discussion above regarding the benefits and limitations of the short 3 pulse also apply to the azimuth beamwidth.
The use of high resolution in angle and/or range  is the principal method available for detecting a fixed target in clutter, assuming the target  "cross section per unit area" is greater than that of clutter a'.
Too narrow a beamwidth, just  as too narrow a pulse width, is not desired since it can also alter the clutter statistics in an  unfavorable manner.3  Antenna scan rate.
The sea clutter background does not change significantly during the time  the usual civil-marine radar antenna (with a 20 rpm rotation rate) scans by a particular  clutter patch.
That is, the sea can be considered " frozen" during the observatioil time.
For a  medium-resolution X-band radar at low grazing angles, the time required for the sea clutter  echo to decorrelate is about 10 ms.l6S2' Any pulses received from sea clutter during this time  will be correlated and no improvement in signal-to-clutter ratio will be obtained by integra-  tion.
(This is unlike receiver noise since integration of signal pulses and noise can provide  significant improvement in signal-to-noise ratio, as described in Sec.
2.6.) Although the clutter  received during a single scan past a target will be correlated, the sea surface will i~sually change  by the time of the next antenna scan so that the clutter will be decorrelated from scan to scan.
 Thus scan-to-scan integration can usually result in an improvement of target-to-clirtter ratio.
 To make available more independent clutter echoes, the antenna rotation rate can be  in~reased.~'.~~ If, for example, the radar antenna has a 2" beamwidth, a pulse repetition  frequency of 3600 Hz, and a 20 rpm rotation rate, there will be 60 pulses returned from a  target on each scan of the antenna.There is little integration improvement obtained from these  60 pulses since they occur within a time (& s) comparable to the decorrelation time for  X-band sea clutter.
If the antenna rotation rate is speeded II~ to 600 rpm, there will be 2  pulses received during a scan past a target.
(There should be at least 2 pulses per scan rather  than one, in order to avoid a large scanning loss.) On thc next scan, one-tc~~tll sccoucl later, two  additional pulses are received that are decorrelated from the previous two pulses so that an  integration improvement can be obtained.
The number of pulses processed by the slow-speed  at~ri the high-speed atltennas are the same.
The 20 rpm antenna receives 60 pulses per scan  with a 3-second rotation period.
In the same 3 seconds, the 600 rpm antenna scans by the  target 30 times, receiving two pi~lses on each scan.
A scan-to-scan integration imjlrovcmc~~t  can be achieved with the high-speed antenna if the storage properties of the CKT screen permit  efficient integration (as with a storage tube) or if some form of automatic integration is used.
 Experimental measurements using civil-marine radar with a lo beamwidth and 5000 Hz  pulse repetition frequency show that increasing the antenna rotation rate from 20 to  420 rpm improves the target-to-clutter ratio from about 4 to 8 dB depending on the sea  state." (The smaller improvement corresponds to the higher sea state.) An attempt was also  484INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS function) withshortpulsewidths,asdiscussed inSec.13.3.Thechanges inclutterstatistics mustbeaccounted forinthedetector design,elsethelargesignal-to-c1utter ratiosrequired ofa conventional threshold detector mightnegateanybenefitoftheshortened pulse.Asmentioned previously, aradarwithaveryshortpulse(ornarrowbeamwidth) mightprovetobeworse thanonewithalongerpulse(orawiderbeamwidth) because ofthechange inclutter statistics.
(Receiver detection-criteria forcompensating theeffectsofachangeincluttersta­ tisticswithhighresolution arediscussed laterinthissection.) Third,ifthepulseistooshort,it mightencompass onlypartofalargetargetsuchasaship,andthetargetcrosssectionmight bereduced.
However, iftheechoesfromthevariouspartsofalargetargetaredisplayed withoutcollapsing lossandiftheoperator knowsthegeneralshapeofthetarget,therewillbe little,ifany,lossindetectability.
Antenna beamwidth.Thediscussion aboveregarding thebenefitsandlimitations oftheshort pulsealsoapplytotheazimuth beamwidth.
Theuseofhighresolution inangle{ndjor range istheprincipal method available fordetecting afixedtargetinclutter,assuming thetarget "crosssectionperunitarea"isgreaterthanthatofclutter (10.Toonarrowabeamwidth, just astoonarrowapulsewidth,isnotdesiredsinceitcanalsoaltertheclutterstatistics inan unfavorable manner.
31 Antenna scanrate.Theseaclutterbackground doesnotchangesignificantly duringthetime theusualcivil-marine radarantenna (witha20rpmrotation rate)scansbyaparticular clutterpatch.Thatis,theseacanbeconsidered" frozen"duringtheobservation time.Fora medium-resolution X-bandradaratlowgrazingangles,thetimerequired fortheseaclutter echotodecorrelate isabouttoms.16•21Anypulsesreceived fromseaclutterduringthistime willbecorrelated andnoimprovement insignal-to-clutter ratiowillbeobtained byintegra­ tion.(Thisisunlikereceiver noisesinceintegration ofsignalpulsesandnoisecanprovide significant improvement insignal-to~noise ratio,asdescribed inSec.2.6.)Although theclutter received duringasinglescanpastatargetwillbecorrelated, theseasurfacewillusually chang~ bythetimeofthenextantenna scansothattheclutterwillbedecorrelated fromscantoscan.
Thusscan-to-scan integration canusuallyresultinanimprovement oftarget-to-c1utter ratio.
Tomakeavailable moreindependent clutterechoes, theantenna rotation ratecanbe increased.21•23If,forexample, theradarantenna hasa 20beamwidth, apulserepetition frequency of3600Hz,anda20rpmrotation rate,therewillbe60pulsesreturned froma targetoneachscanoftheantenna.
Thereislittleintegration improvement obtained fromthese 60pulsessincetheyoccurwithinatime(ins)comparable tothedecorrelation timefor X-bandseaclutter.Iftheantenna rotation rateisspeeded lipto600rpm,therewillbe2 pulsesreceived duringascanpastatarget.(Thereshouldbeatleast2pulsesperscanrather thanone,inordertoavoidalargescanning loss.)Onthenextscan,one-ll.:nl.h secondlater,two additional pulsesarereceived thataredecorrelated fromtheprevious twopulsessolhatan integration improvement canbeobtained.
Thenumberofpulsesprocessed hytheslow-speed andthehigh-speed antennas arethesame.The20rpmantenna receives 60pulsesperscan witha3-second rotation period.Inthesame3seconds, the600rpmantenna scansbythe target30times,receiving twopulsesoneachscan.Ascan-to-scan integration improvement canbeachieved withthehigh-speed antenna ifthestorageproperties oftheCRTscreenpermit efficient integration (aswithastoragetube)orifsomeformofautomatic integration isused.
Experimental measurements usingcivil-marine radarwitha 10beamwidth and5000Hz pulserepetition frequency showthatincreasing theantenna rotation ratefrom20to 420rpmimproves thetarget-to-clutter ratiofromabout4to8dBdepending onthesea state.H(Thesmallerimprovement corresponds tothehigherseastate.)Anattempt wasalso RADAR CLUTTER 485  made to decorrelate the two pulses received from a target with the high-speed rotation rate by  transmitting each of the two pulses'at a different frequency.
Unexpectedly, no discernible  improvement was noted when the two frequencies were used instead of a single frequency, even  though the two frequencies were 60 MHz apart.
This would indicate that there is a slowly  fading component of the clutter echo which cannot be decorrelated and is probably similar to  the clutter spikes discussed in Sec.
13.3.
 The decorrelation time of the clutter is approximated by the reciprocal of the width of the  clutter doppler spectrum.
It is found that the width of the frequency spectrum decreases with  decreasing frequency so that the decorrelation time is greater at the lower frequencies than at  the high frequencies.
Normally it would be expected that the decorrelation time would be  linearly proportio~lal to the frequency, since the doppler-frequency shift is also linearly related  to tlie frcqucltcy.
).lowever, experimental measurements show that the ratio of the decorrela-  tion tir~lc at L band to that at X band is less than would be expected if the linear relation  applietl.
For exarnplc, if the decorrelation time at X band were 10 ms, then it would be about  60 tns at L band, instead of the 70 to 75 ms predicted on the basis of a linear law.
Therefore,  when tile clr~tter spectra are given in units of velocity rather than frequency, the velocity  spcctra are sligl~tly broader at tllc lower frcqucncies, an urlexpected The spectra are  broader for horizontal than for vertical polarization, and increase in width as the square root  of the wave height for both polarizations.
 Observation time.
In the above, a rapid antenna-rotation rate takes advantage of the fact that  the clutter echo changes with time, but the target echo does not.
With a high-resolution radar  (nanoseconds pulse width) the individual sea-clutter spikes, as mentioned in Sec.
13.3, can  persist for several seconds, which is much greater than the 10 ms decorrelation time quoted for  S-band sea clutter.
The persistence of these sea-clutter spikes makes difficult the detection of  small targets, such as buoys and small boats.
A single "snapshot" of a PPI would not likely  differentiate the echo of a small target from that of the sea spikes.
The individual sea spikes,  however, will disappear with time and new spikes will appear at other locations.
If it is possible  to observe the radar display for a sufficient period of time, the small targets can be recognized  since they will remain relatively fixed in amplitude while the sea spikes come and go.
The  penalty paid for this procedure is a long observation time.
 3  Frequency agility.
If tile frequency of a pulse of length r is changed by at least l/s, the echo  from uniformly distributed clutter will be decorrelated.
Thus pulse-to-pulse frequency changrs  (Irequcncy agility) of I/r or greater will decorrelate the clutter and permit an increase in  target-to-clutter ratio when the decorrelated pulses are integrated.
With a high-resolution  radar in which the persistent sea-clutter spikes appear, the benefit of frequency agility is  decreased since the sea spikes are correlated over a relatively long period of time and appear  sirnilar to target echoes.
Thils frequency agility will be of less value the more non-Rayleigh the  clutter statistics.
(If the radar is on a rapidly moving platform, the clutter might also be  decorrelated as the radar resolution cell views a different patch of clutter.)  Receiver detection criteria.
In Chap.
2 the receiver detection criterion was based on the  methods of Marcum and Swerling.
Relationships between threshold levels, probabilities of  detection and false alarm, signal-to-noise ratio, and number of pulses integrated were obtained  using as a model a receiver with the following characteristics: (1) the envelope of the receiver  noise at the output of the IF filter was described by the Rayleigh probability density function  (pdf); (2) the envelope detector had either a linear or a square-law characteristic; (3) the  integrator consisted of a linear addition of the pulses in the video portion of the receiver; and  RADAR CLUTIER 485 madetodecorrelate thetwopulsesreceived fromatargetwiththehigh-speed rotation rateby transmitting eachofthetwopulses'a{ adifTerentfrequency.Unex.pectedly, nodiscernible improvement wasnotedwhenthetwofrequencies wereusedinsteadofasinglefrequency, even thoughthetwofrequencies were60MHzapart.Thiswouldindicate thatthereisaslowly fadingcomponent oftheclutterechowhichcannotbedecorrelated andisprobably similarto theclutterspikesdiscussed inSec.13.3.
Thedecorrelation timeoftheclutterisapproximated bythereciprocal ofthewidthofthe clutterdoppler spectrum.
Itisfoundthatthewidthorthefrequency spectrum decreases with decreasing frequency sothatthedecorrelation timeisgreateratthelowerfrequencies thanat thehighfrequencies.
Normally itwouldbeexpected thatthedecorrelation timewouldbe linearlyproportional tothefrequency, sincethedoppler-frequency shiftisalsolinearlyrelated tothcfrequency.
However.
experimental measurements showthattheratioofthedecorrela­ tiontimcatLbandtothatatXbandislessthanwouldbeexpected ifthelinearrelation applied.
Forexample.
ifthedecorrelation timeatXbandwere10ms,thenitwouldbeabout 60msatLband.insteadofthe70to75mspredicted onthebasisofalinearlaw.Therefore.
whentheclutterspectraaregiveninunitsofvelocity ratherthanfrequency.
thevelocity spectraarcslightlybroader atthelowerfrequencies.
anunexpected result.25Thespectraare broader forhorizontal thanforverticalpolarization, andincrease inwidthasthesquareroot ofthewaveheightforbothpolarizations.
Observation time.Intheabove.arapidantenna-rotation ratetakesadvantage ofthefactthat theclutterechochanges withtime,butthetargetechodoesnot.Withahigh-resolution radar (nanoseconds pulsewidth)theindividual sea-clutter spikes,asmentioned inSec.13.3,can persistforseveralseconds.
whichismuchgreaterthanthetomsdecorrelation timequotedfor X-bandseaclutter.Thepersistence ofthesesea-clutter spikesmakesdifficultthedetection of smalltargets.suchasbuoysandsmallboats.Asingle"snapshot" ofaPPIwouldnotlikely differentiate theechoofasmalltargetfromthatoftheseaspikes.Theindividual seaspikes, however.
willdisappear withtimeandnewspikeswillappearatotherlocations.Ifitispossible toobservetheradardisplayforasufficient periodoftime,thesmalltargetscanberecognized sincetheywillremainrelatively fixedinamplitude whiletheseaspikescomeandgo.The penaltypaidforthisprocedure isalongobservation time.
Frequency agility.Ifthefrequency ofapulseoflength tischanged byatleastlit.theecho fromuniformly distributed clutterwillbedecorrelated.
Thuspulse-to-pulse frequency changes (frequency .agility) ofIItorgreaterwilldecorrelate theclutterandpermitanincrease in target-to-clutter ratiowhenthedecorrelated pulsesareintegrated.
Withahigh-resolution radarinwhichthepersistent sea-clutter spikesappear,thebenefitoffrequency agilityis decreased sincetheseaspikesarecorrelated overarelatively longperiodoftimeandappear similartotargetechoes.Thusfrequency agilitywillbeoflessvaluethemorenon-Rayleigh the clutterstatistics.
(Iftheradarisonarapidlymoving platform, thecluttermightalsobe decorrelated astheradarresolution cellviewsadifferent patchofclutter.) Receiver detection criteria.
InChap.2thereceiver detection criterion wasbasedonthe methods ofMarcum andSwerling.
Relationships between threshold levels,probabilities of detection andfalsealarm,signal-to-noise ratio,andnumberofpulsesintegrated wereobtained usingasamodelareceiverwiththefollowing characteristics: (1)theenvelope ofthereceiver noiseattheoutputoftheIFfilterwasdescribed bytheRayleigh probability densityfunction (pdf);(2)theenvelope detector hadeitheralinearorasquare-law characteristic; (3)the integrator consisted ofalinearaddition ofthepulsesinthevideoportionofthereceiver; and 486 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  (4) the detection decision was determined by whether or not the receiver output crossed a  threshold that depended on the desired probability of false alarm.
When the noise, or clutter, is  not described by a Rayleigh pdf, the receiver model of Chap.
2 is not optimum and can cause  degraded performance.
The higher "tails" of the probability density function of non-Rayleigh  clutter mean that there will be a greater number of false alarms in the conventional receiver  designed on the basis of Rayleigh statistics.
The filse alarms with non-Rayleigh clutter can be  reduced to any desired level by raising the receiver threshold.
Raising the threshold, however,  can require a significantly larger signal-to-noise, or signal-to-clutter, ratio for a given proba-  bility of detection.
 Trunk and GeorgeI2 were among the first to note that something other than the conven-  tional receiver design should be used when tlie clutter pdf is not Rayleigl~.
They sliowed that  the median dctc~ctoi- gave better performance in non-Rayleigh clutter than the conventional  receiver (which can be called a mcJu1l dc~tecrot-).
In this detector, the median vglue of the 11  received pulses is found and compared against a threshold.
This requires that the amplitt~des  of the tl individual samples (pulses) be stored and then arranged (ranked) in order of amplitude  to find the median.
An alternate approach, which is irsually easicr to implement, is to employ  the m-out-of-tr detector (the double threshold or binary integrator of Sec.
10.7) with the second  threshold set at m = (n - 1)/2.
The median detector is "robust," in that the threshold values  and the detection probabilities do not depend on the detailed shape of the clutter pdf, but only  on the median value.
 The conventional receiver may he considered as comparing tlie HIL~LIII value of the 11 pulses  to a predetermined threshold.
Trunk has shown that the trimmed-mean detector can be better  than either the mean or the median  detector^.^^.^' If there are 11 pulses available from which to  make a detection decision, the trimmed-mean detector discards the smaliest and the largest of  the 11 pulses before taking the mean.
Although its performance may be good, it is difficult to  implement in practice because the 11 pulses must be rank-ordered to find the smallest and (lie  largest.
 Although the median detector is superior to tlie mean detector (conventional receiver).
it  is inferior to both the nt-out-of-)] detector and the logarithmic receiver when clutter can he  described by the log-normal2' or the Weib~ll'~ models.
The 111-out-of-tr detector, or binary  integrator, was originally employed in radar as an automatic integrator, hilt it has other  propertics of interest.
The optlmum number 1r1 (or the sccond thrcstiold) will dcpentl on lhc  nature of the pdf.
When the optimum m is used with non-Rayleigli-clutter, the tn-out-of-tr  detector seems to be better than the other receiver criteria.'".28  The logarithmic receiver has an output voltage whose amplit~rdc is proportional lo tlie  logarithm of the input envelope.
A logarithmic characteristic provides a constant false alarm  rate (CFAR) when the input clutter or noise has a Rayleigh pdf.
The performance of the log-  arithmic receiver in non-Rayleigh clutter is almost as good as the trl-out-of-,] detector and is  probably easier to implcment.14.28  A comparison of the performance of the various receivers for a specific case is shown in  Fig.
13.7.
 Log-FTC and log-log receivers.
The techniques discussed thus Tar attempt to improve the  detection of targets in clutter by increasing the target-to-clutter ratio.
There are also several  tecl~niques found in radars for the detection of targets in clutter whose purpose is to prevent  the clutter from saturating the display or the receiver, or to maintain a constant fiilse-alarm  rate (CFAR).
They have no subclutter visibility in that tiley offer no ability to see targets  masked by clutter, but they do permit targets large compared to the clutter to be detected that  might otherwise be lost because of the limited dynamic range of the receiving system.
An  486INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS (4)thedetection decision wasdetermined bywhether ornotthereceiver outputcrossed a threshold thatdepended onthedesiredprobability offalsealarm.Whenthenoise,orc1utter,is notdescribed byaRayleigh pdf,thereceiver modelofChap.2isnotoptimum andcancause degraded performance.
Thehigher"tails"oftheprobability densityfunction ofnon-Rayleigh cluttermeanthattherewillbeagreaternumberoffalsealarmsintheconventional receiver designed onthebasisofRayleigh statistics.
Thefalsealarmswithnon-Rayleigh cluttercanbe reduced toanydesiredlevelbyraisingthereceiver threshold.
Raisingthethreshold, however, canrequireasignificantly largersignal-to-noise, orsignal-to-Ij:lutter, ratioforagivenproba­ bilityofdetection.
TrunkandGeorgel2wereamongthefirsttonotcthatsomething otherthantheconven­ tionalreceiver designshouldbeusedwhentheclutterpdfisnotRayleigh.
Theyshowedthat themediandetector gavebetterperformance innon-Rayleigh clutterthantheconventional receiver (whichcanbecalledameandetector).
Inthisdetector.
themedianv,lueoftheII received pulsesisfoundandcompared againstathreshold.
Thisrequires thattheamplitudes oftheIIindividual samples (pulses)bestoredandthenarranged (ranked) inorderofamplitude tofindthemedian.
Analternate approach, whichisusuallyeasiertoimplement.
istoemploy them-out-of-n detector (thedoublethreshold orbinaryintegrator ofSec.
10.7) withthesecond threshold setatm=(n-1)/2.Themediandetector is..robust," inthatthethreshold values andthedetection probabilities donotdependonthedetailed shapeoftheclutterpdf.butonly onthemedianvalue.
Theconventional receiver maybeconsidered ascomparing the/11(:"111valueofthe"pulses toapredetermined threshold.
Trunkhasshownthatthetrimmed-mean detector ~anbebetter thaneitherthemeanorthemediandetectors.26.27Iftherearenpulsesavailable fromwhichto makeadetection decision, thetrimmed-mean detector discards thesmallest andthelargestof theIIpulsesbefore'takingthemean.Although itsperformance maybegood.itisdifficult to implement inpractice because theItpulsesmustberank-ordered tofindthesmallest andthe largest.
Although themediandetector issuperior tothemeandetector (conventional receiver), it isinferiortoboththem-out-of-n detector andthelogarithmic receiver whenc1ullercanhe described bythelog-normaI2t!orthe'Weibulll-l- models.Them-Ollt-of-n detector.
orbinary integrator, wasoriginally employed inradarasanautomatic integrator, hutithasother properties ofinterest.
Theoptimum number m(orthesecondthreshold) willdependonthe natureofthepdf.Whentheoptimum misusedwithnon-Rayleigh-clutter.
them-ollt-of-II detector seemstobebetterthantheotherreceivercriteria.l,ut! Thelogarithmic receiver hasanoutputvoltagewhoseamplitude isproportional tothe logarithm oftheinputenvelope.
Alogarithmic characteristic provides aconstant falsealarm rate(CFAR) whentheinputclutterornoisehasaRayleigh pdf.Theperformance ofthelog­ arithmic receiver innon-Rayleigh clutterisalmostasgoodasthem-out-of-II detector andis probably easiertoimpkment.14.28 Acomparison oftheperformance ofthevariousreceivers foraspecificcaseisshownin Fig.13.7.
Log-FTC andlog-logreceivers.
Thetechniques discllssed thusfarattempt toimprove the detection oftargetsinclutterbyincreasing thetarget-to-c1utter ratio.Therearealsosevaal techniques foundinradarsforthedetection oftargetsinclutterwhosepurpose istoprevent theclutterfromsaturating thedisplayorthereceiver, ortomaintain aconstant false-alarm rate(CFAR).Theyhavenosubclutter visibility inthattheyoffernoabilitytoseetargets masked byclutter,buttheydopermittargetslargecompared tothecluttertobedetected that mightotherwise belostbecause ofthelimiteddynamic rangeofthereceiving system.
An 999 I I I I I I I I I  99 8 Rayle~ah Chernoff , -  linear  Linear  envelope  detector  Median  detector  Log  envelope  detector  -  Stgnal/ median clutler (dB)  (b) Figure 13.7 Comparison of various  detectors in (a) log-normal clutter  with a mean-to-median ratio of 1  dB, 0 = 0.693 and (b) Weibull  clutter with a = 1.2 in Eq.
(13.12).
 Probability of false alarm =  10 hits integrated.Thecurve labeled  "Rayleigh linear detector" applies  to the conventional receiver with  Rayleigh clutter or noise.
The curve  labeled " ChernoK bound" provides  an upper bound to the optimum  detector for the particular clutter  model indicated.
 (Afrer ~chleher.'~.~~ courtesy  1 EEE.)  example of one such technique is the log-FTC receiver.32 This is a receiver with a logarithmic  ic~lxit-output cltaracteristic followed by a high-pass filter (one with a fast time-constant, or  FTC).
The log-FTC has the property that when the input clutter or noise is described by a  Rayleigh pdf, the outptrt clutter or noise is a constant independent of the input amplitude.
 Thus the log-FTC receiver has a constant false-alarm rate.
As with any CFAR, the false-alarm  rate is maintained constant by a sacrifice in the probability of detection.
(A further description  as to why the log-FTC receiver is CFAR when the input is Rayleigh clutter is given in  Sec.
13.8.)  RADAR CLUTTER 487 Figure13.7Comparison ofvarious detectors in(a)log-normal clutter withamean-to-median ratioof1 dB, (J=0.693and(b)Weibull clutterwithIX=1.2inEq.(13.12).
Probability offalsealarm::::: 10-6, 10hitsintegrated.
Thecurvelabeled ..Rayleigh lineardetector" applies totheconventional receiver with Rayleigh clutterornoise.Thecurve labeled..Chernoff bound"provides anupperboundtotheoptimum detector fortheparticular clutter modelindicated.
(After Scltlelter.14•Z8collrteS)' IfEE.)995 99- 98-Chernoff bound'-----' 95·- 90.c 9Rayleighu Linearv80- linearenvelope/envelope 4i l:J70deteclor 'detectora"~.
>-60 nSU0na40-'-Q 30-Binary 20inlegrolor , m=7 '-- 10· 5024 18 999 998 Rayleigh Chernoff 995.
linear bound 99-detectorlinear 98- envelope detecfor 95- Median c90 detector2 U Q)Log Qj80 l:J envelopea70- detector ~60- .a500.0a40-d:30- 20 10 5- (" 10246810121416 18 20 Signal/median clutIer(dB} (bl example ofonesuchtechnique isthelog-FTC receiver.32Thisisareceiver withalogarithmic input-output characteristic followed byahigh-pass filter(onewithafasttime-constant, or FTC).Thelog-FTC hastheproperty thatwhentheinputclutterornoiseisdescribed bya Rayleigh pdf,theoutputclutterornoiseisaconstant independent oftheinputamplitude.
Thusthelog-FTC receiverhasaconstant false-alarm rate.AswithanyCFAR,thefalse-alarm rateismaintained constant byasacrifice intheprobability ofdetection.
(Afurtherdescription astowhythelog-FTC receiver isCFARwhentheinputisRayleigh dutterisgivenin Sec.13.8.) 488 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  Sea clutter has a Rayleigh pdf when the resolution is low.
(A low-resolution radar in this  case might have a 5" beamwidth and 1-jts pulse width.") With better resolution the pdf of sea  clutter deviates from Rayleigh and the log-FTC receiver is no longer CFAR.
A variant  sometimes useful for reducing the false-alarm rate in non-Rayleigh clutter is the log-log  receiver.
This is a logarithmic receiver in which the slope of the logarithmic characteristic  progressively declines by a factor of 2 to 1 over the range from noise level to + 80 d~.~"~'  (This assumes that the normal log-FTC has a logaritl~mic characteristic from - 20 dB below  the receiver noise to + 80 dB above noise.) In the log-log receiver the higher clutter values  (tails of the distribution) are subjected to greater suppression.
 Adaptive video threshold.
Other receiver techniques than the log-FTC were discussed in  Sec.
10.7 for achieving CFAR.
One example suitable for a clutter environment is the urluprive  video threshold (AVT) which sets the threshold according to the amount of cluttkr (or noise)  in a number of range cells ahead of and behind the particillar range cell of interest.
This form  of CFAR is popular in automatic detection and track (ADT) systems since it is not strongly  dependent on the type of clutter and can provide CFAR with land and weather clutter as well  as sea clutter.
 Other methods to avoid clutter saturation.
The dynamic range ofa radar display, whether PPI  or A-scope, is far less than the range of echo-signal amplitudes that can be expected from  clutter.
It is necessary, therefore, to keep the large clutter echoes from saturating the display  and preventing the detection of wanted targets.
Echoes from the various sources of clutter  experienced by a civil-marine radar might be 80 dB greater than receiver noise, yet the receiver  might only be able to display without saturation signals that are less than about 20 to 25 dB  above noise.22 Sensitivity time control (STC), or swept gain, is widely used to reduce the  large echoes from close-in clutter.
STC is a time variation of the receiver gain.
At the end of  the transmission of the radar pulse the receiver gain is made low so that large signals from  nearby clutter are attenuated.
Echoes from nearby targets will also be attenuated; but becaitse  of the inverse fourth-power variation of signal power with range, they will usl~ally he large  enough to exceed the threshold and be detected.
The receiver gain increases with time until  maximum sensitivity is obtained at ranges beyond which clutter echoes are expected.
Ideally,  STC should make the average clutter power always equal to the noise power.
Thus its range  variation should be identical to the clutter-power range variation.
It has been suggested that  STC for a civil-marine radar have a gain proportional to R- out to a range of 8h, hw/31, after  which it is proportional to R-', where R = range, h, = radar antenna height, hw = wave  height from peak to trough, and A = radar ~avelength.~~ STC may be implemented in the IF  of the receiver, but it can also be incorporated at RF by inserting variable-attenuation micro-  wave diodes ahead of the receiver.
A particular STC characteristic can be limited by changes in  clutter due to changes in ambient conditions (such as wind speed and direction, or by anoma-  lous propagation), and by the nonuniformity of clutter with azimuth.
Clutter-CFAR  techniques that are "adaptive" do not have this limitation.
(STC is also sometimes employed  in radar not bothered by clutter to make more uniform the target echo power with range.)  Another technique for reducing saturation is instantaneotts automatic gain control (IAGC)  based on negative feedback controlling the gain of the IF amplifier.
The response time of the  IAGC is adjusted so that echo pulses from point targets pass with little attenuation, but longer  pulses such as those from extended clutter are attenuated.
That is, the automatic gain control  is made to act within the time of a few pulse widths: The IAGC acts something like a  pulse-width filter, permitting target pulses to pass and attenuating the longer pulses from  488INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS SeaclutterhasaRayleighpdfwhentheresolution islow.(Alow-resolution radarinthis casemighthavea5°beamwidth andi-JlSpulsewidth.30)Withbetterresolution thepdfofsea clutterdeviates fromRayleigh andthelog-FTC receiver isnolongerCFAR.Avariant sometimes usefulforreducing thefalse-alarm rateinnon-Rayleigh clutteristhelog-log receiver.
Thisisalogarithmic receiver inwhichtheslopeofthelogarithmic characteristic progressively declines byafactorof2toiovertherangefromnoiselevelto+80dB.30.31 (Thisassumes thatthenormallog-FTC hasalogarithmic characteristic from-20dBbelow thereceiver noiseto+80dBabovenoise.)Inthelog-logreceiverthehighercluttervalues (tailsofthedistribution) aresubjected togreatersuppression.
Adaptive videothreshold.
Otherreceiver techniques thanthelog-FTC werediscussed in Sec.10.7forachieving CFAR.Oneexample suitableforaclutterenvironment istheadaptil'e videothreshold (AVT)whichsetsthethreshold according totheamountofc1utth(ornoise) inanumberofrangecellsaheadofandbehindtheparticular rangecellofinterest.
Thisform ofCFAR ispopular inautomatic detection andtrack(ADT)systemssinceitisnotstrongly dependent onthetypeofclutterandcanprovideCFARwithlandandweatherclutteraswell asseaclutter.
Othermethods toavoidcluttersaturation.
Thedynamic rangeofaradardisplay,whether PPI orA-scope, isfarlessthantherangeofecho-signal amplitudes thatcanbeexpected from clutter.Itisnecessary, therefore, tokeepthelargeclutterechoesfromsaturating thedisplay andpreventing thedetection ofwantedtargets.Echoesfromthevarioussourcesofclutter experienced byacivil-marine radarmightbe80dBgreaterthanreceivernoise.yetthereceiver mightonlybeabletodisplaywithoutsaturation signalsthatarelessthanabout20to25dB abovenoise.22Sensitivity timecontrol(STC),orsweptgain,iswidelyusedtoreducethe largeechoesfromclose-inclutter.STCisatimevariation ofthereceiver gain.Atth~endof thetransmission oftheradarpulsethereceiver gainismadelowsothatlargesignalsfrom nearbyclutterareattenuated.
Echoesfromnearbytargetswillalsobeattenuated; butbecause oftheinversefourth-power variation ofsignalpowerwithrange,theywillusuallybelarge enoughtoexceedthethreshold andbedetected.
Thereceivergainincreases withtimeuntil maximum sensitivity isobtained atrangesbeyondwhichclutterechoesareexpected.
Ideally, STCshouldmaketheaverageclutterpoweralwaysequaltothenoisepower.Thusitsrange variation shouldbeidentical totheclutter-power rangevariation.
Ithasbeensuggested that STCforacivil-marine radarhaveagainproportional toR-3outtoarangeof8hahw/3A,after whichitisproportional toR-',whereR=range,ha=radarantenna height,hw=wave heightfrompeaktotrough,andA.=radarwavelength.34STCmaybeimplemented intheIF ofthereceiver, butitcanalsobeincorporated atRFbyinserting variable-attenuation micro­ wavediodesaheadofthereceiver.
Aparticular STCcharacteristic canbelimitedbychanges in clutterduetochanges inambient conditions (suchaswindspeedanddirection, orbyanoma­ louspropagation), andbythenonuniformity ofclutterwithazimuth.
Ctutter-CF AR techniques thatare"adaptive" donothavethislimitation.
(STCisalsosometimes employed inradarnotbothered bycluttertomakemoreuniform thetargetechopowerwithrange.) Another technique forreducing saturation isinstantaneous automatic gaincontrol(IAGC) basedonnegative feedback controlling thegainoftheIFamplifier.
Theresponse timeofthe IAGCisadjusted sothatechopulsesfrompointtargetspasswithlittleattenuation, butlonger pulsessuchasthosefromextended clutterareattenuated.
Thatis,theautomatic gaincontrol ismadetoactwithinthetimeofafewpulsewidths:TheIAGeactssomething likea pulse-width filter,permitting targetpulsestopassandattenuating thelongerpulsesfrom clutter.
Other means for attenuating long pulses from distributed clutter, yet pass the echoes  from point targets, include the Iiigli-pass filter atid various forms of pulse-width discriminators  that itihibit echo signals not of the correct pulse width.
 13.5 LAND C1,UII'EH  pJ'lle cliriter frort~ land is geticrally more of a problem than the clutter from sea, both in tlieory  i1111i ill ~)~;~cticc.
~'IIc I~;Ic~sc;I~~cI.
1'10111 I;III~ is sigtiifi~i1tlt1~ gtratcr lllari from sea except it1 tllc  vicinity of near vertical incidence.
Illerefore, over the grazing angles of usual interest.
a radar  wliicll 11i11st clctcct titrgcts over land lias a more difficult task than one which must detect  targcts over tl~c sca.
I;vcr~ tl~oi~gl~ :I sndur at sea might not be bothered by sea clutter., rie:tr~t,y  land clutter can be so large that it can enter the radar via the antenna sidelobes and degrade  performance.
At vertical incidence there is less backscatter from land than from sea, but tliis is  i~si~ally undesirable since it reduces the range of radar altimeters over land.
 Lntld clutter is difficirlt to quantify and classify.
The radar eclio from land depends on tlie  type of terrain, as described by its roughness and dielectric properties.
Desert, forests, vegeta-  tion, bare soil, ci~ltivated fields.
mountains, swamps, cities, roads, and lakes all have different  scattering characteristics.
Furtherrnore, the radar echo will depend on the moisture content of  tlie surface scatterers, snow cover, and the stage of growth of any vegetation.
Buildings, towers,  and other structures give niore intense eclio signals than forests or vegetation because of tlie  presence of flat reflecting surfaces and "corner reflectors." Bodies of water, roads, and airport  rilriways backscatter little energy but are recognizable on radar PPI displays as black areas  amid the brightness of tlie surrounding ground echoes.
A hill will appear to stand out in high  relief on a PPI.
The near side of the hill will give a large return, while the far side, which is  relatively hidden froni tlie view of tlie radar.
will give little or no return.
The radar cross  section of a farnler's ficld will differ before and after ploughing, as well as before and after  tlarvesting.
It will also depend on tlie direction of tlie radar beam relative to the direction of  tlie ploughed furrows.
The echo froni forests differs depending on the season.
By contrast.
sea  eclio is more uniform over tlie oceans of tlie world, providing the wind conditions are the  same.
Althougli kriowledge of sea clutter is far from complete, it is better understood than is  tlie kriowledge of land clutter.
 Information about the radar backscatter from land is required for several different appli-  cations, eacli of which has its own special needs.
These applications include:  C  Thc dt'tec'tiorr of'nir.crcifi or1c7r.
lcirrd, where the clutter echoes might be as much as 50 to 60 dB  greater than aircraft eclioes.
MTI or pulse-doppler radar is commonly used for tliis  application to remove the background clutter.
 The detc7ctiorr of'srirfacc targets over land, where moving vehicles or personnel can be separated  from clutter by means of MTI.
Fixed targets require high resolution for their detection.
 Alti~ncters which measure the height of aircraft or spacecraft.
Large clutter energy is desired  since the "clutter" is the target.
 The detectior~ of't~rrairt ,/?afrrres such as hills and mountains ahead of an aircraft to warn of  approaching Iligh ground (tr~r~.uiu c~t~)idatrcc) or to allow the aircraft to follow the co~~tour  of t l~e land (terrait1 .fbllo\t~i~rg).
 ilinppirrg.
or imagirrg, radars that irtilize high resolution.
Ground objects are recognized by  their shape and coritrast with surroundirigs.
 Rot~ote serrsirtq with imaging radars.
altimeters, or scatterometers to obtain specific informa-  tion about the nature of the surface characteristics.
 RADAR CLUTTER 489 clutter.Othermeansforattenuating longpulsesfromdistributed clutter,yetpasstheechoes frompointtargets,includethehigh-pass filterandvariousformsofpulse-width discriminators thatinhibitechosignalsnotofthecorrectpulsewidth.
13.5LANDCLU1TER Thcc1uttcrfromlandisgcncrally morcofaproblem thantheclutterfromsea.bothintheory andinpracticc.
Thehackscatterfromlandissignificantly greatertllanfromscaexccptinthe vicinityofnearverticalincidcnce.
Therefore.
overthegrazinganglesofusualinterest.
aradar which IIIlistdetecttargetsoverlandhasamoredifficult taskthanonewhichmustdetect targetsovcrthesea.Eventhougharadaratseamightnotbebothered byseaclutter,nearby landcluttercanbesolargethatitcanentertheradarviatheantenna sidelobes anddegrade performance.
Atverticalincidence thereislessbackscatter fromlandthanfromsea,butthisis usuallyundesirahle sinceitreduces therangeofradaraltimeters overland.
Landclutterisdifficulttoquantify andclassify.Theradarechofromlanddepends onthe typeofterrain.asdescribed byitsroughness anddielectric properties.
Desert,forests.vegeta­ tion,haresoil,cultivated fields.mountains, swamps, ·cities.roads,andlakesallhavedifferent scattering characteristics.
Furthermore, theradarechowilldependonthemoisture contentof thesurfacescalterers, snowcover,andthestageofgrowthofanyvegetation.
Buildings, towers, andotherstructures givemoreintenseechosignalsthanforestsorvegetation because ofthe presence offlatreflecting surfacesand"cornerreflectors." Bodiesofwater,roads,andairport runways backscatter littleenergybutarerecognizable onradarPPIdisplays asblackareas amidthebrightness ofthesurrounding groundechoes.Ahillwillappeartostandoutinhigh reliefonaPPI.Thenearsideofthehillwillgivealargereturn,whilethefarside,whichis relatively hiddenfromtheviewoftheradar.willgivelittleornoreturn.Theradarcross sectionofafarmer's fieldwilldifferbeforeandafterploughing, aswellasbeforeandafter harvesting.
Itwillalsodependonthedirection oftheradarbeamrelativetothedirection of theploughed furrows.
Theechofromforestsdiffersdepending ontheseason.Bycontrast.
sea echoismoreuniform overtheoceansoftheworld.providing thewindconditions arethe same.Although knowledge ofseaclutterisfarfromcomplete.
itisbetterunderstood thanis theknowledge oflandclutter.
Information abouttheradarbackscatter fromlandisrequired forseveraldifferent appli­ cations, eachofwhichhasitsownspecialneeds.Theseapplications include: (" Thedetectionofaircraft 01'£11'land,wheretheclutterechoesmightbeasmuchas50to60dB greaterthanaircraft echoes.MTIorpulse-doppler radariscommonly usedforthis application toremovethebackground clutter.
Thedetection oIslI~face targetsoverland,wheremovingvehiclesorpersonnel canbeseparated fromclutterbymeansofMTI.Fixedtargetsrequirehighresolution fortheirdetection.
Altimeters whichmeasure theheightofaircraftorspacecraft.
Largeclutterenergyisdesired sincethe"clutter" isthetarget.
Tiledetectionofterrainfeatllres suchashillsandmountains aheadofanaircrafttowarnof approaching highground(terrainol'oidonce) ortoallowtheaircrafttorollowthecontour oftheland(terrain/allowing).
Marring.
orimaging.
radarsthatutilizehigl.lresolution.
Ground objectsarerecognized by theirshapeandcontrast withsurroundings.
Remotesensingwithimaging radars,altimeters, orscatterometers toobtainspecificinforma­ tionaboutthenatureofthesurfacecharacteristics. 490 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  Examples of land clutter.
There exist many measurements of land clutter, but there has been  relatively little codified and condensed information.
References 9, 35, and 36 summarize much  of what has been published regarding land clutter.
Not only is there a lack of published data  for the various types of land clutter, but there is not always agreement among similar data  taken by different investigators.
Longg points out that "two flights over apparently the same  type of terrain may at times differ by as much as 10 dB in a'." Such variation and uncertainty  in the value of land clutter must be accounted for by conservative radar design.
 The data for land clutter is usually reported in terms of oO, the cross section per unit area,  just as for sea clutter.
However, it is sometimes given by a parameter y which equals cro/sin 4,  where 4 is the grazing angle.
For ideal rough terrain, y is approximately independent of the  angle 4, except at low grazing angles and near perpendicular incidence.
 An example of clutter a0 for several broad classes of terrain is shown in Fig.
13.8.
Thls  applies to X-band clutter.
The boundaries of the various regions are wide to indicate the wide J variation of the data within the classes of terrain.
Figure 13.9 illustrates airborne data at X and  L bands obtained by the Naval Research Lab~ratory.~' The azimuth beamwidth was 5" and  the pulse width was 0.5 1s at each frequency.
The lack of smoothness of the data IS due, in  part, to the fact that the data was not all taken at the same time.
For a particular graring angle  the two frequencies had to be obtained by reflying the aircraft along the same flight path.
 Different grazing angles also required reflying the aircraft over the same area.
Each point on  the curve is an average over 1 to 2 miles of ground track.
 The curve of Fig.
13.10 illustrates the behavior of land clutter at low graring angles.'"he  value of a0 decreases with decreasing grazing angle until, in this case, at about 3.5" the value of  a0 actually increases as the grazing angle is lowered.
This behavior is said to be due to the  stronger backscatter from vertically oriented structures (trees, buildings, crops) as the grazing  angle approaches zero.
Other reported measurements at low grazing angles of heavily wooded,  rolling hills typical of New England show o0 at these angles to be unaffected by changes in  season or weather.39  There also exists much experimental data of the a0 of crops such as corn, soybeans, milo,  alfalfa, and The radar backscatter depends not only on the type of crop, and  frequency, but also on the state of its growth, the moisture content of the soil, and the time of  day.
 There is wide variability in the clutter measurements made by different experimenters  under supposedly similar conditions.
Some of these differences are due to lack of adequate  ground-truth data, accurate system calibration, or accurate data proce~sing.~~ There is usirally  a practical limit as to how well the significant ground-truth can be measured and how accilrate  a system can be calibrated.
 The backscatter from snow-covered terrain depends on the nature of the underly~ng  surface as well as the depth and wetness of the snow.
Radar energy can propagate in snow wlth  but moderate attenuation so that the backscatter will be determined by the energy reflected  from the snow's surface as well as the energy reflected from the sukface beneath the snow Thc  amount of attenuation in propagating through the snow will also be important.
The backscat-  ter from snow-covered terrain is dependent on the wetness, or amount of liquid and solid  water in the snow, more so than the thickness of the snow.
It was found,46 for example, that  15 cm of dry powderlike snow had no effect on the measured backscatter over the frequency  range 1 to 8 GHz.
Any backscatter contribution by the snow was completely dominated by  the contribution of the underlying soil.
With 12 cm of wet snow, o0 decreased approximately 5  to 10 dB at grazing angles between 30 and 80".
At 30" grazing angle, for exarnple, the variation  of ao as a function of the water content of the snow is in the range -0.3 to -0.6 dBlO.1 glcmZ  over the frequency range from L to C bands.
Other measurements indicate that the presence of  490INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS Examples oflandclutter.Thereexistmanymeasurements oflandclutter,buttherehasbeen relatively littlecodified andcondensed information.
References 9,35,and36summarize much ofwhathasbeenpublished regarding landclutter.Notonlyistherealackofpublished data forthevarious typesoflandclutter,butthereisnotalwaysagreement amongsimilardata takenbydifferent investigators.
Long9pointsoutthat"twoflightsoverapparently thesame typeofterrainmayattimesdifferbyasmuchastodBin0"0."Suchvariation anduncertainty inthevalueoflandcluttermustbeaccounted forbyconservative radardesign.
Thedataforlandclutterisusuallyreported intermsof0"0,thecrosssectionperunitarea, justasforseaclutter.However, itissometimes givenbyaparameter ywhichequalsO"°/sintjJ, wheretjJisthegrazing angle.Foridealroughterrain, yisapproximately independent ofthe angletjJ,exceptatlowgrazing anglesandnearperpendicular incidence.
Anexample ofclutter 0"0forseveralbroadclassesofterrainisshowninFig.13.8.This appliestoX-bandclutter.Theboundaries ofthevariousregionsarewidetoindicatethewide variation ofthedatawithintheclassesofterrain.Figure13.9illustrates airbornt/data atXand Lbandsobtained bytheNavalResearch Laboratory.3? Theazimuth beamwidth was5°and thepulsewidthwas0.5J.lsateachfrequency.
Thelackofsmoothness ofthedataisdue,in part,tothefactthatthedatawasnotalltakenatthesametime.Foraparticular grazingangle thetwofrequencies hadtobeobtained byreflying theaircraftalongthesameflightpath.
Different grazinganglesalsorequired reflying theaircraftoverthesamearea.Eachpointon thecurveisanaverage over1to2milesofgroundtrack.
ThecurveofFig.13.10illustrates thebehavior oflandclutteratlowgrazingangles.
38The valueof0"0decreases withdecreasing grazingangleuntil,inthiscase,atabout3.50thevalueof 0"0actually increases asthegrazing angleislowered.
Thisbehavior issaidtobeduetothe stronger backscatter fromvertically oriented structures (trees,buildings, crops)asthegrazing angleapproaches zero.Otherreported measurements atlowgrazinganglesofheavilywooded, rollinghillstypicalofNewEngland show 0"0attheseanglestobeunaffected bychanges in seasonorweather.
39 Therealsoexistsmuchexperimental dataofthe0"0ofcropssuchascorn,soybeans, milo, alfalfa,andsorghum.48-53Theradarbackscatter depends notonlyonthetypeofcrop,and frequency, butalsoonthestateofitsgrowth,themoisture contentofthesoil,andthetimeof day.
Thereiswidevariability inthecluttermeasurements madebydifferent experimenters.
undersupposedly similarconditions.
Someofthesedifferences areduetolackofadequate ground-truth data,accurate systemcalibration, oraccurate dataprocessing.54ThereisuSllally apractical limitastohowwellthesignificant ground-truth canbemeasured andhowaccurate asystemcanbecalibrated.
Thebackscatter fromsnow-covered terraindepends onthenatureoftheunderlying surfaceaswellasthedepthandwetnessofthesnow.Radarenergycanpropagate insnowwith butmoderate attenuation sothatthebackscatter willbedetermi,ned bytheenergyreflected fromthesnow'ssurfaceaswellastheenergyreflected fromthesurfacebeneath thesnow.The amountofattenuation inpropagating through thesnowwillalsobeimportant.
Thebackscat­ terfromsnow-covered terrainisdependent onthewetness, oramount ofliquidandsolid waterinthesnow,moresothanthethickness ofthesnow.Itwasfound,4b forexample, that 15cmofdrypowderlike snowhadnoeffectonthemeasured backscatter overthefrequency range1to8GHz.Anybackscatter contribution bythesnowwascompletely dominated by thecontribution oftheunderlying soil.With12cmofwetsnow,aOdecreased approximately 5 to10dBatgrazinganglesbetween 30and800 •At30°grazingangle,forexample, thevariation ofaOasafunction ofthewatercontentofthesnowisintherange-0.3to-0.6dB/O.lgjcmZ overthefrequency rangefromLtoCbands.Othermeasurements indicate thatthepresence of HORIZONTAL POLARIZATION d  0 --  -10 - - a, = -20  b  O -30.1 ii  - 4 0 CITY  VTA CULTIVATED  -50 .- TERRAIN ASPHALT 71 CONCRETE  -60L.
.' ---- 1 - 1 L---L--L-,  0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90  GRAZING ANGLE (degrees)  VERTICAL POLARIZATION  1-1 CULTIVATED  TERRAIN -3 ASPHALT  Ell CONCRETE Figure 13.8 Boundaries of measured  radar return at X band from various  GRAZING ANGLE (degrees) land (Corrrtesy ?f I.
Katz.)  a soft, wet snowcover on vegetation tends to lower the return by as much as 6 dB.40 Measure-  ments made over snowfields near Thule, Greenland, showed the backscatter to be propor-  tional to the square of the frequency over the frequency range from UHF to X band and at  gra7irig angles from 5 to  Frequency dependence.
Figure 13.1 1 shows an example of the frequency dependence of land  clutter for a particular grazing angle." Clutter from urban areas in these measurements is  independent of frequency; rural terrain shows no frequency dependence from L to X band;  RADAR CLUTTER 491 20 HORIZONTAL POLARIZATION ~CITY EZ2Z2lCULTIVATED TERRAIN r:::::::::::::;::::::jASPHALT c=JCONCRETE10 o -10 m ~-20 o b -30 -4U -50- 8090-60 __...1._.
I'- L.
L L-_....l._----'- __ o10203040506070 GRAZING ANGLE (degrees) Figure13.8Boundaries ofmeasured radarreturnatXbandfromvarious landclutter.
35(Co/lrresyof1.Karz.)E22Z3CITYc==JCULTIVATED TERRAIN \::::::::::::;:;:::3ASPHALT c=JCONCRE TEVERTICAL POLARIZATION r 10'--__ .J--_-L-._~.L_L_----'--_----.L __ L.-_--'----_--.J 2030405060708090 GRAZING ANGLE (degrees)20 \0 0 -10 CD ~-20 0 b -30 -40 -50 -60 0 asoft.wetsnowcover onvegetation tendstolowerthereturnbyasmuchas6dB.40Measure­ mentsmadeoversnowfields nearThule,Greenland, showed thebackscatter tobepropor­ tionaltothesquareofthefrequency overthefrequency rangefromUHFtoXbandandat grazing anglesfrom5to20°:!? Frequency dependence.
Figure1111showsanexample ofthefrequency dependence ofland clutterforaparticular grazing angle.3?Clutter fromurbanareasinthesemeasurements is independent offrequency; ruralterrainshowsnofrequency dependence fromLtoXband; 492 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  N J, resident101  Arizona desert  Delaware Bay /  Lo In  9 -40 0  -50  - 60  Figure 13.9 Median values of a0 for various terrain: (a) X band, vertical polarization, (h) L band, vertical  polarization, (c) X band, horizontal polarization, (d) L band, horizontal polarization.
(From Dulry, rt - -  - -  X" "  I I I I I I Ill I 1 I 1 I III  10  0-  - m 0 -10- -  0  b  0- 9  0 -20 *.
.- C ..
 OI a  c -30- 0 -  U S  Lo $ -40  U  - 50  - 60 1" 3" 5" 10" 30" 50" 90"  Grazing angle  (a  I I I I I Ill I I I I Ill'  -  -  - -  Arizona mountainous  -  Arizona desert  N.
J marshland  Delaware Bay  - 1  .-  L ""  I I I I I I Ill 1 I I I Ill  lo 3" 5" 10" 30" 60" 90"  Grazing ongle  (b)  492INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS J NJrural 10° Grazingangle (b)Arizonadesert ,",-_~~::::;:;::;::::::::;:1""""" N.J.marshland Delaware Bay10° Grazingangle (a)Delaware Bay PhoenixNJ.residential Arizona mountainousPhoeniX~~~~~:::~;;~~~§~~~;;;=i~:13 Arizonadesert 0 AmonamountainOus K-_--<J NJ.marshland10 0 CD'0-10 °b ci <1J0-20 ·c :0 Ii; 0- c-30a ~ 1I1 1I1 1I1e-40u -50 -60 1° 10 0 CD-10-:g °b ci ~-20- 0 E :0 Q; 0- c-30a "5 <1J 1I1 1I1 1I1-40- a U -50- -60 1° Figure13.9Median valuesof(10forvariousterrain:(a)Xband,verticalpolarization, (h)Lband,vertical polarization, (c)Xband,horizontal polarization, (d)Lband,horizontal polarization.
(FromDuley,et al.37) RADAR CLUlTER 493  -50  -60 - -.
J 1- 1- i-l_l--A  1" 3" 5" 10" 30" 60" 90" , , , , , ,x,+j  Grozlng angle  (c) 10  0 -  3  g -10  0-  0) ..
0  -20  3  & a  & -30 - - U  %  m g --.to ..
V ' --I-T ---1- I I  XPhoenix  Phoenix  tx---- Desert  Arizona mountoin~us  N J morshbnd  I)elowor~ noy +,A  L LHH  -60 ----Lrl I I I I I I 1 (11  1" 3" 5" 10" 30" 60" 90.
 Grazing angle  (dl 0 Phoenix X.
:  = -20 c N J rural  ti, /x-5  Arizona mountainous x/'  Q  Arizona desert x- x- 2 -30 - 5 m C N J marshland x /x- / I  -40 2 U  RADAR CLUTIER 493 10 a iii"0 °-10b c:i QJ 0 c:-20 :J di0.
<:-30Q U QJ '" '"'"._tj() !:u -50NJresidential1\,_~:PRhC;.
n,ix ..x--\~~ ..-<*x~;-:.,.x uro Phoeni~ x ---x~Marsh '\ x .r".'----.,l(~ MIs NJruralx ,,~-:::::::=,x-;::.:;x~xDeser' ArizonadeserP----- ----=:-:~,," / Arizonamountainous ..~- --- NJmarshland .../X _______ x'" Delaware 8ay~x~ -60----..------.-,.--..-.L"-...':'_-L.--'_.L-L.LI .-"__--'__.L---l_.L--'--'--LJ,0 3° SO 10° 30° 60°90° Grazingangle (e) a o QJo -=-20<::J di0.
Q-30 11 '"'"'"-40eu -50x NJresidential/~x x~ _x-----x-x Phoenixx "x"-><"x____ x x_xx-x __ ~-.X NJrural~ x / Arizona mountainous x X <""';:.(/x x~-- --=xy.:;;>,.----x Arizona desertx---x___ / NJmarshlandx~/x x_x Delaware Bayx-----.
__-----'- l~~-l:.--L--'---l-JL.J..-=------'----L__=.__--'--~__::_'_:__:_'_--L.~ 3° 5° 10030° 60090· Grazing angle (d) 494 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  Grazing angle  Figure 13.10 Cross-section per unit area of ci~ltivated terrain illustrating th~: incrsast: or n" witti dccrrasing  grazing angle for small values of grazing angle.
A' band, l~orizontal polari~ation.
(Frott~ Kul: utul  Sprt~lrr,~~~oltrres~ J.
Rrs.
Nar.
Bur.
Stds.)  mountainous terrain also shows no frequency dependence from L to ,Y band but is con-  siderably lower at UHF; rough hills, desert, and cultivated farmland show a linear depen-  dence with frequency; and the backscatter from marsh varies as the power of frequency.
Tlie  frequency dependence indicated by the data of Ref.
37 is independent of the polarization and  of the angle of incidence (at least over the range from 8 to 30").
 Measurements of crops4' and dry trees4' indicate that above .Y band, rrO varies approxi-  itlately linear with frequency, even up to 3.2-mm wavelength.
The frequency cicpendence for  concrete, asphalt, and cinder and gravel roads varies approximately as the square of the  freq~ency.~'  Effect of resolution.
The use of a', the cross section per unit area, to describe the radar  scattering from clutter, implies that the clutter is uniform and independent of the radar-  resolution-cell area.
In reality, land clutter is not uniform.
Radars with high resolution might  actually be capable of better performance than predicted on the basis of a Rayleigh clt~iter  model and a a' independent of radar resolution.
A radar with a narrow pulse width or narrow  beamwidth not only sees less land clutter than a radar with larger pulse width or beam-  width, but it can see targets in those areas where clutter is less than the average, if these areas  can be resolved.
In practice, there are regions of land where the clutter might be considerably  greater than the average and regions where it is considerably less than average.
If tlie resoltl-  tion of the radar is great enough to resolve the areas of lower clutter from thc areas of greater  cli~tter, targets within the clear areas can often be detected and tracked cvcn tliot~gl~ it nligllt t~c  predicted on the basis of the average clutter ao that it would not be possible.
 The ability of some radars to resolve the strong clutter regions into discrete areas, be-  tween which targets may be detected, is called irltc.rcl~lrtc~r 111sihiliry.
It is dil'fici~lt to esti~t~l~st~ a  quantitative measure of this effect; but it has been suggestedJ2 that (he irnprovernent in target  detectability can be approximated by the ratio of the average clutter level to the median  clutter, which can be as much as 20 dB for a medium-resolution radar (for example,hJ one with  a 2 11s pulse width and a 1.5" beamwidth).
Thus a medium resolution radar might have a  20 dB advantage over low-resolution radars in the detection of targets in land clutter.
The  I----+----t-----··-- -_.'--.-.----.494INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS 10....------,----r--,.----,---,----,--.......,---r--, III~0f---+---+--+-- Q b g-10- I__~ (; ~ '§-20/' Qj /~I ~-30V1 : Il3-40 ---+----+---+----+--t----~t---f------· --.--.- U I -50L-_.L-_-L-_--'-_----.l..I __L....---_-'---_-=-'":-_---:-:_---:'o102030405060708090 Grazingangle.J Figure13.10Cross-section perunitareaofcultivated terrainillustrating theincrease ofaOwithdecreasing grazing angleforsmallvaluesofgrazing angle.Xband,horil.Ontal polariLation.
(fromKul:UIIJ Spetller,3B COllrtesy J.Res.Nat.Bllr.Stds.) mountainous terrainalsoshowsnofrequency dependence fromLtoXhandhutiscon­ siderably loweratUHF;roughhills,desert,andcultivated farmland showalineardepen­ dencewithfrequency; andthebackscatter frommarshvariesasthe~poweroffrequency.
The frequency dependence indicated bythedataofRef.37isindependent ofthepolarization and oftheangleofincidence (atleastovertherangefrom8to30°).
Measurements ofcrops40anddrytrees41indicate thataboveXband,aOvariesapproxi­ matelylinearwithfrequency, evenupto3.2-mm wavelength.
Thefrequency dependence for concrete, asphalt, andcinderandgravelroadsvariesapproximately asthesquareofthe frequency.4o Effectofresolution.
Theuseofan,thecrosssection perunitarea,todescribe theradar scattering fromclutter, impliesthattheclutterisuniform andindependent oftheradar­ resolution-cell area.Inreality,landclutterisnotuniform.
Radarswithhighresolution might actually becapable ofbetterperformance thanpredicted onthebasisofa'Rayleigh clulter modelandaaOindependent ofradarresolution.
Aradarwithanarrowpulsewidthornarrow beamwidth not onlyseeslesslandclutterthanaradarwithlargerpulsewidthorbeam­ width,butitcanseetargetsinthoseareaswhereclutterislessthantheaverage, iftheseareas canberesolved.
Inpractice, thereareregionsoflandwherethecluttermightbeconsiderably greaterthantheaverage andregionswhereitisconsiderably lessthanaverage.Iftheresolu­ tionoftheradarisgreatenoughtoresolvetheareasoflowerclutterfromtheareasofgreata ciUlla,targetswithintheclearareascanoftenbedetected andtrackedcvcnthoughitmightbe predicted onthebasisoftheaverage clutter aOthatitwouldnotbepossible.
Theabilityofsomeradarstoresolvethestrongclutterregionsintodiscrete areas,be­ twecnwhichtargetsmaybcdetected, iscalledimerclllttt'l' uisihility.
Itisdifficult toestablish a quantitative measure ofthiseffect;butithasbeensuggested~2 thattheimprovement intarget detectability canbeapproximated bytheratiooftheaverage clutterleveltothemedian clutter,whichcanbeasmuchas20dBforamedium-resolution radar(forexample,6~ onewith a 2I~Spulsewidthanda1.5°beamwidth).
Thusamedium resolution radarmighthavea 20dBadvantage overlow-resolution radarsinthedetection oftargetsinlandclutter.The RADAR CLUTTER 4%  Downtown phoenix  Highest med~on value  SS = 1000  Phoerr~x SS > 25.000  N J residenlial  Ar~zona mountainous  T~rlzono culllvated farmland N J morshland I  - 50 -  10 I I I -60% I I I I I  UHF 1000 L C X 10,000  Frequency (MHz)  0  UJ 0 -10-  0 b  6 w  -601 I I I I I I UHF 1000 L C X 10,000  Frequency,(MHz)  (b) I I -  Downtown phoen~x  Hlqhest med~on volue  - SS = 1000  Phoenix, SS .25,000  N J residential 8 I  6 -20 - -  C 3  L w 0  c 30 0 - +- U  w VI  VI  -40 u  -50  Figure 13.1 1 Median valries of no as a function of frequency.
Grazing angle = 8".
(a) Vertical polarization.
 (I,) Ilori7ontal polari7alion.
Two curves are sl~own for Phoenix: one is for a sample size of 1000 and  corresponds to the downtown area.
tlie other is for a sample size of 25.000 which represents a larger area  and includes a snlaller density of point targets tlian the smaller sample.
(From Daley, rt ~1.~') -  N J rural x  -.
Arizona h~lls, low rough x  Arizona mounloinous x  Arizona desert x  - Arizona cultivated ,  farmland ' N J rnorshlondx  -- Delowore Boy x  RADAR CLUTIER 495 10 0-Downlown phoenix Highestmedianvalue iD55'"1000 .:g-10-°b ei Phoen,x5S>25,000 e? ~(J ~-20-c:> '-IV0- c-30 IMis,lowrough 0+-uArizonamountainous dlen enDelaware Boy en ~-40- ArizonodeserIu NJmarshland -50 -60UHF 1000L C X10,000 Frequency (MHz) (0) Downtown phoenix x Highestmedianvaluex _____ S5=1000 x --""""""'x-- /-x~x x--- ~x- Phoenix,55>25,000 ~ x x NJresidential x X X N J,"""~I i~1 Arizonahllls,low roughx~----=:::~~x Artzonomountainousx~x _____ Artzonadesert X Arlzonacul'iva'edx~ / x x farmlond/ ~ fN.Jmarshland x __________ Delaware Bayx10 a- iD.:g-10 °b ei ~ 0-20- c:> '-<1la.
c-30Q U <1l '"enen-40-~u -50-- -60UHF 1000L Frequency.
(MHz) (b)c X10,000 Fi~ure13.11Medi<lnvaluesofaOasafunction offrequency.
Grazing angle=8°.(a)Verticalpolarization.
(h)horizontal polarilation.
TwocurvesareshownforPhoenix: oneisforasamplesizeof1000and corresponds tothedowntown area.theotherisforasamplesizeof25.000whichrepresents alargerarea andincludes asm<lllerdensityofpointtargetsthanthesmallersample.(FromDaley.etal.37) 4% INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  effectiveness of interclutter visibility has been exploited in MTI radar and in non-MTI radar  with log-FTC receiver characteristics.
 As an example of the effects of high resolution on land clutter, measurements have been  reported with a horizontally polarized C-band radar having a 15-11s pulse width (3 m resolu-  tion) and a 1.5" beam~idth.~~ A rural region in England consisting of woods, fields, buildings,  villages, small towns, and structures such as pylons, was examined at ranges from 7 to 11 km.
 It was found that 65 percent of the clutter exceeded 0.1 mZ, 18 percent exceeded 1 m2, and less  than 1 percent exceeded 10 m2.
The clutter with radar cross sections greater than 10 mZ was  limited to 6 m in length and was found to be associated with man-made objects such as  electricity pylons and buildings.
The separations between clutter larger than 10 m2 was be-  tween 135 and 675 m.
For clutter which was greater than 0.1 m2, the patch sizes varied from  2 m to well over 300 m in length.
The majority of these clutter-patch separations were less  than 30 m but a few exceeded 110 m.
For this terrain, it was concluded that$ a minimum  clutter patch separation of 75 m (0.5 ps) were necessary for target tracking, a 10 m2 target  could be tracked 99 percent of the time, but a 1 m2 target could be tracked only 55 percent of  the time.
 In the above example of C-band data, the echoes from man-made objects were "point"  targets of radar cross sections greater than 10 mZ.
At the lower microwave frequencies, the  echoes from the strong point-scatterers can be several orders of magnitude greater.
They are  often so large that they might not be completely removed by MTI.
Thus it is not uncommon  for MTI radar to have at its output many fixed point-scatterers that must be recognized so as  not to be confused with desired targets.
 Probability density function for land clutter.
Much of the discussion regarding t he statistics of  sea clutter applies as well to land clutter, except that the physical mechanisms may be difTerent.
 The statistical variation of crO from homogeneous terrain such as deserts and some types of  farmland can sometimes be described by the gaussian probability density function (pdf), so  that the envelope of the radar receiver output is given by the Rayleigh pdf (Eq.
13.1O).~~Some  urban areas, rural areas with buildings and silos, and mountainous terrain approximate the  log-normal pdf (Eq.
13.11).44.45 In general, neither the Rayleigh nor the log-normal pdf's  accurately describe the statistics of real clutter, which usually lies between the two.
The  Weibull pdf (Eq.
13.12), which is intermediate between the Rayleigh and the log normal, has  been suggested as applicable to land clutter.
Table 13.2 lists examples of the Weibull parameter  n (in Eq.
13.12) for several types of clutter and sea state.
 Land clutter models.
The wide variety and complexity of terrain and what grows or is built  upon it, makes it difficult to formulate a satisfactory theoretical model to describe tlie back-  scatter from land.
Adding to the difficulty are the effects of weather, time of day, and scason, as  l'able 13.2 Weibull clutter parameters"  -- - - .
---.
- --.
 Beamwidth Pulse wrdth Grar~ng Wclbull  ?'crra~n/Sea state Frequency (deg) (115) angle pal arllctcr  Rocky rnountalns S 1.5 2 .
...
..
0 52  Wooded hills .L 1.7 3 -05 0 63  Forest X 1.4 0 17 0 7 051 053  Cult~vated land X 14 0 17 0 7-5 0 061 20  Sea state 1 X 0 5 0 02 3 7 1 45  Sea state 3 K , 5 0 1 I0300 116 178 --  496INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS effectiveness ofinterclutter visibility hasbeenexploited inMTIradarandinnon-MTI radar withlog-FTC receiver characteristics.
Asanexample oftheeffectsofhighresolution onlandclutter,measurements havebeen reported withahorizontally polarized C-bandradarhavinga15-nspulsewidth(3mresolu­ tion)anda1.5°beamwidth.43AruralregioninEngland consisting ofwoods,fields,buildings, villages, smalltowns,andstructures suchaspylons,wasexamined atrangesfrom7to11km.
Itwasfoundthat65percentoftheclutterexceeded O.tm2,18percentexceeded 1m2,andless than1percentexceeded 10m2•Theclutterwithradarcrosssections greaterthan10m2was limitedto6 minlengthandwasfoundtobeassociated withman-made objectssuchas electricity pylonsandbuildings.
Theseparations between clutterlargerthan10m2wasbe­ tween135and675m.Forclutterwhichwasgreaterthan0.1m2,thepatchsizesvariedfrom 2 mtowellover300minlength.Themajority oftheseclutter-patch separations wereJess than30mbutafewexceeded 110m.Forthisterrain,itwasconcluded thatjfaminimum clutterpatchseparation of75m(0.5j.Js)werenecessary fortargettracking, a10m2target couldbetracked99percentofthetime,buta 1m2targetcouldbetrackedonlySSpercentof thetime.
Intheaboveexample ofC-banddata,theeGhoesfromman-made objectswere"point" targetsofradarcrosssections greaterthan10m2.Atthelowermicrowave frequencies, the echoesfromthestrongpoint-scatterers canbeseveralordersofmagnitude greater.Theyare oftensolargethattheymightnotbecompletely removed byMTI.Thusitisnotuncommon forMTIradartohaveatitsoutputmanyfixedpoint-scatterers thatmustberecognized soas nottobeconfused withdesiredtargets.
Probability densityfunction forlandclutter.Muchofthediscussion regarding thestatistics of seaclutterappliesaswelltolandclutter,exceptthatthephysical mechanisms maybedifferent.
Thestatistical variation ofaOfromhomogeneous terrainsuchasdesertsandsometypesof farmland cansometimes bedescribed bythegaussian probability densityfunction (pdf),so thattheenvelope oftheradarreceiveroutputisgivenbytheRayleigh pdf(Eq.IllO).H Some urbanareas,ruralareaswithbuildings andsilos,andmountainous terrainapproximate the log-normal pdf(Eq.13.11).44.45Ingeneral, neithertheRayleigh northelog-normal pdf's accurately describe thestatistics ofrealclutter,whichusually liesbetween thetwo.The Weibullpdf(Eq.13.12),whichisintermediate between theRayleigh andthelognormal, has beensuggested asapplicable tolandclutter.Table13.2listsexamples oftheWeibull parameter ex(inEq.13.12)forseveraltypesofclutterandseastate.
Landcluttermodels.
Thewidevarietyandcomplexity ofterrainandwhatgrowsorisbuilt uponit,makesitdifficult toformulate asatisfactory theoretical modeltodescribe theback­ scatterfromland.Addingtothedifficulty aretheeffectsofweather, timeofday,andseason,as Table13.2Weibullclutterparameters 14---------------c------- -.----~---.- ..----.---------- ..
Terrain/Sea state Frequency Rockymountains S Wooded hills J..
Forest X Cultivated land X Seastate1 X Seastate3 K"Beamwidth (deg) 1.5 1.7 1.4 1.4 0.5 5Pulsewidth Grazing Weioull (JIS) angle paralllctn ~--~~_._--_ ..
2 .........
0.52 3 ~0.5 0.63 0.17 0.7 0.51053 0.17 0.7-5.0 06120 0.02 4.7 145 01 1.030.0 I161.7X._---- RADAR CLUTTER 497  well as the fact that radar waves can penetrate the surface and can be scattered from discon-  tinuities underneath the surface.
 Land clutter has been modeled as a Lambert surface with a0 varying as sin2 4, where  4 = grazing angless; as assemblies of spheres, hemispheres, hemi~ylinders~~~~~; as specular  reflection from small flat-plate segments, or facets, which backscatter radar energy only when  the facets are oriented perpendicular to the radar line of sights7; as a slightly rough surface  (similar to the model used to describe sea clutter) to describe scattering from concrete and  asphaltq0; as an application of the Kirchhoff-Huygens principle which makes the assumption  that the current flowing at each point in a locally curved surface is the same as would flow in  the surface if it were flat and oriented tangent to the actual surfaces8; and as a model consist-  ing of long, thin, lossy cylinders randomly distributed to describe certain types of vegetation  such as grass, weeds, and flags.40 Norle of these have been too successful as a general model;  however, they do provide some guidance for the understanding of specific land clutter.35  13.6 1)ETECTION OF TARGETS IN LAND CLUTTER  Many of the techniques discussed in Sec.
13.4 for the detection of targets in sea clutter have  application for land clutter as well.
MTI and high resolution are two important examples.
 High-resolution results in a probability density function that is non-Rayleigh for both land  and sea clutter, but the spatial distribution of land clutter provides interclutter visibility that  permits the detection of targets that lie outside the separated clutter patches of large a'.
The  non-Rayieigh pdf, however, limits !he utility of the log-FTC receiver and frequency agility in  land clutter.
 There are two clutter reduction techniques, peculiar to land clutter, which will be men-  tioned briefly in this section.
These are the clutter fence and the Kalmus clutter filter.
 Kalmus clutter filter.s9 This is a technique for extracting moving targets, such as a walking  person or a slowly moving vehicle, from land clutter whose doppler-frequency spectrum masks  that of the moving target.
A moving target will produce a doppler-frequency shift that is either  at a lower or a higher frequency than the transmitted signal.
Vegetation or trees will have a  back-and-forth motion due to the wind; hence, the doppler spectrum from such clutter will be  distributed on both sides of the transmitted frequency, especially if observed over a sufficieiit  period of tiye.
By splitting the received spectrum into two halves about the transmitted carrier  and subtracting the lower part from the upper part, the symmetrical clutter spectrum will  cancel and the asymmetrical target spectrum will not.
This method of suppressing the clutter  relative to the target has been called the Kalmus clutter jilter.
The separation of the receding  doppler signals from the approaching doppler signals may be accomplished with a technique  similar to that shown in Fig.
3.8.
Quantitative measurements of the target-to-clutter enhance-  ment of this technique are not known, but it has been saids9 that "small targets moving in one  direction could be easily detected in the presence of clutter signals exceeding the target return  by many orders of magnitude." The effectiveness of this technique is limited by the degree of  symmetry of the clutter spectrum, the need for a sufficient averaging time, and by the assump-  tion that the clutter fluctuations are large compared to other factors that might affect the  symmetry of the receiver spectrum.
 Clutter fence.
Reflections from nearby mountains and other large clutter can sometimes be of  such a tnagnitude that it is not practical to completely suppress their undesirable effects by  eitlier MI'I or range gating.
One tecl~tlique for reducing the magnitude of such large clutter-  RADAR CLUTTER 497 wellasthefactthatradarwavescanpenetrate thesurfaceandcanbescattered fromdiscon­ tinuities underneath thesurface.
Landclutterhasbeenmodeled asaLambert surfacewith(10varying assin2cjJ,where cjJ=grazing angle55;asassemblies ofspheres, hemispheres, hemicylinders55,56;asspecular renection fromsmallnat-plate segments, orfacets,whichbackscatter radarenergyonlywhen thefacetsareoriented perpendicular totheradarlineofsight57;asaslightly roughsurface (similar tothemodelusedtodescribe seaclutter)todescribe scattering fromconcrete and asphalt 40;asanapplication oftheKirchhoff· Huygens principle whichmakestheassumption thatthecurrent flowingateachpointinalocallycurvedsurfaceisthesameaswouldflowin thesurfaceifitwerenatandoriented tangenttotheactualsurface58;andasamodelconsist­ ingoflong,thin,lossycylinders randomly distributed todescribe certaintypesofvegetation suchasgrass,weeds,andnags.40Noneofthesehavebeentoosuccessful asageneralmodel; however, theydoprovidesomeguidance fortheunderstanding ofspecificlandclutter.
35 13.6DETECTION OFTARGETS INLANDCLUTIER Manyofthetechniques discussed inSec.13.4forthedetection oftargetsinseaclutterhave application forlandclutteraswell.MTIandhighresolution aretwoimportant examples.
High-resolution resultsinaprobability density function thatisnon-Rayleigh forbothland andseaclutter,butthespatialdistribution oflandclutterprovides interclutter visibility that permits thedetection oftargetsthatlieoutsidetheseparated clutterpatchesoflarge(J0.The non-Rayleigh pdf,however, limitstheutilityofthelog-FTC receiverandfrequency agilityin landclutter.
Therearetwoclutterreduction techniques, peculiar tolandclutter,whichwillbemen­ tionedbrieflyinthissection.
ThesearetheclutterfenceandtheKalmus clutterfilter.
Kalmus clutterfilter.59Thisisatechnique forextracting moving targets,suchasawalking personoraslowlymovingvehicle,fromlandclutterwhosedoppler-frequency spectrum masks thatofthemoving target.Amovingtargetwillproduce adoppler-frequency shiftthatiseither atalowerorahigherfrequency thanthetransmitted signal.Vegetation ortreeswillhavea back-and-forth motionduetothewind;hence,thedoppler spectrum fromsuchclutterwillbe distributed onbothsidesofthetransmitted frequency, especially ifobserved overasufficielit periodoftirpe.Bysplitting thereceived spectrum intotwohalvesaboutthetransmitted carrier andsubtracting thelowerpartfromtheupperpart,thesymmetrical clutterspectrum will cancelandtheasymmetrical targetspectrum willnot.Thismethodofsuppressing theclutter relativetothetargethasbeencalledtheKalmusclutterfilter.Theseparation ofthereceding doppler signalsfromtheapproaching doppler signalsmaybeaccomplished withatechnique similartothatshowninFig.3.8.Quantitative measurements ofthetarget-to-clutter enhance­ mentofthistechnique arenotknown,butithasbeensaid59that"smalltargetsmovinginone direction couldbeeasilydetected inthepresence ofcluttersignalsexceeding thetargetreturn bymanyordersofmagnitude." Theeffectiveness ofthistechnique islimitedbythedegreeof symmetry oftheclutterspectrum, theneedforasufficient averaging time,andbytheassump­ tionthattheclutterfluctuations arelargecompared tootherfactorsthatmightaffectthe symmetry ofthereceiver spectrum.
Clutterfence.Reflections fromnearbymountains andotherlargecluttercansometimes beof suchamagnitude thatitisnotpractical tocompletely suppress theirundesirable effectsby eithcrMTIorrangegating.Onetechnique forreducing themagnitude ofsuchlargecluttcr 498 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  seen by a fixed-site radar is to erect an electromagnetically opaque fence around the radar (or  simply between the radar and the clutter source) to prevent the radar from viewing the clutter  directly.
The two-way isolation provided by a typical fence with a straight edge might be about  40 dB, where the isolation is given by the ratio of the clutter signal in the absence of a fence to  that in the presence of the fence.
The isolation is limited by the diffraction of the electromag-  netic energy behind the fence.
Greater isolation than that provided by a straight-edged fence  can be had by incorporating two continuous slots near to, and parallel with, the upper edge of  the fence to cancel a portion of the energy diffracted by the fence.
The double-slot fence can  increase the two-way isolation by 20 dB or more.62  A fence can suppress the clutter seen by the radar, hut it produces other effects not always  desirable.
For example, it will limit the accuracy of elevation-angle measurement because of  the blockage of the fence and the error caused by the energy diffracted by the fence.
Energy  diffracted by the fence also interferes with the direct path from the radar to cadse multipath  lobing of the radiation pattern in the angular region just above the fence.
Radar energy  backscattered from the fence can sometimes be large enough to damage the receiver front-end  In one design, the fence was tilted 15" away from the radar to prevent this from happen~n~.~'  Fences also can serve to prevent high power densities from existing in areas where per-  sonnel might be l~cated.~' A fence can also suppress the ground-reflected multipath signal that  causes radiation-pattern lobing and elevation-angle errors, but the design of fences for this  purpose is different from the design of a clutter-suppression fen~e.~'.~~  13.7 EFFECTS OF WEATHER ON RADAR  On the first page of the first chapter it was stated that radar could see through weather effects  such as fog, rain, or snow.
This is not strictly true in all cases and must be qualified, as the  performance of some radars can be stongly affected by the presence of meteorological particles  (hydrometeors).
In general, radars at the lower frequencies are not bothered by meteorological  or weather effects, but at the higher frequencies, weather echoes may be quite strong and mask  the desired target signals just as any other unwanted clutter signal.
 Whether the radar detection of meteorological particles such as rain, snow, or hail is a  blessing or a curse depends upon one's point of view.
Weather echoes are a nuisance to the  radar operator whose job is to detect aircraft or ship targets.
Echoes from a storm, for  example, might mask or confuse the echoes from targets located at the same range and  azimuth.
On the other hand, radar return from rain, snow, or hail is of considerable impor-  tance in meteorological research and weather prediction.
Radar may be itsed to give an up-to-  date pattern of precipitation in the area around the radar.
It is a simple and inexpensive gauge  for measuring the precipitation over relatively large expanses.
As a rain gauge it is quite useful  to the hydrologist in determining the amount of water falling into a watershed during a given  period of time.
Radar has been used extensively for the study of thunderstorms, squall lines,  tornadoes, hurricanes, and in cloud-physics research.
Not only is radar useful as a means of  studying the basic properties of these phenomena, but it may also be used for gathering the  information needed for predicting the course of the weather.
Hurricane tracking and tornado  warning are examples of applications in which radar has proved its worth in the saving of life  and property.
Another important application of radar designed for the detection of weather  echoes is in airborne weather-avoidance radars, whose function is to indicate to the aircraft  pilot the dangerous storm areas to be avoided.
 498INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS seenbyafixed-site radaristoerectan~Iectromagnetically opaquefencearoundtheradar(or simplybetween theradarandthecluttersource)topreventtheradarfromviewingtheclutter directly.Thetwo-way isolation provided byatypicalfencewithastraightedgemightbeabout 40dB,wheretheisolation isgivenbytheratioofthecluttersignalintheabsenceofafenceto thatinthepresence ofthefence.Theisolation islimitedbythediffraction oftheelectromag­ neticenergybehindthefence.Greater isolation thanthatprovided byastraight-edged fence canbehadbyincorporating twocontinuous slotsnearto,andparallelwith,theupperedgeof thefencetocancelaportionoftheenergydiffracted bythefence.Thedouble-slot fencecan increase thetwo-way isolation by20dBormore.62 Afencecansuppress theclutterseenbytheradar,butitproduces othereffectsnotalways desirable.
Forexample, itwilllimittheaccuracy ofelevation-angle measurement because of theblockage ofthefenceandtheerrorcausedbytheenergydiffracted bythefence.Energy diffracted bythefencealsointerferes withthedirectpathfromtheradartocadsemuhipath lobingoftheradiation patternintheangular regionjustabovethefence.Radarenergy hackscattered fromthefencecansometimes belargeenoughtodamage thereceiverfront-end.
Inonedesign,thefencewastilted15°awayfromtheradartopreventthisfromhappening.60 Fencesalsocanservetopreventhighpowerdensities fromexisting inareaswhereper­ sonnelmightbelocated.61Afencecanalsosuppress theground-reflected multipath signalthat causesradiation-pattern lobingandelevation-angle errors,butthedesignoffencesforthis purpose isdifferent fromthedesignofaclutter-suppression fence.61.63 13.7EFFECTS OFWEATHER ONRADAR Onthefirstpageofthefirstchapteritwasstatedthatradarcouldseethrough weathereffects suchasfog,rain,orsnow.Thisisnotstrictlytrueinallcasesandmustbequalified, asthe performance ofsomeradarscanbestonglyaffectedbythepresence ofmeteorological particles (hydrometeors).
Ingeneral,radarsatthelowerfrequencies arenotbothered bymeteorological orweathereffects,butatthehigherfrequencies, weatherechoesmaybequitestrongandmask thedesiredtargetsignalsjustasanyotherunwanted cluttersignal.
Whether theradardetection ofmeteorological particles suchasrain,snow,orhailisa blessingoracursedepends uponone'spointofview.Weather echoesareanuisance tothe radaroperator whosejobistodetectaircraftorshiptargets.
Echoesfromastorm,for example, mightmaskorconfuse theechoesfromtargetslocatedatthesamerangeand azimuth.
Ontheotherhand,radarreturnfromrain,snow,orhailisofconsiderable impor­ tanceinmeteorological research andweatherprediction.
Radarmaybeusedtogiveanup-to­ datepatternofprecipitation intheareaaroundtheradar.Itisasimpleandinexpensive gauge formeasuring theprecipitation overrelatively large expanses.
Asaraingaugeitisquiteuseful tothehydrologist indetermining theamountofwaterfallingintoawatershed duringagiven periodoftime.Radarhasbeenusedextensively forthestudyofthunderstorms, squalllines, tornadoes, hurricanes, andincloud-physics research.
Notonlyisradarusefulasameansof studying thebasicproperties ofthesephenomena, butitmayalsobeusedforgathering the information neededforpredicting thecourseoftheweather.
Hurricane tracking andtornado warning areexamples ofapplications inwhichradarhasproveditsworthinthesavingoflife andproperty.
Another important application ofradardesigned forthedetection ofweather echoesisinairborne weather-avoidance radars,whosefunction istoindicate totheaircraft pilotthedangerous stormareastobeavoided./'. RADAR CLUTTER 499  Radar equation for meteorological echoes.69 " The simple radar equation is  The symbols were defined in Sec.
1.2.
In extending the radar equation to meteorological targets.
 it isassumed that rain, snow.
hail.
or other hydrorneteors may be represented as a large number  of indeperident scatterers of cross section 0, located within the radar resolution cell.
Let ai  denote the average total backscatter cross section of tlie particles per unit of volume.
Tlie  iridicated summation of ni is carried out over the unit volume.
Tlie radar cross section may he  expressed as n = t', oi, where Vm is the volurne of the radar resolution cell.
The volume V',  occupied by a radar beam of vertical beamwidth 4,, horizontal beamwidth O,, and a pulse  of duration r is approxirnately  wtiere c.
= velocity ofpropagatioti.
In the radar-~i~eteorology literature, the radar pulse-extent II  (in units of length) is often used instead of cr in this equation.
The factor n/4 is included to  :1ccourit for tile elliptical shape of tlie beam area.
111 some instances this factor is omitted for  convenience; however, radar meteorologists almost always include it since they are concerned  with accurate measurement of rainfall rate using the radar equation.
In the interest of even  further accuracy, a correction is usually made to Eq.
(13.15) to account for the fact that the  effective volume of uniform rain illuminated by the two-way radar antenna pattern is less than  that indicated when the half-power beamwidths are used to define the volume.
Assuming a  gaussiari-shaped antenna pattern, the volume given by Eq.
(13.15) must be reduced by a factor  of 2 In 2 to describe the equivalent volume that accounts for tlie echo power received by tlre  two-way antenna pattern from distributed ~lutter.'~ Thus the radar equation of Eq.
(13.14)  call be written  In the above.
the relationship G = n2/tIRc$R for a gaussian beam~hape~~ was substituted.
The  bar over I', denotes that the rcccived power is averaged over many independent radar sweeps  to smooth tk signal fluctuations.
This equation assumes that the volume of the antenna  resolutiori cell is completely filled wit11 uniform precipitation.
If not, a correction must be  lr~ade by iritroducit~g a dinietisionlcss beam-fillil~g factor IC/ wliic11 is the fraction of the cross-  sectional area of the beam intercepted by the region of scattering particles.
It is difficult to  estitnate this correction.
The resolution cell is not likely to be completely filled at long range or  when the beam is viewing tlie edge of a precipitation cell.
If the " bright band" (to be described  later) is within the radar resolution cell, the precipitation also will not be uniform.
 When the radar wavelength is large compared with the circumference of a scattering  particle of diameter I) (Rayleigii scattering region), the radar cross section is  where I K I* = (c - I)/(( + 2), and c = dielectric constant of the scattering particles.
The value  of I K l2 for water varies with temperature and wavelength.
At 10°C and 10 cm wavelength, it is  RADAR CLUTTER 499 Radarequation formeteorological echoes.6971Thesimpleradarequation is p,G2J..2(ip - -.._------ r-(4n)JR4(13.14) Thesymbols weredefinedinSec.1.2.Inextending theradarequation tometeorological targets.
itisassumed thatrain.snow.hail.orotherhydrometeors mayberepresented asalargenumber ofindependent scatterers ofcrosssection (i/locatedwithintheradarresolution cell.LetL(ij denotetheaverage totalbackscatter crosssectionoftheparticles perunitofvolume.
The indicated summation offTjiscarriedoutovertheunitvolume.
Theradarcrosssectionmaybe expressed as(i=limL(ij.whereVmisthevolumeoftheradarresolution cell.Thevolume Vm occupied byaradarbeamofvertical beamwidth 1JB'horizontal beamwidth 0B'andapulse ofduration risapproximately (13.15) wherec=velocityofpropagation.
Intheradar-Illeteorology literature, theradarpulse-extent It (inunitsoflength) isortenusedinsteadofcrinthisequation.
Thefactornj4isincluded to account fortheelliptical shapeofthebeamarea.Insomeinstances thisfactorisomitted for convenience; however.
radarmeteorologists almostalwaysincludeitsincetheyareconcerned withaccurate measurement ofrainfallrateusingtheradarequation.
Intheinterestofeven furtheraccuracy, acorrection isusuallymadetoEq.(13.15)toaccount forthefactthatthe effective volumeofuniform rainilluminated bythetwo-way radarantenna patternislessthan thatindicated whenthehalf-power beamwidths areusedtodefinethevolume.
Assuming a gaussian-shaped antenna pattern.
thevolumegivenbyEq.(13.15)mustbereduced byafactor of2In2todescribe theequivalent volumethataccounts fortheechopowerreceived bythe two-way antenna pattern fromdistributed clutter.69Thustheradarequation ofEq.(13.14) canhewritten (13.16) Intheabove.therelationship G=rr2/OR1JRforagaussian beamshape69wassubstituted.
The haroverPrdenotesthatthereceived powerisaveraged overmanyindependent radarsweeps tosmooth thtsignalfluctuations.
Thisequation assumes thatthevolume oftheantenna resolution celliscompletely filledwithuniform precipitation.
Ifnot,acorrection mustbe madebyintroducing adimensionless beam-filling factortjJwhichisthefractionofthecross­ sectional areaofthebeamintercepted bytheregionofscattering particles.Itisdifficult to estimate thiscorrection.
Theresolution cellisnotlikelytobecompletely fiiledatlongrangeor whenthebeamisviewing theedgeofaprecipitation cell.Ifthe"brightband"(tobedescribed later)iswithintheradarresolution cell,theprecipitation alsowillnotbeuniform.
Whentheradarwavelength islargecompared withthecircumference ofascattering particleofdiameter D(Rayleigh scattering region), theradarcrosssection is (13.17) where IK12=(£-1)/(£+2),and£=dielectric constant ofthescattering particles.
Thevalue ofIK12forwatervarieswithtemperature andwavelength.
At10°Cand10cmwavelength, itis 500 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  approximately 0.93.
Its value for ice at all temperatures is about 0.197 and is independent of  frequency in the centimeter-wavelength region.
Substituting Eq.
(13.17) into (13.16) yields  Since the particle diameter D appears as the sixth power, in any distribution of precipitation  particles the small number of large drops will contribute most to the echo power.
 Equation (13.18) does not include the attenuation of the radar energy by precipitation,  which can be significant at the higher microwave frequencies and when accurate measure-  ments are required.
The two-way attenuation of the radar signal in traversing the range R and  back is exp (- 2a R), where a is the one-way attenuation coefficient.
If a is not a constant over  the path R, the total attenuation must be expressed as the integrated value over the two-way  path.
J  Scattering from rain.
Equation (13.18), which applies for Rayleigh scattering, may be used as a /  basis for measuring with radar the sum of the sixth power of the raindrop diameters in a unit  volume.
The Rayleigh approximation is generally applicable below C band (5 cm wavelength)  and, except for the heaviest rains, is a good approximation at X band (3 cm).
Rayleigh  scattering usually does not apply above X band.
Another complication at frequencies above X  band is that the attenuation due to precipitation precludes the making of quantitative measure-  ments conveniently.
 The sum of the sixth power of the diameters per unit volume in Eq.
(13.18) is called 2, the  rndar rejlectivity factor, or  In this form Z has little significance for practical application.
Experimental measurements,  however, show that Z is related to the rainfall rate r by  where a and h are empirically determined constants.
With this relationship tlie rccc~ved cctio  power can be related to rainfall rate.
A number of experimenters have attempted to determine  the constants in Eq.
(13.20), but considerable variability exists among the reported resi~\ts.'~'  Part of this is probably due to the difficulty in obtaining quantitative measurements and the  variability of rain with time and from one location to another.
One form of Eq.
(13.20) that has  been widely accepted is  where Z is in mm6/m3 and r is in mm/h.
This has been said to apply to stratiform rain.
For  orographic rain Z = 31r1.71 and for thunderstorm rain Z = 486r1.37.
Thus a single expres-  sion need not be used, and the choice of a Z-r relationship can be made on the basis of the type  of rain.70 Substituting Eq.
(13.21) into (13.18) with 1 K 1' = 0.93 yields  where r is in mm/h, R and A in meters, 7 in seconds and P, in watts.
This indicates how the  radar output can be made to measure rainfall.
 The backscatter cross section per unit volume as a function of wavelength and rainfall  (13.18)500INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS approximately 0.93.Itsvalueforiceatalltemperatures isabout0.197andisindependent of frequency inthecentimeter-wavelength region.Substituting Eq.(13.17)into(13.16)yields P__1tsP,G~_ I12"D6 r -1024(1n2)R2,{2K'7 Sincetheparticlediameter Dappears asthesixthpower,inanydistribution ofprecipitation particles thesmallnumberoflargedropswillcontribute mosttotheechopower.
Equation (13.18)doesnotincludetheattenuation oftheradarenergybyprecipitation, whichcanbesignificant atthehighermicrowave frequencies andwhenaccurate measure­ mentsarerequired.
Thetwo-way attenuation oftheradarsignalintraversing therangeRand backisexp(-2(XR), where(Xistheone-way attenuation coefficient.
IJ(Xisnotaconstant over thepathR,thetotalattenuation mustbeexpressed astheintegrated valueoverthetwo-way path.
.J Scattering fromrain.Equation (13.18),whichappliesforRayleigh scattering, maybeusedasa basisformeasuring withradarthesumofthesixthpoweroftheraindrop diameters inaunit volume.
TheRayleigh approximation isgenerally applicable belowCband(5cmwavelength) and,exceptfortheheaviest rains,isagoodapproximation atXband(3cm).Rayleigh scattering usuallydoesnotapplyaboveXband.Another complication atfrequencies aboveX bandisthattheattenuation duetoprecipitation precludes themakingofquantitative measure­ mentsconveniently.
Thesumofthesixthpowerofthediameters perunitvolumeinEq.(13.18)iscalledZ,the radarreflectivity factor,or (13.19) InthisformZhaslittlesignificance forpractical application.
Experimental measurements, however, showthatZisrelatedtotherainfallrateI'by (13.20) whereaandhareempirically determined constants.
Withthisrelationship thereceiveJ echo powercanberelatedtorainfallrate.Anumberofexperimenters haveattempted todetermine theconstants inEq.(13.20),butconsiderable variability existsamongthereporteJ results.7o Partofthisisprobably duetothedifficulty inobtaining quantitative measurements andthe variability ofrain with timeandfromonelocation toanother.
OneformofEq.(13.20)thathas beenwidelyaccepted is Z=2001'1.6 (13.21) (13.22)whereZisinmm6/m3andrisinmm/h.Thishasbeensaidtoapplytostratiform rain.For orographic rainZ=311'1.71andforthunderstorm rainZ=486':1.37.
Thusasingleexpres­ sionneednotbeused,andthechoiceofaZ-rrelationship canbemadeonthebasisofthetype ofrain.70Substituting Eq.(13.21)into(13.18)with IK12=0.93yields j5_2.4P/GrrI.610-8r-R2,{2 X where I'isinmm/h,RandAinmeters,rinseconds andPIinwatts.Thisindicates howthe radaroutputcanbemadetomeasure rainfall.
Thebackscatter crosssectionperunitvolumeasafunction ofwavelength andrainfall RADAR CLUITER 501  1 10 100  r, rainfall rote, mm /hr Figure 13.12 Exact (solid curves) and  approximate (dashed curves) back-  scattering cross section per unit volume  of rain at a temperature of 18°C.
Exact  computations obtained from F.
T.
 Haddock, approximate curves based  on the Rayleigh approximation.
(Fl.orn  Guttn and East," Quart.
J.
Roy.
 Meteor.
Soc.)  rate is sliown plotted in Fig.
13.12.
The dashed lines are plotted by summing the Rayleigh  cross section of Eq.
(13.17) over unit volume and substituting Eq.
(13.21) to give  where f is the radar frequency in GHz and r the rainfall rate in mm/h.
The solid curves are  exact valuefcomputed by Hadd~ck.".~~ The Rayleigh scattering approximation is seen to be  satisfactory over most of the frequency range of interest to radar.
 The reflectivity factor Z of Eq.
(13.19), which was defined as the sum of the sixth power of  tlie particles' diameter per unit volume, was based on the assumption of Rayleigh scattering.
 When tlie scattering is not Rayleigh, a quantity similar to Z is defined, which is called the  uqitii~r~lrtrt radar refiectir'ity ,factor 2,.
given by70*73  wlicrc rl is tile actual radar reflectivity, or backscatter cross section per unit volume, and I K IZ  is taken as 0.93.
 Instead of the rainfall rate r.
the intensity of precipitation is sometimes stated in terms of  ttic dl3 rcllcctivity factor Z = 200r' ', or dUz = 10 log Z.
A rainfall rate of I mm/h eqi~als  23 dBz, 4 rnni/h equals 33 dBz.
and 16 ~nmlh equals 42 dBz.
(This may be an incorrect usage  of the precise definition of decibels as a power ratio, but it is the jargon used by the radar  meteorologist.)  ".I: "k101 ,,IIIITI I"IIRADAR CLUTIER 501 C ::J :u10-2 a.
co ~10'3 if> V1,n o b10-4__ L ClJ ~ ~o ~10-5 -""uorn 10-7L-------.J~"'______J--'--.L.L..l..J....L __"_______'____'__'__'__.LJ...L_'___L__..L.__L.,.L.--'-'--'LU 0.1 1 10 r,rainfallrote,mm/hrFigure13.12Exact(solidcurves)and approximate (dashed curves) back­ scattering crosssectionperunitvolume ofrainatatemperature of18°C.Exact computations obtained fromF.T.
Haddock, approximate curvesbased ontheRayleigh approximation.
(From GUllnandEast,71 Quart.J.Roy.
Meteor.Soc.) rateisshownplottedinFig.13.12.Thedashedlinesareplottedbysumming theRayleigh crosssectionofEq.(13.17)overunitvolumeandsubstituting Eq.(13.21)togive t1=L(Ji=~r4r1.6x\0-12m2/m3 i(13.23) wherefistheradarfrequency inGHzandrtherainfallniteinmm/h.Thesolidcurvesare exactvalueS-computed byHaddock.
71.72TheRayleigh scattering approximation isseentobe satisfactory overmostofthefrequency rangeofinteresttoradar.
Thereflectivity factorZofEq.(13.19),whichwasdefinedasthesumofthesixthpowerof theparticles' diameter perunitvolume,wasbasedontheassumption ofRayleigh scattering.
Whenthescattering isnotRayleigh, aquantity similartoZisdefined,whichiscalledthe t'qliil'll/ent radarre!lectil'it yfactorZ<,givenby70.73 (13.24) where /1istheactualradarreflectivity, orbackscatter crosssectionperunitvolume,andIK 12 istakenas0.93.
Insteadoftherainfallrater,theintensity ofprecipitation issometimes statedintermsof thedBrellectivity factorZ=2001'(6.ordOz=10logZ.ArainfallrateofImm/hequals 2.1dOz.4rnm/hequals3JdOz.and16rnm/hequals42dBz.(Thismaybeanincorrect usage oftheprecisedefinition ofdecibels asapowerratio,butitisthejargonusedbytheradar meteorologist.
) 502 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  Scattering from snow.
Dry snow particles are essentially ice crystals, either single or ag-  gregated.
The relationship between Z and snowfall rate r is as given by Eq.
(1 3.20) for rain, but  with different constants a and b.
There have been less measurements of the 2-r relationship for  snow than for rain, and there have been several different values proposed for the constants u  and b.
The following two expressions have been suggested  Measurements show a correlation between surface temperature and the coefficient a of the  Z = arb relationship, which suggest the following76  Z = 1050r2 for dry snow (ave temp.
< WC) (1 3.26a)  Z = 1600r2 for wet snow (ave temp.
> 0°C) ' (13.26h)  A lower surface temperature results in a lower value of the coefficient a.
Still another value that  has been suggested is77 "% j'  Z = 1000r'.6 (13.27)  There does not seem to be any agreed-upon value; the reader can take his pick.
In all of the  above, the snowfall rate r at the ground is in millimeters per hour of water measured when the  snow is melted.
 A radar is usually less affected by snow and ice than by rain because the factor I K J2 in  Eq.
(13.18) is less for ice than for rain, and snowfall rates are generally less than rainfall rates.
 Scattering from water-coated ice spheres.
Moisture in the atmosphere at altitudes where the  temperature is below freezing takes the form of ice crystals, snow, or hail.
As these particles tall  to the ground they melt and change to rain in the warmer environment of the lower altitudes  When this occurs, there is an increase in the radar backscatter since water particles reflect  more strongly than ice.
As the ice' particles, snow, or hail begin to melt, they first become  water-coated ice spheroids.
At radar wavelengths, scattering and attenuation by water-coated  ice spheroids the size of wet snowflakes is similar in magnitude to that of spheroidal water  drops of the same size and shape.
Even for comparatively thin coatings of water, the compostte  particle scatters nearly as well as a similar all-water particle.
 Radar observations of light precipitation show a horizontal "bright band" at an altiiude  at which the temperature is just above 0°C.
The measured reflectivity in the center of the bright  band is typically about 12 to 15 dB greater, than the reflectivity from the snow above it and  about 6 to 10 dB greater than the rain' below.70 The center of the bright band is generally from  about 100 to 400 m bklow the O°C'isotherm.
Although the bright band is relatively thin,  considerable attenuation can occur'when radar observations are made through it at low  elevations.
 The bright band is due to changes in snow falling through the freezing level.7L At the  onset of melting the snow changes from flat or needle-shaped particles which scatter fcehly to  similarly shaped particles which, owing to a water coating, scatter relatively strongly.
As  melting progresses, the particles lose their extreme shapes, and their velocity of fall increases  causing a decrease in the number of particles per unit volume and a reduction In the  backscatter.
, \,)*I>  \ ,,:4  Scattering'from clouda~ost cloud dropleis do not exceed 100 pm in diameter (1 /rrn =  m); consequently Rayleigh scattering may be applied at radar frequencies for the predic-  tion of cloud echoes.
In Rayleigh scattering, the backscatter is proportional to the sixth power  502INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS Scattering fromsnow.Drysnowparticles areessentially icecrystals, eithersingleorag­ gregated.
Therelationship between Zandsnowfallrate,isasgivenbyEq.(13.20)forrain,but withdifferent constants a.andb.Therehavebeenless measurements oftheZ-,relationship for snowthanforrain,andtherehavebeenseveraldifferent valuesproposed fortheconstants (J andb.Thefollowing twoexpressions havebeensuggested Z=2000,2 Z=1780,2.21(13.25a)H (13.25h)75 Measurements showacorrelation between surfacetemperature andthecoefficient aofthe Z=arbrelationship, whichsuggestthefollowing 76 Z=1050r2fordrysnow(avetemp.<O°C) Z=16OOr2forwetsnow(avetemp.>O°C).J(13.26a) (13.26h) Alowersurfacetemperature resultsinalowervalueofthecoefficient a.Stillanother valuethat hasbeensuggested is77 Z=1000,1.6 (13.27) Theredoesnotseemtobeanyagreed-upon value;thereadercantakehispick.Inallofthe above,thesnowfallrate,atthegroundisinmillimeters perhourofwatermeasured whenthe snowismelted.
Aradarisusuallylessaffected bysnowandicethanbyrainbecause thefactor IK12in Eq.(13.18)islessforicethanforrain,andsnowfall ratesaregenerally lessthanrainfallrates.
Scattering fromwater-eoated icespheres.
Moisture intheatmosphere ataltitudes wherethe temperature isbelowfreezing takestheformoficecrystals, snow,orhail.Astheseparticles fall tothegroundtheymeltandchangetoraininthewarmerenvironment oftheloweraltitudes.
Whenthisoccurs,thereisanincrease intheradarbackscatter sincewaterparticles reflect morestrongly thanice.Astheice',partides, snow,orhailbegintomelt,theyfirstbecome water-coated icespheroids.
Atradarwavelengths, scattering andattenuation bywater-coated icespheroids thesizeofwetsnowflakes issimilarinmagnitude tothatofspheroidal water dropsofthesamesizeandshape.Evenforcomparatively thincoatings ofwater,thecomposite particlescatters nearlyaswellasasimilarall-water particle.
Radarobservations oflightprecipitation showahorizontal" brightband"atanaltiiude atwhichthetemperature isjustaboveO°c.Themeasured reflectivity inthecenterofthebright bandistypically about12to15dBgreater.thanthereflectivity fromthesnowaboveitand about6to10dBgreaterthantherain'below.70Thecenterofthebrightbandisgenerally from about100to400mbelowtheO°C:isotherm.
Although thebrightbandisrelatively thin, considerable attenuation canoccur'whenradarobservations aremadethrough itatlow elevations.
Thebrightbandisduetochanges insnowfallingthrough thefreezing level."Atthe onsetofmeltingthesnowchanges fromflatorneedle-shaped particles whichscatterfeeblyto similarly shapedparticles which,owingtoawatercoating, scatterrelatively strongly.
As meltingprogresses, theparticles losetheirextreme shapes,andtheirvelocityoffallincreases causing adecrease inthenumberofparticles perunitvolume andareduction inthe backscatter..", '...;\1I, Scattering fromclouds.Most.cloud'droplets donotexceed100~mindiameter (IJlm= 10-6m);consequently Rayleigh scattering maybeappliedatradarfrequencies forthepredic­ tionofcloudechoes.InRayleigh scattering, thebackscatter isproportional tothesixthpower of the diameter, Eq.
(13.17).
Since the diameter of cloud droplets is about one-hundredth the  diameter of raindrops.
the echoes from fa~r-weather clouds are usually of little concern.
 It is also possible to obtain weak echoes from a deep, intense log at millimeter.
 wavelengths, but at wavelengths of 3 cm and longer, eclioes due to fog may generally be  regarded as insignificant.
 Attenuation by precipitation.
In tlic frequency range for which Rayleigh scatterirlg applies  (particles srnall in sire conil~itrcd with tlie wavclcngtli) tlic attenuation due to absorption is  give~t by  Attenuation (dB/krn) = 0.434 D~ Im (- K)  i ]  wlicrc tile sunimation is over 1 rnJ.
D is the partlcle diameter in ccntimetcrs.
E.
IS tile  wavelength in centimeters, In1 (- K) is the rmaginary part of - K, and K is a factor whicll  clcpcndc ilpori tlic dielectric coristant of thc particle.
At a temperature of 10°C.
thc v;ili~e ol  Im (- K) for water is 0.00688 wllcn the wavelength is 10 crn (S band) and 0.0247 for 3.2-cm  wavelength (.Y band)." Eqi~atiori (13.28) is a good approximation for rain attenuation at  S-band or loriger wavelengths.
Since rain attenuation is usually small and unimportant at thc  longer wavelengths wl~cre tliis expression is valid, the simplicity offered by the Ravleigh  scattering approximation is of limited use for predicting the attenuation through rain.
 -Pl~e compirtation of rain att*wuatioti must thercforc be based on the exact formulation for  splicres as dcvelopcd by Mie.lh Tlic results of such computatlon5 are shown in Fig 13.13 as a  function of tlie wavelcngtll arid the rainrall rate.
 -Phe attenuation produced by icc particles in the atmospl~erc, whether occurring as hail.
 snow, or ice-crystal clouds, is mucli less than that caused by rairl of an equivalent rate of  pre~ipitation.'~ Gunn and East" state that the attenuatio~i in snow is  .
 where r = snowfall rate (rnm/ll of nielted water content).
and i = wavelength, cm.
 Figure 13.13 One-way attenuation (dB/  km) in rain at a temperature of  18°C.
(a) Drizzle- 0.25 mm/h; (h) light  rain---I mm/h; (c) moderate rain- 4  mm/h; (d) heavy rain--16 mm/h; (o)  excessive rain- 40 rnmlh.
In Wastiing-  ton.
D.C., a rainfall rate of 0.25  mm/h is exceeded 45'' h!yr, 1 mmjh is  exceeded 200 h!yr.
mm/h is exceeded  60 111yr.
16 rnntlh is exceeded 8 h/yr and  Wnvel~ngtll, cm 40 mrnfl, ; c~xceeded 2 2 yr.
 RADAR CLUTIER 503 ofthediameter, Eq.(13.17).Sincethediameter ofclouddroplets isaboutone-hundredth the diameter ofraindrops, theechoesfromfair-weather cloudsareusuallyoflittleconcern.
Itisalsopossible toobtain weakechoes fromadeep,intense fogatmillimeter, wavelengths, butatwavelengths of3cmandlonger,echoesduetofogmaygenerally be regarded asinsignificant.
(13.2X) Attenuation (dB/km)=0.434l~; (~D3 )1m(-K)jAttenuation byprecipitation.
Inthefrequency rangeforwhichRayleigh scattering applies (particles smallinsitecompared withthewavelength) theattenuation duetoabsorption is givenl1y wherethesummation isover1rn",Vistheparticle diameter incentimeters.
).isthe wavelength incentimeters, 1m(-K)istheimaginary partof-K,andKisafactorwhicll depends uponthedielectric constant oftheparticle.
Atatemperature oflOOC,thevalueof 1m(-K)forwaterisO,006XX whenthewavelength istoem(5band)and0.0247for3.2-cm wavelength (Xband).71 Equation (13.2R)isagoodapproximation forrainattenuation at S-bandorlongerwavelengths.
Sincerainattenuation isusuallysmallandunimportant atthe longerwavelengths wherethisexpression isvalid,thesimplicity offered bytheRayleigh scattering approximation isoflimiteduseforpredicting theattenuation through rain.
Thecomputation ofrainatt"nuation musttherefore bebasedontheexactformulation for spheres asdeveloped byMie.1hTheresultsofsuchcomputations arcshowninFig.D.Dasa function ofthewavelength andtherainfallrate.
Theattenuation produced byiceparticles intheatmosphere.:, whether occurring ashail, snow.oricc-crystal clouds.
ismuchlessthanthatcausedbyraipofanequivalent rateof precipitatioll.7RGunnandEast ~Istatethattheattenuation inc;nowis .
,0.00349,.1 (,0.00224,.
AttenuatIon atnee(dB/km)=-).4 -+--).- (D.29) wherer=snowfall rale(rnm/hofmeltedwatercontent).
and)=wavelength.
em, 10 ;-1.0 ~ C1Jc:o E<10' CDu-c:o = 2 4 5 6 7 Wavelrngll1.
em8Figure13.13One-way attenuation (0BI km)inrainatatemperature of l8°C(0)Drizzle- 0.25mmlh;(h)light rain--l mm/h;(c)moderate rain-4 mm/h:(d)heavyrain-16 mm/h;(e) excessive rain-40mm/h.InWashing­ ton.D,C,arainfall rateof0,25 mm/hisexceeded 4','1h1yr.1mm/his exceeded 200h/yr..1mm/hisexceeded 91060h/yr.16mm/hisexceeded 8h/yrand 40mm/I!il'xceeded 22Iyr. 504 INTROD~JCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  13.8 DETECTION OF TARGETS IN PRECIPITATION  The chief effect of weather on radar performance is the backscatter,or clutter, from precipita-  tion within the radar resolution cell.
Attenuation by precipitation usually has little effect on  the detection of targets except at frequencies above X band.
Weather clutter, however, can be a  serious factor in limiting the performance of microwave radars even at frequencies as low as 1-  band.
Good radar design must include methods for maintaining performance in the presence  of precipitation.
 The most effective method for reducing the effects of precipitation is to operate at a low  frequency to'take advantage of the significant decrease in backscatter from precipitation with  decrease in frequency.
The backscatter cross section of a particle in the Rayleigh region, as  shown by Eq.
(13.17) varies as the fourth power of the frequency.
A radar operating at L hand  (1.3 GHz), for example, might experience about 34 dB less precipitation cltlttct(han a radar at  X band (9 GHz).
Thus when precipitation is of concern, the lower frequencies are to be  preferred.
, < A1 the higher microwave frequencies, precipitation clutter can be reduced by meanh of '  high resolution in range and in angle.
Since rain is relatively uniform, the statistics of thc  backscatter are described by the Rayleigh probability density function, even when the radar 1s  of high resolution.
Therefore the problem of non-Rayleigh statistics with its deleterious effect  on the false-alarm probability as occurs with high-resolution radar viewing sea clutter and  land clutter (Secs.
13.3 and 13.5), does not usually occur with precipitation clutter.
 Moving target indication (MTI) radar can provide some improvement in the detection  of moving targets in precipitation if the MTI is properly designed to attenuate the doppler-  shifted precipitation echoes.
Unlike land clutter, storm clouds are not stationary and usually  have a nonzero relative velocity that results in a doppler-frequency shift.
The internal motions  of the storm can also widen the spectrum of the precipitation clutter.
At the higher microwave  frequencies, where precipitation can be a bother, it is difficult to achieve effective MTI because  of the reduced blind speeds (Sec.
4.2) and the increased spread of the clutter spectrum.
The  Moving Target Detector, described in Sec.
4.7, is an example of an MTI radar designed  specifically to cope with the special problems of precipitation clutter.
 Polarization.
Raindrops are spherical, or nearly so, but aircraft are complex targets.
Tllus the  backscattered energy from rain and aircraft will be affected differently by the polarization of  the incident radar energy.
Advantage can be taken of this difference to enhance the target-to-  clutter ratio when the clutter background is precipitation.
This is accomplished by utilizing a  radar with circular polarization or with crossed linear polarization.
 A circularly polarized wave incident on a spherical scatterer is reflected as a circillarly  polarized wave with the opposite sense of rotation and is rejected by the antenna that orig-  inally transmitted it.
With a complex target such as an aircraft the reflected energy is more or  less equally divided between the two senses of rotation so that some target-echo energy is  accepted by the same radar antenna that transmitted the circularly polarized signal.
This is the  basis for target-to-clutter enhancement using circular polarization.
 A circularly polarized wave is one in which the electric field vector rotates with constant  amplitude about the axis of propagation at the radar frequency.
To an observer looking In the  direction of propagation, a clockwise-rotating electric field is known as right-hand circular  polarization, and a counterclockwise rotation is known as left-hand circular polarization.
 Right-hand and left-hand circular polarization are said to be orthogonal polarizations since an  antenna capable of accepting one will not accept the other.
Similarly, horizontal and vertical  linear polarizations are orthogonal.
If the radar radiates one sense of circular polarized energy,  504INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS 13.8DETECTION OFTARGETS INPRECIPITATION Thechiefeffectofweatheronradarperformance isthebackscatter, orclutter,fromprecipita­ tionwithintheradarresolution cell.Attenuation byprecipitation usuallyhaslittleeffecton thedetection oftargetsexceptatfrequencies aboveXband.Weather clutter,however, canbea seriousfactorinlimitingtheperformance ofmicrowave radarsevenatfrequencies aslowasL band.Goodradardesignmustincludemethods formaintaining performance inthepresence ofprecipitation.
Themosteffective method forreducing theeffectsofprecipitation istooperateatalow frequency to'takeadvantage ofthesignificant decrease inbackscatter fromprecipitation with decrease infrequency.
Thebackscatter crosssectionofaparticleintheRayleigh region.as shownbyEq.(13.17)variesasthefourthpowerofthefrequency.
Aradaroperating atLhand (1.3GHz),forexample, mightexperience about34dBlessprecipitation cluttcr..than aradarat Xband(9GHz).Thuswhenprecipitation isofconcern, thelowerfrequencies aretobe preferred.
Atthehighermicrowave frequencies, precipitation cluttercanhereduced bymeansor highresolution inrangeandinangle.Sincerainisrelatively uniform, thestatistics ofthe backscatter aredescribed bytheRayleigh probability densityfunction, evenwhentheradaris ofhighresolution.
Therefore theproblem ofnon-Rayleigh statistics withitsdeleterious effect onthefalse-alarm probability asoccurswithhigh-resolution radarviewing seaclutterand landclutter(Secs.13.3and13.5),doesnotusuallyoccurwithprecipitation clutter.
Moving targetindication (MTI)radarcanprovidesomeimprovement inthedetection ofmovingtargetsinprecipitation iftheMTIisproperly designed toattenuate thedoppler­ shiftedprecipitation echoes.Unlikelandclutter,stormcloudsarenotstationary andusually haveanonzero relativevelocitythatresultsinadoppler-frequency shift.Theinternalmotions ofthestormcanalsowidenthespectrum oftheprecipitation clutter.Atthehighermicrowave frequencies, whereprecipitation canbeabother,itisdifficulttoachieveeffective MTIbecause ofthereduced blindspeeds(Sec.4.2)andtheincreased spreadoftheclutterspectrum.
The Moving TargetDetector, described inSec.4.7,isanexample ofanMTIradardesigned specifically tocopewiththespecialproblems ofprecipitation clutter.
Polarization.
Raindrops arespherical, ornearlyso,butaircraftarecomplex targets.Tilusthe backscattered energyfromrainandaircraftwillbeaffected differently bythepolarization 01 theincident radarenergy.Advantage canbetakenofthisdifference toenhance thetarget-to­ clutter ratio whentheclutterbackground isprecipitation.
Thisisaccomplished hyutilizing a radarwithcircular polarization orwithcrossedlinearpolarization.
Acircularly polarized waveincident onaspherical scatterer isreflected asacircularly polarized wavewiththeopposite senseofrotation andisrejected bytheantenna thatorig­ inallytransmitted it.Withacomplex targetsuchasanaircraftthereflected energyismoreor lessequallydivided between thetwosensesofrotation sothatsometarget-echo energyis accepted bythesameradarantennathattransmitted thecircularly polarized signal.Thisisthe basisfortarget-to-c1utter enhancement usingcircular polarization.
Acircularly polarized waveisoneinwhichtheelectricfieldvectorrotateswithconstant amplitude abouttheaxisofpropagation attheradarfrequency.
Toanobserver lookinginthe direction ofpropagation, aclockwise-rotating electricfieldisknownasright-hand circular polarization, andacounterclockwise rotation isknownasleft-hand circular polarization.
Right-hand andleft-hand circularpolarization aresaidtobeorthogonal polarizations sincean antenna capableofaccepting onewillnotaccepttheother.Similarly, horizontal andvertical linearpolarizations areorthogonal.
Iftheradarradiates onesenseofcircularpolarized energy, it cannot accept the backscattered echosignal from a sphere or a plane sheet, since the direction  ofthe polarization is reversed on reflection; that is, if right-hand circular polarization is trans-  mitted, spherical raindrops reflect the energy as left-hand circular polarization.
If the same  antenna is used for both transmitting and receiving, the antenna is not responsive to the  opposite sense of rotation and the echo energy will not appear at the receiver.
A target such as  an aircraft, however, will return some energy with the correct polarization as well as energy  with the incorrect polarization.
Energy incident on the aircraft may be returned after one  "bounce," as from a plane sheet or a spherical surface; or it might make two or more bounces  between various portions of the target (similar to a corner reflector) before being returned to  the radar.
On each bounce the direction of polarization rotation is reversed.
Signals which  make single reflections (or any odd number) will be rejected by the circularly polarized antenna  that transmitted it, but those which make two reflectio~is (or any even number) will be  accepted.
In addition to the mechanism of the double bounce, depolarization (or generation  of the orthogonal component) can occur when the objects causing the scattering are not sym-  metrical.
With most targets of interest, the scatterers are asymmetrical and backscatter energy  appears in both orthogonal polarization components.
 Raindrops may not always be perfect spheres.
Their deviation from the syrnmetrical shape  of a sphere will result in the reflected signal containing some energy in that polarization  cotilponent accepted by the antenna.
This limits the ability of circular polarization to reject  precipitation clutter.
 The rejection of rain echoes by a circularly polarized radar depends on the purity with  whicii circular polarization can be generated by a practical antenna, as well as the deviation  of the precipitation particles from a spherical shape.' l7 The cancellation of the orthogonal  polarization by an exceptionally well-designed, well-maintained antenna might be limited to  about 40 dB.79 TO achieve 40 dB of cancellation the voltage ellipticity ratio of the antenna  (ratio of the minor axis to the major axis of the polarization ellipse) must be 0.99, a difficult  value to achieve.
For 24 dB cancellation, the ellipticity ratio must be 0.94.
Cancellations in  excess of 30 dB have been achieved in light rain and in dry'sn~w.~~ However, cancellations of  only 15 dB or less are obtained from nonspherical precipitation such as heavy rain, from the  melting layer.
and from large wet  snowflake^.^^^^^.^^ In some heavy rains and thunderstorms,  the carlcellation might be only 5  It has beer1 fourld that better cancellation of precipitation is obtained when the polariza-  tion is not quite circular.
That is, there is a particular elliptical polarization which produces the  best cancellation.
The optirrium elliptical polarization depends on the nature of the rain.
This  effect is dw to the nonspherical raindrops which cause the phase shift and attenuation of the  radar energy to be different depending on the direction of polarization.
As the radar energy  propagates through the rain, the differential phase shift and the differential attenuation results  in the circular polarization being converted to elliptical polarization.
By selecting the optimum  elliptical polari~ation, it lias bee11 said that the cancellation in some regions of" heavy raiti"  might be increased by as much as 12 dB over that obtained with circular p~larization.~'  However, the polarization that is optimum for one particular region might actually prove to  be worse than the cancellation obtained with circular polarization in some ather region.
The  optin~um polarization tlius depends on the distance traveled in rain, so that the antenna  polarization needs to be continuously adjusted.79 The greater the penetration into a rain-  storm, the more elliptical will become the polarization of an originally circular polarized wave.
 Thus to maintain the improvement in rain cancellation with elliptical polarization, the polar-  ization on receive should be made variable with range (time).
With such adaptive polarization  it has been suggested that an improvement in caricellation of 6 to 9 dB might be obtained  c~nsistentjy.~~  RADAR CLUTTER 505 itcannotacceptthebackscattered echosignalfromasphereoraplanesheet,sincethedirection ofthepolarization isreversed onreflection; thatis,.ifright-hand circular polarization istrans­ mitted,spherical raindrops reflecttheenergyasleft-hand circular polarization.
Ifthesame antenna isusedforbothtransmitting andreceiving, theantenna isnotresponsive tothe opposite senseofrotation andtheechoenergywillnotappearatthereceiver.
Atargetsuchas anaircraft, however, willreturnsomeenergywiththecorrectpolarization aswellasenergy withtheincorrect polarization.
Energyincident ontheaircraft maybereturned afterone "bounce," asfromaplanesheetorasrherical surface; oritmightmaketwoormorebounces between variousportions ofthetarget(similar toacornerreflector) beforebeingreturned to theradar.Oneachbounce thedirection ofpolarization rotation isreversed.
Signals which makesinglereflections (oranyoddnumber) willberejected bythecircularly polarized antenna thattransmitted it.butthosewhichmaketworeflectiOlis (oranyevennumber) willbe accepted.
Inaddition tothemechanism ofthedoublebounce, depolarization (orgeneration oftheorthogonal component) canoccurwhentheobjectscausing thescattering arenotsym­ metrical.
Withmosttargetsofinterest.
thescatterers areasymmetrical andbackscatter energy appears inbothorthogonal polarization components.
Raindrops maynotalwaysbeperfectspheres.
Theirdeviation fromthesymmetrical shape ofaspherewillresultintherellected signalcontaining someenergyinthatpolarization component accepted bytheantenna.
Thislimitstheabilityofcircular polarization toreject precipitation clutter.
Therejection ofrainechoesbyacircularly polarized radardepends onthepuritywith whichcircular polarization canbegenerated byapractical antenna.
aswellasthedeviation oftheprecipitation particles fromaspherical shape.!!7 Thecancellation oftheorthogonal polarization byanexceptionally well-designed, well-maintained antenna mightbelimitedto about40dB.79Toachieve 40dBofcancellation thevoltageellipticity ratiooftheantenna (ratiooftheminoraxistothemajoraxisofthepolarization ellipse)mustbe0.99,adifficult valuetoachieve.
For24dBcancellation, theellipticity ratiomustbe0.94.Cancellations in excessof30dBhavebeenachieved inlightrainandindry~snow.79 However, cancellations of onIyISdBorlessareobtained fromnonspherical precipitation suchasheavyrain,fromthe melting layer.andfromlargewetsnowflakes.79.80.82 Insomeheavyrainsandthunderstorms.
thecancellation mightbeonly5dBB2 IthasbeenfoundthaIbettercancellation ofprecipitation isobtained whenthepolariza­ tionisnotquitecircular.
Thatis.thereisaparticular elliptical polarization whichproduces the hestcancellation.
Theoptimum elliptical polarization depends onthenatureoftherain.This dfectisduetothenonspherical raindrops whichcausethephaseshiftandattenuation ofthe radarenergytobedifferent depending onthedirection ofpolarization.
Astheradarenergy propagates through therain,thedifferential phaseshiftandthedifferential attenuation results inthecircular polarization beingconverted toelliptical polarization.
Byselecting theoptimum elliptical polarization.
ithasbeensaidthatthecancellation insomeregionsof"heavyrain" mightbeincreased byasmuchas12dBoverthatobtained withcircular polarization.8! However, thepolarization thatisoptimum foroneparticular regionmightactually proveto beworsethanthecancellation obtained withcircular polarization insomeotherregion.The optimum polarization thusdepends onthedistance traveled inrain,sothattheantenna polarization needstobecontinuously adjusted.79Thegreaterthepenetration intoarain­ storm,themoreelliptical willbecomethepolarization ofanoriginally circular polarized wave.
Thustomaintain theimprovement inraincancellation withelliptical polarization, thepolar­ izationonreceiveshouldbemadevariable withrange(time).Withsuchadaptive polarization ithasbeensuggested thatanimprovement incancellation or6to9dBmightbeobtained consistently.82 506 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  Still another factor which reduces the effectiveness of circular polarization in rain clutter  is the different reflection coefficients experienced.by the horizontal and vertical polarization  components on reflection from the surface of the land or the sea.
This results in a change of  polarization and a degradation of the rain can~ellation.~~ 86 It will be recalled from Sec.
12.2  that it is possible for a portion of the transmitted energy to arrive at the target via a surface-  reflected path as well as by the direct path.
Similarly, precipitation clutter can result from a  surface-reflected path as well as the direct path.
On reflection from the surPdct.
the vertically  polarized component is attenuated more than the horizontal component, and it experiences a  different phase shift (Fig.
12.3).
The result is that the horizontally polarized component is  cancelled to a greater extent than the vertical component so that the original circi~lar polariza-  tion is converted to elliptical polarization with the vertical component pred~minating."~  Assuming a 3.2" vertical beamwidth with cosecant-squared shaping up to 10".
theoretical  calculations give the following maximum cancellation ratios as limited by surface rellcctions:  20.2 dB for sea, 23.6 dB for marsh, 27.2 dB for average land, and 34.1 dH for dd~rt.~~ Otller  calculations for ground-mapping radars, such as those used for airport surface-tratfic control,  indicate significantly worse cancellation limitations.
A 3" vertical beamwidth, pointed 0.7"  below the horizon, with cosecant-squared shaping up to 30' will result in the cancellat ion ratio  being limited to about 13 dB over water and 17 dB over moist soil." To minimize the  problem, narrow vertical beamwidths should be employed.
 The radar cross section of aircraft targets is, in general, less with circular polarization than  with linear polarization.
Experimental measurementss7 indicate that when an aircraft is illir-  minated with one sense of circular polarization, the echo power on a statistical basis is divided  more or less equally between right-hand and left-hand circular polarization.
With linear  polarization, the amount of energy converted to the orthogonal polarization is about 0.5 dB.
 Thus the net loss of aircraft-echo power:on changing from linear to circular polarization is  about 2.5 dB.
In some cases, however, a.greater value of radar cross section may be obtained  with circular polarization rather, than with linear.79  An alternative to circular polarization is to transmit any linear polarization and receive  on the orthogonal linear polari~ation.'~.~' Spherical raindrops will give no retiirn in the  orthogonal channel if no cross-polarization distortion takes place in the radar or the propaga-  tion medium.
There is some evidence to indicate that crossed linear polarization may give  better rain rejection than conventional circular polarization.
 I.
 1,og-FTC receiver.
A receiver with a logarithmic input-output cllaractcristic followed by a  high-pass filter (fast-time-constant, or FTC, circuit), will provide a constant false-alarm rate  (CFAR) at the output when the input clutter or noise is described by the Rayleigh probability  density function.
CFAR is important since, without it, clutter can excite the radar display and  obscure the presence of desired targets even if the targets are of greater strength than the  clutter.
CFAR prevents obscuration of detectable targets by weaker clutter by maintaining  the clutter output from the receiver at a constant .value well below the saturation level of  the display.
This is especially important in track-while-scan, or automatic detection and  tracking (ADT) systehs, where even small increases in background clutter could result in  excessive false alarms that overload the capacity of the tracking computer.
As with any CFAR,  the constant false-alarm rate is maintained at the expense of the probability of detection.
With  log-FTC there is no improvement in target-to-clutter ratio and there is no subclutter visibility.
 The log-FTC, or similar CFAR, is necessary, however, in order to extract the target informa-  tion contained in the radar signal that otherwise would be undetected if displayed along with  the clutter, or which would be lost because of computer overload in an automatic system.
 Although one of the first applications considered for the log-FTC receiver was the detec-  506INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS Stillanother factorwhichreducestheeffectiveness ofcircular polarization inrainclutter isthedifferent reflection coefficients experienced' bythehorizontal andverticalpolarization components onreflection fromthesurfaceofthelandorthesea.Thisresultsinachangeof polarization andadegradation oftheraincancellation.lIllit>Itwillberecalled fromSec.12.2 thatitispossible foraportionofthetransmitted energytoarriveatthetargetviaasurface­ reflected pathaswellasbythedirectpath.Similarly, precipitation cluttercanresultfroma surface-reflected pathaswellasthedirectpath.Onreflection fromthesurfacethevertically polarized component isattenuated morethanthehorizontal component, anditexperiences a different phaseshift(Fig.12.3).Theresultisthatthehorizontally polarizl.:d component is cancelled toagreaterextentthantheverticalcomponent sothattheoriginalcircularpolariza­ tionisconverted toelliptical polarization withthevertical component predominating.lll Assuming a3.2°vertical beamwidth withcosecant-squared shaping upto10°,theordical calculations givethefollowing maximum cancellation ratiosaslimitedbysurfacl.:rdlections: 20.2dBforsea,23.6dBformarsh,27.2dBforaverageland,and34.1dBforddl.:rt.ll~ Other calculations forground-mapping radars,suchasthoseusedforairportsurface-tramc control, indicate significantly worsecancellation limitations.
A3°vertical beamwidth, pointedo.r belowthehorizon, withcosecant-squared shapingupto30°willresultinthecancellation ratio beinglimitedtoabout13dBoverwaterand17dBovermoistsoil.lIt>Tominimize the problem, narrowverticalbeamwidths shouldbeemployed.
Theradarcrosssectionofaircrafttargetsis,ingeneral,lesswithcircular polarization than withlinearpolarization.
Experimental measurements87indicate thatwhenanaircraft isillu­ minated withonesenseofcircularpolarization, theechopoweronastatistical basisisdivided moreorlessequally between right-hand andleft-hand circular polarization.
Withlinear polarization, theamountofenergyconverted totheorthogonal polarization isabout0.5dB.
Thusthenetlossofaircraft-echo power-onchanging fromlineartocircular polarization is about2.5dB.Insomecases, however, a·greatervalueofradarcrosssectionmaybeobtained withcircular polarization rather,thanwithlinear.79 Analternative tocircular polarization istotransmit anylinearpolarization andreceive ontheorthogonal linearpolarization.79.IHSpherical raindrops willgivenoretllrninthl.: orthogonal channel ifnocross-polarization distortion takesplaceintheradarorthepropaga­ tionmedium.
Thereissomeevidence toindicate thatcrossedlinearpolarization maygive betterrainrejection thanconventional circular polarization.
I,og-FTC receiver.
Areceiver withalogarithmic input-output characteristic followed bya high-pass filter(fast-time-constant, orFTC,circuit), willprovideaconstant false-alarm rate (CFAR)attheoutputwhentheinputclutterornoiseisdescribed bytheRayleigh probability densityfunction.
CFARisimportant since,without it,cluttercanexcitetheradardisplayand obscure thepresence ofdesiredtargetsevenifthetargetsareofgreaterstrength thanthe clutter.CFARprevents obscuration ofdetectable targetsbyweakerclutterbymaintaining theclutteroutputfromthereceiver ataconstant 'valuewellbelowthesaturation levelof thedisplay.
Thisisespecially important intrack-while-scan, orautomatic detection and tracking (ADT)syste·ms, whereevensmallincreases inbackground cluttercouldresultin excessive falsealarmsthatoverload thecapacity ofthetracking computer.
AswithanyCFAR, theconstant false-alarm rateismaintained attheexpenseoftheprobability ofdetection.
With log-FTC thereisnoimprovement intarget-to-clutter ratioandthereisnosubclutter visibility.
Thelog-FTC, orsimilarCFAR,isnecessary, however, inordertoextractthetargetinforma­ tioncontained intheradarsignalthatotherwise wouldbeundetected ifdisplayed alongwith theclutter,orwhichwouldbelostbecauseofcomputer overload inanautomatic system.
Although oneofthefirstapplications considered forthelog-FTC receiverwasthedetec- ti011 of targets it1 sea ~It~tter,~~~~~ it is prolxtt~ly more i~sefi~l for operation in precipitation  clutter.
Siicli cliittcr is niorc likely to 1)e Rnyleigli tlia~i sea cliitter (Sec.
13.3) or larid cliitter  (Sec.
13.5) that oftell cxliibit non-Rayleigli characteristics.
especially with high-resolution  ritditr .
'1'11~ log-F-I.(' II;IS soli~ctiriics I1cc1i cnllctl tr~c~crtlic~r ,fi.u.
 '['lie Kaylcigli p~ol)ability dc~isity lulictio~i its was give11 in Sec.
13.3 is  wl~crc nZ is the Incitn square value of r).
'Tlie Rayleigli pdf lias the property that tlie rrns  arnpliti~tfe oftlie flucti~ations about tlic nieali (detioted by 61)~~) is proportional to the mean Fin.
 or ,?I.,,, = kii,,, .
A logaritlirriic receiver Iiiis tlie ch:tractcristic  rC,,,, = 11 log 1~:~~ (13.31)  Tlie slope of tlic logaritlirnic receiver cliaracteristic at bin is  If tlic input clutter fluctuatiotis dcin are small compared to the total range of the logarithmic  cliaracteristic, the oi~tpi~t IlucttlatiotIs ('it*,,,,, are approximately  (1 O~T,,,,~ = slope x c'itlin = - (5vin = uk  Vin  Tlii~s the output fluctuations are constant.
independent of the input mean.
 Although the output fluctuations about the mean are constant, the output mean is not.
A  liig11-pass filter rcnloves the mean value of the output, leaving the fluctuation of the clutter at a  constant level on the display.
The high-pass filter is equivalent to a differentiation, or to  a circuit with a fast time-constant (FTC).
The noise or clutter fluctuations that appear at the  output of a logarithmic receiver are not symmetrical since the large amplitudes are suppressed  due to tl~c nati~re of the logarithmic cl~aracteristic.
To make the output more like that of a  liriear receiver, tlie log-FTC may he followed by an amplifier with the inverse of the logarith-  ~riic cliaracteristic (antilog).
This restores the contrast of the display and eliminates the loss in  detectability associated with the logarithmic characteristic.
 A true(logarithmic characteristic cannot be maintained down to zero iriput since  I..,,~ 4 - rn as vin --* 0.
At some point the receiver characteristic must deviate from logarithmic  and go through the origin.
The practical logarithmic receiver will have a law given by  I*,,, = u log (1 + hvin).
The receiver characteristic is linear at low signal levels and logarithmic  st large signals.
Tliis is called a litl-log receiver.
The logarithmic characteristic must be main-  tained to about 20 dI3 below tlie rrns noise level.RR A variation of the log-FTC is the log-CFAR  receiver in which tlie order of 10 resolution cells containing clutter are averaged by a narrow-  band video filter with a symmetrical impulse response.90  Althougli tlie logaritllr~iic receiver acts similarly to an automatic STC, it does not  suppress properly, as does STC, tlie nearby clutter echoes which enter via the sidelobes.
STC  turns down the gain at close ranges, thereby reducing sidelobe clutter signals.
Clutter large  cnoiigh to appear in the sidelobes of a logarithmic receiver might not be suppressed and may  confuse tlie radar display.
For this reason STC and logarithmic receivers are sometimes used  together.
Tlie STC action should be in the RF portion of the receiver rather than in the  logarittimic amplifier.
 RADAR CLUTTER 507 tionoftargetsinseac1utter.RR.HQitisprohahly moreusefulforoperation inprecipitation clutter.SuchclutterismorelikelytoheRayleigh thanse,tclutter(Sec.13.3)orlandclutter (Scc.13.5)thatortcncxhibitnon-Rayleigh characteristics.
espccially withhigh-resolution radar.Thelog-FTC hassometimes heencalledwelltlrerfix.
TheRayleigh prohabilily t1ensityfunctioll aswasgiveninSec.13.3is I'>(} (lJ.J(}) whererr2isthemeansquarevalueof1'.TheRayleigh pdfhastheproperty thattherms amplilude oftheIluctuations aboutthemean(t1enoted by(5Ilin)isproportional tothemeanf'in.
or(5"ln=kl\n'Alogarithmic receiverhasthecharacteristic 1'0111=IIloghVin Theslopeofthelogarithmic receivercharacteristic atVinis ~I'OUI II ~I'in Vin(13.31) (13.32) Iftheinputclutterfluctuations (h'inaresmallcompared tothetotalrangeofthelogarithmic characteristic.
theOlitPUtIluctuations (5vOIIIarcapproximately II (51'0111=slopex(51'in=_()Vin=ak Vin(13.33) Thustheoutputfluctuations areconstant, independent oftheinputmean.
Although theoutputfluduations ahoutthemeanareconstant, theoutputmeanisnot.A high-pass filterremoves themeanvalueoftheoutput,leavingthefluctuation oftheclutterata constant levelonthedisplay.Thehigh-pass filterisequ~valent toadifferentiation, orto acircuilwithafasltime-constant (FTC).Thenoiseorclutterfluctuations thatappearatthe outputofalogarithmic receiverarenotsymmetrical sincethelargeamplitudes aresuppressed duetothenatureofthelogarithmic characteristic.
Tomaketheoutputmorelikethatofa linearreceiver, thelog-FTC mayhefollowed byanamplifier withtheinverseofthelogarith­ miccharacteristic (antilog).
Thisrestoresthecontrast ofthedisplayandeliminates thelossin detectability associated withthelogarithmic characteristic.
Atrue{Jogarithmic characteristic cannotbemaintained downtozeroinputsince I'.'UI--4-00as"in--4O.I\tsomepointthereceivercharacteristic mustdeviatefromlogarithmic andgothrough theorigin.Thepractical logarithmic receiver willhavealawgivenby ,'out=alog(I+hl'in)'Thereceivercharacteristic islinearatlowsignallevelsandlogarithmic atlargesignals.Thisiscalledalin-logreceiver.Thelogarithmic characteristic mustbemain­ tainedtoabout20dBbelowthermsnoiselevel.88Avariation ofthelog-FTC isthelog-CFAR receiverinwhichtheorderoftoresolution cellscontaining clutterareaveraged byanarrow­ handvideofilterwithasymmetrical impulseresponse.90 Although thelogarithmic receiver actssimilarly toanautomatic STC,itdoesnot suppress properly, asdoesSTC,thenearbyclutterechoeswhichenterviathesidelobes.
STC turnsdownthegainatcloseranges,therebyreducing sidelobe cluttersignals.Clutterlarge enoughtoappearinthesidelobes ofalogarithmic receivermightnotbesuppressed andmay confusetheradardisplay.ForthisreasonSTCandlogarithmic receivers aresometimes used together.
TheSTCactionshouldbeintheRFportionofthereceiver ratherthaninthe logarithmic amplifier. 13.9 ANGEL ECHOES  Radar echoes can be obtained from regions of the atmosphere where no apparent rellecting  sources seem to exist.
These have been called by varioi~s names, but they are commonly called  gl~osts or nnyels.
They can take several different forms and have been attributed to various  caiises.
There are two general classes of angel echoes: dot angels, which are point targets due to  birds and insects, and distrihirtrd angels, which have siibstantial horirontal or vertical cxtc~lt  and are due to inhomogeneities of the refractive index of the atmosphere.
Birds and insects in  s\\h~ti\ntial nt~mber can also appear as distrihi~tcd ai.rgcls, and can have a dcgracting cfkct on  radar.
Since they are moving clutter to an MTI radar they are difficult to remove by dopplcr  filtering.
Sensitivity time control (STC) has proven a satisfactory method, in many cases, for  reducing the effect of such clutter.
Operation at UHF can reduce the backscatter from insects  and, to some extent, birds because of the fourth-power relationship between crds section and  frequency of a scatterer in the Rayleigh region (Eq.
13.17).
Inhomogeneities of the atmospheric  index of refraction generally do not produce strong enough backscatter to he a serious sotirct.
-;  of clutter to most radars.
 Birds.
Probably the most prominent source of angels is birds.
Although the radar cross section  of a single bird is small compared with that of an ordinary aircraft, the backscatter echo from a  bird can be readily detected by many radars, especially at the shorter ranges, because of the  inverse-fourth-power variation of echo signal with range.
If, for example, the cross section of a  bird the size of a sea gull were 0.01 m2, it would produce as large an echo signal at a range of  10 nmi as would a 100 m2 radar cross-section target at 100 nmi.
When birds travel in Ilocks.
 the total cross section can be significantly greater than that of a single bird.
Because the radar  screen collapses a relatively large volume of space onto a small radar screen, the display can  appear cluttered with bird echoes even though only a few birds can be seen by vistial examina-  tion of the surrounding area.
If there were, on the average, only one bird per sqiiare mile, more  than 300 echoes would be displayed on the PPI within a 10-mile radius from the radar.
This  represents a significant amount of clutter.
It has been said that as few as eight birds per sqiiare  mile can completely blank a PPI screen.
Increased echoes from birds are to be expected during  migratory periods (spring and fall) and during those times of day when bird activity is large  (sunrise and sunset).
 Birds typically fly at speeds of from 15 to 40 knots,'* and some can fly 50 knots or greater.
 These speeds are usually too high to be completely rejected by most microwave MTI radars.
 Most birds fly at altitudes below about 2500 m, with peak numbers between 300 and 1200 m,  or even lo~er.~~.~~  Table 13.3 gives some examples of the radar cross sections of birds taken at three freqiien-  cies with vertical polari~ation.~' The largest values occur at S band.
Other examples of cross  section are given in Fig.
13.14, which plots the average radar cross section as a function of the  weight of the bird.
The solid circles are the averages over a ir 20" sector around the broadside  aspect.g2 The x's are the average of the +20° head-on and +20° tail-on aspects.92993 (Note  that the values given for the pigeon in Fig.
13.10 differ from those given in Table 13.3.
The two  sets of values are from diflerent sources.)  The radar cross section of birds does not show a simple wavelength or size dependen~e.~'  There are resonant effects, as illustrated by the measured cross section of a 21-lb duck at UliF  being nearly twice that of a 4&-lb (The median value of the 4a-lb duck head-on was  600 cm2, and 24 cm2 tail-on.) The backscatter from birds fluctuates over quite large values  with the maximum and minimum differing at times by more than two orders of magnitude  'Thus it is difficult to describe the radar cross section by a single value.
It should properly be  508INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS 13.9ANGEL ECHOES Radarechoescanbeobtained fromregionsoftheatmosphere wherenoapparent rdkcting sourcesseemtoexist.Thesehavebeencalledbyvariousnames,buttheyarecommonly called O'lOstsoraI/gels.Theycantakeseveraldifferent formsandhavebeenattributed tovarious causes.Therearetwogeneralclassesofangelechoes:dotangels,whicharepointtargetsdueto birdsandinsects,anddistrihuted angels,whichhavesubstantial horizontal orvaticalextent andareduetoinhomogeneities oftherefractive indexoftheatmosphere.
Birdsandinsectsin substantial number canalsoappearasdistributed angels,andcanhaveadegrading effedon radar.SincetheyaremovingcluttertoanMTIradartheyaredifficulttoremovebydoppler filtering.
Sensitivity timecontrol(STC)hasprovenasatisfactory method, inmanycases,for reducing theeffectofsuchclutter.Operation atUHFcanreducethebackscatter frominsects and,tosomeextent,birdsbecauseofthefourth-power relationship between crotssectionand frequency ofascatterer intheRayleigh region(Eq.13.17).Inhomogeneities oftheatmospheric indexofrefraction generally donotproduce strongenoughbackscatter tobeaseriollssource ofcluttertomostradars.
Birds.Probably themostprominent sourceofangelsisbirds.Although theradarcrosssection ofasinglebirdissmallcompared withthatofanordinary aircraft, thebackscatter echofroma birdcanbereadilydetected bymanyradars,especially attheshorterranges,because ofthe inverse-fourth-power variation ofechosignalwithrange.If,forexample, thecrosssectionofa birdthesizeofaseagullwere0.01m2,itwouldproduce aslargeanechosignalatarangeof 10nmiaswoulda100m2radarcross-section targetat100nmi.Whenbirdstravelinflocks.
thetotalcrosssectioncanbesignificantly greaterthanthatofasinglebird.Because theradar screencollapses arelatively largevolumeofspaceontoasmallradarscreen,thedisplaycan appearcluttered withbirdechoeseventhoughonlyafewbirdscanbeseenbyvisualexamina­ tionofthesurrounding area.Iftherewere,ontheaverage, onlyonebirdpersquaremile,more than300echoeswouldbedisplayed onthePPIwithinaIO-mileradiusfromtheradar.This represents asignificant amount ofclutter.Ithasbeensaidthatasfewaseightbirdspersquare milecancompletely blankaPPIscreen.Increased echoesfrombirdsaretobeexpected during migratory periods(springandfall)andduringthosetimesofdaywhenbirdactivity islarge (sunrise andsunset).
Birdstypically flyatspeedsoffrom15to40knots,92 andsomecanfly50knotsorgreater.
Thesespeedsareusuallytoohightobecompletely rejected bymostmicrowave MTIradars.
Mostbirdsflyataltitudes belowabout2500m,withpeaknumbers between 300and1200m, orevenlower.95•96 Table13.3givessomeexamples oftheradarcrosssections ofbirdstakenatthreefrequen­ cieswithverticalpolarization.91ThelargestvaluesoccuratSband.Otherexamples ofcross sectionaregiveninFig.13.14,whichplotstheaverageradarcrosssectionasafunction ofthe weightofthebird.Thesolidcirclesaretheaverages overa±200sectoraroundthebroadside aspect.92Thex'saretheaverage ofthe±200head-on and±200tail-onaspects.92.93(Note thatthevaluesgivenforthepigeoninFig.13.10differfromthosegiveninTable13.3.Thetwo setsofvaluesarefromdifferent sources.) Theradarcrosssectionofbirdsdoesnotshowasimplewavelength orsizedependence.
91 Thereareresonant effects,asillustrated bythemeasured crosssectionofa2!-lbduckatUHF beingnearlytwicethatofa41-lbduck.94(Themedianvalueofthe41-lbduckhead-on was 600cm2,and24cm2tail-on.) Thebackscatter frombirdsfluctuates overquitelargevalues withthemaximum andminimum differing attimesbymorethantwoordersofmagnitude.91 Thusitisdifficulttodescribe theradarcrosssectionbyasinglevalue.Itshouldproperly be Table 13.3 Radar cross sections of birds9'  Frequency Mean radar Median radar  Rird batid cross section (cm2) cross section (cm2)  Sparrow ,Y  S  0111:  described statistically.
There is some evidence to indicate that the probability density function  for the radar cross section of (or received power from) a single bird in flight is log-normal.
The  nican-to-median ratio of the cross section, which is a measure of the amount of fluctuation in  the cross section, is found to be independent of the magnitude of the radar cross section but is  a function of the physical size of the bird relative to the radar ~avelength.~' Thus measure-  ments of the mean-to-median ratio might be used to determine the size of the bird b-ing  observed.
Tlie fluctuations it1 the radar cross section have been attributed to the relative  rrlotions between the various parts of the bird and to changes in aspect, as well as to the  wing-beat frequency.
For example, spectral measurements of a small nocturnal migrant (a  pipit) showed a wing-beat frequency of 15.8 Hz; and a migrating rapit (a honey buzzard) gave  a frequency of 3.2 A mallard produced a frequency of 6.5 Hz, plus harmonics at 13 and  3L- I -L._i- 60 100 200 500 1003 I  Weight of bird, q Figure 13.14 Radar cross section of birds  (with closed wings) at S band.
Vcrtical  polarization.
Solid circles apply to average  values ?- 20" around broadside, x's apply to  the average of the 4 20" sector about the  head and tile k20" sector about the tail.
 (.4fier Holyhton arld Smith.93)  RADAR CLUTIER 509 Table13.3Radarcrosssectionsofbirds91 BirdFrequency bandMeanradar crosssectionIcm2)Median radar crosssection(cm2) (jracklc Srarrow Pigeonx S UHF X S UHF X S UHF16 25 0.57 1.6 14 0.02 15 XO II6.9 12 0.45 0.8 II 0.02 6.4 32 8.0 described statistically.
Thereissomeevidence toindicate thattheprobability densityfunction fortheradarcrosssectionof(orreceived powerfrom)asinglebirdinflightislog-normal.
The mean-to-median ratioofthecrosssection.whichisameasure oftheamount offluctuation in thecrosssection.
isfoundtobeindependent ofthemagnitude oftheradarcrosssectionbutis afunction ofthephysical sizeofthebirdrelativetotheradarwavelength.91Thusmeasure­ mentsofthemean-to-median ratiomightbeusedtodetermine thesizeofthebirdb"ing observed.
Thefluctuations intheradarcrosssectionhavebeenattributed totherelative motions between thevarious partsofthebirdandtochanges inaspect,aswellastothe wing-beat frequency.
Forexample.
spectral measurements ofasmallnocturnal migrant (a pipit)showed awing-beat frequency of15.8Hz;andamigrating rapit(ahoneybuzzard) gave arrcquency of3.2HZ.92t\mallardproduced afrequency of6.5Hz,plusharmonics at13and 100------..---r90 .
80 70 60 50.
40.
130 ._____e• ,,-I~--c=- till 100Figure13.14Radarcrosssectionorbirds (withclosedwings)atSband.Vertical polarization.
Solidcirclesapplytoaverage values*20°aroundbroadside, x'sapplyto theaVl"rap.{' orthe±20°sectoraboutthe headandthe±20°sectoraboutthetail.
(AleerHOlll/hco/! andSmith.93)200 Weigh! 01Oird,q__--x \ \'\ x---x-- '\ I \'\'-I::;\ I 0", Oc .
\ '-0,g;,\0/ ij,rr, , I _.:.._-------1->..
..:-'------'----'-_-'I 500 1008x--- e 5V> V>eu (; u d?10.
9 8 7 510 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  19.5 Hz.97 The wing-beat frequency f in hertz and the length I of the wing in millimeters are  foundg8 to be related byJ0.827 = 572.
The term hirdactit~ity nlodrtlation (BAM) has been applied  to the distinctive waveforms obtained from birds." The spectral components of tllc DAM  pattern of a bird in flight are said to be remarkably stableg7 and suited for determining  identity.
  insect^.'^^ Even though they are small, insects are readily detected by radar, and in sufficient  numbers can clutter the display and reduce the capability of a radar to detect desired targets.
A  radar cross section of 0.1 cm2, which might correspond to an insect the size of a housefly at K,  band (8.6 cm ~avelength),~' can be detected at a range of about I I nmi by a radar capable of  seeing a 1 m2 target at 200 nmi.
Even modest insect concentrations (one insect in 10' m') can  cause angel activity which can be classed as moderate.Io0  At .Y.
band, radar cross section measurements of a variety of insects rangofrom 0.02 to  9.6 cm2 with longitudinal polarization, and from 0.01 to 0.96 cm2 for transverse  polarization.'0' A desert locust'02 or a honeybeer0' might have a cross section of about 1 cm2  at X band.
At S band the cross section of a cabbage looper moth is about 2 x 10- ' cm2, and  for an adult field cricket it is 0.1 cm2.'03 The cross section of insects below .Y band is  approximately proportional to the fourtli-power of the freq~iency.'~~.'"~ Appreciable echoes  are obtained only when insect body lengths are greater than a third of the radar wavelength.
 Insects observed broadside have echoes 10 to 1000 times greater than when viewed  end-on.' "  Heavy angel activity can be readily produced by insect concentrations that would scarcely  cause visual awareness.
Insects can be carried by the wind; therefore angels due to insects  might be expected to have the velocity of the wind.
Insect echoes are more likely to be found at  the lower altitudes, near dawn and twilight.
The majority of insects are incapable of flight at  temperatures below 40°F (4.5"C) or above 90°F (32°C): consequently, large concentrations of  insect angel echoes would not be expected outside this temperattrre range.
As with clutter due  to birds, sensitivity time control (STC) can reduce the adverse effects of clutter due to insects.
 Clear-air turbulence.
Some types of angel echoes which are nonpoint targets are attribtrted to  atmospheric effects rather than to birds or insects.
Early attempts to accoirnt for siich L'CIIOL'S  assumed specular reflect ion from gradients in the refractive index (dielectric constant) of the  atmosphere.
Theoretical calculations of the necessary gradients reqtlired to accotrnt for t he  observed angel reflections were excessively large compared to what is found in the real atmo-  sphere.
Instead, it is believed that the observed backscattering can be explained as retlections  from atmospheric turbulence associated with inhomogeneities in the refractive index Thcsc  inhomogeneities might be cailsed by differences in the water vapor, teniperaturc, and pressitre  At low altitude, variations in the water-vapor pressure (humidity) are probably the dominant  effect.
At high altitirde, there is little water vapor, and changes in ttrnperalLire liirvc 11ie most  effect on the refractive index.
 Reflections from clear-air tirrbulence are thus a potential source of radar angel echoes.
 Turbulent motion is characterized by a variable velocity field and tllc prshcncc of no~iun~for-  mities, or eddies, that produce mixing.
The atmosphere can be assitmed to be ttrrbulent  everywhere, but its intensity varies widely both in space and time.
It is only when turbulence is  concentrated into regions of greater or lesser intensity than its surroundings that it is of  interest as an electromagnetic scatterer.
There are at least two types of turbulent atmospherrc  formations that can result in angel activity.
One is the c*ontjrcttvc.
cell or pllirnr that occurs in  the lower part of the atmosphere.
The other is the ntmosplte~~ic hori~orltnl luyrr that can occur  at any altitude.
The latter is the form of ttrrbulent effect that aircraft encounter at the higher  510INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS 19.5HZ.97Thewing-beat frequency finhertzandthelengthIofthewinginmillimeters are found98toberelatedbyfio.827=572.ThetermbirdactilJitymodulation (BAM)hasbeenapplied tothedistinctive waveforms obtained frombirds.92Thespectral components oflheBAM patternofabirdinflightaresaidtoberemarkably stable97andsuitedfordetamining identity.
Insects.
I20Eventhoughtheyaresmall,insectsarereadilydetected byradar,andinsufficienl numbers canclutterthedisplayandreducethecapability ofaradartodetectdesiredtargetsA radarcrosssectionof0.1cm2,whichmightcorrespond toaninsectthesizeofahousetly atKg band(8.6cmwavelength),99 canbedetected atarangeofabout11nmibyaradarcapableof seeinga I m2targetat200nmi.Evenmodestinsectconcentrations (oneinsectin104m.J)can causeangelactivitywhichcanbeclassedasmoderate.loo AtX.band,radarcrosssectionmeasurements ofavarietyofinsectsrangC)from 0.02to 9.6cm2withlongitudinal polarization, andfrom0.01to0.96cm2fortransverse polarization.lolAdesertlocustl02orahoneybeelOImighthaveacrossseclionofaboutIcml atXband.AtSbandthecrosssectionofacabbage loopermothisabout2x10-~cml,and foranadultfieldcricketitis0.1cm2.103Thecrosssection ofinsectsbdowXbandis approximately proportional tothefourth-power ofthefrequency.
104.1liSAppreciable echoes areobtained onlywheninsectbodylengthsaregreaterthanathirdoftheradarwavelength.
Insects observed broadside haveechoes 10to1000timesgreater thanwhenviewed end_on.116 Heavyangelactivitycanbereadilyproduced byinsectconcentrations thatwouldscarcely calisevisualawareness.
Insectscanbecarriedbythewind;therefore angelsduetoinsects mightbeexpected tohavethevelocityofthewind.Insectechoesaremorelikelytobefoundal theloweraltitudes, neardawnandtwilight.
Themajority ofinsectsareincapable ofnightat temperatures below40°F(4.5°C)orabove90°F(32°C);consequently, largeconcentrations of insectangelechoeswouldnotbeexpected outsidethistemperature range.Aswithclutterdue tobirds,sensitivity timecontrol(STC)canreducetheadverse effectsofclutterdue10insects.
Clear-air turbulence.
Sometypesofangelechoeswhicharenonpoint targelsareallribulcd 10 atmospheric effectsratherthantobirdsorinsects.Earlyattempts toaccount forsuchechoes assumed specular reflection fromgradients intherefractive index(dielectric constant) ofIhe atmosphere.
Theoretical calculations ofthenecessary gradients required toaccount forthe observed angelreflections wereexcessively largecompared towhatisfoundintherealatmo­ sphere.Instead, itisbelieved thattheobserved backscattering canbeexplained asrefleclions fromatmospheric turbulence associated withinhomogeneities intherefractive indexThese inhomogeneities mightbecausedbydifferences inthewatervapor,temperature, andpressure.
Atlowaltitude, variations inthewater-vapor pressure (humidity) areprobably thedominant effect.Athighaltitude, thereislittlewatervapor,andchanges intemperalure havethemost effectontherefractive index.
Reflections fromclear-air turbulence arethusapotential sourceofradarangelechoes.
Turbulent motion ischaracterized byavariable velocity fieldandthl'pn;scncc ofnOlllllllfor­ mities,oreddies,thatproduce mixing.
Theatmosphere canbeassumed tobeturbulent everywhere, butitsintensity varieswidelybothinspaceandtime.Itisonlywhenturbulence is concentrated intoregionsofgreaterorlesserintensity thanitssurroundings thatitisof interestasanelectromagnetic scatterer.
Thereareatleasttwotypesofturbulent atmospheric formations thatcanresultinangelactivity.
OneisthecOllvective cellorpilimethatoccursin thelowerpartoftheatmosphere.
Theotheristheatmospheric hori::olllal luy/!/'thatcanoccur atanyaltitude.
Thelatteristheformofturbulent effectthataircraftencounter atthehigher RADAR CLIJTTER 511  altitudes.
The convective cell is generally of greater turbulent intensity than the layer, but it  does not extend over as wide an area of space and is not present as often as layers seem to be.
 Convective cells, which are also called tlrertnals, are the mechanism by which birds and  gliders soar.
When the surface of the earth is heated sufficiently so that the air becomes hotter  than its surroundings, the buoyancy of the heated air will cause it to rise.
If the source of heat is  fixed, tlie rise of buoyant air is called a thermal plume.
Wllerl the rising buoyant air is  separated from the groilrid it may break away and form a freely floating thermal (convective  cell), especially if tllcre is a wind.
Near the ground tlie convective cells might be a few tens of  meters in diameter.
As tlley rise, tiley grow in size and can reach a diameter of 1 to 3 krn.
They  rise until they lose buoya~icy or until they reacli a level wliere condensation takes place.
The  tops of the cells rniglit be at altitudes from 1 to 2 km.
An individual cell might have a life of  from 15 to 30 riiini~tes.
The cells can drift with tlie wind and align themselves in "streets."  Mucli of tllc ktiowlcdgc of tlic bclir~vior of convective cells lias been obtained from rildztr.
 ~iieasure~~~c~it~.~~'~'~'~ 'OR  An atmosl7licric layer is a stratum within which the mean vertical gradient and/or tlie  variance of refractive index are much greater than elsewhere.
Layers may be from a few meters  to more tllan a Iiutldred meters in vertical thickness and might extend in the horizontal from  about one kilometer to several tens of kilometers.
Layers have been observed from altitudes of  about 0.3 to more than 22 km, with the greatest number appearing in the vicinity of 1 to  2 km.'07.109 A typical layer associated with a subsidence inversion might exhibit a decrease of  about 20N units in a thickness of 30 to 50 m'I0 [where N = (n - 1)106, n = refractive index].
 Tile cclioes from clear-air turbulerice are quite weak and are seen only by high-power  radar.
The basic tlleory for scattering from 1iomogeneous and isotropic turbulent media was  first given by Tatar~ki."'.''~ The scattering mechanism from turbulent media is similar to  f3ragg scatter in that a radar of wavelength A scatters from that particular component of tlie  turbuletice wit11 eddy sizes equal to A/2.
The volume reflectivity, or radar cross section (m2) per  ci~hic volume.
fro~n a turh~rlerlt ~tlcdii~ril is  wliere C:.
thc structure constant, represents a measure of the intensity of tlie refractive-index  fluct\~ations, and A is the radar wavelength.
At altitudes of several hundred meters.
values of c.;  arc bctwect~ 10 arid 10 " m '13 , wl~icli correspond to a volume reflectivity of about  0.82 x 10 to 0.82 x 10 " ni - ' at S band (A = 10 cm).
This is quite low as can be seen by  coniparisoti of the volume reflectivity for rain in Fig.
13.12.
At 10 ktn altitude Ci is approxi-  niatcly 10 in ' -', An S-band radar with one degree beamwidth and 1 14s bulsewidth  viewing a turbulent rnediuni with tl = lo-'' m-' yields a radar cross section at 10 km of  about 3 x 10- * m2.
TIILIS, angel echoes frorqclear-air turbulence are not likely to bother most  radars.
 Other angel echoes.
It lias been suggested that other forms of meteorological angels are the  rnantle-shaped eclioes (inverted U- or V-shape) associated with the upper surfaces of cu-  mulus clouds, and cclioes believed to be produced by the boundary surfaces between differen-  tially moisterled surface air over adjacent cold and warm water.'13 Radar also can detect ttic  passage of an irlvisible sea breeze as it moves toward the sh~re.'~.'~~ Occasionally radar  echoes may bc obtained from large niineral or organic particles carried into the air by heavy  winds or tli~nderstorms.'~" Echoes have also been received from the vicinity of forest fires arid  from tile snioke plr~riies of dump fires.loO The reflectivity of smoke particles is too small to  account for these reflections, but tile cclioes might be due to the numerous large particles and  debris svrnetirnes present iri tlie air above tlie fires.
The heat from the fire also might cause  RADAR CLUTIER ~tt altitudes.
Theconvective cellisgenerally ofgreaterturbulent intensity thanthelayer,butit doesnotextendoveraswideanareaofspaceandisnotpresentasoftenaslayersseemtobe.
Convective cells,whicharealsocalledtIJermals, arethemechanism bywhichbirdsand gliderssoar.Whenthesurfaceoftheearthisheatedsufficiently sothattheairbecomes hotter thanitssurroundings.
thebuoyancy oftheheatedairwillcauseittorise.Ifthesourceofheatis fixed.theriseofbuoyant airiscalledathermal plume.Whentherisingbuoyant airis separated fromthegrounditmaybreakawayandformafreelyfloatingthermal(convective cell).especially ifthereisawind.Nearthegroundtheconvective cellsmightbeafewtensof metersindiameter.
Astheyrise,theygrowinsizeandcanreachadiameter of1to3km.They riseuntiltheylosebuoyancy oruntiltheyreachalevelwherecondensation takesplace.The topsofthecellsmightbeataltitudes fromIto2km.Anindividual cellmighthavealifeof from15to:\0minutes.
Thecellscandriftwiththewindandalignthemselves in..streets." Muchoftheknowledge ofthebehavior ofconvective cellshasbeenobtained fromradar measurements.70.IO~ lOA I\natmospheric layerisastratum withinwhichthemeanverticalgradient and/orthe variance ofrdractive indexarcmuchgreaterthanelsewhere.
Layersmaybefromafewmeters tomorethanahundred metersinverticalthickness andmightextendinthehorizontal from aboutonekilometer toseveraltensofkilometers.
Layershavebeenobserved fromaltitudes of about0.3tomorethan22km.withthegreatest numberappearing inthevicinityof1to 2km.I07.I09 Atypicallayerassociated withasubsidence inversion mightexhibitadecrease of about20Nunitsinathickness of30to50milo[whereN=(11-1)106,n=refractive index].
Theechoesfromclear-air turbulence arcquiteweakandareseenonlybyhigh-power radar.Thebasictheoryforscattering fromhomogeneous andisotropic turbulent mediawas firstgivenbyTatarski.III.112 Thescattering mechanism fromturbulent mediaissimilarto Braggscatterinthataradarofwavelength A.scattersfromthatparticular component ofthe turhulence witheddysizesequaltoA.12.Thevolumereflectivity, orradarcrosssection(m2)per cuhicvolume.
fromaturbulent medium is (13.34) where C~.thestructure constant, represents ameasure oftheintensity oftherefractive-index fluctuations, andAistheradarwavelength.
Ataltitudes ofseveralhundred meters.valuesofC; arcbetween 10qand10IIm"213,whichcorrespond toavolumeretlectivity ofabout 0.82x109toO.!Qx10IIm IatSband(A.=10cm).Thisisquitelowascanbeseenby comparison ofthevolumereflectivity forraininFig.13.12.At10kmaltitudeC;isapproxi­ mately10(4III2-'.I\nS-bandradarwithonedegreebeamwidth and1JISpUlsewidth viewingaturbulent medium with'I=10-10m-Iyieldsaradarcrosssectionat10kmof ahout3x10-4m2.Thus,angelechoesfrom.clear-air turbulence arenotlikelytobothermost radars.
Ocherangelechoes.Ithasbeensuggested thatotherformsofmeteorological angelsarethe mantle-shaped echoes(inverted U-orV-shape)associated withtheuppersurfaces ofcu­ mulusclouds,andechoesbelieved tobeproduced bytheboundary surfacesbetweendifferen­ tiallymoistened surfaceairoveradjacent coldandwarmwater.
113Radaralsocandetectthe passageofaninvisible seabreezeasitmovestowardtheshore.70.100 Occasionally radar echoesmaybeobtained rromlargemineralororganicparticles carriedintotheairbyheavy windsorthunderstorms.looEchoeshavealsobeenreceived fromthevicinityofrorestfiresand fromthesmokeplumesordumpfires.loaThereflectivity ofsmokeparticles istoosmallto accountforthesereflections, buttheechoesmightbeduetothenumerous largeparticles and debrissometimes presentintheairabovethefires.Theheatfromthefirealsomightcause atmospheric turbulence which is detectable by radar.
"Ring echoes " have been observed on  PPI displays that start at a point and form a rapidly expanding ring.''' After one ring grows  to a diameter of several miles, a second ring forms.
Other rings can form similarly.
They  expand at velocities ranging from 20 to 30 knots and can attain diameters of 30 km or more.
 These ring-angels are associated with birds flying away from roosting areas.
Angels can also be  caused by second-time-around echoes or large signals that enter the radar via the antenna  sidelobes.
 REFERENCES  1.
Skolnik, M.
I.: Sea Echo, chap.
26 of "Radar Handbook," M.
I.
Skolnik (ed.) McGcBw-Hill Book  Company, New York, 1970.
 2.
Guinard.
N.
W., J.
T.
Ransone, Jr., and J.
C.
Daley: Variation of the NRCS of the Sea with Increasing  Roughness, J.
Ceophys.
Res., vol.
76, pp.
1525-1538, Feb.
20, 1971.
 3.
Daley, J.
C., J.
T.
Ransone, Jr., and J.
A.
Burkett: Radar Sea Return-JOSS I, Naval Research  Laboratory Report 7268.
Washington, D.C., May 11, 1971.
 4.
Daley, J.
C., J.
T.
Ransone, Jr., J.
A.
Burkett, and J.
R.
Duncan: Upwind-Downwind-Crosswind  Sea-Clutter Measurements, Naval Research Laboratory Report 6881, Washington, D.C., Apr.
14, 1969.
 5.
Daley, J.
C., J.
T.
Ransone, Jr., and W.
T.
Davis: Radar Sea Return-JOSS 11, Nacul Resrurch  Laboratory Report 7534, Washington, D.C., Feb.
21, 1973.
 6.
Moskowitz, L.
I.: The Wave Spectrum and Windspeed as Descriptors of the Ocean Surface, Nrlval  Research Laboratory Report 7626, Washington, D.C., Oct.
30, 1973.
 7.
Macdonald, F.
C.: Characteristics of Radar Sea Clutter, pt 1-Persistent Target-Like Echoes in Sea  Clutter, Naval Research Laboratory Report 4902, Washington, D.C., Mar.
19, 1957.
 8.
Lewis, B.
L., and I.
D.
Olin: Some Recent Observations of Sea Spikes, Internatiotral Cotfir~~~rc~.
 RADAR-77, pp.
115-1 19, Oct.
25-28, 1977, IEE (London) Conference Publication no.
155.
 9.
Long, M.
W.: "Radar Reflectivity of Land and Sea," Lexington Books, D.
C.
Heath and Co.,  Lexington, Mass., 1975.
 10.
Lewis, B.
L., J.
P.
Hansen, I.
D.
Olin, and V.
Cavaleri: High-Resolution Radar Scattering Character-  istics of a Disturbed Sea Surface and Floating Debris, Nutul Resurc.lr Lcrhorutory Kcport H 13 1,  Washington, D.C., July 29, 1977.
 11.
Williams, P.
D.
L.: Limitations of Radar Techniques for the Detection of Small Sirrfacc Targets in  Clutter, The Rudio and Electronic Engineer, vol.
45, pp.
379-389, Airgust, 1975.
 12.
Trunk, G.
V., and S.
F.
George: Detection of Targets in Non-Gaussian Sea Clutter, 1EEE Tru~rs., vol.
 AES-6, pp.
620-628, September, 1970.
 13.
Trunk, G.
V.: Kadar Properties of Non-Rayleigll Sea Cluttcr, IEEE 'I'~.atrs., vul.
AIIS-H, I)]).
196 204,  March, 1972.
 14.
Schleher, D.
C.: Radar Detection in Weibull Clutter, IEEE Trans., vol.
AES-12, pp.
736-743, Novem-  ber, 1976.
 15.
Fay, F.
A., J.
Clarke, and R.
S.
Peters: Weibull Distribution Applies to Sea Clutter, Itrtrrnariotral  Conference RADAR-77, pp.
101-104, IEE Conference Publication no.
155.
 16.
Kerr, D.
E.
(ed.): "Propagation of Short Radio Waves," MIT Radiation Laboratory Series, vol.
13,  McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York, 195 1.
 17.
Goldstein, H.: Frequency Dependence of the Properties of Sea Echo, Phys.
Rev., vol.
70, pp.
9311-946,  Dec.
1 and 15, 1946.
 18.
Katzin, M.: On the Mechanisms of Radar Sea Clutter, Proc.
IRE, vol.
45, pp.
44-54, January, 1957.
 19.
Wright, J.
W.: A New Model for Sea Clutter, IEEE Trans., vol.
AP-16, pp.
217-223, March, 1968.
 20.
Guinard, N.
W., and J.
C.
Daley: An Experimental Study of a Sea Clutter Model, Proc.
I EEE, vol.
58,  pp.
543-550, April, 1970.
 21.
Croney, J.: Civil Marine Radar, chap.
31 of " Radar Handbook," M.
I.
Skolnik (ed.), McGraw-Hill  Book Company, New York, 1970.
 22.
Paoli, L.: Sea Clutter Cancellation & Attenuation in Modern Marine Radars, Rivisra Teoriu Srlrnia,  (Rome, Italy), vol.
3, no.
4, pp.
1-9, 1976.
 23.
Croney, J.: Improved Radar Visibility of Small Targets in Sea Clutter, The Rudio und Electrot~ic  Engineer, vol.
32, pp.
135-148, September, 1966.
 512INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS atmospheric turbulence whichisdetectable byradar...Ringechoes tohavebeenobserved on PPIdisplays thatstartatapointandformarapidlyexpanding ring.lOoAfteroneringgrows toadiameter ofseveralmiles,asecond-ring forms.Otherringscanformsimilarly.
They expandatvelocities rangingfrom20to30knotsandcanattaindiameters of30kmormore.
Thesering-angels areassociated withbirdsflyingawayfromroostingareas.Angelscanalsobe causedbysecond-time-around echoesorlargesignalsthatentertheradarviatheantenna sidelobes.
REFERENCES 1.Skolnik, M.I.:SeaEcho,chap.26of"Radar Handbook," M.I.Skolnik (ed.)McGraw-Hili Book Company, NewYork,1970.
2.Guinard, N.W.,J.T.Ransone, Jr.,andJ.C.Daley:Variation oftheNRCSoftheSeawithIncreasing Roughness, J.Geophys.
Res.,voL76,pp.1525-1538, Feb.20,1971.
3.Daley,J.c.,J.T.Ransone, Jr.,andJ.A.Burkett: RadarSeaReturn-JOSS I,NavalResearch Laboratory Report7268,Washington, D.C.,MayII,1971.
4.Daley,J.c.,J.T.Ransone, Jr.,J.A.Burkett, andJ.R.Duncan: Upwind-Downwind-Crosswind Sea-Clutter Measurements, NavalResearch Laboratory Report6881,Washington, D.C.,Apr.14,1969.
5.Daley,J.c.,J.T.Ransone, Jr.,andW.T.Davis:RadarSeaReturn-JOSS II,NavalResearch Laboratory Report7534,Washington, D.C.,Feb.21,1973.
6.Moskowitz, L.I.:TheWaveSpectrum andWindspeed asDescriptors oftheOceanSurface,N"val Research Laboratory Report7626,Washington, D.C.,Oct.30,1973.
7.Macdonald, F.c.:Characteristics ofRadarSeaClutter,ptI-Persistent Target-Like EchoesinSea Clutter,NavalResearch Laboratory Report4902,Washington, D.C.,Mar.19,1957.
8.Lewis,B.L.,andI.D.Olin:SomeRecentObservations ofSeaSpikes,International Confert!lIce RADAR-77, pp.115-119, Oct.25-28,1977,lEE(London) Conference Publication no.155.
9.Long,M.W.:"Radar Reflectivity ofLandandSea,"Lexington Books,D.C.HeathandCo., Lexington, Mass.,1975.
10.Lewis,B.L.,J.P.Hansen,I.D.Olin,andV.Cavaleri: High-Resolution RadarScattering Character­ isticsofaDisturbed SeaSurfaceandFloating Debris,NavalResarch LtJ!Joratory ReportX131, Washington, D.C.,July29,1977.
II.Williams, P.D.L.:Limitations ofRadarTechniques fortheDetection ofSmallSurfaceTargetsin Clutter,TheRadioandElectronic Engineer, vol.45,pp.379-3H9, August, 1975.
12.Trunk,G.V.,andS.F.George: Detection ofTargetsinNon-Gaussian SeaClutter,IEEETrailS.,vol.
AES-6,pp.620-628, September, 1970.
13.Trunk,G.V.:RadarProperties ofNon-Rayleigh SeaClutier,IEEl.:;'!'rtllIS.,vul.AI:S-K,pp.1%204, March,1972.
14.Schleher, D.c.:RadarDetection inWeibullClutter,IEEETrans.,vol.AES-12, pp.736-743,Novem­ ber,1976.
15.Fay,F.A.,J.Clarke,andR.S.Peters:Weibull Distribution AppliestoSeaClutter,Intt'rnatiollal COt!{erence RADAR-??, pp.101-104, lEEConference Publication no.155.
16.Kerr,D.E.(ed.):"Propagation ofShortRadioWaves," MITRadiation Laboratory Series,vol.13, McGraw-Hili BookCompany, NewYork,1951.
17.Goldstein, H.:Frequency Dependence oftheProperties ofSeaEcho,Phys.Rep.,vol.70,pp.938-946, Dec.Iand15,1946.
18.Katzin,M.:OntheMechanisms ofRadarSeaClutter,Proc.IRE,vol.45,pp.44-54,January, 1957.
19.Wright,J.W.:ANewModelforSeaClutter,IEEETrans.,vol.AP-16,pp.217-223, March,1968.
20.Guinard, N.W.,andJ.C.Daley:AnExperimental StudyofaSeaClutterModel,Proc.IEEE,vol.58, pp.543-550, April,1970.
21.Croney, J.:CivilMarineRadar,chap.31of"RadarHandbook," M.I.Skolnik (ed.),McGraw-Hili BookCompany, NewYork,1970.
22.Paoli,L.:SeaClutterCancellation &Attenuation inModern MarineRadars,RivistaTeclliaSelt'nia, (Rome,Italy),vol.3,no.4,pp.1-9,1976.
23.Croney,J.:Improved RadarVisibility ofSmallTargets inSeaClutier,TheRadioandElecrrollic Engineer, vol.32,pp.135-148, September, 1966. 24.
Croney.
J., and A.
Woroncow: Dependence of Sea Clutter Decorrelation Improvements Upon Wave  Height, IEE lt~t.
Cot!f:.otr Ad~lances in ,Marine -Navigatiottal Aids, July 25-27, 1972, IEE (London)  Coliference Publication no.
87.
pp.
52-59.
 25.
Valcnxuela.
Ci.
R..
and M.
R.
Laitig: Study of Iloppler Spectra of Radar Sea Eclio.
J.
Geopkys.
Rtps..
 vol.
75, pp.
551 563, Jan.
20.
1970.
 26.
'Trunk, (i.
V.: Trimmed-Mean Iletcctor for Noncoherent Distributions, Nut~~l Rt~secirch Lohorc~torp  Rcport 6997, ~dsliinpton.
D.C..
Occ.
l I.
1969.
 27.
'trt~tik, (i.
V.: 1-t~rtlicr Rrstrlts o~i llic 1)ctcction of I'argcts in Non-(iaussian Sea Clutter.
IEEE  7'rutu..
vol.
,413-7, pp.
553 556, May.
1971.
 28.
Sclileher.
I>.
C.: Radar Detection in Log-Normal Clutter, lEEE 1975 l~~terttatio~tal Radar Cot~fi~re~tcr,  Arlinptoti.
Va..
Apr.
21 23.
1975, pp.
262 267.
 29.
Jakcman.
I!..
and P.
N.
Pusey: A Model for Non-Rayleigli Sea Eclio, lEEE Trtit~s..
vol.
AP-24.
pp.
 X06 8 14.
Novcmhcr.
1976.
 30.
('roriey.
J.: Clutter and Its Reduction on Shipborne Radars, lt~terr~atiotrul Cottfere~lce otr Radtir  I'rcpset~t t111d F'~rtrtrr.
Oct.
23--25, 1973.
IEE (London) Conference Publication no.
105.
pp.
213 220.
 31.
Croncy, J..
A.
Woroncow, arid B.
R.
Gladman: Further Observation on the Detection of Small  l'argets in Sea Clutter, Tire Radio ut~d Electronic Etrginecr, vol.
45, pp.
105--I 15, March.
1975.
 32.
Croney, J.: Clutter on Radar Displays, Wireless E~tgr., vol.
33, pp, 83--96, April, 1956.
 33.
Wylic, F.
J.: "Tlie lJse of Radar at Sea." Hollis and Carter.
Ltd..
London.
1968.
 34.
llarrison, A.: Marine Radar Today -A Review, Tlre Radio utrd Electrorric E~rginver, vol.
47.
pp.
 177 183, April, 1977.
 35.
Moore, R.
K.: Ground Echo, chap.
25 of" Radar Handbook," M.
1.
Skolnik (ed.).
McGraw-Hill  Rook Co..
New York, 1970.
 36.
Harton.
U.
K.: "Radars.
vol.
5, Radar Clutter." Artech House, Inc., Dedham, Mass..
1975.
(A collec-  tion of 38 reprints on sea, land, and atmospheric clutter.)  37.
I);~lcy.
J.
c..
W.
-1'.
I>avis.
J.
K.
I3uncan.
and M, B.
Laing: NKL Terrain Clutter Study.
Pliasc II.
 Nc~t.ril Rt~setirc.11 L[~horutory Rcport 6749, Washington, D.C., Oct.
21, 1968.
 3X.
K;tt7.
I..
arid L.
M.
Spclncr: Polarization and Depression-Angle Dependence of Radar Terraill  Rcturn.
J.
Rcs.
Not.
Blrr.
Stds., vol.
64D, pp.
483-486, September/October, 1960.
 39.
Krason.
I!..
and <;.
Randig: Terrain Backscattering Characteristics at Low Grazing Angles for .Y-  arid S-13and.
I'roc,.
IEEE.
vol.
54, pp.
1964.- 1965, December, 1966.
 40.
C'osgriff, R.
L..
W.
11.
Peake.
and R.
C.
Taylor: Terrain Scattering Properties for Sensor Systcrn  Ilesign (Terrain Handbook 11).
Etryitrtrri~~g E.~perimolt Statiott B~rlletin 110.
181.
The Ohio State  University, Columbus, Ohio, May, 1960.
(Reprinted in ref.
36.)  41.
1)yer.
F.
R., N.
C.
Currie.
and M.
S.
Applegate: Radar Backscatter from Land, Sea, Rain, and Snow at  Millimeter Wavelengths, It~terttatiot~al Cot?feret~ce RADAR-77, pp.
559-563, 25-28 Oct., 1977.
IEE  (London) Conference Publication no.
155.
 42.
Barton, I>.
K., and Slirader.
W.
\Y.: Interclutter Visibility in MTI Systems, IEEE Eascon Record,  1969.
pp.
294 297.
 43.
Rigden.
C.
J.: High Resolution Land clutter Characteristics, IEE Conf.
Publ.
No.
105.
Rtdar.- -  Prc~sotrr arrd Frttrrri~, London.
Oct.
23 -25, 1973, pp.
227-232.
 44.
Valcn7.~la.
G.
R..
and M.
B.
Laing: Point-Scatterer Formulation of Terrain Clutter Statistics, Narsal  Resi~orclt Luhoratory Report 7459, Sept.
27, 1972, Washington, D.C.
 45.
Warden.
M.
P.: An Experimental Study of Some Clutter Characteristics, AGARD Cot?/: Proc.
tto.
66  on .4dl*atrced Rudur Systert~s, November.
1970.
 46.
Ulaby, F.
T., W.
H.
Stiles.
L.
F.
Dellwig.
and B.
C.
Hanson: Experiments on the Radar Backscatter of  Snow, IEEE Tratts..
vol.
GE-15, pp.
185-189, October, 1977.
 47.
Ritipwalt.
1).
L..
and F.
C.
MacDonald: Terrain Clutter Measurements in the Far North, Report of  NRI, I'royri~ss.
Naval Research Laboratory.
Wasllington, D.C., pp.
9-14, December, 1956.
 48.
Ulahy.
F.
T.: Radar Response to Vegetation, IEEE Trans., vol.
AP-23, pp.
36-45, January, 1975.
 49.
Illahy, 1:.
T..
T.
F.
Busli, and P.
P.
Batlivala: Radar Response to Vegetation 11: 8-18 GHz Band,  IEEE 7'rrlrrs., vol.
AP-23, pp.
608 618, September, 1975.
 50.
Illahy.
F.
T..
and P.
P.
Batlivala: Diurnal Variations of Radar Backscatter from a Vegetation Canopy,  IEEE 7'ro11s., vol.
AP-24, pp.
1 1 - 17, January.
1976.
 51.
Busli, T.
F., and F.
T.
Ulahy: Radar Return from a Continuous Vegetation Canopy, IEEE Trutrs.,  vol.
AP-24, pp.
269 276, May.
1976.
 52.
Ulaby, F.
T..
and T.
F.
Bush: Corn Growth as Monitored by Radal.
IEEE Tratu., vol.
AP-24, pp.
 8 19-828, November, 1976.
 53, dcloor.
G.
P..
A.
A.
Jurriens, and H.
Gravestein: The Radar Backscatter from Selected Agricultural  Crops, IEEE Trutrs., vol.
GE-12, pp.
70-77, April, 1974.
 RADAR CLUTTER 513 24.Croney.J..andA.Woroncow: Dependence ofScaClutterDecorrelation Improvements UponWave Height.
1EElilt.COII(0I1Adl lallcesillMar;lIeNav;gat;ollaIAids.
July25-27.1972.lEE(London) Conference Publication no.87.pp.5.1-59.
25.Valen7uela, G.R..andM.R.Laing:StudyofDopplcr SpectraofRadarSeaEcho.J.Geopllys.
Res..
vol.75.pp.551563,Jan.20,1970.
26.Trunk.G.V.:Trimmed-Mcan Detector forNoncoherent Distributions.
Nal1alResearch LanorC/tory Report6997.Wdshington, D.C..Dec.II.1969.
27.Trunk.
(i.V.:Fmther ResultsontheDetection ofTargets inNon-{iaussian ScaCluller, IEEE ·ruJIls..vol.AES-7.pp.553556,May.1971.
n.Schlcher.
D.c.:RadarDetection inLog-Normal Clult~r,IEEE1975Illternat;ollal RadarCOllferellce.
1\r1ingtoll.
Va..Apr.21n.1975.pp.262267.
29.Jakcman.
E.,andP.N.Pusey:AModelforNon-Rayleigh ScaEcho.IEEETrailS.•vol.AP-24.pp.
X06X14.Novemhcr.
1976.
30.Croncy.
J.:ClullcrandItsReduction onShipborne Radars.
IlIterllatiollal COllferellce allRadar l're.H'/lt (lIldFutl/re.Oct.13-25.1973.1EE(London) Conference Publication no.105.pp.213220.
31.Croncy.
1..1\.Woroncow.
andB.R.Gladman: Further Observation ontheDetection ofSmall Targcts inScaClutier, TheRadio Q/ldElectrOllic Ellg;/lecr.
vol.45,pp.105--J15.March.
1975.
32.Croncy.
J.:ClullcronRadarDisplays, Wireless Ellgr.,vol.33.pp.83--96,April,1956.
33.Wylic.F.J.:"TheUseofRadaratSea,"HollisandCarter,Ltd.,London, 1968.
34_Harrison.
1\_:Marine RadarToday-A Review.
TileRadioarIdElectrollic Ellgill(.'('/'.
vol.47.pp.
177183,April,1977.
.
35.Moore.
R.K.:Ground Echo,chap.25of"RadarHandbook," M.I.Skolnik (cd.).McGraw-Hili RookCo..NewYork,1970.
36.Harton, DK.:"Radars.
vol.5,RadarClutter," ArtechHouse,Inc..Dedham.
Mass..1975.(Acollec­ tionof38reprints onsca.land,andatmospheric c1uller.) 37.Daley.JC..WT.Davis.J.R.Duncan, andM.B.Laing:NRLTerrain ClutterStudy.PhaseII.
Nal'ClIRescarch La!Joratorj' Rcport6749,Washington, D.C.,Oct.21,1968.
~X.Katz.I..andL.M.Spctncr: Polarization andDepression-Angle Dcpendence ofRadarTerrain Return.J.Rcs.Nat.Bill'.Stds.,vo/.64D,pp.483-486, Septembcr/October, 1960.
39.Krason.
II.,andG.Randig: Tcrrain Backscaltering Characteristics atLowGrazing Anglesfor.\'­ andS-Band.
l'roc.IfEE.vol.54,pp.1964--1965, Decembcr.
1966.
40.Cosgriff.
R.L..W.H.Pcake,andR.C.Taylor: Terrain Scattcring Properties forSensorSySl\:m Design(Terrain Handbook II),Ellgineerillg Experiment StationBlliletin 110.181,TheOhioState University, Columbus.
Ohio,May,1960.(Reprinted inref.36.) 41.Dyer.F.R.,N.C.Currie.andM.S.Applegate: RadarBackscatter fromLand,Sea,Rain,andSnowat Millimeter Wavclengths.
Illtel'llational COllference RADAR-77, pp.559-563.
25-28Oct.,1977.lEE (London) Confercncc Publication no.155.
42.Rarton.
D.K..andShrader, W.W.:Intcrc1utter Visibility inMTISystems, IEEEEasconRecord.
1969.pr.294297.
.
43.Rigden.C.1:HighResolution LandClutter Characteristics, lEEConf.Pub/.No.lOS,Radar-- Prcscnt(lIIdflltl/re,London, Oct.23-25,1973,pp.227-232.
.
44.Valcl1Z~la, G.R..andM.B.Laing:Point-Scatlerer Formulation ofTerrainClutterStatistics, Naral Researc11 La!Joratory Report7459,Sept.27,1972,Washington, D.C.
45.Warden, M.P.:AnExperimental StudyofSomeClutterCharacteristics, AGARD C01!(Proc.no.66 OilAdrllllced RadarSystems, November.
1970.
46.Ulaby.F.1'.,W.H.Stilcs,L.F.Dellwig.
andB.C.Hanson: Experiments ontheRadarBackscatter of Snow.IEEETrans.,vol.GE-15.pp.185-189.
October, 1977.
47.Ringwalt.
f)L..andF.C.MacDonald: TerrainClutterMeasurements intheFarNorth,Reportor NRLProgrcss.
NavalResearch Laboratory.
Washington, D.C.,pp.9-14,December, 1956.
4R.Ulahy.F.1'.:RadarResponse toVegctation, IEEETrans.,vol.AP-23,pp.36-45,January, 1975.
49.lliahy.F.T..1'.F.Rush.andP.
P.Ratlivala: RadarResponse toVegetation II:8-18GHzBand.
IEEETrans,vol.AP-2J,pr.608618.
Septembcr, 1975.
50.LJlaby.F.T..andP.
P.Batlivala: Diurnal Variations ofRadarBackscatter fromaVegetation Canopy.
IEEETrmls..vol.AP-24,pp.11-17.January.
1976.
51.Bush,T.F..andF.T.Ulaby:RadarReturnfromaContinuous Vegetation Canopy, IEEETraIlS..
vol.AP-24,pr.269276, May,1976.
52.Ulahy.F.1'..and1'.F.Rush:CornGrowth asMonitored byRada•.IEEETrailS.,vol.AP-24.pp.
819-828.
Novcmbcr, 1976.
5.1.deLoor.
G.P..A.A.Jurriens.
andH.Gravestein: TheRadarBackscatter fromSelected Agricultural Crops.IEEETrailS..vol.CiE-I2.pp.70-77,April,1974. 54.
Bush, T.
F., F.
T.
Ulaby.
and W.
H.
Peake: Variability in the Measurcmcnt of Radar Backscatter,  1 EEE Trans., vol.
AP-24, pp.
896-899.
November, 1976.
 55.
Clapp, R.
E.: A Theoretical and Experin~ental Study of Radar Ground Rrturn.
AllT Rudiutioti  Laboratory Rttpt.
1024, April.
1946.
 56.
Twersky, V.: On Scattering and Reflectiotl of Electromagnetic Wavcs hy Rougti Surfaces.
IRE  Trans., vol.
AP-5, pp.
81-90, January, 1957.
 57.
Katz, I., and L.
M.
Spetner: Two Statistical Models of Radar Return, IRE Trr~t~s., vol.
AP-K, pp.
 242-246.
May.
1960.
 58.
Beckmann, P..
and A.
Spizzichino: "The Scattering of Electromiignetic Wavcs frorn Rougll Sirr-  faces," The Macmillan Company, New York.
1963.
 59.
Kalmus.
H.
P.: Doppler Wave Recognition with High Cluttei Rejection.
IEEE Trut~s., vol.
AES-3  Supplement, no.
6, pp.
334-339, November, 1967.
 60.
Ruze, J., F.
I.
Sheftman, and D.
A.
Cahlander: Radar Ground-Clutter Shields, Prot.
I EEE.
vol.
51.
 pp.
1 17 1 - 1 183, September, 1966.
 61.
Becker, J.
E., and J.-C.
Sureau: Control of Radar Site Environment by Use of Fences, IEEE Truns.,  vol.
AP-14, pp.
768-773, November, 1966.
J  62.
~ecker, J.
E., and R.
E.
Millett: A Double-Slot Radar Fence for Increased Clutter Suppression, IEEE  Trans., vol.
AP-16, pp.
103-108, January, 1968.
 63.
Albersheim.
W.
J.: Elevation Tracking Through Clutter Fences.
IEEE Tru~rs., vol.
AES-3, no.
6  (EASTCON Suppl.), pp.
366-373, November, 1967.
 64.
Shrader, W.
W.: Moving Target Indication Radar.
IEEE NEREAf 74 Rccord, pt 4: Rudur SJ~S~~,IIIS  and Conrponrnts, Oct.
28-31, 1974, pp.
18-26, IEEE Catalog no.
74 CHO 934-0 NEREM.
 65.
Parashar, S.
K., R.
M.
Haralick, R.
K.
Moore, and A.
W.
Biggs: Radar Scatterometer Discrimination  of Sea-Ice Types, IEEE Trans., vol.
GE-15, pp.
83-87, April, 1977.
 66.
Williams, P.
D.
L.: Detection of Sea Ice Growlers by Radar, IEE Cot!/: Pirhl.
no.
105, Rudar- Prcsrtit  and Futrtrr, London, Oct.
23-25, 1973, pp.
239-244.
 67.
Waite, A.
H., and S.
J.
Schmidt: Gross Errors in Height Indication from Pulsed Radar Altimctzrs  Operating over Thick Ice or Snow, Proc.
IRE, vol.
50, pp.
15 15-1520, June, 1962.
 68.
Pilon, R.
O., and C.
G.
Purves: Radar Imagery of Oil Slicks, IEEE Trans., vol.
AES-9, pp.
630 636,  September, 1973.
 69.
Probert-Jones, J.
R.: The Radar Equation in Meteorology.
Qlturt.
J.
Roy.
hfrrror.
Soc., vol.
88, pp.
 485-495, 1962.
 70.
Battan, L.
J.: "Radar Observation of the Atmosphere," Unit).
of Chicugo Press, Chicago, Ill., 1973.
 71.
Gunn, K.
L.
S., and T.
W.
R.
East: The Microwave Propcrties of Precipitation Particles, Qirurt.
J.
 Roy.
Meteor.
Soc., vol.
80, pp.
522-545, October, 1954.
 72.
Haddock, F.
T.: Scattering and Attenuation of Microwave Radiation Through Rain.
Natlal Rrsrurch  Laboratory, Washington, D.C.
(unpublished manuscript), 1948.
 73.
Smith, P.
L., Jr., K.
R.
Hardy, and K.
M.
Glover: Applications of Radar to Meteorological Opera-  tions and Research, Proc.
IEEE, vol.
62, pp.
724-745, June, 1974.
 74.
Gunn, K.
L.
S..
and J.
S.
Marshall: The Distribution with Size of Aggregate Snowflakes, J.
hlrtror.,  VOI.
15, pp.
452-466, 1958.
 75.
Sekhon, R.
S., and R.
C.
Srivastava: Snow Size Spectra and Radar Reflectivity, J.
.lrmos.
Sci., vol.
27,  pp.
299-307, 1970.
 76.
Puhakka, T.: On the Dependence ofthe Z-R-Relation on the Temperature in Snowfall, Prepritirs 16111  Rudur Meteorology Conference, Am.
Meteor.
Soc., Apr.
22-24, 1975, Houston, Texas, pp.
504- 507.
 77.
Austin, P.
M.: Radar Measurements of the Distribution of Precipitation in New England Storms,  Proc.
10th Weather Radar ConJ, pp.
247-254, 1963.
 78.
Saxton, J.
A.: The Influence of Atmospheric Conditions on Radar Performance, J.
Inst.
Nuviguriotr  (London), vol.
1 I, pp.
290-303, 1958.
 79.
Schneider, A.
B., and P.
D.
L.
Williams: Circular Polarization in Radars, Rudio i111d Elrctro~ric  Engineer, vol.
47, no.
1/2, pp.
11-29, JanuaryIFebruary, 1976.
 80.
Offutt, W.
B.: A Review of Circular Polarization as a Means of Precipitation Clutter Suppression and  Exumples, Proc.
Natl.
Electronics Con& (Chicago), vol.
1 1, pp.
94 - 100, 1955.
 81.
Hendry, A., and G.
C.
McCormick: Deterioration of Circular-polarization Clutter Cancellation in  Anisotropic Precipitation Media, Electronics Letters, vol.
10, no.
10, pp.
165 - 166, May 16, 1974.
 82.
Nathanson, F.
E.: Adaptive Circular Polarization, IEEE 1975 lrtternutionril Radar Con/c'rrticc, Apr.
 21-23, 1975, pp.
221-225.
 83.
White, W.
D.: Circular Polarization C.uts Rain Clutter, Electronics, vol.
27, pp.
158-160, March,  1954.
 84.
McFee, R., and T.
M.
Maher: Effect of Surface Reflections on Rain Cancellation of Circularly  Polarized Radars, IRE Trans., vol.
AP-7, pp.
199-201, April, 1959.
 514INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS 54.Bush.T.F.,F.T.Ulaby,andW.H.Peake:Variability intheMeasurement ofRadarBackscatter.
IEEETrans.,vol.AP-24,pp.896-899.
November.
1976.
55.Clapp,R.E.:ATheoretical andExperimental StudyofRadarGround Return.,\fITRadialioll Laboratory Rept.1024,April.1946.
56.Twersky, V.:OnScattering andRdlection ofElectromagnetic WavesbyRough Surface~.
IRE Trans.,vol.AP-5.pp.81-90,January, 1957.
57.Katz.I.,andL.M.Spetner: TwoStatistical ModelsofRadarReturn.IRETrWls..vol.AP-K.pp.
242-246.
May.1960.
58.Beckmann.
P..andA.Spizzichino: ..TheScattering ofElectrom,ignetic WavesfromRoughSur­ faces,"TheMacmillan Company.
NewYork.1963.
59.Kalmus, H.P.:Doppler WaveRecognition withHighClutterRejection.
IEEETrailS..vol.A[5-3 Supplement.
no.6.pp.334-339.
November.
1967.
60.Ruze,J.,F.LSheftman, andD.A.Cahlander: RadarGround-Clutter Shields.Pmc.IEEE.vol.54.
pp.1171-1183, September.
1966.
61.Becker,J.E.•andJ.-C.Sureau:Control ofRadarSiteEnvironment byUseofFences.IEEETrailS.
vol.AP-14,pp.768-773, November, 1966.
J 62.Becker,J.E.,andR.E.Millett:ADouble-Slot RadarFenceforIncreased ClutterSuppression.
IEEE Trans.,vol.AP-16.pp.
103-108, January, 1968.
63.Albersheim.
W.J.:Elevation Tracking Through ClutterFences.IEEETrailS,vol.AES-3,no.6 (EASTCON Suppl.), pp.
366-373.
November.
1967.
64.Shrader, W.W.:Moving TargetIndication Radar.IEEENEREM 74Record.pl4:RadarSyslt.'ms andComponents, Oct.28-31,1974,pp.18-26.IEEECatalog no.74CHO934-0NEREM.
65.Parashar, S.K.,R.M.Haralick, R.K.Moore,andA.W.Biggs:RadarScatterometer Discrimination ofSea-IceTypes,IEEETrans.,vol.GE-15,pp.83-87,April.1977.
66.Williams, P.D.L.:Detection ofSeaIceGrowlers byRadar,lEECOI!(Puhl.no.105.Radar·Prt.'st'tll andFutllre,London, Oct.23-25,1973,pp.239-244.
67.Waite,A.H.,andS.J.Schmidt: GrossErrorsinHeightIndication fromPulsedRadarAltimetas Operating overThickIceorSnow,Proc.IRE,vol.50,pp.1515-1520, June.1962.
68.Pilon,R.0.,andC.G.Purves:RadarImagery ofOilSlicks.IEEETrailS..vol.AES-9.pp.630636.
September, 1973.
69.Probert-Jones, J.R.:TheRadarEquation inMeteorology.
Quart.J.Ro.v.Melt'or.Soc.,vol.Hg,pp.
485-495, 1962.
70.Baltan,L.J.:..RadarObservation oftheAtmosphere," Vnil'.ofCilicago Press,Chicago.
III..1973.
71.Gunn,K.L.S.,andT.W.R.East:TheMicrowave Properties ofPrecipitation Particles.
Quurt.J.
Roy.Meteor.Soc.,vol.80,pp.522-545, October, 1954.
72.Haddock, F.T.:Scattering andAttenuation ofMicrowave Radiation Through Rain.Nat'alResearch Lahoratory, Washington, D.C.(unpublished manuscript), 1948.
73.Smith,P.L.,Jr.,K.R.Hardy,andK.M.Glover: Applications ofRadartoMeteorological Opera­ tionsandResearch, Proc.IEEE,vol.62,pp.724-745.
June,1974.
74.Gunn,K.L.S..andJ.S.Marshall: TheDistribution withSizeofAggregate Snowflakes, J.Melear..
.vol.15,pp.452-466, 1958.
75.Sekhon, R.S.,andR.C.Srivastava: SnowSizeSpectraandRadarReflectivity.
J.Almos.Sci.,vol.27.
pp.299-307, 1970.
76.PUhakka, T.:OntheDependence oftheZ-RRelation ontheTemperature inSnowfall, Preprims 16/11 RadarMeteorology Conference, Am.Meteor.Soc.,Apr.22-24,1975,Houston, Texas.pp.504507.
77.Austin.P.M.:RadarMeasurements oftheDistribution ofPrecipitation inNewEngland Storms, Proc.10thWeather RadarConf.pp.247-254.
1963.
78.Saxton,J.A.:TheInfluence ofAtmospheric Conditions onRadarPerformance, 1.Inst.Navigation (London), vol.11,pp.290-303, 1958.
79.Schneider.
A.B.•andP.D.L.Williams: Circular Polarization inRadars,RadioWIdEla/ronk Engineer, vol.47,no.1/2,pp.11-29.January/February, 1976.
80.Offutt,W.B.:AReviewofCircular Polarization asaMeansofPrecipitat ionClutterSuppression and Examples, Proc.Natl.Electronics Conf(Chicago), vol.II,pp.94-100,1955.
HI.Hendry, A.•andG.C.McCormick: Deterioration ofCircular-polarization ClutterCancellation in Anisotropic Precipitation Media,Electronics Letters,vol.10,no.10,pp.165-166, May16,1974.
82.Nathanson, F.E.:Adaptive Circular Polarization, IEEE1975International RadarCon./i.·rt'nct.', Apr.
21-23,1975,pp.221-225.
83.White,W.D.:Circular Polarization CutsRainClutter,Electronics, vol.27.pp.158-160, March.
1954.
84.McFee, R.,andT.M.Maher:EffectofSurfaceReflections onRainCancellation ofCircularly Polarized Radars,IRETrans.,vol.AP-7.pp.199-201, April,1959. 85.
Beasley.
E.
W.: Efict of Surface Reflections on Rail1 Cancellatiori in Radars Using Circular Polariza-  tion.
Proc.
IEEE.
vol.
54.
pp.
2OOU -2001.
December; 1966.
 86.
Kalafus.
R.
M.: Rain Cancellation Deterioration Due to Surface Reflections in Ground-Mapping  Radars CJsing Circular Polari~ation.
IEEE Trutrs..
vol.
AP-23, pp.
269-271, Marcll.
1975.
 87.
Gent, H..
I.
M.
Hunter.
and N.
P.
Robinson: Polarization of Radar Echoes, Including Aircraft.
 Precipitation.
and Terrain.
Proc.
IEE.
vol.
110.
pp.
2139-2148.
Dcccmber.
1963.
 88.
Croney.
J.: The Reduction of Sea and Rain Clutter in Marine Radars, J.
Ilwr.
Nariyutiotr (Lorldof~),  vol.
7.
pp 17.5 1x0.
190 192.
1954.
 89.
C'ror~cy.
J : ('lr~ttcr.
on K;~tl;~r.
1)isplays.
IVir.c~lt.s.s 111qr..
vol.
33, 1111.
HZ 96, Ap~.il, 1956.
 90.
Taylor J W..
Jr..
and J.
Mattern: Reccivers.
chap.
5 of Rudsr lltrtrdhook, M.
I.
Skolriik (ed.).
 Mdiraw-Hill Hook Cornpany.
New York.
1970.
 91.
Kor~r;ld.
1'.
(i..
J.
J.
Ilicks.
:tnd F.
H.
1)obson: Radar Characteristics of Rirds in Flight.
Scic~rtc.cs.
vol.
 159.
1311 274 ZHO.
Jan.
19, 1908.
 92.
flor~gl~tori.
I:.
W..
1:.
I%l;ickwcll.
and T.
A: Wilmot: Rird Strike and [tie Radar Properties of Birds,  Iitr111rrot1~1 'o.
I it I'l.cscr~r utrd F'II~III.CJ.
Oct.
23 25.
1973, pp.
257 262.
IEE Conference  Puh.
no.
105.
 93.
Iloughtori.
I:.
W..
:~nd N.
J.
Smith: Radar Eclioing Areas of Rirds.
Roycil Radar Esrtrhlisl~t~~c~~~t  Atcv~torcrtrdrr~r~ no.
2557.
July.
1969, Malvern, England.
 94.
Hlacksrnitli.
P..
Jr..
and R.
H.
Mack: On Measuring the Radar Cross Sections of Ducks and Chickens,  Proc.
IEEE.
vol.
53.
p.
1125.
August, 1965.
 95.
1-lock.
W.
I,.: Monitoring Bird Movements by Radar, IEEE Sl)c~ctrto~r, vol.
5, pp.
62-66, June, 1968.
 96.
East~.ood.
I.!.: " Radar Ornithology," Methuen & Co., Ltd., London, 1967.
 97.
Blackwell.
F..
and E.
W.
Houghton: Radar Tracking and Identification of Wild Duck During the  Aut urnn M iprat ion.
I'roc.
World CON/: OII Bird Huzards ro Aircruii, Cunuda, pp.
359-376.
1969.
 98.
Flock.
W.
L..
and J.
L.
Green: The I)etection and Identification of Birds in Flight, Using Coherent  and Noricoliererit Radars, Proc.
IEEE, vol.
62.
pp.
745-753.
June.
1974.
 99.
Tolbert, C.
W..
A.
W.
Straiton.
and C.
0.
Britt: Phantom Radar Targets at Millimeter Radio  Wavelengtlis.
IRE Trclrts..
vol.
AF-6, pp.
380--384, October, 1958.
 100.
Plank.
V.
G.: A Meteorological Study of Radar Angels, U.S.A.F.
Catnhridge Researclr Center Geopkps.
 Rcsrarrlr Papers, no.
52, July; 1956.
AFCRC-TR-56-211.
AD 98752.
 101.
Hajovsky.
R.
(3..
A.
P.
Ueam.
and A.
H.
LaGrone: Radar Reflections from Insects in tlie Lower  Atmosphere.
IEEE Trcrr~s., vol.
AP-14.
pp.
224--227, March, 1966.
 102.
Riley.
J.
R.: Angular and Temporal Variations in the Radar Cross-Sections of Insects.
Proc.
IEE.
vol.
 120.
pp.
1229 1232.
October.
1973.
 103.
Richter.
J.
H..
and I).
R.
Jensen: Radar Cross-Section Measurements of Insects, Proc.
IEEE, vol.
61.
 pp.
143 - 144.
January.
1973.
 104.
<;lover, K.
M., K.
R.
Hardy, T.
G.
Konrad, W.
N.
Sullivan, and A.
S.
Michaels: Radar Observations  of Insects in Free Fligl~t.
Scirrtcc..
vol.
154, pp.
967-972.
1966.
 105.
I-lardy.
K.
R..
and I.
Katz: Probing tlie Clear Atmosphere with High Power, High Resolution  Radars, Proc.
IEEE, vol.
57, pp.
468-480, April, 1969.
 106.
Konrad, T.
G.: The Dynamics of the Convective Process in Clear Air as Seen by Radar, J.
Atm.
Sci..
 vol.
27.Cpp.
1 138- 1 147, November, 1970.
 107.
Gossard.
E.
E., D.
R.
Jensen, and J.
H.
Richter: An Analytical Study of Tropospheric Structure as  Seen by High-Resolution Radar, J.
Arm.
Sci., vol.
28, pp.
794-807, July, 1971.
 108.
Gossard.
E.
E., and W.
H.
Hooke: "Waves in the Atmosphere," Elsevier Scientific Publishing Co.,  New York, 1975.
 109.
Saxton J.
A..
J.
A.
Lane, R.
W.
Meadows, and P.
A.
Matthews: Layer Structure of the Troposphere,  I'roc.
IEE, vol.
1 1 I, pp.
275-283, February, 1964.
 110.
Lane, J.
A.: Radar Echoes from Clear Air in Relation to Refractive-Index Variations in the Tropo-  sphere, Proc.
IEE, vol.
1 16, pp.
1956- 1660, October, 1969.
 11 1.
Tatarski, V.
I.: " Wave Propagation in a Turbulent Medium." McGraw-Hill Book Co., New York,  1961.
 112.
Tatarski, V.
I.: The Effects of the Turbulent Atmosphere on Wave Propagation, TT68-50464, Na-  tional Technical Information Service, Springfield, VA, 1971.
 113.
Atlas, D.: Meteorological "Angel" Echoes, J.
Meteorol., vol.
16, pp.
6-1 1, February, 1959.
 114.
George, S.
F.: The 1)etection of Nonfli~ctiratirip Targets in Log-Normal Clutter.
Naval Rtscnrcl~  i.(rl~orctror)~ Reporr h796.
Wnsl~irigtor~, I).C'., Oct.
4, 1968.
 115.
(ioldstein.
(j.
B.: False-Alarm Regulatior~ in Log-Normal and Weibull Clutter, IEEE Trc~t~s., vol.
 AES-9, pp.
84 -92, January.
1973.
 116.
Scllacfer.
(i.
W.: Radar Observatio~~s of lr~sect Fligi~t, chap.
8, of" lnsect Flight," R.
C.
Rainey (ed.),  Blackwell Scientific P~~blicatior~s.
Londoii.
1976.
 RADAR CLUTIER 515 85.Beasley.E.W.:EffectofSurface Reflections onRainCancellation inRadarsUsingCircular Polariza­ tion.ProcIEEE.vol.54.pp.2000-"2(Xll.December: 1966.
86.Kalafus.
R.M.:RainCancellation Deterioration DuetoSurface Rellections inGround-Mapping RadarsUsingCircular Polarization.
IEEETrails.•vol.AP-23.pp.269-271.
March.
1975.
87.Gent.H..I.M.Hunter.
andN.P.Robinson: Polarization ofRadarEchoes.
Including Aircrart.
Precipitation.
andTerrain.
Proc.lEE,vol.110.pp.2139·-214X.
December.
1963.
88.Croney.
J.:TheReduction ofSeaandRainClutterinMarineRadars.J.Illst.Nc.wigatioll (Lolldoll), vol.7.pp.175IXO.190192,1954.
!i9.t'roncy.
J :Clutier 011RadarDisplays, Wireless Ell!!"..vol..'\3,pp.!i396,April.1956.
90.Taylor J W..Jr..andJ.Mattern: Receivers.
chap.5ofRadIII'Hc.mdhook.
M.I.Skolnik(cd.), McGraw-Hili BookCompany, NewYork.1970.
91.Konrad.
T.(i.J..IlIicks.andF.B.Dohson: RadarCharacteristics ofBirdsinFlight.Sciellcc.
vol.
159.pp2742Xll.Jan.19.196X.
.
92.Houghton.
F.W.F.Blackwell.andT.A.Wilmot: BirdStrikeandtheRadarProperties ofBirds.
IIIlel'lltltiollell ('Ollt: OilReidelI'Prese/1talldFuture.Oct.2J25.1973.pp.257262.IEEConference Puh.no.lOS.
93.Houghton.
F.W.andN.J.Smith:RadarEchoing AreasofBirds.RoyalRadarEstahlishllle/1t MemoralldulII no.2557.July,1969.Malvern.
England.
94.Blacksmith.
P..Jr..andR.B.Mack:OnMeasuring theRadarCrossSections ofDucksandChickens.
Proc.IEEE.vol.53.p.1125,August, 1965.
95.Flock.W.L.:Monitoring BirdMovements byRadar,IEEESpectruIII.
vol.5,pp.62-66.June.1968.
96.Eastwood.
L:..RadarOrnithology," Methuen &Co.,Ltd.•London.
1967.
97.Blackwell.
F.oandE.W.Houghton: RadarTracking andIdentification ofWildDuckDuringthe Autumn Migration.
Prot.'.WorldCOllt:OilBirdHazards 10Aircraft.
Callada, pp.359-376, 1969.
98.Flock,W.L..andJ.L.Green:TheDetection andIdentification ofBirdsinFlight.UsingCoherent andNoncoherent Radars,Proc.IEEE.vol.62,pp.745-753.
June.1974.
99.Tolbert.
C.W..A.W.Straiton.
andC.O.Britt:Phantom RadarTargets atMillimeter Radio Wavelengths.
IRETrailS..vol.AP-6.pp.380-384.
October.
1958.
100.Plank,V.G.:AMeteorological StudyofRadarAngels.U.S.A.F.
Camhridge Research CellterGeoph}'s.
Research Papers.no.52.July;1956.AFCRC-TR-56-21 l.AD98752.
101.Hajovsky, R.G..A.P.Deam.andA.H.LaGrone: RadarReflections fromInsectsintheLower Atmosphere, !EEETrailS..vol.AP-14.pp.224-227.
March.
1966.
102.Riley.J.R.:Angular andTemporal Variations intheRadarCross-Sections ofInsects,Proc.lEE,vol.
120.rr.122912.12,Octoner.
1973.
103.Richter.JH.,andD.R.Jensen: RadarCross-Section Measurements ofInsects.Proc.IEEE.vol.61.
pp.143·144.January, 1913.
104.Glover, K.M.,K.R.Hardy,T.G.Konrad.
W.N.Sullivan.
andA.S.Michaels: RadarObservations ofInsectsinFreeFlight.Sciellce.
vol.154.pp.967-972.
1966.
105.Hardy, K.R.,andI.Katz:Probing theClearAtmosphere withHighPower.HighResolution Radars,Proc.IEEE.vol.57.pp.468-480.
April,1969.
106.Konrad, T.G.:TheDynamics oftheConvective Process inClearAirasSeenbyRadar.J.Atm.Sci.• vol.27/pp.1138-1147, November.
1970.
107.Gossard, E.E..D.R.Jensen,andJ.H.Richter: AnAnalytical StudyofTropospheric Structure as SeenbyHigh-Resolution Radar,J.Atm.Sci.,vol.28.pp.794-807, July.1971.
108.Gossard.
E.E.,andW.HHooke:"Waves intheAtmosphere." Elsevier Scientific Publishing Co., NewYork.1975.
109.SaxtonJA.,J.A.Lane,R.W.Meadows, andP.A.Matthews: LayerStructure oftheTroposphere.
I'roc.lEE.vol.III.pp.275-283.
February.
1964.
110.Lane.J.A.:RadarEchoesfromClearAirinRelation toRefractive-Index Variations intheTropo­ sphere,Proc.lEE,vol.116.pp.1956-1660.
October.
1969.
Ill.Tatarski.
V.I.:"WavePropagation inaTurbulent Medium." McGraw-Hili BookCo..NewYork, 1961.
112.Tatarski.
V.I.:TheEffectsoftheTurbulent Atmosphere onWavePropagation, TT68-50464.
Na­ tionalTechnical Information Service, Springfield.
VA.1971.
113.Atlas.D.:Meteorological "Angel" Echoes.J.Meteorol ..vol.16.pp.6-11,February, 1959.
114.George.
S.F.:TheDetection ofNonnuctuating Targets inLog-Normal Clutter, NavalResearch I.a!wrator}' Report6796.Washingtoll, D.C.,Oct.4,1%1\.
115.Goldstein.
G.B.:False-Alarm Regulation inLog-Normal andWeibulJ Clutter,IEEETrailS.,vol.
AES-9,pp1\4-92,January.
1973.
116.Schaefer, G.W.:RadarOnservations orInsectFlight,chap.8,or"lnsect Flight," R.C.Rainey(ed.).
Blackwell Scientific Puhlications.
London, 1976. 117.
Pecbles.
P.
Z..
Jr.: Radar Rain Clutter Cancellation 13ounds Using Circular Polari~ation.
IEEE 1975  111trr11utio11ul Radar COI!~~~~PIICL~.
Apr.
21-23, 1975, Arlington, Va, pp.
210 214, IEEE Publication.
75  CHO 938-1 AES.
 118.
Bass.
F.
G., I.
M.
FukS, A.
1.
Kalmyk'ov, 1:'E.
Ostrovsky.
and A.
D.
Roscnherg: Very tligh Freqc~ency  Radiowave Scattering by a Disturbed Sea Surace.
IEEE Trc~~ts., vol.
AP-16.
pp.
553- 568.
Septrnlber,  1968.
 119.
Kdlmykov.
A.
I., and V.
V.
Pustovoytenko: On Polarization Features of Radio Signals Scattrrcci  From thc Sea Surrace at Small crazing Angles, J.
Gc~oplrys.
RLJS., vol.
81, no.
12.
pp.
1960 1964.
Apr.
 20, 1976.
 120.
Greneker.
E.
F., and M.
A.
Corbin: Radar Refleclivity of Airborne Insects.
A 1-iterature Survc).
 Georgia I~lsritlrtr 01' Tc~ch~~oloy!~ Rutlar a11rl I~l.srrir~~rrnrario~~ Lahoruror~: Atlanta, Ga., sponsored by  Western Collon Research Laboratory, 1J.S.
Dcpt.
of Agriculture.
 516INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS 117.Pl:l:bles.
P.Z..Jr.:RadarRainClutterCancl:llatioll Bounds UsingCircular Polarization.
It:t:t:1975 IlItemat;ollal Radal'CO/!IL-rellce.
Apr.21-23.1975.
Arlington.
Va.pp.210214.IEEE Publication 75 CHO93X-1AES.
IIX.Bass.F.G.•I.M.Fuks.A.I.KalmYkov.TE.
Ostrovsky.
andA.D.Rosenherg: VeryHighFrl:qul:ncy Radiowave Scattering byaDisturbed SeaSurace.IEEETrails..vol.AP-16.pp.554·568.
Septl:lllhl:r.
196H.
119.Kdlmykov.
A.I..andV.
V.Pustovoytenko: OnPolarization Features ofRadioSignalsScallacd FromtheSeaSurfaceatSmallGrazing Angles.J.GeophJ's.
Res.•vol.81.no.12.pp.19601964.Apr 20.1976.
120.Greneker.
E.F.•andM.A.Corbin: RadarReflectivity ofAirborne Insects.
ALiterature Survey.
GeorgiaIllstitl/le of'Techlloloy,I' RadaramiIllStrlllllelltatioll Lahoratory, Atlanta.
Ga.,sponsored by Western CottonResearch Laboratory.
U.S.Dept.ofAgriculture. CHAPTER  FOURTEEN  OTHER RADAR TOPICS  14.1 SI'N'I'I-IE'I'IC APEH'I'URE RADAR'  A synthetic aperture radar (SAR) achieves high resolution in the cross-range dimension by  taking advantage of the motion of the vehicle carrying the radar to synthesize the effect of a  large antenna aperture.
The imaging of the earth's surface by SAR to provide a maplike  display can be applied to military reconnaissance, measurement of sea state and ocean wave  conditio~is.
geological and rnitleral explorations, and other remote sensing  application^.^^  'I'lie resolutio~i it1 the cross-range dimension or a conventional antenna is  wliere R is the range and OR is the beamwidth.
The narrower the beamwidth, the better the  resolution (smaller h,,).
There is a limit, however, to the minimum beamwidth of a practical  microwave antenna because of tlie difficulty of achieving and maintaining the necessary  mechanical and electrical tolerances (Secs.
7.8 and 8.8).
If the antenna beamwidth were as  sr~lall as 0.2"~tIie resolution (T,, at a range of 100 km would be about 350 m, which is far larger  than the fraction of a mrter resolution possible in the range coordinate with the use of  l~illsc-co~nprcssioti r;tdar.
SAR pcrrnits the attainment of high resolution by using the motion  of the veliicle to generate the antenna aperture sequentially rather than simulta~~eoirsly as with a  co~lventional array antenna.
In this section, the radar may be thought of as carried by an  aircraft.
but sirnilar argunie~its apply for satellites or other moving vehicles.
 Figure 14.1 shows an aircraft traveling with a constant velocity o along a straight path.
Its  radar antenna is mounted so as to radiate in the direction perpendicular to the direction of  motion.
Such a radar is known as a sidelooki~tg radar, or SLR.
The x's in the figure represent  the position of [lie radar arltcri~iit cacti lime a pulse is transmitted.
If the ecfio received at each  position is stored and if tlie last 11 pulses are combined (added together), tile effect will be  si~nilar to a linear-array ariteriria wliose length is tlie distance traveled during the transmission  of tlie 11 pi~lscs.
I'tie "element" spacirlg of the synthesized antenna is equal to the distance  traveled by tlie aircraft betweeri pulse transmissions, or d, = uTP = vgb, where Tp is the pulse-  repetition period and ,/, is the pulse-repetition frequency.
 CHAPTER FOURTEEN OTHER RADAR TOPICS 14.1SYNTHETIC APERTURE RADAR 1 3 /\synthetic aperture radar(SAR)achieves highresolution inthecross-range dimension by takingadvantage ofthemotionofthevehiclecarrying theradartosynthesize theeffectofa largeantenna aperture.
Theimaging oftheearth'ssurface bySARtoprovide amaplike displaycanbeappliedtomilitary reconnaissance, measurement ofseastateandoceanwave conditions.
geological andmineral explorations, andotherremotesensingapplications.98 Theresolution inthecross-range dimension ofaconventional antenna is (14.1) whereRistherangeandOnisthebeamwidth.
Thenarrower thebeamwidth, thebetterthe resolution (smaller /5e,).Thereisalimit,however, totheminimum beamwidth ofapractical microwave antenna because ofthedifficulty ofachieving andmaintaining thenecessary mechanical andelectrical tolerances (Secs.7.8and8.8).Iftheantenna beamwidth werea!> smallasO.r,the rcsolution ()c,atarangeof100kmwouldbeabout350m,whichisfarlarger thanthefraction ofameterresolution possible intherangecoordinate withtheuseof pulse-compression radar.S/\Rpermitstheattainment ofhighresolution byusingthemotion ofthevehicletogenerate thcantcnna aperture sequentially ratherthansimultaneollsly aswitha conventional arrayantenna.
Inthissection, theradarmaybethought ofascarriedbyan aircraft.
butsimilararguments applyforsatellites orothermoving vehicles.
Figure14.1showsanaircrafttraveling withaconstant velocityvalongastraight path.Its radarantenna ismounted soastoradiateinthedirection perpendicular tothedirection of motion.
Sucharadarisknownasasidelooking radar,orSLR.Thex'sinthefigurerepresent theposilion oftheradaralltelllla eachlimeapulseistransmitted.
Iftheechoreceived ateach position isstoredandifthelastnpulsesarecombined (addedtogether), theeffectwillbe similartoalinear-array antenna whoselengthisthedistance traveled duringthetransmission oftile/Ipulscs.The"clement" spacing ofthesynthesized antenna isequaltothedistance traveled bytheaircraftbetween pulsetransmissions, orde=vTp=vlf~,whereTpisthepulse­ repetition period and.l~isthepulse-repetition frequency.
517 Figure 14.1 Geometry of the synthetic aperture radar  traveling with a velocity o.
The radar transmits a pulse at  each position marked by an x.
.fp= pulse repetition  frequency.
 Resolution of the SAR.
The beamwidth of a conventional antenna of width D at a wavelength  1 is  Bs = kl/D (14.2)  3 where k is a constant that depends on the shape of the current distribution across the aperture.
 (The constant k might vary from 0.9 to 1.3 or greater.) For convenience of analysis, take k = 1.
 Substituting Eq.
(14.2) into (14.1) gives the cross-range resolution as , +- .
2%  3  The beamwidth of a synthetic aperture antenna of effective length L, is similarly  The factor 2 appears in the denominator because of the two-way propagation path from the  'irltenna "element" to the target and back as compared with the one-way path of a conven-  tional antenna.
As a consequence of the two-way path the phase dimerence between the equally  spaced elements of a synthetic array is twice that of a conventional array with the same  spacing.
(The terms synthetic array and synthetic aperture are used interchangeably here.)  Agaln the factor k will be taken to be unity.
 rhere are two fundamental limits to the maximum effective length of the synthetic aper-  ti11.e.
Clne limit is determined by the width of the region illuminated at the range R by the real  allrenna.
The length of the effective aperture Le can be no greater than the width of the  illum~l~atrd region as given by Eq.
(14.3).
'Thus L, S ROB.
Note that the maximum effective  length varies directly as the range.
The other limit is determined by the far field of the synthetic  aperture; i.~., by the need to restrict the aperture size so that the phase front can be considered  as a plane wave.
When this condition applies, the S.4R is called unfocused.
Figure 14.2 defines  the maximum aperture of an unfocused SAR srtch tlrat the difference between the minimum  and lnaxi~nl~rn (two-way) paths is a quarter wavelsngtl I From this geometry it can be derived  that the effective length Le of the synthesized anteri~la 1 m, so that the cross-range resolu-  t~on for I he unfocused synthetic antenna is  a,, = m/2 (14.5)  X  X ~-----------2=Zs Tarqet ,  Figure 14.2 Geometry of the unfocused SAR.
 518INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS x x :1 x­x~xlI/ip xFigure14.1Geometry ofthesynthetic aperture radar traveling withavelocity v.Theradartransmits apulseat eachposition marked byanx.fp=pulserepetition frequency.
Resolution oftheSAR.Thebeamwidth ofaconventionalantenna ofwidthDatawavelength A.is 08=kl/D (14.2) wherekisaconstant thatdepends ontheshapeofthecurrentdistribution across~he aperture.
(Theconstant kmightvaryfrom0.9to1.3orgreater.) Forconvenience ofanalysis, takek=1.
Substituting Eq.
(14.2) into(14.1)givesthecross-range resolution as bcr=RA/D Thebeamwidth ofasynthetic aperture antenna ofeffective lengthLeissimilarly 0$=klJ2Le(143) (14.4) Thefactor2appears inthedenominator becauseofthetwo-way propagation pathfromthe .1Iltenna "element" tothetargetandbackascompared withtheone-way pathofaconven­ tit,nalantenna.
Asaconsequence ofthetwo-way paththephasedifference between theequally spacedelements ofasynthetic arrayistwicethatofaconventional arraywiththesame spacing.
(Thetermssynthetic arrayandsynthetic aperture areusedinterchangeably here.) Againthefactorkwillbetakentobeunity.
Therearetwofundamental limitstothemaximum effective lengthofthesynthetic aper­ ture.Onelimitisdetermined bythewidthoftheregionilluminated attherangeRbythereal antenna.
Thelengthoftheeffective aperture Lecanbenogreaterthanthewidthofthe illuminated regionasgivenbyEq.(14.3).ThusLe;5;ROB'Notethatthemaximum effective lengthvariesdirectlyastherange.Theotherlimitisdetermined bythefarfieldofthesynthetic apalUfc; i.e.,bytheneedtorestricttheaperture sizesothatthephasefrontcanbeconsidered asJplanewave.Whenthiscondition applies,theSARiscalledunfocused.
Figure14.2defines themaximum aperture ofanunfocused SARs\1\:hthatthedifference between theminimum andmaximum (two-way) pathsisaquarter wavel~ngtl iFromthisgeometry itcanbederived thattheelTective lengthLeofthesynthesized anteIlllahjRi,sothatthecross-range resolu­ tionforlheunfocused synthetic antenna is (14.5) Figure14.2Geometry oftheunfocused SAR. The resolution of the unfocused SAR does not depend on the size of the real antenna.
(In a  sidelooking SAR the cross-range resolution is also called the ,along-track or azimuth  resolution.)  The limit on resolution due to operation in the far field can be overcome by correcting the  rcceived signal for the curvature of the spherical wavefront experienced when the target is  wrthin the Fresnel region of the synthetic array.
At each "element" of the synthetic array  antenna a phase correction A4 = 2nx2/1R is applied, where x is the distance from the center of  the syntl~etic aperture.
Note that a diflerent correction must be applied for each range R.
When  this correction is applied at each element of the synthetic array, the antenna is said to be  jbcused at a distance R and all the received echo signals from a target at that range are in  phase.
The angular resolution when the antenna is focused in the Fresnel region is equivalent  to that in tlic far field.
Hence, the cross-range resolution of the focused synthetic aperture using  Eq.
(14.4) with L, = RA/D is  The resolution of the focused SAR is independent of the range and the wavelength, and  depends solely on the dimension D of the real antenna.
 An example comparing the resolution of the conventional antenna and the two types of  synthetic aperture antennas is shown in Fig.
14.3.
 I' was mentioned that the factor of 2 in the denominator of Eq.
(14.4) was a consequence  of the relative phase shift between elements of the synthetic array antenna being due to the  two-way propagation path, instead of the one-way propagation path as in the conventional  array antenna.
This results in the synthetic aperture radar having a two-way antenna pattern  I Conventional antenna /  I / Unfocused SAR /  Focused SAR Figure 143 Comparison of the resolution of a  I I synthetic aperture radar and a radar with a con- ' i 10 100 ventional antenna, assuming an X-band antenna  Range, k m with dimension D = 3.
m.
 OTHER RADAR TOPICS519 Theresolution oftheunfocused SARdoesnotdependonthesizeoftherealantenna.
(Ina sidelooking SARthecross-range resolution isalsocalledthe,along-track orazimuth resolution.
) Thelimitonresolution duetooperation inthefarfieldcanbeovercome bycorrecting the received signalforthecurvature ofthespherical wavefront experienced whenthetargetis withintheFresnelregionofthesynthetic array.Ateach"element" ofthesynthetic array antennaaphasecorrection At/J=2nx2/A.Risapplied,wherexisthedistance fromthecenterof thesynthetic aperture.
Notethatadifferent correction mustbeappliedforeachrangeR.When thiscorrection isappliedateachelementofthesynthetic array,theantenna issaidtobe focusedatadistance Randallthereceived echosi'gnalsfromatargetatthatrangearein phase.Theangularresolution whentheantennaisfocusedintheFresnelregionisequivalent tothatinthefarfield.Hence,the cross-range resolution ofthefocusedsynthetic aperture using Eq.(14.4)with L~=RA.IDis D <5cr=RO,="2 (14.6) Focused SARTheresolution ofthefocusedSARisindependent oftherangeandthewavelength, and depends solelyonthedimension Doftherealantenna.
Anexample comparing theresolution oftheconventional antennaandthetwotypesof synthetic aperture antennas isshowninFig.14.3.
l'wasmentioned thattI,efactorof2inthedenominator ofEq.(14.4)wasaconsequence oftherelativephaseshiftbetween elements ofthesynthetic arrayantenna beingduetothe two-way propagation path,insteadoftheone-way propagation pathasintheconventional arrayantenna.
Thisresultsinthesynthetic aperture radarhavingatwo-way antennapattern E FllUre14.3Comparison oftheresolution ofa .'---- ----,,-'::1- --,-JI,-:-synthetic aperture radarandaradarwithacon- II 10 100ventional antenna, assuming anX-bandantenna Range.km withdimension D=3m. 520 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  equal to the one-way pattern of the conventional antenna of the same length, but with one-half  the beamwidth.
The two-way patterns with uniform weighting, assuming small angles, are  approximately  sin [2n(Le/A) sin 01 SAR -+ sin2 [lr(L/I) sin 81  2n(Le/A) sin 8 real array 4 [n(L/A) sin el2  Thus the two-way beamwidth of the SAR antenna is narrower than a real radar antenna of the  same aperture size (if it could be built), but the sidelobes are not as low and do not drop off  with increasing angle as fast.
Two-way sidelobes of 13.2 dB in the SAR are not satisfactory for  most purposes.
weighting of the received signals, similar to the weighting of the aperture  illumination of a real antenna, is often applied to reduce the sidelobe levels.
 Constraint on resolution and swath.
Ambiguities can arise when signals are sampled, rather  than continuous.
As discussed in Sec.
2.10, the radar pulse repetition frequency (prf) must be  low enough to avoid range ambiguities and multiple-time-around echoes.
An additional con-  straint on the prf occurs in a synthetic aperture radar.
The prf must be high enough to avoid  angle ambiguities and image-foldover that results from grating lobes produced when the  spacing between the elements of the synthetic array is too large.
These two conflicting require-  ments on the prf of a SAR mean that the resolution and the coverage (swath) cannot be  selected independently.
 To avoid grating lobes in a phased-array antenna of isotropic radiating elements (with  the main beam perpendicular to the aperture), the element spacing must be less than the  wavelength A (Sec.
8.2).
A similar condition for a synthetic aperture antenna is that the  distance traveled by the radar between pulse transmissions should be less than 1/2.
(The  factor of 4 appears here for the same reason it was included in Eq.
(14.3).) When a "directive"  element-pattern is used the spacing necessary between elements to avoid grating lobes can he  much greater than 1/2.
In the SAR, the directive pattern of the real antenna can be considered  as the element pattern of the synthetic array.
By making the angular location of the first  grating lobe coincide with the first null of the element pattern (that of the real antenna),  grating lobes can be attenuated to a small value.
The position of the first grating-lobe maxi-  mum of the synthetic array is  where d, = vlf, = spacing between elements of the synthetic array  v = velocity of vehicle carrying the radar  fp = pulse repetition frequency  The position of the first null of the real antenna is approximately 0, = A/D, where D = width of  the antenna.
Since 0, must be greater than or equal to 0, to avoid grating lobes, the following  condition is obtained  The right-hand portion of the equation applies for a focused SAR, since 6,' = D/2.
 Combining the restriction on prf due to i~narnbigi~oi~s range R, with that of Eq.
(14.8)  yields  v C - < f < --- S,, - - 2R,  510INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS equaltotheone-way patternoftheconventional antennaofthesamelength,butwithone-half thebeamwidth.
Thetwo-way patterns withuniform weighting, assuming smallangles,are approximately SAR-+sin[21t(Lej).)sin8] 21t(Lej).)sin8sin2[1t(Lj).)sin8] realarray-+[1t(Lj).)sin8]2 (14.7)Thusthetwo-way beamwidthoftheSARantenna isnarrower thanarealradarantenna ofthe sameaperture size(ifitcouldbebuilt),butthesidelobes arenotaslowanddonotdropoff withincreasing angleasfast.Two-way sidelobes of13.2dBintheSARarenotsatisfactory for mostpurposes.
Weighting ofthereceived signals,similartotheweighting oftheaperture illumination ofarealantenna, isoftenappliedtoreducethesidelobe levels.
Constraint onresolution andswath.Ambiguities canarisewhensignalsaresa~led, rather thancontinuous.
Asdiscussed inSec.2.10,theradarpulserepetition frequency (prf)mustbe lowenoughtoavoidrangeambiguities andmultiple-time-around echoes.Anadditional con­ straintontheprfoccursinasynthetic aperture radar.Theprfmustbehighenoughtoavoid angleambiguities andimage-foldover thatresultsfromgratinglobesproduced whenthe spacingbetween theelements ofthesynthetic arrayistoolarge.Thesetwoconflicting require­ mentsontheprfofaSARmeanthattheresolution andthecoverage (swath)cannotbe selected independently.
Toavoidgratinglobesinaphased-array antenna ofisotropic radiating elements (with themainbeamperpendicular totheaperture), theelement spacing mustbelessthanthe wavelength ).(Sec.8.2).Asimilarcondition forasynthetic aperture antenna isthatthe distance traveled bytheradarbetween pulsetransmissions shouldbelessthan)./2.(The factoroftappearshereforthesamereasonitwasincluded inEq.(14.3).)Whena"directive" element-pattern isusedthespacingnecessary between elements toavoidgratinglobescanbe muchgreaterthan),/2.IntheSAR,thedirective patternoftherealantennacanbeconsidered astheelement patternofthesynthetic array.Bymaking theangular location ofthefirst gratinglobecoincide withthefirstnulloftheel~ment pattern(thatoftherealantenna), gratinglobescanbeattenuated toasmallvalue.Theposition ofthefirstgrating-lobe maxi­ mumofthesynthetic arrayis B=~=Afp g2de2v wherede=v/fp=spacingbetween elements ofthesynthetic array v=velocityofvehiclecarrying theradar fp=pulserepetition frequency Thepositionofthefirstnulloftherealantenna isapproximately On=)./D,whereD=widthof theantenna.
SinceBgmustbegreaterthanorequaltoBntoavoidgratinglobes,thefollowing condition isobtained 2vv fp?-D=~ Ocr(\4.8) Theright-hand portionoftheequation appliesforafocusedSAR,sinceber=D/2.
Combining therestriction onprfduetounambiguolls rangeRuwiththatofEg.(14.8) yields (14.9) This leads to the condition  Tllrrs tlic rrnanibigi~or~s rilligc arid tile resolution cannot be selected independently of one  ariotlier.
 ?'he coridit~on given by Eq.
(14.10) is optimistic in that there are at least two factors which  result in the riglit -lii~ricI portioti being reduced.
One sucli co~idition results froni tlie use of  acttral alltenria pattcrris ratlier tlia~i idealized patterns.
The utiambiguous regions must be  s~nallcr tlian ;~ssr~nicd in the above to allow for tlie fact tliat antenna patterns are riot zero  outside tlie niapped re.gio~i.~.'"or a uniform aperture illumination of the real antenna.
 Eq.
(1 4.9) becomes4  Essentially tile sariie rcsirlt is obtained for a cosine-weight aperture illumination.
It has been  suggcstcdJ tliat a practical procedure for estitnatitig tlie required aperture and prf is to size the  arite~ina sucll tliat tlie required swatli and processed doppler bandwidth are within the 6-dB  two-way antenna pattern, arid tlie prf is sucli tliat the unambiguous time-delay and doppler  intervals are within the 16-dB response.
 Tliere is another factor wliich reduces the right-hand side of Eqs.
(14.10) or (14.1 lh) when  optical processirig or similar processing is used.
As will be explained later, this increases the  riglit-hand side of Eq.
(14.8) by 2 so that Eq.
(14.10) becomes  Similarly, tlic riglit-harid sidc of Eq.
(14.1 1h) is also reduced by a factor of 2.
 Wlieri a sytitlietic-aperture radar images the ground from an elevated platform, the unam-  biguous range can correspond to tlie distance between the forward edge and the far edge of the  region to be mapped.
This requires that the elevation beamwidth be tailored to illuminate only  the swath S,, that is to be imaged by the radar.
The swath Sw is often much smaller than the  niaximirni range so that tlie prf car1 be increased to allow tlie umambiguous range Ru to  encompass file distance S, cos $.
wliere $ is tlie grazing angle.
Equation (14.12) becomes  sw C -< - 5'.
40 COS $  Equatiori 14.1 1h would also be modified accordingly.
The condition given by Eq.
(14.13), and  similar relations, represent an upper bound on tlie capabilities of an SAR to achieve a resolu-  tion 6,, over a swath S,..
 Radar equation for SAU.
Eacli particular application has its own form of the radar equation.
 7'1ic SAR 1i;ls a ~~nrticularly iritercsting form, especially when the relationships derived above  arc ti\k~11 into ;ICCOIII~(.
111 tlie literatirrc ori SAR, tlie radar equation is usually written wit11 tlic  sigtial-to-noise ratio (SIN) 011 tlic left-liand side.
We start with tlie followirig  P A~OII SJN = Lz--  4d2kT0 BF, R4  OTHER RADAR TOPICS521 Thisleadstothecondition RuC-<­ ()CI-21'(14.10) Thustheunamhiguous rangeandtheresolution cannotbeselected independently ofone another.
Thecondition givenbyEq.(14.10)isoptimistic inthatthereareatleasttwofactorswhich resultintheright-hand portion heingred·uced.
Onesuchcondition resultsfromtheuseof actualantenna patterns ratherthanidealized patterns.
Theunambiguous regionsmustbe smallerthanassullled intheahovetoallowforthefactthatantenna patterns arenotzero outside themapped region.4.16Forauniform aperture illumination oftherealantenna, Eq.(14.9)becomes4 orv c1.53-- S;(pS;----bel' 1.53X2Ru Rc-~<-­ ()el-4.71'(14.1Ia) (14.llh) (14.12)Essentially thesameresultisobtained foracosine-weight aperture illumination.
Ithasheen suggested.t thatapractical procedure forestimating therequired aperture andprfistosizethe antenna suchthattherequired swathandprocessed doppler bandwidth arewithinthe6-dB two-\vay antenna pattern, andtheprfissuchthattheunambiguous time-delay anddoppler intervals arewithinthe16-dBresponse.
Thereisanother factorwhichreducesthe right-hand sideofEqs.(14.10)or(14.11b) when opticalprocessing orsimilarprocessing isused.Aswillbeexplained later,thisincreases the right-hand sideofEq.(14.8)by2sothatEq.(14.10)becomes Rcu< _ ()CI-4(1 Similarly, theright-hand sideofEq.(l4.11h) isalsoreduced byafactorof2.
Whenasynthetic-aperture radarimagesthegroundfromanelevated platform, theunam­ biguous rangecancorrespond tothedistance between theforward edgeandthefaredgeofthe regiontohemapped.
Thisrequires thattheelevation beamwidth betailored toilluminate only theswathS,..thatistobeimagedbyl.heradar.TheswathSwisoftenmuchsmallerthanthe maximulll rangesothattheprfcanbeincreased toallowtheumambiguous rangeRuto encompass filedistance S...cosl/J,wherel/Jisthegrazing angle.Equation (14.12)becomes Sw c-<._--- ()CI-41'cosl/J(14.13) Equation 14.llhwouldalsobemodified accordingly.
Thecondition givenbyEq.(14.13),and similarrelations, represent anupperboundonthecapabilities ofanSARtoachievearesolu­ tionc5croveraswathS....
Radarequation forSAR.Eachparticular application hasitsownformoftheradarequation.
TheSARhasaparticularly interesting form,especially whentherelationships derivedahove aretakenintoaccoun!.
Intheliterature onSAR,theradarequation isusuallywrittenwiththe signal-to-noise ratio(SIN)ontheleft-hand side.We'startwiththefollowing P A2al!SIN=----'-"--- (14.14)4rrA2kToBFnR4 where P, = peak transmitted power  A, = effective aperture of the real antenna  a = target cross section  tt = number of pulses integrated (cot~erently)  A = wavelength  kTo = 4 x lo-*' W/Hz  B = receiver bandwidth  F, = receiver noise figure  R = range  This equation is modified by substituting P, = P,,/T~;, wlw-e P,, = average power, T = pulse  width = 1/B, and f, = pulse repetition frequency.
Also 11 =/ito, where to = L,/v = time  required to generate the synthetic aperture whose length is given by L, = RAID, v = velocity of  the vehicle carrying the radar, and D = real-antenna dimension.
For low draring angle  (r = a0 6,, 6, sec I) where o0 = radar cross section of the ground per unit area illuminated,  6., = along-track, or cross-range, resolution (equal to Dl2 for a focused SAR), 6, = range -,:)  resolution, and I) = grazing angle.
Substituting the above relations into Eq.
(14.14) yields  Pa, A;~O 6, sec $ SIN = 8nAkTo F, vR3  This is essentially the same equation as given by Cutrona2 and Harger.-\  Equation (14.15) does not include the ambiguity constraints described previously.
To use  the equality of Eq.
(14.13) in Eq.
(14.15), write A, = p, A, where p, = antenna aperture  efficiency, and A = physical aperture area assumed to be rectangular of width D and height H.
 The height H must produce a vertical beamwidth which illuminates only the swath S, that is  to be covered.
With such constraints, Eq.
(14.15) becomes  SIN = 2Pav p:g0 6cr -- 6,  nf kTo F, RS, sin2 I)  where f = radar frequency.
This equation applies for pulse compression if 6, is the resolution of  the compressed pulse.
It is seen from Eq.
(14.16) that for a fixed signal-to-noise ratio, the  average power must be increased if the resolution in range or azimuth are decreased, or if the  range or swath are increased.
 Equipment considerations.
The synthetic-aperture radar requires a coherent reference signal  and means for storing and processing the radar echoes.
The coherent reference is necessary  since an angle measurement is a measurement of phase from spatially separate positions.
The  effective length of the synthetic aperture can be limited by the stability of the transmitter or the  receiver.
 The heart of the SAR is the processor which must provide the proper amplitude and phase  weights to the stored pulses, and sum them to obtain the image of the scene.
Optical processors  and digital processors have both been used.
 Angular motions in yaw, roll, and pitch of the aircraft carrying the radar will cause the  real antenna beam to point incorrectly.
To avoid degradation of the SAR due to angular  motions, the antenna must be stabilized.'." Roll and pitch angles can be stabilized by means  of gyroscopes.
Yaw angle can be compensated by reference to a gyroscope or by " clutter-lock "  in which the antenna position is adjusted so as to maintain a symmetrical doppler spectrum  about zero frequency.
 Atmospheric turbulence as well as deliberate maneuvers result in the aircraft trajectory  (14.16)522INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS wherePr=peaktransmitted power Ae=effective aperture oftherealantenna a=targetcrosssection n=numberofpulsesintegrated (coherently) l=wavelength kTo=4x10-21W/Hz B=receiver bandwidth Fn=receiver noisefigure R=range Thisequation ismodified bysubstituting Pr=PaJr.l~, wherePa\,=average power,r=pulse width ~l/B,andJp=pulserepetition frequency.
Also/I=.I~to, whereto=Le/t,=time required togenerate thesynthetic aperture whoselengthisgivenbyLe=RA.ID,v=velocityof thevehiclecarrying theradar,andD=real-antenna dimension.
Forlow-grazing angle a=aObcrbrsect/Jwhere(To=radarcrosssectionofthegroundperunitareailluminated, c5cr=along-track, orcross-range, resolution (equaltoDI2forafocused SAR),fl,=range resolution, andt/J=grazing angle.Substituting theaboverelations intoEq.(14.14)yields PayA;aobrsect/J SIN=8nlkToF nl'R3- (14.15) Thisisessentially thesameequation asgivenbyCutrona2andHarger.J Equation (14.15)doesnotincludetheambiguity constraints described previously.
Touse theequality ofEq.(14.13)inEq.(14.15), writeAe=PaA,wherePa=antenna aperture efficiency, andA=physical aperture areaassumed toberectangular ofwidthDandheightH.
TheheightHmustproduce averticalbeamwidth whichilluminates onlytheswathS",thatis tobecovered.
Withsuchconstraints, Eq.(14.15)becomes S/N=2PavP;(T°bcr15; nJkToFnRS",sint/J whereJ=radarfrequency.
Thisequation appliesforpulsecompression iftJ,istheresolution of thecompressed pulse.ItisseenfromEq.(14.16)thatforafixedsignal-to-noise ratio,the average powermustbeincreased iftheresolution inrangeorazimuth aredecreased, orifthe rangeorswathareincreased.
Equipment considerations.
Thesynthetic-aperture radarrequires acoherent reference signal andmeansforstoringandprocessing theradarechoes.Thecoherent reference isnecessary sinceananglemeasurement isameasurement ofphasefromspatially separate positions.
The effective lengthofthesynthetic aperture canbelimitedbythestability ofthetransmitter orthe receIver.
TheheartoftheSARistheprocessor whichmustprovidetheproperamplitude andphase weightstothestoredpulses,andsumthem!oobtaintheimageofthescene.Opticalprocessors anddigitalprocessors havebothbeenused.
Angular motions inyaw,roll,andpitchoftheaircraftcarrying theradarwillcausethe realantenna beamtopointincorrectly.
Toavoiddegradation oftheSARduetoangular motions, theantenna mustbestabilized.usRollandpitchanglescanbestabilized bymeans ofgyroscopes.
Yawanglecanbecompensated byreference toagyroscope orby..clutter-lock" inwhichtheantenna position isadjusted soastomaintain asymmetrical doppler spectrum aboutzerofrequency.
Atmospheric'turbulence aswellasdeliberate maneuvers resultintheaircrafttrajectory deviating from a straight line.
These deviations must be sensed and proper compensation  applied to the received-signal phase so as to "straighten out" the synthetic antenna.I9 The  required phase correction is a function of range with the Inore rapid corrections required at  steep depression angles.
Thus both motion compensation and antenna stabilization are neces-  sary to achieve the resolution inherent in an SAR.
 Optical processing.'--3.92 In a synthetic aperture radar the coherent echo signals S, from each  range interval must be stored, without loss of phase, over the time interval required to form the  syritlletic aperture.
An amplitude weighting W, is usually applied to each of the signals to taper  the "illumination" of the synthetic aperture so as to achieve lower sidelobes than given by a  uniform illumination.
In a focused SAR, a phase weighting exp (j4,) also must be applied to  cornperisate for the spherical wavefront when the scene to be imaged lies within the Fres~iel  regiorl of tlie synthesized aperture.
Then the signals at each range interval must be summed, as  expressed by the operation S, W, exp (jq5,).
The processing is complicated by the fact that  n  the number of pulses to be summed is proportional to the range.
Furthermore, the phase  correction in a focused SAR also depends on the range.
Adding to the complication of  processing is the large bandwidth and high information content of synthetic-aperture radar.
 Optical processing has proved to be well suited to the needs of SAR, except that it is seldom  dorie in real time.
The radar output is usually stored photographically and processed later on  t lit: ground.
 In optical processing, the electrical signals at the radar output are converted to optical  images on film.
The weighting, filtering, and summation of signals are accomplished with the  proper ,optical lenses and transparencies.
Optical processing is basically two dimensional so  that processing in the range coordinate is possible with the same apparatus.
The output of the  optical processor is a maplike photographic film of the terrain, as in Fig.
14.4.
The SAR  produces images without the slant-range distortion that occurs with the photographic camera.
 The radar output is stored on film as depicted in Fig.
14.5.
The output of the radar  receiver is applied to the "z axis" of a cathode-ray tube so as to produce an intensity-  modulated vertical sweep.
The vertical deflection of the CRT is in synchronism with the range  sweep of the radar.
A lens focuses the CRT output on a moving strip of film whose rate of  travel is proportional to the speed of the vehicle carrying the radar.
The vertical dimension on  the film represents tlie range and the horizontal dimension represents the cross-range, cr  along-track coordinate.
Returns from a single point-target fall on a horizontal linq.
Since film  records lig C t intensity, the sign of the signal amplitude will be lost if the signal alone is  recorded on the film.
To retain the sign of the amplitude, a dc bias equal to or greater than the  most negative signal excursion is added to the signal.
(It is this bias, plus the offset frequency  described below.
which causes the factor of 2 to be inserted in Eq.
(14.12))  The signal received from a single scatterer will appear as a varying doppler-frequency due  to the relative motion as the antenna scans by.
The doppler frequency is initially of high value,  decreases to zero beat, and then increases again.
When this signal is recorded on film the  rcsu lting intensity modulation is a one-dimensional hologram, or Fresnel zone-plate, and has  focusirlg properties.
If the film were illuminated by a coherent, collimated beam of light like  that from a laser.
a focused target-image will be obtained.
Figure 14.6 shows the basic arrange-  ment of an optical processor.
The film contains the superposition of the holographic signals  from all the individual scatterers illuminated by the radar.
It is sometimes called the phase  Itistor.j.
or sigrttrl I~istnry.
The image that results by illuminating the film is focused on a tilted  plane siricc the curvature of tlie wavcfrorit is proportional to the range.
(This is somewhat like  an optical analog of tlie radar itself.) Since it is undesirable to operate with the image focused  OTHER RADAR TOPICS ~23 deviating fromastraight line.Thesedeviations mustbesensedandpropercompensation appliedtothereceived~signalphase so"asto"straightenuut"" thesynthetic antenna.19The required phasecorrection isafunction ofrangewiththemorerapidcorrections required at steepdepression angles.Thusbothmotioncompensation andantenna stabilization areneces­ sarytoachievetheresolution inherent inanSAR.
Opticalprocessing.t"-3.92 Inasynthetic aperture radarthecoherent echosignalsSnfromeach rangeintervalmustbestored,withoutlossofphase,overthetimeintervalrequired toformthe synthetic aperture.
Anamplitude weighting Wnisusuallyappliedtoeachofthesignalstotaper the"illumination" ofthesynthetic aperture soastoachievelowersidelobes thangivenbya uniform illumination.
InafocusedSAR,aphaseweighting expUcPn)alsomustbeappliedto compensate forthespherical wavefront whenthescenetobeimagedlieswithintheFresnel regionofthesynthesized aperture.
Thenthesignalsateachrangeintervalmustbesummed.
as expressed bytheoperationLSnJ¥,.expUcPn)'Theprocessing iscomplicated bythefactthat n thenumber ofpulsestobesummed isproportional totherange.Furthermore, thephase correction inafocused SARalsodepends ontherange.Addingtothecomplication of processing isthelargebandwidth andhighinformation contentofsynthetic-aperture radar.
Opticalprocessing hasprovedtobewellsuitedtotheneedsofSAR,exceptthatitisseldom doneinrealtime.Theradaroutputisusuallystoredphotographically andprocessed lateron theground.
Inopticalprocessing, theelectrical signalsattheradaroutputareconverted tooptical imagesonfilm.Theweighting, filtering, andsummation ofsignalsareaccomplished withthe proper:opticallensesandtransparencies.
Opticalprocessing isbasically twodimensional so thatprocessing intherangecoordinate ispossible withthesameapparatus.
Theoutputofthe opticalprocessor isamaplike photographic filmoftheterrain,asinFig.14.4.TheSAR produces imageswithouttheslant-range distortion thatoccurswiththephotographic camera.
Theradaroutputisstoredonfilmasdepicted inFig.14.5.Theoutputoftheradar receiver isappliedtothe."zaxis"ofacathode-ray tubesoasto'produce anintensity­ modulatedverticalsweep.Theverticaldel1ection oftheCRTisinsynchronism withtherange sweepoftheradar.I\.lensfocusestheCRToutputonamovingstripoffilmwhoserateof travelisproportional tothespeedofthevehiclecarrying theradar.Theverticaldimension on thefilmrepresents therangeandthehorizontal dimension represents thecross-range, cr along-trac~coordinate.
Returnsfromasinglepoint-target fallonahorizontallin~.
Sincefilm records lightintensity, thesignofthesignalamplitude willbelostifthesignalaloneis recorded onthefilm.Toretainthesignoftheamplitude, adcbiasequaltoorgreaterthanthe mostnegative signalexcursion isaddedtothesignal.(Itisthisbias,plustheoffsetfrequency described below,whichcausesthefactorof2tobeinserted inEq.(14.12).) Thesignalreceived fromasinglescatterer willappearasavaryingdoppler-frequency due totherelativemotionastheantenna scansby.Thedoppler frequency isinitiallyofhighvalue, decreases tozerobeat,andthenincreases again.Whenthissignalisrecorded onfilmthe resulting intensity modulation isaone-dimensional hologram, orFresnelzone-plate, andhas focusing properties.
Ifthefilmwereilluminated byacoherent, collimated beamoflightlike thatfromalaser.afocusedtarget-image willbeobtained.
Figure14.6showsthebasicarrange­ mentofanopticalprocessor.
Thefilmcontains thesuperposition oftheholographic signals fromalltheindividual scatterers illuminated bytheradar.Itissometimes calledthephase I,isloryorsiqllalhistory.Theimagethatr'esultsbyilluminating thefilmisfocusedonatilted planesincethecurvature ofthewavefront isproportional totherange.(Thisissomewhat like anopticalanalogoftheradaritself.)Sinceitisundesirable tooperatewiththeimagefocused INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTECiS  Figt  (Go  Thi:  SC).~  (wit  Resl  4f A Ire 14.4 (a) Synthetic aperture radar image of San Diego, California obtained with the X-band GEM  odyear Electronic Mapping System) radar.
Resolution = 12 rn; aircraft altitude = 40,000 ft (12 km  ; is a mosaic covering approximately 19 by 32 km.
(Coldrirsy b;oodpeur Atlrosp~cr alud l.iltot~ ,Art  )ice.) (h) A bend in the Huron river (center)just east of Ann Arbor, Michigan.
Note foolball stadlur  h lights) top left center, and large orchard in upper righl cenler.
South is in the up direclio  olution is 5 fi (1.5 rn) in azimlith and 7 ft (2.1 m) in range.
(Colrrtesy E~t~lirot~tr~erlral Research lrlsritlrl  4ichigan.)  524INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS (a) (b) figure14.4(a)Synthetic aperture radarimageofSanDiego,California obtained withtheX·bandGEMS (Goodyear Electronic Mapping System) radar.Resolution =12m;aircraftaltitude =40,000ft(12km).
Thisisamosaiccovering approximately 19by32km.(Courtesy Goodyear Aaospace alldLittollAero Service.) (b)AbendintheHuronriver(center)justeastofAnnArbor,Michigan.
Notefoothall stadium (withlights)topleftcenter,andlargeorchard inupperrightcenter.Southisintheupdirection.
Resolution is5ft(1.5m)inazimuth and7ft(2.1m)inrange.(Col/rtesy El/l'iwlltnelltal Research Jnstillite ofMichigan.) Inlens~ty modified  verlicol sweep  I  Lens  Figure 14.5 Recordirig of SAR signal on photograpllic film with the aid of a CRT  on a tilted plane, the different phase-front curvatures are corrected and the image is erected by  insertion of a conical lens placed at the phase-history film located in plane PI.
This erect image  has its focus at infinity.
The one-dimensional hologramlike signals recorded along the horizon-  tal dinlension on the phase-Ilistory filtn provide focusing in the horizontal plane.
A cylindrical  lens is used to focus the image in the vertical plane.
The front focal-plane of the cylindrical lens  coincides with that of the phase-history film.
(A lens has the property that a Four~er transform  relation exists between the amplitude distribution of the illumination at the front and back  focal  plane^.^)  With the conical and cylindrical lens.
inserted, the image is erect and is simultaneously  focused in the range and cross-range dimensions, but it lies at infinity.
To bring the image to  some conveniently located plane, a spherical lens is inserted.
A vertical slit in an opaque screen  placed in the focal plane of the spherical lens displays all ranges in a particular direction.
The  slit is omset from the origin because of the dc bias that had to be added to the signal at the  input to the CRT in order to record on film.
If the slit were placed on the optical axis,  the presence of the dc bias will cause a degraded image because the energy from the bias  overlaps the desired image.
This is avoided by placing the input signal on a residual carrier  Cylindrical Spherical  @c+  *3 .$ode -  ovO e - ptrcal  59 9\0v C po""  XIS "i: \oo" Pz  44  screen  Slit  Sqnol- history film  and weighting tronsparancy  Figure 14.6 Optical processor for synthetic aperture radar  OTHER RADAR TOPICS525 LensCathode roytubeIntensitymodified verticalsweep j FiRure14.5Recording ofSARsignalonphotographic filmwiththeaidofaCRT.
onatiltedplane,thedifferent phase-front curvatures arecorrected andtheimageiserectedby insertion ofaconicallensplacedatthephase-history filmlocatedinplanePI'Thiserectimage hasitsfocusatinfinity.Theone-dimensional hologram likesignalsrecorded alongthehorizon­ taldimension onthephase-history filmprovidefocusing inthehorizontal plane.Acylin<1rical lensisusedtofocustheimageinthevertical plane.
Thefrontfocal-plane ofthecylindrical lens coincides withthatofthephase-history film.(Alenshastheproperty thataFouriertransform relation existsbetween theamplitude distribution oftheillumination atthefrontandback focalplanes.5) Withtheconicalandcylindrical lens.inserted, theimageiserectandissimultaneously focused intherangeandcross-range dimensions, butitliesatinfinity.Tobringtheimageto someconveniently locatedplane,aspherical lensisinserted.
Averticalslitinanopaquescreen placedinthefocalplaneofthespherical lensdisplays allrangesinaparticular direction.
The slitisoffsetfromtheoriginbecauseofthedcbiasthathadtobeaddedtothesignalatthe inputtotheCRTinordertorecordonfilm.Iftheslitwereplacedontheopticalaxis, thepresence ofthedcbiaswillcauseadegraded imagebecause theenergyfromthebias overlaps thedesiredimage.Thisisavoided byplacingtheinputsignalonaresidual carrier {'" Conical lensCylindrical lensSpherical lens Slit Si<}nol-hisloryfilm andweighting transparancy Figure14.6Optical processor forsynthetic aperture radar. frequency, called the olfiut.freqlre~lcy, along with the dc bias.
(The offset frequency is equal to  the doppler frequency shift associated with a scattcrer located at the edge of t llr: rcal ailtcnna  beam.) The result, which is similar to reconstrtlcting the image of a hologram, is that the  desired real image can then be separated from the energy associated with the bias and the  virtual image.
The slit is displaced from the optical axis at the place where the offset frequency  focuses the real image.
A recording film in the output plane P2, when moved with a speed  proportional to that of the vehicle carrying the radar, produces a map of the scene originally  viewed by the radar.
 If amplitude weighting of the synthetic aperture is desired to reduce the sidelobes, a  shaded transparency with uniform phase thickness can be inserted adjacent to tlle data film in  plane P,.
 Digital processing.
The recirculating delay-line integrator, range-gated filter bank, and 1.
storage-tube integrator all have been used in the past for the electronic processing of tin-  focused SAR.' The optical processor was used for focused systems.
Digital processing is also  practical and has the advantage of real-time operation as compared with optical processing.
 The digital processor has 1 and Q channels with a higli-speed A/[) convertor in each cllailnel.
 The sampling rate of the AID is determined by the radar signal bandwidth, and the number of  bits is set by the dynamic range desired.
Motion compensation for a~imutll and range slip  (range walk) can be applied, as well as phase corrections for focusing.
Semiconductor devices  are used for memory and arithmetic.
When the swath is significantly less than the unambig-  uous range, a buffer can be inserted after the AID convertors to read the data out at a slower  speed so as to process at a lower data rate than if the entire unambiguous range had to be  imaged.
Digital processing also allows the use of a nonlinear sweep to convert slant range to  ground distance so as to make distances correct on the image.
 Doppler-frequency model.
The synthetic aperture radar may be considered as a vector summa-  tion of synthetic-array elements (which is the model generally taken in this section), or it may  be considered in terms of doppler filtering.
In fact, it was originally conceived by Carl Wiley of  Goodyear Aircraft Corporation in 1951 as a doppler-filtering process rather than as a syn-  thetic antenna.
The two models are sometimes used interchangeably, depending upon which  describes more clearly a particular effect.
The basic difference between the two is that the  coordinate system moves with the radar in the doppler description, while in the synthetic-  aperture model the coordinate system is fixed to the ground.g  Consider the geometry of Fig.
14.1 in which an aircraft with a sidelooking SAR travels at  a velocity v.
(The effect of the elevation angle is neglected in this simple analysis but must be  included in more precise considerations.) When a point scatterer just enters the forward edge  of the beam, it has a doppler frequency 2(u/A) cos (QB/2).
For small beamwidths, the doppler  frequency decreases linearly as the point-scatterer position changes relative to the radar and  goes to zero when the scatterer is at the center of the beam, after which the frequency increases.
 The time-varying doppler frequency can be shown to be approximately'  where to is the time when the point scatterer is at the center of the beam, and H is the range to  the scatterer at that time.
The total width Af, of this doppler signal as the scatterer progresses  through the beam is 2v2Td/AR, where & is the time during which the scatterer is within tlie  beam.
By analogy to the linear-FM pulse-compression waveform, the linearly varying doppler  signal can be passed through a matched filter to produce a pulse of duration 1/AJd.
This  526INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS frequency, calledthe~trsetfrequency, alongwiththedcbias.(Theoffsetfrequency isequalto thedoppler frequency shiftassociated withascalterer locatedattheedgeoftherealantenna beam.)Theresult,whichissimilartoreconstructing theimageofahologram, isthatthe desiredrealimagecanthenbeseparated fromtheenergyassociated withthebiasandthe virtualimage.Theslitisdisplaced fromtheopticalaxisattheplacewheretheoffsetfrequency focusestherealimage.Arecording filmintheoutputplaneP2,whenmovedwithaspeed proportional tothatofthevehiclecarrying theradar,produces amapofthesceneoriginally viewedbytheradar.
Ifamplitude weighting ofthesynthetic apenure isdesiredtoreducethesidelobcs, a shadedtransparency withuniform phasethickness canheinserted adjacent tothedatafilmin planePI' Digital processing.
Therecirculating delay-line integrator, range-gated hilabank,and storage-tube integrator allhavebeenusedinthepastfortheelectronic pro&ssing ofun­ focusedSAR.1Theopticalprocessor wasusedforfocusedsystems.
Digitalprocessing isalso practical andhastheadvantage ofreal-time operation ascompared withopticalprocessing.
Thedigitalprocessor hasIandQchannels withahigh-speed A/Dconvertor ineachchannel.
Thesampling rateoftheAIDISdetermined bytheradarsignalbandwidth, andthenumherof bitsissetbythedynamic rangedesired.
Motioncompensation forazimuth andrangeslip (rangewalk)canbeapplied, aswellasphasecorrections forfocusing.
Semicond uctordevices areusedformemory andarithmetic.
Whentheswathissignificantly lessthantheunambig­ uousrange,abuffercanbeinserted aftertheAIDconvertors toreadthedataoutataslower speedsoastoprocessatalowerdataratethaniftheentireunambiguous rangehadtobe imaged.
Digitalprocessing alsoallowstheuseofanonlinear sweeptoconvertslantrangeto grounddistance soastomakedistances correctontheimage.
Doppler-frequency model.Thesynthetic aperture radarmaybeconsidered asavectorsumma­ tionofsynthetic-array elements (whichisthemodelgenerally takeninthis section), oritmay beconsidered intermsofdoppler filtering.
Infact,itwasoriginally conceived byCarlWileyof Goodyear Aircraft Corporation in1951asadoppler-filtering processratherthanasasyn­ theticantenna.
Thetwomodelsaresometimes usedinterchangeably, depending uponwhich describes moreclearlyaparticular effect.Thebasicdifference between thetwoisthatthe coordinate systemmoveswiththeradarinthedoppler description, whileinthesynthetic­ aperture modelthecoordinate systemisfixedtotheground.9 Consider thegeometry ofFig.14.1inwhichanaircraftwithasidelooking SARtravelsat avelocity v.(Theeffectoftheelevation angleisneglected inthissimple analysis butmusthe included inmorepreciseconsiderations.) Whenapointscatterer justenterstheforward edge ofthebeam,ithasadoppler frequency 2(vll)cos(0812).Forsmallbeamwidths, thedoppler frequency decreases linearlyasthepoint-scatterer position changes relativetotheradarand goestozerowhenthescatterer isatthecenterofthebeam,afterwhichthefrequency increases.
Thetime-varying doppler frequency canbeshowntobeapproximately! (14.17) wheretoisthetimewhenthepointscatterer isatthecenterofthebeam,andRistherangeto thescatterer atthattime.Thetotalwidth!:lfdofthisdoppler signalasthescatterer progresses through thebeamis2v2TdllR,whereT.Jisthetimeduringwhichthescatterer iswithinthe beam.Byanalogy tothelinear-FM pulse-compression waveform, thelinearlyvaryingdoppler signalcanbepassedthrough amatched filtertoproduce apulseofduration l/!:ljJ.This corresponds to a cross-range.
or along-track, resolution of o/Ah, or  which is wliat was obtaincd in Eq.
(14.6) from the synthetic aperture model.
(In the above, the  relations 1*74 = L, = RA/I) were employed.)  Range resolution.
In niappitig or itliaging.
it is usually desired to have the range resolution  eqilal to the along-track, or cross-range resolution.
When optical processing is employed, the  linear FM.
or chirp, pulse-compression waveform readily lends itself to the same type of  processing as described for the cross-range signal.' The form of the lines..
FM signal in the  range dimerisiori is similar to the form of tlie signal in the cross-range dimfnsion.
The linear  FM signal has a phase that varies as tZ (t = time), and the cross-range signai has a phase that  varies as .uZ (.u = distance along the ground track).
Just as the phase history >f the cross-range  signal records on film as a Fresnel zone-plate, which then has a focusing action when iliu-  minated by coherent light, so does the signal of the linear FM waveform also record as a  Fresnel zone-plale.
The range and the cross-range recorded signals may be treated as orthog-  onal aspects of a single two-dimensional filtering operation.
Although the usual SAR optical  processing provides dechirping (matched filtering) of the linear FM pulse-compression  wavcform, tlie cliirp niodulation of the transmitter is accomplished as in other pulse-  compression radars.
 Other aspects of SAR.
The SAR has been described as a side-lookirtg rudur wiih the antenna  beam directed perpendicular to the path of the vehicle such that the dopplel.
frequency of  scatterers illuminated by tlie center of the antenna beam is zero.
It is possible.
however, to  operate with the antenna beam pointed either forward or aft of broadside.
Thiz: is called the  syrti~lt nrodr.
The signal processor must be modified to account for the averagc doppler fre-  quency riot being zero.
Recorders and displays must beldesigned to account for lh!.
geometry  of tlie omset beam.
Compensation might also be necessary for" range walk" which is the result  of the target " walking" through one or more range-resolution cells during the time osobserva-  tion.
The achievable cross-range, or along-track, resolution worsens as the squint angle in-  creases from br.oadside (S,, 2 l/sin 0, where U = angle between aircraft heading and squinted  antenna beam direction).
 The sq&;t mode produces a strip map just as does the sidelooking SAR.
Thc doppler  heum-slrarpettitry mode is used with a circularly scanning antenna and a normal PPI display.
As  the squint angle of the doppler beam-sharpening mode varies, thc integration time d..:h:~nges to  keep tlie resolution constant.' The along-track resolution for either the squint mod(.
or the  doppler beam-sharpening mode is  (5, = AR  2oT sin U  wlicrc tile synlbols have been defined previously.
As II decreases in the doppler bca~n-  sharpening mode.
T is made to increase.
As O approaches 0 degrees, the required inlegr ttion  tirile T becomes too large to provide bean1 sharpening so that improved resolution is not  obtained in a finite angular sector about tlie direction of the vehicle velocity.
 In the telescope, or spotliglrt, r~rode very high resolution of a particular patch on the  ground is obtained by steering the real antenna aperture to dwell longer than is possiblc with a  fixed antenna.
Theoretically, resolutions better than D/2 can be obtained.
Another benefit of  OTHER RADAR TOPICS527 corresponds toacross-range.
oralong-track, resolution ofvifj.fd'or J.RJ.R c)=-~.=--=D12cr2117".1 2L~(14.18) whichiswhatwasobtained inEq.(14.6)frqmthesynthetic aperture model.(Intheabove,the relations I'Jd=L.=RA./Dwereemployed.) Rangeresolution.
Inmapping orimaging.
itisusuallydesiredtohavetherangeresolution equaltothealong-track, orcross-range resolution.
Whenopticalproces"ing isemployed, the linearFM.orchirp.pulse-compression waveform readilylendsitselftothesametypeof processing asdescribed forthecross-range signa!.7Theformofthelinea'FMsignalinthe rangedimension issimilartotheformofthesignalinthecross-range dim~nsion.
Thelinear FMsignalhasaphasethatvariesast2(t=time),andthecross-range signaihasaphasethat variesasx2(x=distance alongthegroundtrack).Justasthephasehistory)fthe cross-range signalrecordsonfilmasaFresnel zone-plate, whichthenhasafocusing actionwhenjHu­ minated hycoherent light,sodoesthesignalofthelinearFMwaveform alsorecordasa Fresnelzone-plate.
Therangeandthecross-range recorded signalsmaybetreatedasorthog­ onalaspectsofasingletwo-dimensional filtering operation.
Although themcualSARoptical processing provides dechirping (matched filtering) ofthelinearFMpulse-compression waveform, thechirpmodulation ofthetransmitter isaccomplished asinotherpulse­ compression radars.
OtheraspectsofSAR.TheSARhasbeendescribed asaside-looking radarwi,htheantenna beamdirected perpendicular tothepathofthevehiclesuchthatthedoppler frequency of scalterers illuminated bythecenteroftheantenna beamiszero.Itispossible.
however, to operate withtheantenna beampointedeitherforward oraftofbroadside.
Thi':iscalledthe sqliilltmode.Thesignalprocessor mustbemodified toaccount fortheaveragedoppler fre­ quencynotbeingzero.Recorders anddisplays mustbeldesigned toaccount fort11'.'geometry oftheoffsetbeam.Compensation mightalsobenecessary for"rangewalk,.whichistheresult ofthetarget,.walking" through oneormorerange-resolution cellsduringthetimeorobserva­ tion.Theachievable cross-range.
oralong-track, resolution worsens asthesquintanglein­ creasesfrombroadside (c)cr~I/sin0,where0=anglebetween aircraftheading andsquinted antenna beamdirection).
TheSqtfultmodeproduces astripmapjustasdoesthesidelooking SAR.Th·.;doppler heam-sharpeni"y modeisusedwithacircularly scanning antenna andanormalPPIdisplay.
As thesquintangleofthedoppler beam-sharpening modevaries,theintegration time':hanges to keeptheresolution constant.lThealong-track resolution foreitherthesquintmod,orthe doppler beam-sharpening modeis J.R ()a=2T.0VSill(14.19) wherethesymbols havebeendefined previously.
As0decreases inthedoppler beam­ sharpening mode.Tismadetoincrease.
As0approaches 0degrees, therequired infegrItion timeTbecomes toolargetoprovide beamsharpening sothatimproved resolution isnot obtained inafiniteangular sectoraboutthedirection ofthevehiclevelocity.
Inthetelescope, orspotlight, modeveryhighresolution ofaparticular patchonthe groundisobtained bysteering therealantenna aperture todwelllongerthanispossib/t.
witha fixedantenna.
Theoretically, resolutions betterthanDI2canbeobtained.
Another benefitof 528 INTRODLJCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  this mode is that the scene to be imaged is observed over a range of incidence angles which  averages the speckle and makes a smoother image.
 Since the synthetic-aperture radar is coherent, the image produced will have speckle; i.e.,  there will be constructive and destructive interference which results in a "breakup" of dis-  tributed scatterers.
To reduce the effect of speckle and make a more " filled-in" image, the  same scene can be viewed from different aspects or at different frequencies, or both, and the  several images superimposed.
The multiple looks can be obtained as in the searchlight mode  by dwelling with a positionable antenna on the same area.
Another approach, applicable with a  fixed antenna, is to not use the full synthetic antenna length L, to achieve a resolution 6,, , but  to break up the synthetic length into m subsections and look at the scene from slightly different  aspects each with a resolution m 6,,.
The m independent images are then combined non-  coherently into a single image.
It has been suggested that the noncoherent combining of  images of lesser resolution produces a better image with less speckle than a single image of  greater  resolution."^"  If the SAR is mapping a scene in which there are moving objects such as cars or trains, the  resulting image will be smeared in range and shifted in the along-track dimension due to the  radial motion of the object.
The image also will be defocused in the along-track dimension  because ol radial acceleration or cross-range velocity of the ~bject.~ These effects can cause a  distortion and displacement of the moving-target image.
A reduction in signal strength will  also occur if the target doppler shift is sufficiently large to be outside the passband of the  along-track-dimension processor.
When the SAR is located on a satellite, the effect of earth  rotation must be properly compensated since it results in the earth's surface appearing as a  moving target.'O~~l  The difference in signal characteristics from a moving target as compared to that from a  stationary target can be used as a basis for combining AMTI (airborne moving target indica-  tion) with SAR.8 The moving-target doppler shift can be detected when it exceeds the clutter  doppler-spectrum width.
It is also possible to use a dual sidelooking antenna pattern and  detect the phase difference between the two mutually conerent observations of a target  separated in time.
The phase-detection AMTI method allows slowly moving targets to be  detected when the aircraft velocity is large.
 Ground relief, such as due to hills or mountains, stands out on SAR imagery because o  the shadows they form, especially when viewed at low grazing angles.
Shadows help emphasiz  topographic and geologic features that permit a trained interpreter to learn much about the  nature of the terrain.
(Optical photographs are generally taken from large grazing angles and  do not show the same shadowing effects produced by radar.) Stereoscopic techniques can also  be applied to SAR to provide a three-dimensional image df the terrain.
This is accomplished  by viewing the same terrain from different aspects, such as by flying two separate flight paths  to produce images from two different elevation angles.
l2 It is also possible to generate a palr of  stereo images on a single pass using two vertical fan beams at different azimuth angles, or one  fan beam and a conical beam.13 The stereo processing of SAR images has been successfi~lly  used for mineral exploration.
 At short ranges it is possible to use conventional noncoherent sidelooking radar with a  large antenna aperture and pulse compression to obtain high-resolution terrain imaging.
The  images obtained with conventional noncoherent radar are generally dift'erent than those of  coherent SAR in that they are less speckled.
 Inverse SAR.
Instead of moving a radar relative to a stationary object, it is possible to  generate an image by moving the object relative to a stationary radar Imaging with a station-  ary radar and moving target is called inverse SAR or ronge-doppler imaging.
It has been applied  528INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS thismodeisthatthescenetobeimagedisobserved overarangeofincidence angleswhich averages thespeckleandmakesasmoother image.
Sincethesynthetic-aperture radariscoherent, theimageproduced willhavespeckle; i.e., therewillbeconstructive anddestructive interference whichresultsina..breakup"ofdis­ tributed scatterers.
Toreducetheeffectofspeckleandmakeamore"filled-in" image,the samescenecanbeviewedfromdifferent aspectsoratdifferent frequencies, orboth,andthe severalimagessuperimposed.
Themultiple lookscanbeobtained asinthesearchlight mode bydwelling withapositionable antenna onthesamearea.Another approach, applicable witha fixedantenna, istonotusethefullsynthetic antenna lengthLetoachievearesolution bee'but tobreakupthesynthetic lengthintomsubsections andlookatthescenefromslightlydifferent aspectseachwitharesolution mbee.Themindependent imagesarethencombined non­ coherently intoasingleimage.Ithasbeensuggested thatthenoncoherent combining of imageso.flesserresolution produces abetterimagewithlessspecklethana~ngleimageof greaterresolution.!!'! 7 IftheSARismapping asceneinwhichtherearemovingobjectssuchascarsortrains,the resulting imagewiltbesmeared inrangeandshiftedinthealong-track dimension duetothe radialmotionoftheobject.Theimagealsowillbedefocused inthealong-track dimension becauseofradialacceleration orcross-range velocityoftheobject.lITheseeffectscancausea distortion anddisplacement ofthemoving-target image.Areduction insignalstrength will alsooccurifthetargetdoppler shiftissufficiently largetobeoutsidethepassband ofthe along-track-dimension processor.
WhentheSARislocatedonasatellite, theeffectofearth rotation mustbeproperly compensated sinceitresultsintheearth'ssurfaceappearing asa movingtarget.IO,9! Thedifference insignalcharacteristics fromamovingtargetascompared tothatfroma stationary targetcanbeusedasabasisforcombining AMTI(airborne movingtargetindica­ tion)withSAR.8Themoving-target doppler shiftcanbedetected whenitexceedstheclutter doppler-spectrum width.Itisalsopossible touseadualsidelooking antenna patternand detectthephasedifference between thetwomutually coherent observations ofatarget separated intime.Thephase-detection AMTImethod allowsslowlymoving targetstobe detected whentheaircraftvelocity islarge.
Ground relief,suchasduetohillsormountains, standsoutonSARimagery becauseof theshadows theyform,especially whenviewedatlowgrazingangles.Shadows helpemphasize topographic andgeologic features thatpermitatrainedinterpreter tolearnmuchaboutthe natureoftheterrain.(Optical photographs aregenerally takenfromlargegrazinganglesand donotshowthesameshadowing effectsproduced byradar.)Stereoscopic techniques canalso beappliedtoSARtoprovideathree-dimensional imageoftheterrain.Thisisaccomplished byviewing thesameterrainfromdifferent aspects,suchasbyflyingtwoseparate flightpaths toproduce imagesfromtwodifferent elevation angles.12Itisalsopossible togenerate apaIrof stereoimagesonasinglepassusingtwoverticalfanbeamsatdifferent azimuth angles,orone fanbeamandaconicalbeam.13Thestereoprocessing ofSARimageshasbeensuccessfully usedformineralexploration.
Atshortrangesitispossible touseconventional noncoherent sidelooking radarwitha largeantenna aperture andpulsecompression toobtainhigh-resolution terrainimaging.
The imagesobtained withconventional noncoherent radararegenerally different thanthoseof coherent SARinthattheyarelessspeckled.
InverseSAR.Insteadofmoving aradarrelative toastationary object,itispossible to generate animagebymovingtheobjectrelativetoastationary radar.Imaging withastation­ aryradarandmovingtargetiscalledinverseSARorrange-doppler imaging.Ithasbeenapplied OTHER RADAR TOPICS 529  Figure 14.7 1 nverse SA R, or range-doppler imaging,  of a rotating object.
 10 tlic i~iiagitig of rot;ltirig t;isgcts.' cspcci;tlly tlic rnoon and planets.15 Figure 14.7 shows a  r igid hody I ot;itirig at :ill arigular.
speed of (11, radians per second, wit11 the axis of rotati011  riorrn;~l to tlic p:1per.
'I'lic ctopplcr frccli~ericy associatcd witti a point P on the body located :I  distarlce r fro111 tlic axis of rotation is  where I.
= velocity of poilit 1'.
Froin this equation, the resolution in the .u dimension can be  writtcri  where T is the colierent integration tirnc equal to l/(A/,), and A0 is the angle through which the  body rotates during the time T.
It does not take ti~uch of an angular rotation to produce good  resolution at microwave frequencies.
The contours of constant doppler are perpendicular to  the .u axis, and contours of cbnstailt range lie parallel to the x axis.
 If the angle of target rotation over which the doppler is observed is too short, the doppler  spectrum is broad and the resolution is low.
Increasing the observation time narrows the  spectrum arid the rcsolutiori will increasc.
However, if the time of observation is too long, the  doppler frequency of a point P on the rotating target will not be constant and the doppler  spectrum w'll broaden with a consequent reduction in resolution.
That is, there is an apparent t target acceleration which limits the resolution.
The result is that there will be an optimum time  of observation, or aspect angle change, wlien attempting to image a target with the inverse  SAR technique.'"  14.2 HF OVER-THE-HORIZON RADAR~O  Frequencies at VHF or lower are seldom used for conventional radar applications because of  ttieir narrow bandwidths, wide beamwidths, high ambient noise levels, and the potential  interference from other users of the crowded electromagnetic spectrum.
In spite of these  limitations, the HF region of the spectrum is of special interest for radar because of its unique  property of allowing propagation to long distances beyond the curvature of the earth by  means of refraction from the ionosphere.
A single refraction allows radar ranges to be ex-  tended to almost 4000 krn.
The targets of interest to HF over-the-horizon (OTH) radar are the  OTHER RADAR TOPICS529 / IaI~~\ X""'fJ:v\ I , I I ~-----_ ...--..--------',; w,---'----- Direction ofradar Figure14.7InverseSAR,orrange-doppler imaging, ofarotating ohject.
totheimaging ofrotating targels,14 especially themoonandplanets.
ISFigure14.7showsa rigidhodyrotating atanangular speedof(l)rradians persecond, withtheaxisofrotation normaltothepaper.Thedoppler frequency associated withapointPonthebodylocateda distance,.
fromtheaxisofrotation is .
2rcosex2(1)r"cosex2(1)rX!d=-.-------- ..=------ =.A A )(14.20) wherer=velocity ofpointP.Fromthisequation, theresolution inthexdimension canbe written .)1) )dx=d!d-.=-----'---=----.2(1)rT2(dOjT) 2dO(14.21) whereTisthecoherent integration timeequaltoI/(d/~),anddOistheanglethrough whichthe bodyrotatesduringthetimeT.Itdoesnottakemuchofanangularrotation toproduce good resolution atmicrowave frequencies.
Thecontours ofconstant doppler areperpendicular to thexaxis,andcontours ofconstant rangelieparalleltothexaxis.
Iftheangleoftargetrotation overwhichthedoppler isobserved istooshort,thedoppler spectrum isbroadandtheresolution islow.Increasing theobservation timenarrows the spectrum andtheresolution wil1increase.
However, ifthetimeofobservation istoolong,the doppler frequency ofapointPontherotating targetwillnotbeconstant andthedoppler spectrum wplbroaden withaconsequent reduction inresolution.
Thatis,thereis~napparent targetacceleration whichlimitstheresolution.
Theresultisthattherewillbeanoptimum time ofohservation, oraspectanglechange, whenattempting toimageatargetwiththeinverse SARtechnique.IOI 14.2HFOVER-THE-HORIZON RADAR20 Frequencies atVHForlowerareseldomusedforconventional radarapplications because of theirnarrow bandwidths, widebeamwidths, highambient noiselevels,andthepotential interference fromotherusersofthecrowded electromagnetic spectrum.
Inspiteofthese limitations, theHFregionofthespectrum isofspecialinterestforradarbecauseofitsunique property ofallowing propagation tolongdistances beyond thecurvature oftheearthby meansofrefraction fromtheionosphere.
Asinglerefraction allowsradarrangestobeex­ tendedtoalmost4000km.ThetargetsofinteresttoHFover-the-horizon (OTH)radararethe same as those of interest to microwave radar and include aircraft, missiles, and ships.
In  addition, the long wavelengths characteristic of HF radar also provide distinctive information  regarding the sea, as well as aurora, meteors, and land features.
(Although the HF band is  officially defined as extending from 3 to 30 MHz, for radar usage the lower frequency limit  might lie just above the broadcast band, and the upper limit can extend to 40 MHz or more.)  The ability to see a target at long range by means of ionospheric refraction depends on the  nature of the ionosphere (the density of electron concentration) and the radar frequency, as  well as the normal parameters that enter into the radar range equation.
Unlike conventional  microwave radar, the specific frequency to be used by an OTH radar is a function of the range  that is desired and the character of the, ionosphere.
Since the ionosphere varies wit11 time of  day, season, and solar activity, the optimum radar frequency will vary widely.
Such radars  must therefore be capable of operating over a wide portion of the HF band, as much as three  octaves (4 to 32 MHz for e~ample).~' The ionosphere often consists of more than one rsfract-  1 ing region.
The highest region, denoted F2, and the most important for HF propagation, is at  altitudes of from 230 to 400 km.
It provides the greatest-ranges for a single refraction and can  support the highest usable frequencies.
The F, region, from about 180 to 240 km, is observed  only during the day and is more pronounced during the si~mmer than the winter.
T11e E region,  which lies between 100 and 140 km, can also support refraction.
At these heights there can  appear at times patches of high-density ionization cai'led sporadic E whicll, wllen available,  can be quite effective in providing stab!e propagation.
The multiple refracting regions give rise  'to multipath propagation which can result in degraded performance because of the s;rnulta-  neous arrival of radar energy at the target via more than one propagation path, each with -  different time delays.
The effects of multipath can be reduced by the proper selection of  frequency and by use of narrow elevation beamwidths which allow the energy to travel to the  target via only a single path.
The presence of the various refracting regions with difli'rent  ioniration densities at different altitudes requires good frequency management if an OTH  radar is to operate with reliability.
 The minimum range to which'~f'ener~~ can be propagated by ionospheric refraction is  determined by the lowest frequency at which the radar can operatz.
A nominal value for the  minimum range (or skip distance) is about 1000 km.
 The backscatter from the earth's surface is generally many orders of magnitirde larger  than the echo from desired moving targets.
Thus HF radar must employ some form of doppler  processing such as MTI, pulse-doppler, FM-CW, or CW radar to separate desired moving  targets from clutter.
The equivalent of a high-pass filter must be used to detect moving aircraft  and missiles and reject stationary surface clutter.
The detection of ships requires more sophis-  ticated processing since the relatively low velocity of ships produces doppler-frequeilcy strifts  comparable to those of the sea (which is also a moving target).
Even thougli the radar cross  section of ships is often greater than that of aircraft, longer observation tinies are reqtiirccl to  provide sufficient resolution in doppler frequency.
 Character of OTH radar.
The factors affecting the design of an HF OTH radar are slightly  different than those affecting conventional microwave radar.
This is illustrated by the simple  radar equation commonly used in OTH radar analysis, which is  where R = range  Pa, = average power  G, = transmitting antenna gain  (14.22)530INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS sameasthoseofinterest tomicrowave radarandinclude aircraft, missiles, andships.In addition, thelongwavelengths characteristic ofHFradaralsoprovidedistinctive information regarding thesea,aswellasaurora, meteors, andlandfeatures.
(Although theHFhandis officially defined asextending from3to30MHz,forradarusagethelowerfrequency limit mightliejustabovethebroadcast band,andtheupperlimitcanextendto40MHzormore.) Theabilitytoseeatargetatlongrangebymeansofionospheric refraction depends onthe natureoftheionosphere (thedensityofelectron concentration) andtheradarfrequency, as wellasthenormalparameters thatenterintotheradarrangeequation.
Unlikeconventional microwave radar,thespecific frequency tobeusedbyanOTHradarisafunction oftherange thatisdesiredandthecharacter oftheionosphere.
Sincetheionosphere varieswithtimeof day,season,andsolaractivity, theoptimum radarfrequency willvarywidely.Suchradars musttherefore becapableofoperating overawideportionoftheHFband,asmuchasthree octaves (4to32MHzforexample).21 Theionosphere oftenconsists ofmorethanonerdract­ ingregion.Thehighestregion,denotedF2,andthemostimportant forHFprop'agation, isat altitudes offrom230to400km.Itprovides thegreatest-ranges forasinglerefraction andcan support thehighestusablefrequencies.
TheF1region,fromabout180to240km,isobserved onlyduringthedayandismorepronounced duringthesummer thanthewinter.TheEregion, whichliesbetween 100and140km,canalsosupport refraction.
Attheseheightstherecan appearattimespatchesofhigh-density ionization calledsporadic Ewhich,whenavailable, canbequiteeffective inproviding stablepropagation.
Themultiple refracting regionsgiverise tomultipath propagation whichcanresultindegraded performance because ofthesimulta­ neousarrivalofradarenergyatthetargetviamorethanonepropagation path,eachwith different timedelays.Theeffectsofmultipath canbereduced bytheproperselection of frequency andbyuseofnarrowelevation beamwidths whichallowtheenergytotraveltothe targetviaonlyasinglepath.Thepresence ofthevarious refracting rcgions withdiffcrcnt ionization densities atdifferent altitudes requires goodfrequency managcmcnt ifanOTH radaristooperate withreliability.
Theminimum rangetowhich'HFlenergy canbepropagated byionospheric refraction is determined bythelowestfrequency atwhichtheradarcanoperate.
Anominal valueforthe minimum range(orskipdistance) isaboutWOOkm.
Thebackscatter fromtheearth'ssurface isgenerally manyordersofmagnitude larger thantheechofromdesiredmovingtargets.ThusHFradarmustemploysomeformofdoppler processing suchasMTJ,pulse-doppler, FM-CW, orCWradartoseparate desin.:dmoving targetsfromclutter.Theequivalent ofahigh-pass filtermustbeusedtodetectmoving airr.raft andmissilesandrejectstationary surfaceclutter.Thedetection ofshipsrequires moresophis­ ticatedprocessing sincetherelatively lowvelocity ofshipsproduces doppler-frequency shifts comparable tothoseofthesea(whichisalsoamoving target).
Eventhoughtheradarcross sectionofshipsisoftengreaterthan thatofaircraft, longerobservation timesarerequired to provide sufficient resolution indoppler frequency.
Character ofOTHradar.Thefactorsaffecting thedesignofanHFOTHradarareslightly different thanthoseaffecting conventional microwave radar.Thisisillustrated bythesimple radarequation commonly usedinOTHradaranalysis, whichis 4PavG,G,i2(JF;TcR=------- (4n)3No(SjN)Ls whereR=range Pav=average power G,=transmitting antenna gain 6, = receiving antenna gait1  A - wavelength  o = larget cross section  F, = factor to account for the one-way propagation effects  T, = coherent processing time  No = receiver noise power per unit bandwidth  (SIN) = signal-to-noise (power) ratio  L, = system losses  The transmitting and receiving antenna gains are shown separately in Eq.
(14.22) since it  is sorrletinles convenient in OTH radar to have separate antennas for these two functions.
If  narrow bearnwidths are to be achieved, the radar antenna must be a physically large phased  array.
A one-degree beamwidth, for example, requires an aperture of about 1200 m at a  frequency of 15 MHz.
Since the transmitting antenna must handle high power, it is more  costly to obtain than large receiving apertures.
In one type of OTH radar design, a (rela-  tively) small transmitting antenna with broad azimuth beamwidth is used along with a large  rcccivir~g aperture consisting ol' a number of narrow co~~tiguous beams coveril~g the angle  illuminated by the wide transmitting beam.
Thus the complexity of a large transmitting  antenna is traded for a nirmber of parallel receiving channels.
It is also possible to utilize a  conlrnon aperture for both transmit and receive, with equal transmit and receive beamwidths.
 1)uplexers would be required as in a microwave phased-array radar.
The antenna might also  support several simultaneous, irldcpendellt radar beams; or multiple beams can be generated  sequentially (a pulse burst).
A narrow, steerable beam in the elevation plane is desired for  OTH radar in order to avoid multipath propagation and to concentrate the energy at the  desired range.
However, the large vertical.
apertures to achieve such a capability are quite  costly, so that HF OTH radars seldonl have as large a vertical aperture, or as narrow an  elevation beamwidth, as might be desired.
 The propagation factor (F,), receiver noise (No), and coherent integration time (T,) of  Eq.
(14.22) represent major differences between the HF OTH radar and the conventional  microwave radar.
The factor F.', includes the energy loss along the ionospheric path, thc  mismatch loss due to a change in polarization caused by the ionosphere, ionospheric focusing  gain or loss, and losses due to the dynamic nature of the path.22.23 The receiver noise No  includes the ambient noise radiated by natural sources (chiefly lightning discharges from  around the world) as well as the combined interference from the many users of the HF band.
It  is the latter +which generally determines system sensitivity at HF.
The processing.time T, is  included to emphasize that an OTH radar is usually a doppler-processing radar that requires a  dwell tinie of T, seconds if a frequency resolution of 1/T, hertz is to be achieved.
 Tlie radar cross sectiorl (T of targets at HF is often different than at microwaves.
Sir~ce  nlariy targets have dimensions comparable to the HF wavelength, or component structures  witti dimensions comparable to the wavelength, the target is often in the resonance region  where the radar cross sections are gerlerally larger than at microwaves.
At the lower HF  frequencies where the wavelength is large compared to the target dimensions, the cross section  will be in the Rayleigh region where r~ decreases rapidly with decreasing frequency.
If the  frequency is sufficiently low, the cross section of small aircraft or missiles might be smaller  than their microwave values.
 It was mentioned that external sources of interference from other HF users can limit the  sensitivity of the HF radar receiver.
Thus the design of the radar for maximum performance  will differ from that when receiver thermal noise sets the limit.
In addition to satisfying the  needs for an adequate signal-to-noise ratio, there must be adequate signal-to-clutter ratio.
 OTIIER RADAR TOPICS531 G,=receiving antenna gain A=wavelength a=targetcrosssection Fp=factortoaccount fortheone-way propagation effects Tc=coherent processing time No=receiver noisepowerperunitbandwidth (SfN)=signal-to-noise (power) ratio L,=systemlosses Thetransmitting andreceiving antenna gainsareshownseparately inEq.(14.22)sinceit issometimes convenient iilOTHradartohaveseparate antennas forthesetwofunctions.
If narrowbeamwidthsaretobeachieved, theradarantenna mustbeaphysically largephased array.Aone-degree beamwidth, forexample, requires anaperture ofabout1200mata frequency of15MHz.Sincethetransmitting antenna musthandlehighpower,itismore costlytoobtainthanlargereceiving apertures.
InonetypeofOTHradardesign,a(rela­ tively)smalltransmitting antenna withbroadazimuth beamwidth isusedalongwithalarge receiving aperture consisting ofanumber ofnarrowcontiguous beamscovering theangle illuminated bythewidetransmitting beam.Thusthecomplexity ofalargetransmitting antenna istradedforanumber ofparallel receiving channels.
Itisalsopossible toutilizea common aperture forbothtransmit andreceive,withequaltransmit andreceivebeamwidths.
Duplexers wouldberequired asinamicrowave phased-array radar.Theantenna mightalso support severalsimultancous, indcpendcnt radarbeams;ormultiple beamscanbegenerated sequentially (apulseburst).Anarrow, steerable beamintheelevation planeisdesiredfor OTHradarinordertoavoidmultipath propagation andtoconcentrate theenergyatthe desired range.However, thelargevertical.
apertures toachieve suchacapability arequite costly,sothatHFOTHradarsseldomhaveaslargeavertical aperture, orasnarrow an elevation beamwidth, asmightbedesired.
Thepropagation factor(F,,),receiver noise(No),andcoherent integration time(1;)of Eq.(14.22)represent majordifferences between theHFOTHradarandtheconventional microwave radar.ThefactorFpincludes theenergylossalongtheionospheric path,the mismatch lossduetoachangeinpolarization causedbytheionosphere, ionospheric focusing gainorloss,andlossesduetothedynamic natureofthepath.22•23Thereceiver noiseNo includes theambient noiseradiated bynatural sources (chiefly lightning discharges from aroundtheworld)aswellasthecombined interference fromthemanyusersoftheHFband.It isthelatter,vhichgenerally determines systemsensitivity atHF.Theprocessing ·timeT.:is included toemphasize thatanOTHradarisusuallyadoppler-processing radarthatrequires a dwelltimeofT.:seconds ifafrequency resolution ofliT.:hertzistobeachieved.
TheradarcrosssectionaoftargetsatHFisoftendifferent thanatmicrowaves.
Since manytargetshavedimensions comparable totheHFwavelength, orcomponent structures withdimensions comparable tothewavelength, thetargetisoftenintheresonance region wheretheradarcrosssections aregenerally largerthanatmicrowaves.
AtthelowerHF frequencies wherethewavelength islargecompared tothetargetdimensions, thecrosssection willbeintheRayleigh regionwhereadecreases rapidlywithdecreasing frequency.
Ifthe frequency issufficiently low,thecrosssectionofsmallaircraftormissiles mightbesmaller thantheirmicrowave values.
Itwasmentioned thatexternal sourcesofinterference fromotherHFuserscanlimitthe sensitivity oftheHFradarreceiver.
Thusthedesignoftheradarformaximum performance willdifferfromthatwhenreceiver thermal noisesetsthelimit.Inaddition tosatisfying the needsforanadequate signal-to-noise ratio,theremustbeadequate signal-to-c1utter ratio. 532 INTRODLJCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  Signal-to-clutter ratio usually can be increased with narrow beamwidths and narro  pulsewid t hs.
 An OTH radar designed for the detection of aircraft at ranges out to 4000 km might have,  for example, an average power of several hundreds of kilowatts or more, antenna gains from  about 20 to 30 dB, and operating frequencies from several megahertz to several tens of  megahertz.
Antennas must be large in order to obtain reasonably narrow beamwidths.
The  antenna horizontal length might be 300 m or greater.
The transmitted waveform can be pulse,  CW, FM-CW, FM (chirp) pulse, or other pulse-compression coded waveforms.
Pulsc conl-  pression is used for the same reason as in microwave radars.
Spectral bandwidths of from  approximately 5 kHz to 100 kHz might be used, corresponding to effective pulse widttts of  200 /is and 10/is, respectively.
(Actual pulse widths can be much longer, especially if pulse  compression is used.) The lower bandwidth limit of 5 kHz is set by the desire to be able to  operate in the quieter "holes" of the HF spectrirm.
The wider the spectral width the less likely  that regions of the spectrum can be found without significant interference.
~vedif interference  is not a problem, the upper limit of spectral width, about 100 kHz, is set by the dispersive  nature of the ionosphere.
Doppler filter bandwidths for separating targets from clutter in an  OTH radar might range from 1 Hz down to 0.05 Hz or less, depending on the target's chara  teristics and the stability of the propagation path.
The pirlse repetition frequency (prf) of a  OTH radar is generally low to avoid range ambiguities.
A prf of 30 Hz, for example, corre-  sponds to an unambiguous range of about 5000 km.
 The ionosphere is not a benign propagation medium.
As the amount of ionization  changes, the optimum frequency for propagating energy to a particular distance must be  changed accordingly.
The losses in propagating through the ionosphere change with time, and  the transmitter must have sufficient excess power to overcome the maximum loss expected.
 Fading of the HF signals can occur due to the rotation of the plane of polarization over tt~e  ionized region of the propagation path.
Multipath interference from more than one refracting  region, as well as dynamic irregularities in the ionospheric propagation path, are two other  sources of fading.
 The specific region on the earth's surface illuminated by an HF radar depends on iono-  spheric conditions.
A "typical" patch of the ground illuminated by a single freqtiency might be  about 1000 km in the range coordinate.
The region from 1000 to 4000 km might therefore  require the radiation of three different frequencies for full coverage.
On the other hand, ther  might be times when ionospheric,conditions allow this region to be covered by only a sing1  frequency, while at other times five or six frequencies might be required.
This illustrates the  necessity for flexible management of the radar.
The ionosphere must be sensed and the param-  eters of the radar adjusted to optimum operation.
With proper radar design and manage-  ment it should be possible to achieve a propagation path reliability comparable to that of a  microwave radar.
This requires a large frequency range of operation, high power to overcome  propagation losses, and diagnostics of the ionospheric conditions to determine proper radar  parameters.
 Example capabilities.
The following describe the nominal performance capabilities that might  be achieved with an over-the-horizon radar operating in the HF band:2"  Rlrtlgr coverage-1000-4000 km; longer ranges are possible wtth multihop propagatton, but  with degraded performance.
 At~yle coverage--can be 360" in azimuth from a single site, tfdesired; 60 to 120" is more typ~cal  Ttrrgrts-aircraft, missiles, and ships; also nuclear explosions, prominent surface featilres  (such as mountains, cities, and islands), seit, aurora, meteors, itnd ~iit~lltte~.
 532INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS Signal-to-c1utter ratiousually canbeincreased withnarrow beamwidths andnarrow pulsewidths.
AnOTHradardesigned forthedetection ofaircraftatrangesoutto4000kmmighthave, forexample, anaverage powerofseveralhundreds ofkilowatts ormore,antenna gainsfrom about20to30dB,andoperating frequencies fromseveralmegahertz toseveral tensof megahertz.
Antennas mustbelargeinordertoobtainreasonably narrow beamwidths.
The antenna horizontal lengthmightbe300morgreater.Thetransmitted waveform canbepulse, CW,FM-CW, FM(chirp)pulse,orotherpulse-compression codedwaveforms.
Pulsecom­ pression isusedforthesamereasonasinmicrowave radars.Spectral bandwidths offrom approximately 5kHzto100kHzmightbeused,corresponding toeffective pulsewidthsof 200ILSandlOlLS,respectively.
(Actual pulsewidthscanbemuchlonger,especially ifpulse compression isused.)Thelowerbandwidth limitof5kHzissetbythedesiretobeableto operate inthequieter" holes"oftheHFspectrum.
Thewiderthespectral widththelesslikely thatregionsofthespectrum canbefoundwithout significant interference.
Evetfifinterference isnotaproblem, theupperlimitofspectral width,about100kHz,issetbythedispersive natureoftheionosphere.
Doppler filterbandwidths forseparating targetsfromclutterinan OTHradarmightrangefrom1Hzdownto0.05Hzorless,depending onthetarget'scharac­ teristics andthestability ofthepropagation path.Thepulserepetition frequency (prf)ofan OTHradarisgenerally lowtoavoidrangeambiguities.
Aprfof30Hz,forexample, corre­ spondstoanunambiguous rangeofabout5000km.
Theionosphere isnotabenignpropagation medium.
Astheamount ofionization changes, theoptimum frequency forpropagating energytoaparticular distance mustbe changed accordingly.
Thelossesinpropagating through theionosphere changewithtime,and thetransmitter musthavesufficient excesspowertoovercome themaximum lossexpected.
FadingoftheHFsignalscanoccurduetotherotation oftheplaneofpolarization overthe ionizedregionofthepropagation path.Multipath interference frommorethanonerefracting region,aswellasdynamic irregularities intheionospheric propagation path,aretwoother sourcesoffading.
Thespecificregionontheearth'ssurfaceilluminated byanHFradardepends oniono­ sphericconditions.
A..typical" patchofthegroundilluminated byasinglefrequency mightbe about1000kmintherangecoordinate.
Theregionfrom1000to4000kmmighttherefore requiretheradiation ofthreedifferent frequencies forfullcoverage.
Ontheotherhand,there mightbetimeswhenionospheric.
conditions allowthisregiontobecovered byonlyasingle frequency, whileatothertimesfiveorsixfrequencies mightberequired.
Thisillustrates the necessity forflexiblemanagement oftheradar.Theionosphere mustbesensedandtheparam­ etersoftheradaradjusted tooptimum operation.
Withproperradardesignandmanage­ mentitshouldbepossible toachieveapropagation pathreliability comparable tothatofa microwave radar.Thisrequires alargefrequency rangeofoperation, highpowertoovercome propagation losses,anddiagnostics oftheionospheric conditions todetermine properradar parameters.
Example capabilities.
Thefollowing describe thenominal performance capahilities thatmight beachieved withanover-the-horizon radaroperating intheHFband:Hl Rangecoverage-l000-4000 km;longerrangesarepossihle withmultihop propagation, but withdegraded performance.
Anglecoverage--can be3600inazimuth fromasinglesite,ifdesired; 60to1200ismoretypical.
Targets-aircraft, missiles, andships;alsonuclear explosions, prominent surface features (suchasmountains, cities,andislands), sea,aurora, meteors, andsatl:llitl:s. OTI-IER RADAR TOPICS 533  Range resolurion-could be as low as 2 km, but is more typically 20 to 40 km.
 R~lati~~e rairge accurac~~--typically 2 to 4 km for a target location relative to a known location  ohserved by tlie same radar.
 Ahsolrtte rurtye ucc.~rac)~-- IO to 20 kin, assutning real-time analysis of tlie propagatiori path is  made.
 ,111glc resolrrtiotr detcrrniricd by tlie bearnwidtli; it car1 be less that1 lo which corresporids to  50 kni at a distatice of 3000 km.
 I cry " he;itn splittirig" of orie part in 10 should be possible if tlie signal-to-noise  ratio is sufficierlt ; iotiosplieric effects rniglit lir~iit the angle measurement accuracy to some  fraction of a degree.
 1)oppIer rcsol~ctiotr-resolution of targets wliose doppler frequencies differ by 0.1 Hz or less is  generally possible: at a radar frequeticy of 20 MHz, 0.1 Hz corresponds to a difference in  relative velocity of about 1.5 knots.
 Althougll the resolution of an HF radar is poorer in range and angle than that of  tnicrowave radar, its resolution in the doppler-frequency domain is quite good.
Targets not  resolvable in range or angle can be readily resolved in doppler.
After targets are resolved in  doppler, measurements in range and angle can be made to a greater accuracy than given by the  noniinal resolution in those coordinates.
 Application to air traffic control.
Tlie order of magnitude increase in range possible with an  IIF OTH radar as compared with conventional microwave radar makes it attractive for  coverage of tliose geographical areas where it is not convenient to locate line-of-sight radars.
 I'lie observation of targets over large areas of the sea is an example where HF OTH radar can  find effective applications.
The unique properties of these radars also make them of interest for  military applications.
To illustrate the types of applications well suited for HF OTH radar,  two examples will be mentioned: air traffic control over the sea, and remote observation of  sea conditions.
 In the continental United States and similar land areas of the world with large air traffic,  lotig-range microwave air-surveillance radars can keep track of aircraft for the purpose of  providing safe and efficient air travel.
Such coverage over the ocean is not practical because of  the unavailability of suitable sites for microwave radar.
A shore-based HF OTH radar car1  cover large areas of the ocean and detect and track aircraft so as to provide air-traffic control.
 For example, an OTH radar with 120' angle coverage and a range interval extending from  IOU0 to 4dk krn can survey an area of almost sixteen million square kilometers'.
Aircraft at  any altitude within this region can be detected, located, and tracked so as to provide a  cost-effective over-ocean air-traffic-control capability.
Target height is not obtained with this  OTIl radar.
(Nor is height obtained with tlie usual microwave air-traffic-control radars.) It is  possible to utilize modified H F communications equipment as transponders on each aircraft  which can relay back to the radar tlie height of the aircraft as determined by the onboard  altimeter, as well as tlie identity of the aircraft.
Limited communications also can be effected by  this means.
Tlie cost of an ff F OTH radar for the detection of aircraft might be expected to be  Iiigli relative to tlic cost of a colivelitional microwave radar, but on the basis of cost per unit  area of coverage it is quite competitive..
Its chief advantage is that it can cover areas not  rc;isihle wit11 corivcritiot~al rndats.
 Application to r~ieasurerrierit of sea cotiditions.
The distinctive nature of the doppler freqilency  sl~il't fro111 tlie sea allows irilormation to be extracted regarding the.sea conditions at~d the  wrritls driving the sea.?*." Tlie major portion of the doppler-frequency spectrum from tire SC~  OTHER RADAR TOPICS533 Rangeresolution-could beaslowas2km,butismoretypically 20to40km.
Relatil)e rangeaccuracy-typically.2.t04 kmforatargetlocation relativetoaknownlpcation observed bythesameradar.
Ahsolute rangeaccuracy--IO to20kIll,assuming real-time analysis ofthepropagation pathis made.
A/lgleresoll/tio/l determined bythebeamwidth; itcanbelessthan10whichcorresponds to 50kmatadistance of3000km.
A/I~/l('llCnlrllCY "beamsplitting" ofonepartin10shouldbepossible ifthesignal-to-noise ratioissuffkient; ionospheric effectsmightlimittheanglemeasurement accuracy tosome fraction ofadegree.
Dopplerresolutio/l-resolution oftargetswhosedoppler frequencies differby0.1Hzorlessis generally possible; ataradarfrequency of20MHz,0.1Hzcorresponds toadifference in relative velocity ofabout1.5knots.
Although theresolution ofanHFradarispoorerinrangeandanglethanthatof microwave radar.itsresolution inthedoppler-frequency domain isquitegood.Targets not resolvable inrangeoranglecanbereadilyresolved indoppler.
Aftertargetsareresolved in doppler, measurements inrangeandanglecanbemadetoagreateraccuracy thangivenbythe nominal resolution inthosecoordinates.
Application toairtrafficcontrol.
Theorderofmagnitude increase inrangepossible withan IIFOTHradarascompared withconventional microwave radarmakesitattractive for coverage ofthosegeographical areaswhereitisnotconvenient tolocateline-of-sight radars.
Theobservation oftargetsoverlargeareasoftheseaisanexample whereHFOTHradarcan findeffective applications.
Theuniqueproperties oftheseradarsalsomakethemofinterestfor military applications.
Toillustrate thetypesofapplications wellsuitedforHFOTHradar, twoexamples willbementioned: airtrafficcontroloverthesea,andremoteobservation of seaconditions.
Inthecontinental UnitedStatesandsimilarlandareasoftheworldwithlargeairtraffic, long-range microwave air-surveillance radarscankeeptrackofaircraft forthepurpose of providing safeandefficient airtravel.Suchcoverage overtheoceanisnotpractical becauseof theunavailability ofsuitable sitesformicrowave radar.Ashore-based HFOTHradarcan coverlargeareasoftheoceananddetectandtrackaircraftsoastoprovide air-traffic control.
Forexample, anOTHradarwith1200anglecoverage andarangeinterval extending from 1000to4<i)okmcansurveyanareaofalmostsixteenmillionsquarekilometers'.
Aircraft at anyaltitude withinthisregioncanbedetected, located, andtracked soastoprovide a cost-effective over-ocean air-traffic-control capability.
Targetheightisnotobtained withthis OTHradar.(Norisheightobtained withtheusualmicrowave air-traffic-control radars.) Itis possible toutilizemodified HFcommunications equipment astransponders oneachaircraft whichcanrelaybacktotheradartheheightoftheaircraft asdetermined bytheonboard altimeter, aswellastheidentityoftheaircraft.
Limited communications alsocanbeeffected by thismeans.ThecostofanHFOTHradarforthedetection ofaircraftmightbeexpected tobe highrelativetothecostofaconventional microwave radar,butonthebasisofcostperunit areaofcoverage itisquitecompetitive ..Itschiefadvantage isthatitcancoverareasnot feasible withconventional rauars.
Application tomeasurement ofseaconditions.
Thedistinctive natureofthedoppler frequency shillfromtheseaallowsinformation tobeextracted regarding the·seaconditions alldthe WlIlllsdrivingthesea.J4.25Themajorportionorthedoppler-frequency spectrum fromtl:t.:<;('3 534 tNTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  Figure 14.8 Spectl-t~m \he radar echo from the .,ra obtained from an area about 9.5 by 7.5 km via  groundwave propag;ition.
The sea was developed by a 25-knot approaching ~ind.
Radar frcqi~rncy was  13.4 MHz producing .i resonant doppler frequency shift of 0.37 HL.
The dopplcr frcquoncy scale tias hccn  normalized so that ttte dominant components are iit + I.
AKW = approach resonant wave; KHW =  recede resonant wavu.
calibration signal is at left of figure.
 is not found at zero freqt~ency as is the case for land backscatter, but is centered at two discrete  frequencies symmetrically spaced around zero, Fig.
14.8.
The sea may be thought of as  composed of a large number of individual wave trains, each with a differcnt wavelength and  amplitude and traveling In different directions.
This collection of wave trains is described by a  two-dimensional spectrum (wave amplitude as a funct~on of water-wavelength and d~rect~on ol'  travel).
At grazing incidence the radar responds chiefly to the two wave trains whlch are  traveling toward and aw.iv from the radar, each with a water-wavelength A, equal to half thc  radar-wavelength A,.
For ,I grazing angle 4, this cond~tlon becomes A, = (,?,/2) cos 4 The  scattering from these two " resonant" wave components is similar to that from a diffract~on  grating.
The term Bragg s,..ltter IS sometimes used to describe th~s form of scattering, by  analogy to the Bragg-scatter mode for the X-ray diffraction by crystals.
 The velocity of a water wave (a gravity wave in deep water) is v = (gR,/2~)'~~, where g is  the acceleration of gravity Subst~tuting this velocity Into the classical formula for doppler  frequency shift [Eq.
(3 2)], and using the resonant condition A, = ,412, gives the doppler sh~ft  for the resonant sea waves at gr :zing incidence as  The plus sign appl~es to the apprt,aching resonant wave, and the minus sign corresponds to the  receding resonant wave.
When tile wind is blowing toward the radar tlie dpproacliing-wavc  spectral line IS the larger of the two.
When the wind is blowing away from the radar, the  receding-wave spectral line is the larger When the wind IS blowing perpendicular to  the direction of the radar beam, the two spectral lines are equal.
Thus the relative magnitude  of the two major components of the doppler spectrum can provide a measure of the direction  of the wind.
(More ;-\recisely, ~t determines the direction of the waves driven by the wind since  the wave and wind djrections are not exactly coincident.) Note that In Eq.
(14.23) the doppler  534lNTRODUCTlON TORADAR SYSTEMS 0----ARW 10--------+---+------/-- II.J o} \ ./2./3 2RRW --_.- --I---H-----+----~ --++--U--+--+H-l 40 50_.4i ~20a.
4l.2 ~30 a:: Figure14.8Spectrllm llfIheradarechofromthe,eaobtained fromanareaabout9.5by7.5kmvia groundwave propag;.tion.
Theseawasdeveloped bya25-lI.not approaching .....ind.Radarfrequency was .13.4MHzproducing .1resonant doppler frequency shiftof0.37HI.Thedoppler frequency scalehashecn Ilormaltzed sothattileJominant components areat±I.ARW=approach resonant wave;RRW= recederesonant wavecalibration signalisatleftoffigure.
isnotfoundatzerofrequency asisthecaseforlandbackscatter, butiscentered attwodiscrete frequencies symmetrically spacedaround zero,Fig.14.8.Theseamaybethought ofas composed ofalargenlJmberofindividual wavetrains,eachwithadifferent wavelength and ampli~ude andtraveling indifferent directions.
Thiscollection ofwavetrainsisdescribed bya two-dimensional spectrum (waveamplitude asafunction ofwater-wavclength anddirection or travel).Atgrazing incidence theradarresponds chieflytothetwowavetrainswhichare traveling towardandaWJVfromtheradar,eachwithawater-wavelength Awequaltohalfthe radar-wavelength Ar.Foritgrazingangle4>,thiscondition becomes Aw=(J..r/2)cos4>.The scattering fromthesetwo..resonant" wave component~ issimilartothatfromadiffraction grating.
ThetermBraggsdtterissometimes usedtodescribe thisformofscatlcnng.
by analogy totheBragg-scatte..- modefortheX-raydiffraction bycrystals.
Thevelocity ofawaterwave(agravitywaveindeepwater)isv=(gAw/2n)JI2,where9is theacceleration ofgravity.
Substituting thisvelocity intotheclassical formula fordoppler frequency shift[Eq.(32)],andu-,ingtheresonant condition Aw=Ar/2,givesthedoppler shift fortheresonant seawavesatgrmngincidence as ./~=±Jg!nA.
(14.23) Theplussignappliestotheapprl)arhing resonant wave,andtheminussigncorresponds [0the receding resonant wave.Whentilewindishlowing towardtheradartheapproaching-wave spectral lineISthelargerofthetwo.Whenthewindisblowing awayfromtheradar,the receding-wave spectral lineisthelarger.Whenthewind ISblowing perpendicular to thedirection oftheradarbeam,thetwospectral linesareequal.Thustherelative magnitude ofthetwomajorcomponents ofthedoppler spectrum canprovide ameasure ofthedirection ofthewind.(MoreI'recisely, itdetermines thedirection ofthewavesdrivenbythewindsince thewaveandwinddlrections arenotexactlycoincident.) NotethatinEq.(14.23)thedoppler OTtIER RADAR TOPICS 535  frequency shift is proportional to tlie square root of the carrier frequency instead of tlie linear  dependence normally characteristic of a doppler shift.
 As the wind speed increases, higher-order components appear at $fd.
Jfd.
etc.
The  appearance of higher-order components can be used as a measure of the wind speed, but a  more useful measure is the magnitude of the continuum about zero doppler relative to the  magtiitude of tlie larger resonant spectral line.
(The continumum between the two spectral  lines is determined by second-order scattering from sets of waves that form corner   reflector^.'^) If land clutter is present in the radar resolution cell along with sea clutter, or if it  eriters the radar via the antenna sidelobes, there will be a spectral component at zero frequency  wliicli can degrade the usefulness of this measurement.
When the sea is saturated.
which is not  trr~trs~r;tI for tl~ose wntcr wavclc~igtt~s resotiarlt with f4F wavclcr~gths.
tlieory predicts, atid  cxpcrirnents verify, that tlie cross sectiotl per unit area (TO corresponding to the larger resonant  component is - 29 dB.
independent of sea state and frequency.25.2h This allows that compo-  nent to be used as a calibration standard.
 ~l'lius an examination of the doppler spectrum of the sea can give the sea roughness and  ditcctio~~, from wliicti cat1 hc ilifcrrcd sor~ietliirig about the witids driving tl~e sea.
Swell waves  or ship eclioes can be recog~iised as distinct components.
Surface currents can he noted by the  asymmetrical placement of the two resonant components about zero frequency.
With suficient  radar measurements tlie two-dimensional sea spectrum can be derived.
The HF radar rcpre-  sents a uniqire tool for measuriti? sea conditions at a distance.
Tlie cost of a radar to measure  sea coriditiotis can be considerably less than the cost of an HF radar to detect aircraft.
It is  iritcrcsting to note that the dcvclopmcnt of si~ch a capability was originally not as an attempt  to Icilrn niore about tlic sea.
t3irt was a byproduct of attempts to iniprove tlic detection or  targets in a sea-clutter background.
 111; radar equation.
Tlie simple OTi-i radar equation of Eq.
(14.22) does not account for the  fact that a surveillance radar must cover a specified angular sector in a specified time.
The  radar equation for a microwave surveillance radar was given by Eq.
(2.57).
This must be  modified for an HF radar since the coherent integration tim'e T, is fixed in an HF radar by the  doppler processing requirements.
Also in an HF radar, the elevation beamwidth 0, is often not  available as a design parameter because of the large cost ofhigh antenna structures.
Substituting  into Eq.
(14.22) G, = G, = G = nZ/O,O,, where 0, = azimuth beamwidth; and T, = rS0,/OT, r, =  revisit time (scan time) and 0, = total azimuth angle coverage, we get  Lumpirig into a single constant K the constants in this equation and the parameters assumed  to be given (including I),.) or not under the control of the radar designer, we get  Thus a measure of the performance of an HF surveillance radar is the ratio of the average  power divided by the azimi~tli beamwidth.
When comparing the performance of two radars  with different antenna heights as well as dimerent widths, a measure of relative performance is  Measure of performance = Pa, wh2 (14.26)  where w = antenna width and It = antenna height.
If separate antennas are used for transmit  and receive, rv is the width of the receiving antenna and 11' is replaced by h,hr where  it, = transmitting antenna height and /I, = receiving antenna height.
 (14.24) (14.25)OTHER RADAR TOPICS535 frequency shiftisproportional tothesquarerootofthecarrierfrequency insteadofthelinear dependence normally characteristic ofadoppler shift.
Asthewindspeedincreases.
higher-order components appearatj1.fd.fird.etc.The appearance ofhigher-order components canbeusedasameasure ofthewindspeed.buta moreusefulmeasure isthemagnitude ofthecontinuum aboutzerodoppler relativetothe magnitude ofthelargerresonant spectral line.(Thecontinumum between thetwospectral linesisdetermined bysecond-order scattering fromsetsofwavesthatformcorner retlectors.24)Iflandclutterispresentintheradarresolution cellalongwithseaclutter.orifit enterstheradarviatheantenna sidelobes.
therewiJlbeaspectralcomponent atzerofrequency whichcandegrade theusefulness ofthismeasurement.
Whentheseaissaturated.
whichisnot 1"1I1~11tl1 forthosewaterwavelengths rcsonant withHFwavelcngths.
thcorypredicts.
and experiments verify.thatthecrosssectionperunitarea(Tocorresponding tothelargerresonant component is-29dB.independent ofseastateandfrequency.25.26 Thisallowsthatcompo­ nenttobeusedasacalibration standard.
Thusanexamination ofthedoppler spectrum oftheseacangivethesearoughness and dircction.
fromwhichcanhcinfcrred something aboutthewindsdrivingthesca.Swellwavcs orshipechoescanberecognized asdistinctcomponents.
Surfacecurrents canbenotedbythe asymmetrical placement ofthetworesonant components aboutzerofrequency.
Withsufficient radarmeasurements thetwo-dimensional seaspectrum canbederived.
TheHFradarrepre­ senlsauniquetoolformeasurill~ seaconditions atadistance.
Thecostofaradartomeasure seaconditions canbeconsiderably lessthanthecostofanHFradartodetectaircraft.Itis inleresting 10notethatthedevelopment ofsuchacapability wasoriginally notasanattempt tolearnmoreahoutthesea,butwasabyproduct ofattempts toimprove thedetection of targetsinasea-clutter background.
IlFradarequation.
ThesimpleOTHradarequation ofEq.(14.22)doesnotaccount forthe factthatasurveillance radarmustcoveraspecified angular sectorinaspecified time.The radarequation foramicrowave surveillance radarwasgivenbyEq.(2.57).Thismustbe modified foranHFradarsincethecoherent integration timeT.:isfixedinanHFradarbythe doppler processing requirements.
AlsoinanHFradar,theelevation beamwidth Orisoftennot available asadesignparameter becauseofthelargecostofhighantenna structures.
Substituting inloEq.(14.22)G,=G,=G=Tt2/O"Or'where0"=azimuth beamwidth; andT.:=tsO,,/OT' ts= revisittime(scantime)and0T=totalazimuth anglecoverage, weget (" R4 ~PavA2(JFpts -64NoO"O;(SjN)LsO r Lumping intoasingleconstant Ktheconstants inthisequation andtheparameters assumed tobegiven(including 0,.)ornotunderthecontroloftheradardesigner.
weget R4=K!,av 0" Thusameasure oftheperformance ofanHFsurveillance radaristheratiooftheaverage powerdivided bytheazimuth beamwidth.
Whencomparing theperformance oftworadars withdifferent antenna heightsaswellasdifferent widths,ameasure ofrelativeperformance is Measure ofperformance =Pa,·wh2(14.26) where IV=anlenna widthandIt=antenna height.Ifseparate antennas areusedfortransmit andreceive, IVisthewidthofthereceiving antenna and1t2isreplaced byh,It,where It,=transmitting antenna heightandIt,=receiving antenna height. 536 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  A "figure of merit" that has been used in the past for comparison of OTH radars is the  DBJ value which is defined as the product of Pa, G, G, T,, expressed in dB.
The units are joirles  (energy), or dB relative to a joule, hence the name DRJ.
It is quite different than the measure of  performance given above.
This figure of merit is more representative of a " searchlighting "  radar and not a surveillance radar.
 Ground-wave OTH radar.
The type of OTH radar described in the above that propagates vra  refraction from the ionosphere is sometimes called a sky-wave radar.
It is also possible at HF  to propagate energy around the curvature of the earth by diffraction.
This is commonly called  ground-wave propagation.
A ground-wave radar can detect the same kind of targets as can a  sky-wave radar.
Detection is somewhat easier than with sky-wave propagation since iono-  spheric effects are not present and clutter returns from aurora generally can b$lelirninated by  time gating.
The ground-wave radar has a far shorter range than can be obtained via sky wave  because of the propagation loss which increases exponentially with range.
A ground-wave  radar of a size and frequency comparable to the sky-wave radar discussed in the above might '<~"  have a range against low-altitude aircraft targets of perhaps 200 to 400 km.
i  The microwave radar that uses the over-ocean evaporative dlrct (Sec.
12.5) to obtain  extended propagation to detect low-altitude or surface targets beyond the normal line of sight  is also sometimes called an over-the-horizon radar.
It should not be confused wit11 the HF  radars described in this section that operate at much lower frequencies and at much longer  ranges.
 14.3 AIR-SURVEILLANCE  RADAR^' 29.46 49,103  The first successful application of radar was for the detection and tracking of aircraft.
Air  surveillance continues to be one of the more important radar applications for both civilian  (air traffic control) and military purposes.
The military employ such radars for general hurveil-  lance of the airspace, for providing acquisition information to anti-air-warfitre systems, and for  directing aircraft to an interception.
There are two different types of civilran air-surve~llanc~  radars used by the Federal Aviation Administration for the control of air traffic in t11c Ij~lited  States.
One is the S-band 60 nmi airport-si~rveillu~~ce radar (ASH), t:ig.
14 9, wll~cll l,~c~v~clcb  information on aircraft in the vicinity of airports.
The other is the L-hand, 2(M) II~I air-rotltc  sirrveillance radar (ARSR), Fig.
14.10, that provides coverage bctwccn airports.
Tahlc I4 I 1151b  the major characteristics of these two radars.
 There is no simple formula or step-by-step guide for the design of an air-surveillance  radar.
One place to start, however, is with the proper form of the radar eqi~ation, along with a  clear understanding of the task to be accomplished by the radar and knowledge of the con-  straints imposed by the environment.
Quite often there IS more than one Pictor affcct~ng the  selection of a particular radar characteristic, and these factors are sometimes conllicting.
The  designer must then make subjective judgments or even arbitrary choices in order to arrive at  a compromise set of radar characteristics.
Logical design of an entire radar system by com-  puter is therefore difficult and dangerous.
Experience and educated gilesses are still necessary  in many cases, just as is true of other engineering disciplines in which reasonable design  decisions must be made on the basis of incomplete information or conflicting constraints.
It is  for these reasons that different design groups, in meeting the same user's reqi~irements, often  produce different radar designs that bear little oi~tward resemblance to one anotiler, yet  accomplish the same objectives.
 536INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS A..figureofmerit"thathasbeenusedinthepastforcomparison ofOTHradarsisthe DBJvaluewhichisdefined astheproductofPayG,G,Tc,expressed indB.Theunitsarejoules (energy), ordBrelativetoajoule,hence thenameDB1.Itisquitedifferent thanthemeasure of performance givenabove.Thisfigureofmeritismorerepresentative ofa..searchlighting " radarandnotasurveillance radar.
Ground-wave OTHradar.ThetypeofOTHradardescribed intheabovethatpropagates via refraction fromtheionosphere issometimes calledasky-wave radar.Itisalsopossible atHF topropagate energyaroundthecurvature oftheearthbydiffraction.
Thisiscommonly called ground-wave propagation.
Aground-wave radarcandetectthesamekindoftargetsascana sky-wave radar.Detection issomewhat easierthanwithsky-wave propagation sinceiono­ spheric e~ectsarenotpresentandclutterreturnsfromauroragenerally canb~)eliminated by timegating.Theground-wave radarhasafarshorterrangethancanbeobtained viaskywave because ofthepropagation losswhichincreases exponentially withrange.Aground-wave radarofasizeandfrequency comparable tothesky-wave radardiscussed intheabovemight havearangeagainstlow-altitude aircrafttargetsofperhaps 200to400km.
Themicrowave radarthatusestheover-ocean evaporative duct(Sec.12.5)toobtain extended propagation todetectlow-altitude orsurfacetargetsbeyondthenormallineofsight isalsosometimes calledanover-the-horizon radar.Itshouldnotbeconfused withtheHF radarsdescribed inthissectionthatoperate atmuchlowerfrequencies andatmuchlonger ranges.
14.3AIR-SURVEILLANCE RADAR2729,4649.103 Thefirstsuccessful application ofradarwasforthedetection andtracking ofaircraft.
Air surveillance continues tobeoneofthemoreimportant radarapplications forbothcivilian (airtrafficcontrol) andmilitary purposes.
Themilitary employsuchradarsforgeneralsurveil­ lanceoftheairspace, forproviding acquisition information toanti-air-warfare systems, andfor directing aircrafttoaninterception.
Therearetwodifferent typesofcivilian air-surveillance radarsusedbytheFederal Aviation Administration forthecontrolofairtrafficinthelJnited States.OneistheS-band60nmiairport-surveillance radar(ASR),Fig.14.9,whichpr(\vides information onaircraft inthevicinityofairports.
TheotheristheL-band, 200nmiair-roule surveillance radar(ARSR), Fig.14.10,thatprovides coverage between airports.
Table14.1lists themajorcharacteristics ofthesetworadars.
Thereisnosimpleformula orstep-by-step guideforthedesignofanair-surveillance radar.Oneplacetostart,however, iswiththeproperformoftheradarequation, alongwitha clearunderstanding ofthetasktobeaccomplished bytheradarandknowledge ofthecon­ straints imposed bytheenvironment.
Quiteoftenthereismorethanonefactoraffecting the selection ofaparticular radarcharacteristic, andthesefactorsaresometimes conllicting.
The designer mustthenmakesubjective judgments orevenarbitrary choices inordertoarriveat acompromise setofradarcharacteristics.
Logical designofanentireradarsystembycom­ puteristherefore difficult anddangerous.
Experience andeducated guessesarestillnecessary inmanycases,justasistrueofotherengineering disciplines inwhichreasonable design decisions mustbemadeonthebasisofincomplete information orconflicting constraints.
Itis forthesereasonsthatdifferent designgroups, inmeeting thesameuser'srequirements, often produce different radardesigns thatbearlittleoutward resemblance tooneanother, yet accomplish thesameobjectives. OTHER RADAR TOPICS 537  PROCESSED SIGNAL  KLYSTRON KLYSTRON  TRANSMlrtlR  REMOTE UNl T w  Figure 14.9 diock diagran~ of the ASR-8 airport surveillance radar.
APG is the azimuth puise generator  which provides antenna timing information, and CJB is the cable junction box.
(Courtesy o/ Texas  111.~f rlltt1~~11~s.
IIIC.)  User's requirements.
Sirlce the desigrl of a radar is strongly influenced by the task it is to  accornplisi~, tllc radar desigilcr sllould start with the user's requirements.
For an air-traffic-  co~itrol radar these rnigllt include the following: purpose the radar is to serve; types of aircraft  it rnust detect; lnaxirniirn range, with a stated probability of detection and average time  between false alarms; coverage; number of aircraft expected within the radar coverage; mini-  rnum spacing of targets, which then determines the required resolution; accuracy of target  location, or the accuracy of the target trajectory if a track-while-scan radar; weather and the  environment in which the radar must operate, including restrictions imposed by the site or the  OTHER RADAR TOPICS537 l"""=!:::::-...._J~~~::::c.;5~~§~f1 KLYSTRON__------T...~~:: TRANSMITltR TRANSMITltR SITE C18..VIDE..........
CO~fIROl.
......
APG.
20(Q)FT,.L' L~NO1I~'l'I R{MOTING I REMOTtUNIT Figure14.9diockdiagram oftheASR-8airportsurveillance radar.APGistheazimuth puisegenerator whichprovides antenna timinginformation, andCJBisthecablejunction box.(Courtesy ofTexas InstI"lIIIICIltS.
11Ic.) User'srequirements.
Sincethedesignofaradarisstrongly influenced bythetaskitisto accomplish.
theradardesigner shouldstartwiththeuser'srequirements.
Foranair-traffic­ controlradarthesemightincludethefollowing: purpose theradaristoserve;typesofaircraft itmustdetect;maximum range,withastatedprobability ofdetection andaverage time between falsealarms;coverage; numberofaircraftexpected withintheradarcoverage; mini­ murnspacing oftargets, whichthendetermines therequired resolution; accuracy oftarget location, ortheaccuracy ofthetargettrajectory ifatrack-while-scan radar;weather andthe environment inwhichtheradarmustoperate, including restrictions imposed bythesiteorthe Figure 14.10 Photograph of the ARSR-3, air route surveillance radar.
(Co~trrcsy l?i' ~Y~~sritlyhotrsr.
Itic.)  Table 14.1 Characteristics of two air traffic control radars28.46.56  Frequency band  Freq i~ency  Instrt~mented range  Peak power  Average power  Noise figure  Pulse width  Pulse repetition frequency  Antcnna rotation rate  Ante~tna size  Azimuth beamwidth  Elevation coverage  Antenna gain  Polarization  Blind speed  MTI improvement factor L  1250-1350 MHz  200 nmi (370 km)  5 MW  3.6 kW  4 dB  2 11s  310-365 HZ  5 rpm  12.8 m by 6.9 m  1.25"  40"  34 dB  hor, vert, or circular  1200 knots  39 dB S  2700-2900 MHz  60 nmi (1 I1 km)  1.4 MW  875 W  4 dB  0.6 jts  700- 1200 HZ  1040 Hz (ave)  12.8 rpm  4.9 m by 2.7 m  1.35"  30"  33 dB  vert or circular  800 knots  34 dB  538INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS ,.
"·'.'I;"~'~\",,~,:\,>"~~ '.-i..
,.
Figure14.10Photograph oftheARSR-3, airroutesurveillance radar.(Col/rtt'sy ofWeslillyhollst', IlIc.) Table14.1Characteristics oftwoairtrafficcontrolradars28.46.56 Frequency band Frequency Instrumented range Peakpower Averagepower Noisefigure Pulsewidth Pulserepetition frequency Antenna rotation rate Antenna size Azimuth beamwidth Elevation coverage Antenna gain Polarization Blindspeed MTIimprovement factorARSR-3 L 1250-1350 MHz 200nmi(370km) 5MW 3.6kW 4dB 2/IS 310-365Hz 5rpm 12.8mby6.9m 1.250 400 34dB hor,vert,orcircular 1200knots 39dBASR-8 S 2700-2900 MHz 6Onmi(lllkm) 1.4MW 875W 4dB 0.6jlS 700-1200 Hz 1040Hz(ave) 12.8rpm 4.9mby2.7m 1.35° 30° 33dB vertorcircular 800knots 34dB OTIiER RADAR TOPICS 539  vehicle on wliicli tile radar is carried; rcliahility (mean tinie betwceti failures), availability  (fraction of time tlie radar works properly).
and maintainability (sornctimcs these last three are  called RAM); electromagrietic compatibility (EMC) requirements; restrictions on size, weight,  cost, and delivery: type of prime-power available; restrictions on warm-up time and shut-  dowti procedures; and the form in which tlie output information froin the radar isdesired.
The  user (or buyct ) sl~oi~ld i~ttctnpt to liliilt llic rcqtlirctlictits to stalcnicllls of pcrforlnatice r'atlicr  than give them in ternis oCspecific radar cllaracteristics wliicli restrict the radar designer in tile  clioiccs i~vnil:~hle.
 Characteristics of a long-range air-surveillance radar.
To illustrate tlie nature of a long-range  air-surveillii~ice ri~dnr, the ARSK-3 (Table 14.1) will be described.
No clairn is niade tlint tlie  rationale given for eacli cllaracteristic was that wliich influenced the original specifications for  this radar.
The brief discussion here is simply meant to convey some of the general philosophy  that might enter into radar design.
 The ARSR-3 has iln instrurnentcd range of 200 nmi.
and is required to detect a 2 rn2  cross-section target with a single-scan probability of detection of 0.8 and a false alarm proba-  bility of 10- '.
The greater [lie radar range the fewer the number of radars required to cover a  specified area.
On the other hand.
the radars cannot be placed too Pdr apart since tlie curvature  of the cart11 will limit the minimum altitude at which targets can be seen.
For example.
at  2Ot) rimi.
all targets below X ktn altitildc are beneath tlie radar line of siglit and normally  would riot be detected.
Most commercial aircraft have a cross section greater than ihe 2 mZ  specified for this radar.
This low value is necessary, i~owever, if small general-aviation aircraft  are also to be detected.
 The 5 rpni rotation rate of tlie antenna corresponds to a 12-second interval between  target observations (scan tinie).
This is about tlie longest interval that can usually be tolerated  between observations of aircraft targets.
A high rotation rate is needed for good target track-  ing.
A low rotation rate is desired for more hits on target, which reduces tlie requiremcnts for  large transmitter power or antenna aperture.
For a surveil!ance radar the product of average  power, antetitla aperture.
arid scan time is a constant.
Eq.
(2.57).
Reducing scan time (increas-  ing rotation rate) requires at1 increase in the average power and/or antenna six.
Some long-  range military radars have rotation rates of 15 rpm (44 scan time) because of the likelihood  of target maneuver.
A rapid change of course is less likely for civilian aircraft: hence.
tlie slower  rotation rate of 5 rpm for the ARSR-3.
 .Plie pulse width of 2 14s corresponds to a range resolution of about 300 m.
(It1 practice.
 4- the resolution is said to be about 500 m.46) If limitations on peak power require a co'nsidcrably  longer pulse width in order to acliieve the necessary energy within the pulse.
some form of  pulse compression could be used.
(The ARSR-3 does not have pulse compression, however.)  FM (chirp) is a common choice of pulse-compression waveform.
 The 12.8 m (42 ft) wide by 6.9 m (22.6 it) I~igli antenna reflector produces a 1.25" azimuth  beamwidtli and a shaped elevation beam extending beyond 40" so as to provide coverage to an  altitude of 18.6 km (61 ft).
The upper corners of the antenna aperture have a square rather  than rounded outline.
This causes the underside of the elevation beam to have a sharp drop-off  wliicli minimizes the ground-reflected energy that causes a lobed elevation pattern and a  degradation of the rairi-rejection capability of circular polarization.
The azimuth resolution  and accuracy obtained by tlie 1.25" beatnwidth is said to be 2" and 0.2", re~pectively.'~ Tlie  antenna cati he lio~lsed in a 17.4 tn (57 ft) diameter rigid geodesic-radome.
 The AKSR-3 antenna generates two beams sliglitly displaced in elevation for the purpose  of reducing the eclioes from high-speed surface clutter, such as from automobiles and trucks.
 These clutter echoes cati be large enougll and have a sufficiently high doppler frequency shift  (HilER RADAR TOPICS539 vehicleonwhichtheradariscarricd; rcliability (meantimehetween failures).
availability (fraction oftimetheradarworksproperly).
andmaintainability (somctimesthese lastthreeare calledRAM);elcctromagnetic compatibility (EMC)requirements; restrictions onsize.weight, cost,anddelivery: typeofprime-power available; restrictions onwarm-up timeandshut­ downprocedures; andtheforminwhichtheoutputinformation fromtheradarisdesired.The user(orbuycr)shouldattclllpt tolimilthcrequircments tostatcments ofperformance rather thangivetheminterlllsofspecificradarcharacteristics whichrestricttheradardesigner inthe choices availahle.
Characteristics ofalon~-range air-surveilla'nce radar.Toillustrate thenatureofalong-range air-surveillancc radar,theARSR-J (Tablc14.1)willbedescribcd.
Noclaimismadethatthe rationale givenforeachcharacteristic wasthatwhichinnuenced theoriginal specifications for thisradar.Thebriefdiscussion hereissimplymeanttoconveysomeofthegeneralphilosophy thatmightenterintoradardesign.
TheARSR-3 hasaninstrumented rangeof200nmi,andisrequired todetecta 2 m2 cross-section targetwithasingle-scan probability ofdetection of0.8andafalsealarmproba­ bilityof10-6.Thegreatertheradarrangethefewerthenumber ofradarsrequired tocovera spccifled area.Ontheotherhand.theradarscannotbeplacedtoofarapartsincethecurvature oftheearthwilllimittheminimum altitude alwhichtargetscanbeseen.Forexample.
at 200nmi.alltargetsbelowXkmaltitude areheneath theradarlineofsightandnormally wouldnothedetected.
Mostcommercial aircraft haveacrosssectiongreaterIhanthe2 m2 specifled forthisradar.Thislowvalueisnecessary, however.
ifsmallgeneral-aviation aircraft arealsotohedetected.
The5rpmrotation rateoftheantenna corresponds toa12-second interval between targetobservations (scantime).Thisisaboutthelongestinterval thatcanusuallybetolerated hetween observations ofaircraft targets.Ahighrotation rateisneededforgoodtargettrack­ ing.Alowrotation rateisdesiredformorehitsontarget,whichreducestherequirements for largetransmitter powerorantenna aperture.
Forasurveil!ance radartheproduct ofaverage power.antenna aperture.
andscantimeisaconstant.
Eq.(2.57).Reducing scantime(increas­ ingrotation rate)requires allincrease intheaverage powerand/orantenna size.Somelong­ rangemilitary radarshaverotation ralesof15rpm(4-sscantime)because ofthelikelihood oftargetmaneuver.
Arapidchangeofcourseislesslikelyforcivilianaircraft: hence.theslower rotation rateof5rpmfortheARSR-3.
Thepul~ewidthof2liScorresponds toarangeresolution ofabout300m.(Inpractice, theresoluticfn issaidtobeabout500m.46)Iflimitations onpeakpowerrequireaco'nsidcrably longerpulsewidthinordertoachieve thenecessary energywithinthepulse,someformof pulsecompression couldbeused.(TheARSR-J doesnothavepulsecompression, however.) FM(chirp)isacommon choiceofpulse-compression waveform.
The12.8m(42ft)wideby6.9m(22.6ft)highantenna reflector produces al.25°azimuth heamwidth andashapedelevation beamextending beyond40°soastoprovide coverage toan altitude of18.6km(61ft).Theuppercornersoftheantenna aperture haveasquarerather thanrounded outline.Thiscausestheunderside oftheelevation beamtohaveasharpdrop-ofT whichminimizes theground-reflected energythatcausesalobedelevation patternanda degradation oftherain-rejection capability ofcircular polarization.
Theazimuth resolution andaccuracy obtained bythe1.25°beamwidth issaidtobe2°and0.2°,respectively.46 The antenna canhehOllsedina17.4m(57ft)diameter rigidgeodesic-radome.
TheARSR-3 antenna generates twobeamsslightlydisplaced inelevation forthepurpose ofreducing theechoesfromhigh-speed surfaceclutter,suchasfromautomobiles andtrucks.
Theseclutterechoescanbelargeenoughandhaveasufficiently highdoppler frequency shift 540 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  to not be completely eliminated by MTI doppler processors.
Transmission takes place only on  the lower of the two beams.
At short range, reception is on the lipper beam only.
This beam is  tilted to minimize illumination of the ground.
As the transmitted pulse travels beyond the  ground clutter range (typically 50 miles or greater) the receiver is switched to the lower beam  for long-range reception.
In the ARSR-3 the ratio of the lower-beam gain in the direction of  the horizon to that of the upper-beam gain in the same direction is 16 dB.'" (The lower beam  has its half-power point on the horizon.) The antenna elevation pattern is shaped to have at  the higher angles a greater gain than would be normal with a cosecant-squared pattern.
This  permits sensitivity time control (STC) to be used with the radar without a loss of coverage at  high altitudes and short range (Fig.
7.27).
The STC is employed to reduce near-in clutter,  especially from birds and insects.
In this radar the STC is applied in the RF ahead of the  low-noise amplifier.
The advantage of STC in the RF as compared to the IF is that it prevents  saturation of the RF amplifier, as well as the IF amplifier, by close-in clutter.
Themoist: level in  the receiver is but little affected by the STC, a condition that is desired for operation of the  log-CFAR receiver.
Four PIN diodes provide an STC range of 63 dB with an insertton loss of  less than 0.6 dB.
 The ARSR-3 is really two separate radars, each at a different frequency, operating into a  single antenna.
Either system can be used separately (simplex operation) or both can be used  simultaneously (diplex operation).
The chief reason for the dual channels in this radar is to  provide greater availability of the radar.
A failure in one channel does not require the radar to  shut down.
The radar operhtes with a single channel while repairs are being made.
The  availability of dual-channel radars with built-in-test equipment and fault isolation has been  demonstrated to be considerably greater than 99 percent.
High availability also requires that  spare parts be at hand when needed and that maintenance personnel be experienced and  motivated.
In diplex operation the two frequencies are radiated on orthogonal polarizations.
 Frequency and polarization diversity can provide an improved signal-to-noise ratio by con-  verting a Swerling type 1 target (Sec.
2.8) with scan-to-scan fluctuations to a Swerling type 2  with pulse-to-pulse fluctuation.
From 4 to 7 dB improvement in signal-to-noise ratio might be  achieved in the diplex mode as compared with the simplex mode.46  The ARSR-3 utilizes a klystron amplifier to achieve 5 MW peak power and 3.6 kW  average power.
The receiver front-end is a low-noise transistor with 4 dB noise figure.
The  logarithmic receiver is followed by a CFAR which divides the amplitude of each range sample  in the logarithmic output by the average amplitude of the returns within 4 nmi of that sample.
 A 4-pulse digital canceller is employed with variable interpulse periods to produce a calculated  MTI improvement factor of 39 dB.
The pulse repetition frequencies range from 310 to  360 Hz.
 The ARSR-3 contains provision for switching in or out various processing features.
A  range-azimuth generator (RAG) permits the selection to be made on the basis of both range  and azimuth.
Among the features that might be selected by range and azimuth are included the  choice of MTI or normal (log-CFAR) video, two STC control curves (one optimized for  terrain clutter, the other for sea clutter), the crossover range in switching from the upper to the  lower beam, fixed pulse-repetition period (for eliminating second-time-around clutter) or  variable pulse periods, different RF receiver gains, and sectors for transmitter blank~ng to  avoid RFI.
 The digital target extractor provides the radar output in a form suitable for transmission  over narrowband telephone lines rather than require wideband microwave data links.
Sliding-  window detectors determine the range and azimuth centroid of the radar returns using the  m-out-of-n detection criterion.
.
i.
-  Circular polarization can be selected to reduce weather clutter.
MTI and the log-CFAR  540INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS tonotbecompletely eliminated byMTIdopplerprocessors.
Transmission takesplaceonlyon thelowerofthetwobeams.Atshortrange,reception isontheLIpperheamonly.Thisheamis tiltedtominimize illumination oftheground.
Asthetransmilled pulsetravelsheyondthe groundclutterrange(typically 50milesorgreater)thereceiver isswitched tothelowerbeam forlong-range reception.
IntheARSR-3 theratioofthelower-heam gaininthedirection of thehorizontothatoftheupper-beam gaininthesamedirection is16dB..~b(Thelowerbeam hasitshalf-power pointonthehorizon.) Theantenna elevation patternisshapedtohaveat thehigheranglesagreatergainthanwouldbenormalwithacosecant-squared pallern.This permitssensitivity timecontrol(STC)tobeusedwiththeradarwithoutalossofcoverage at highaltitudes andshortrange(Fig.7.27).TheSTCisemployed toreducenear-incluller, especially frombirdsandinsects.InthisradartheSTCisappliedintheRFaheadofthe low-noise amplifier.
Theadvantage ofSTCintheRFascompared totheIFisthatitprevents saturatio~ oftheRFamplifier, aswellastheIFamplifier, byclose-inclutter.The'-1Oise levelin thereceiver isbutlittleaffectedbythe.STC,acondition thatisdesiredforoperation ofthe log-CFAR receiver.
FourPINdiodesprovideanSTCrangeof63dBwithaninsertion lossof lessthan0.6dB.
TheARSR-3 isreallytwoseparate radars,eachatadifferent frequency, operating intoa singleantenna.
Eithersystemcanbeusedseparately (simplex operation) orbothcanbeused simultaneously (diplexoperation).
Thechiefreasonforthedualchannels inthisradaristo providegreateravailability oftheradar.Afailureinonechanneldoesnotrequiretheradarto shutdown.Theradaroperates withasinglechannel whilerepairsarebeingmade.The availability ofdual-channel radarswithbuilt-in-test equipment andfaultisolation hasbeen demonstrated tobeconsiderably greaterthan99percent.
Highavailability alsorequires that sparepartsbeathandwhenneededandthatmaintenance personnel beexperienced and motivated.
Indiplexoperation thetwofrequencies areradiated onorthogonal polarizations.
Frequency andpot"arization diversity canprovide an improved signal-to-noise ratiobycon­ vertingaSwerling type1target(Sec.2.8)withscan-to-scan fluctuations toaSwerling type2 withpulse-to-pulse fluctuation.
From4to7dBimprovement insignal-to-noise ratiomightbe achieved inthediplexmodeascompared withthesimplexmode.46 TheARSR-3 utilizesaklystron amplifier toachieve 5MWpeakpowerand3.6kW averagepower.Thereceiver front-end isalow-noise transistor with4dBnoisefigure.The logarithmic receiverisfollowed byaCFARwhichdividestheamplitude ofeachrangesample inthelogarithmic outputbytheaverageamplitude ofthereturnswithininmiofthatsample.
A4-pulsedigitalcanceller isemployed withvariableinterpulse periodstoproduce acalculated MTJimprovement factorof39dB.Thepulserepetition frequencies rangefrom310to 360Hz.
TheARSR-3 contains provision forswitching inoroutvariousprocessing features.
A range-azimuth generator (RAG)permitstheselection tobemadeonthebasisofbothrange andazimuth.
Amongthefeaturesthatmightbeselectedbyrangeandazimuth areincluded the choiceofMTJornormal(log-CFAR) video,twoSTCcontrolcurves(oneoptimized for terrainclutter,theotherforseaclutter),thecrossover rangeinswitching fromtheuppertothe lowerbeam,fixedpulse-repetition period(foreliminating second-time-around clutter)or variable pulseperiods, different RFreceiver gains,andsectorsfortransmitter hlanking to avoidRFI.
Thedigitaltargetextractor provides theradaroutputinaformsuitable fortransmission overnarrowband telephone linesratherthanrequirewidebandmicrowave datalinks.Sliding­ window detectors .determine therangeandazimuth centroid oftheradarreturnsusingthe m-out-of-n detection criterion..
l.:c.
Circular polarization canbeselectedtoreduceweather clutter.MTJandthelog-CFAR OTHER RADAR TOPICS 541  receivers also reduce weather clutter at the radar output.
However, in air-traffic-control opera-  tions, it is important that tlle coritroller kriow the locations of tlie bad weather so as not to  vector aircraft througll it.
In the ARSR-3, the weather information is available at the ortho-  gonal port of tlie circular-polarization diplexer and can be viewed by switching this output to  tlic display.
 Frequency considerations.
Tlie ARSR-3 described above operates at L band (1250 to  1350 M H7).
I'his is a good conipro~nise frequency for a long-range air-surveillance radar.
 iliglicr frcque~lcies can provide tlic sitme angular bearnwidths with smaller antennas, but the  snlallcr apertures ~ilust be co~npc~isnted by greater power if tlie maximum ranges are the same.
 Alrllol~pl~ Iiigh-power transtilitters are available at S band, the peak power that can he  rraris~iiitted is less because of the s~naller waveguide sizes.
Pulse cornpressiotl can be used to  cornpensate for the reduced peak power, but at tile price of additional complexity.
At the  Iiiglicr frc~luencics tlie backscatter from rain is greater, and tlle MTI blind speeds are more ofa  ~xohleni.
IJecause of the smaller apertures and tlie greater effect of rain clutter, S-band radars  arc likely to have less range capability than radars at lower frequencies.
Frequencies higher  than S band are seldom used for long-range air surveillance.
 High-power, large antenna apertures, and good MTI are easier to achieve at frequencies  below L band.
Also, weather clutter is much less.
The lower tlie frequency the easier it is to  obtain long range.
However, at the lower frequencies, the azimuth beamwidths are broader  and the available bandwidths are narrower than might be desired.
Below UHF, the external  noise increases wit11 decreasing frequency and can limit receiver sensitivity.
The lobing of the  elevation pattern due to ground reflections results in wider elevation nulls at the lower  frequencies and can cause long fade times of the target signals.
The elevation angle of the first  rnultipath lobe varies inversely with frequency (Sec.
12.2), so that low-altitude coverage is  more difficult to acliieve at tlie lower frequencies.
In spite of limitations, the lower frequencies  arc attractive wlien low cost and lotig range are triore important than otlier factors.
 14.4 HEIGHT-FINDER AND 3D RADARS  111 many applications a k~iowledgc of target Iieigl~t might not be needed.
An obvious examplc  is where the target is know11 to lie on the surface of the earth, and its location is given by the  range and a7imuth coordinates.
However, there are other instances in which the target's  position in4tlirce dirncrisiolls   nil st be known.
In tliis section, radar methods for obtaining the  elevatioti angle or heiglit of a target will be discussed briefly.
The height of a target above  the surface of the earth may be derived from the measurement of elevation angle and range.
 The use of height as the third target-coordinate is more desirable than the elevation angle in  applications where the Iieight is apt to be constant.
This is usually true for commercial aircraft  and for satellites wit11 nearly circular orbits.
A radar whose purpose is the measurement of  elevation angle, and which usually does not measure the azimuth angle, is called a height-finder  radar.
A radar which measures the elevation angle along with the azimuth angle (and range) is  called a 31) radar.
One which measures the range and one angle coordinate (usually azimuth)  is called a 2.0 radar.
 Nodding-beam height finder.
Just as the range-azimuth coordinates of a target can be obtained  with a vertical fan-beam antenna, the elevation coordinate can be obtained with a horizontal  fan beam.
(The three coordinates can thus be obtained with two 2D-radars.) Such a height  finder would be directed by the 2D air-surveillance radar to the azimuth of the target.
It then  OTHER RADAR TOPICS541 receivers alsoreduceweather clutterattheradaroutput.However, inair-traffic-control opera­ tions,itisimportant thatthecontroller knowthelocations ofthebadwe~theJ soasnotto vectoraircraftthrough it.IntheARSR-3, theweather information isavailable attheortho­ gonalportofthecircular-polarization diplexcr andcanbeviewedbyswitching thisoutputto thcdisplay.
Frequency considerations.
TheARSR-3 described aboveoperates atLband(1250to 1350MHz).Thisisagoodcompromisc frequency foralong-range air-surveillance radar.
Higherfrequencies canprovide thesameangular beamwidths withsmallerantennas, butthe smallerapertures mustbecompensated bygreaterpowerifthemaximum rangesarethesame.
Although high-powcr transmitters areavailable atSband,thepeakpowerthatcanbe transmitted islessbecause ofthesmallerwaveguide sizes.Pulsecompression canbeusedto compensate forthereduced peakpower,butatthepriceofadditional complexity.
Atthe higherfrequencies thebackscatter fromrainisgreater,andtheMTIblindspeedsaremoreofa prohlem.
Because ofthesmallerapertures andthegreatereffectofrainclutter,S-bandradars arclikelytohavelessrangecapability thanradarsatlowerfrequencies.
Frequencies higher thanSbandareseldomusedforlong-range airsurveillance.
High-power, largeantenna apertures, andgoodMTIareeasiertoachieveatfrequencies belowLband.Also,weather clutterismuchless.Thelowerthefrequency theeasieritisto obtainlongrange.However, atthelowerfrequencies, theazimuth beamwidths arebroader andtheavailable bandwidths arenarrower thanmightbedesired.
BelowUHF,theexternal noiseincreases withdecreasing frequency andcanlimitreceiver sensitivity.
Thelobingofthe elevation patternduetoground reflections resultsinwiderelevation nullsatthelower frequencies andcancauselongfadetimesofthetargetsignals.Theelevation angleofthefirst multipath lobevariesinversely withfrequency (Sec.12.2),sothatlow-altitude coverage is moredifficult toachieveatthelowerfrequencies.
Inspiteoflimitations, thelowerfrequencies arcattractive whenlowcostandlongrangearcmoreimportant thanotherfactors.
14.4HEIGHT-FINDER AND3DRADARS Inmanyapplications aknowledge oftargetheightmightnotbeneeded.Anobvious example iswherethetargetisknowntolieonthesurfaceoftheearth,anditslocation isgivenbythe rangeandazimuth coordinates.
However, thereareotherinstances inwhichthetarget's position in{threedimensions mustbeknown.Inthissection,radarmethods forObtaining the elevation angleorheightofatargetwillbediscussed briefly.Theheightofatargetabove thesurfaceoftheearthmaybederived fromthemeasurement ofelevation angleandrange.
Theuseofheightasthethirdtarget-coordinate ismoredesirable thantheelevation anglein applications wheretheheightisapttobeconstant.
Thisisusuallytrueforcommercial aircraft andforsatellites withnearlycircular orbits.Aradarwhosepurpose isthemeasurement of elevation angle,andwhichusuallydoesnotmeasure theazimuth angle,iscalledaheight-finder radar.Aradarwhichmeasures theelevation anglealongwiththeazimuth angle(andrange)is calleda3Dradar.Onewhichmeasures therangeandoneanglecoordinate (usually azimuth) iscalleda 2Dradar.
Nodding-beam heightfinder.Justastherange-azimuth coordinates ofatargetcanbeobtained withaverticalfan-beam antenna, theelevation coordinate canbeobtained withahorizontal fanbeam.(Thethreecoordinates canthusbeobtained withtwo2D-radars.) Suchaheight finderwouldbedirected bythe2Dair-surveillance radartotheazimuth ofthetarget.Itthen scans its horizontal fan beam in elevation to make an elevation angle measurement of the  target found at the range designated by the air-surveillance radar.
The nodding-beam height  Jinder scans its beam in elevation by mechanically rocking the entire antenna.
It is possible to  mechanically slew a nodding-beam height finder a full 180" in a relatively short time (within  two seconds, for example).
With an operator making a height measurement manually, from  2 to 4 measurements per minute might be made.
In one nodding-beam height finder, up to 22  target-heights per minute can be obtained when the slewing is controlled automatically for  maximum data rate by the computer of the associated data-handling system.29 The absolute  height accuracy of a nodding-beam height finder can be + 1500 ft (460 m) at 150 nmi (280 km)  range.
 The nodding-beam height finder is one of the oldest techniques for measuring the eleva-  tion angle of aircraft targets.
It is also one of the best.
Its accuracy is probably as good or better  than any other technique.
Even though a separate radar is employed to measurejarget height,  the combined cost of the 2D air-surveillance radar and the nodding-beam height finder can be  iess than the cost of a comparable single 3D radar.
(It is not always true that two radars cost  more, are more complex, or occupy more volume than a "single" radar designed to do the  same job.) Another advantage of the separate nodding-beam height finder in military applica-  tions is that it generally operates at a higher frequency (S or C bands are common choices)  than does the 2D air-surveillance radar.
This increases the ECCM capability of the system  since a jammer must radiate in both radar bands simultaneously to deny the location of air-  craft targets.
The use of a higher frequency for the height finder is appropriate since it can be of  shorter range tlian the 2D air-surveillance radar, and the antenna aperture can be of smaller  size for a given heamwidth.
The height finder can also be made to provide good range  resolution for target counting by utilizing a narrower pulse than might be desired for a  long-range 2D air-surveilla~ce radar operating at a lower frequency.
 Thus tliere are many reasons for the nodding-beam height finder being a good chow for  obtaining the third coordinate on aircraft,  Instead of mechanically rocking the entire antenna structure, the horizontal fan beam of a  height finder can be scanned in elevation by electromechanical means, such as with the  Robinson scanner, organ-pipe scanner, or delta-a (or Eagle) scanner.
It is also possible to scan  the beam with electronic phase shifters.
With a scanning phased-array antenna, however, the  radiation pattern, which is a fan beam at broadside, becomes a conical beam when scanned off  broadside.
This can cause an error in the elevation measurement if the target is off the center o  the beam.
For this reason, height finders which use electronic scan usually radiate penci  beams rather than broad fan beams.
 V-beam radar.
This radar generates two fan beams: one vertical and the otl~cr slanted at some  angle to the vertical (perhaps at 30 to 45').
The time separation between the echoes rece~ved in  the vertical arid slant beams is a measure of the target height.
A short time-separation signifies  low altitude, while longer separations occur with high altitude targets.
Two separate retlectors  may be used to generate the two fan beams,=' the two reflectors might be back to back, a single  reflector with two feeds cana be ~sed,J!!~~ or the two beams can be generated with a single  phased array antenna.$ The.
V-beam radar, is a satisfactory method for obtaining three-  coordinate target information if the number of targets is not excessive.
The larger the number  of targets, the more difficult is the problem of correlating the echoes from each of the two  beams.
The closer the beams, the easier it is to correlate the echoes, but the iess the accuracy.
 Another useful modification is to separate the beams at zero elevation so that the data from  the vertical and the slant beam do not appear close in time.
 542INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS scansitshorizontal fanbeaminelevation tomakeanelevation anglemeasurement ofthe targetfoundattherangedesignated bytheair-surveillance radar.Thenodding-beam height finderscansitsbeaminelevation bymechanically rockingtheentireantenna.
Itispossible to mechanically slewanodding-beam heightfinderafull180°inarelatively shorttime(within twoseconds, forexample).
Withanoperator makingaheightmeasurement manually, from 2to4measurements perminutemightbemade.Inonenodding-beam heightfinder,upto22 target-heights perminutecanbeobtained whentheslewing iscontrolled automatically for maximum dataratebythecomputer oftheassociated data-handling system.29Theabsolut~ heightaccuracy ofanodding-beam heightfindercanbe±1500ft(460m)at150nmi(280km) range.
Thenodding-beam heightfinderisoneoftheoldesttechniques formeasuring theeleva­ tionangleofaircrafttargets.Itisalsooneofthebest.Itsaccuracy isprobably asgoodorbetter thanany?thertechnique.
Eventhoughaseparate radarisemployed tomeasure}arget height, thecombined costofthe20air-surveillance rada'randthenodding-beam heightfindercanbe lessthanthecostofacomparable single3Dradar.(Itisnotalwaystruethattworadarscost more,aremorecomplex, oroccupymorevolumethana"single" radardesigned todothe samejob.)Another advantage oftheseparate nodding-beam heightfinderinmilitary applica­ tionsisthatitgenerally operates atahigherfrequency (SorCbandsarecommon choic~s) thandoesthe20air-surveillance radar.Thisincreases theECCMcapability ofthesystem sinceajammermustradiateinbothradarbandssimultaneously todenythelocation ofair­ crafttargets.Theuseofahigherfrequency fortheheightfinderisappropriate sinceitcanbeof shorterrangethanthe2Dair~surveillance radar,andtheantenna aperture canb~ofsmaller sizeforagivenbeamwidth.
Theheightfindercanalsobemadetoprovide goodrange resolution fortargetcounting byutilizing anarrower pulsethanmightbedesiredfora long-range 20air-surveillance radaroperating atalowerfrequency.
Thustherearemanyreasonsforthenodding-beam heightfinderbeingagoodchoicefor obtaining thethirdcoordinate onaircraft.
Insteadofmechanically rockingtheentireantenna structure, thehorizontal fanbeamofa heightfindercanbescanned inelevation byelectromechanical means,suchaswiththe Robinson scanner, organ-pipe scanner, ordelta-a(orEagle)scanner.Itisalsopossible toscan thebeamwithelectronic phaseshifters.
Withascanning phased-array antenna, however, the radiation pattern,whichisafanbeamatbroadside, becomes aconicalbeamwhenscanned ofT broadside.
Thiscancauseanerrorintheelevation measurement ifthetargetisoffthecenterof thebeam.Forthisreason,heightfinderswhichuseelectronic scanusuallyradiatepencil beamsratherthanbroadfanbeams.
V-beam radar.Thisradar g~nerates twofanbeams:oneverticalandth~otherslantedatsome angletothevertical(perhaps at30to45°).Thetimeseparation between theechoes receiv~d in theverticalandslantbeamsisameasure ofthetargetheight.Ashort tim~-separation signifies lowaltitude, whilelongerseparations occurwithhighaltitudetargets.Twoseparate retlectors maybeusedtogenerate thetwoJanbeams,30 thetworeflectors mightbebacktoback,asingle retlector withtwofeedscan:beusedf~hJ60r thetwobeamscanbegenerated withasingle phasedarrayantenna.\ The,V-beam :radar Iisasatisfactory method forobtaining three­ coordinate targetinformation ifthenumberoftargetsisnotexcessive.
Thelargerthenumber oftargets,themoredifficult istheproblem ofcorrelating theechoesfromeachofthetwo beams.Thecloserthebeams,theeasier..it istocorrelate theechoes,butthelesstheaccuracy.
Another usefulmodification istoseparate thebeamsatzeroelevation sothatthedatafrom theverticalandtheslantbeamdonotappearcloseintime. OTHER RADAR TOPICS 543  Monopulse.
An elevation angle measurctnent can be made similar to that of the monopulse  radar described in Sec.
5.4.
Two fan beams arc displaced ("squinted ") in elevation arigle and  tlie sum and difference patterns are obtained.
The measurement of angle is similar to that of an  amplitude-cornparis011 monopi~lsc trackitig radar except that it is made open loop; i.e., the  output voltage from tlie angle-error detector is calibrated to read elevation angle.
Two  displaced horns with combining circuitry, or a single multimode horn.
is the principle  modification reqiiircd of tllc anteniia.
Although nlonopulse tracking radars are capable of  excellent accuracy, when monopulse is applied to a 2D surveillar~ce radar the angle accuracy is  usually poor.
One reason is the broad elevation beamwidths.
(The rms error of an angle  measurement is proportional to the beamwidth.) Another limitation is the effect of multipath  due to reflection from the earth's surface.
also a consequence of tlle broad fan beams.
The effect  of~iiultip;rtli is sirtiil;lr to the elfect of glint discussed in Sec.
5.5 for trackitig radars.
'Tlie ~iiulti-  pat11 crror can he quite severe and make tile angle measurement in many cases almost useless,  as discilsscd in Scc.
22.3 of Kcf.
32.
Tllis cffcct will generally be less severe over land than over  water hccausc of the snlaller reflection coefficient of land.
If the antenna beam can be tilted up  so as to rcdircc the illir~nination of the surface, or if the antenna elevation pattern can be  designed to have a sllarp cutoff on the underside of the beam, the effect of surface reflections is  reduced and the nionopulse angle measurement is improved.
However, this reduces the cover-  age of targets at low elevation angles.
 Sir~ce the problem of tnultipath errors occurs for antenna beams whicll illuminate the  surface.
one approach is to use three elevation bearns.
The lowest beam is made as narrow as  practical in elevation.
It illuminates tlie low angles.
No monopulse angle measurement would  be attempted wit11 this beam.
Tile otller two beams cover tlie liigller angles with monopulse  processing.
Since tl\ese fan bearns do not illuminate the surface they do not suffer from  multipath problerns.
 Phase in space.
This technique employs a single reflector with a rather unique type of feed.
The  effect of multiple beams is generated with this feed, but only two receivers plus a phase detector  are needed to determine angular location." 35 Sn order to obtain wide coverage in elevation  angle a parabolic-torus reflector is employed rather than a section of a paraboloid.
A curved  piece of wavegiiide with radiating slots acts as the feed.
The transmitter is fed into one end of  the waveguide feed wllose slots are designed to produce a number of contiguous bearns in  elevation witli atnplitudes co~itrolled so as to produce a cosecant-squared radiation patterrl.
 On reception, a receiver is inserted at each end of the feed.
TIle echo signal from a particular  direction isf'ieceivcd at one of tlte slots and is divided in the waveguide feed.
The'two signals  travel in opposite directions and arc received at each end of tlie feed.
The phase difference  between the two signals (or the differetlcc in travel time) depends on from which slot they  originated.
whicli in turn depends on the elevation angle of arrival.
Thus a measurement of  pltase difTerence restilts it1 a nieasurement of elevation angle.
 A detailed analysis of the accuracy of the phase-in-space technique is not available, but in  one implenientation it has been said3' to have a potential elevation accuracy of about 0.2".
 Multipath reflections can also degrade the accuracy of this method, but since the phase-in-  spacc teclitlique employs rnt~ltiplc hen~ns to shape its elevatiot~ pattern.
it might be possible to  control the radiation so as ro illurnir~ale tlle surface witli less energy than the conventional  fan-bearn antenna.
 Rlultiple elevation (stacked) bearns.
The use of contiguous beams stacked in elevation has beer1  employed for 3D radar.
It is sometimes called a stacked-beam radar.
It is a good technique  OTHER RADAR TOPICS543 Monopulse.
Anelevation anglemeasurement canbemadesimilartothatofthemonopulse radardescribed inSec.5.4.Twofanbeamsarcdisplaced ("squinted ")inelevation angleand thesumanddifference patterns areobtained.
Themeasurement ofangleissimilartothatofan amplitude-comparison monopulse tracking radarexceptthatitismadeopenloop;i.e..the outputvoltage fromtheangle-error detector iscalibrated toreadelevation angle.Two displaced hornswithcombining circuitry.
orasinglemultimode horn.istheprinciple modification required oftheantenna.
Although monopulse tracking radarsarecapahle of excellent accuracy.
whenmonopulse isappliedtoa20surveillance radartheangleaccuracy is usuallypoor.Onereasonisthebroadelevation beamwidths.
(Thermserrorofanangle measurement isproportional tothebeamwidth.) Anolher limitation islheeffectofmultipath duetoreflection fromtheearth'ssurface.alsoaconsequence ofthebroadfanbeams.Theeffect ofllluitipath issimilar 10theciTedofglinldiscussed inSec.5.5fortracking radars.TheIllulli­ patherrorcanbequitesevereandmaketheanglemeasurement inmanycasesalmostuseless, asdiscussed inSec.22.JofRef.J2.Thiseffectwillgenerally belesssevereoverlandthanover waterhecause ofthesmallerreflection coefficient ofland.Iftheantenna beamcanbetiltedup soastoreducetheillumination ofthesurface.oriftheantenna elevation patterncanbe designed tohaveasharpcutoffontheunderside ofthebeam.theeffectofsurfacereflections is reduced andthemonopulse anglemeasurement isimproved.
However, thisreducesthecover­ ageoftargetsatlowelevation angles.
Sincetheproblem ofmultipath errorsoccursforantenna beamswhichilluminate the surface.
oneapproach istousethreeelevation beams.Thelowestbeamismadeasnarrowas practical inelevation.
Itilluminates thelowangles.Nomonopulse anglemeasurement would beattempted withIhisbeam.TheotherIwobeamscoverthehigherangleswithrnonopulse processing.
Sincethesefanheamsdonotilluminate thesurface theydonotsufferfrom multipath problems.
Phaseinspace.Thistechniqueemploys asinglerellector witharatheruniquetypeoffeed.The effectofmultiple beamsisgenerated withthisfeed.butonlytworeceivers plusaphasedetector areneededtodetermine angular 10cation.3.\ 35Inordertoobtainwidecoverage inelevalion angleaparabolic-torus reflector isemployed ratherthanasectionofaparaboloid.
Acurved pieceofwaveguide withradiating slotsactsasthefeed.Thetransmitter isfedintooneendof thewaveguide feedwhoseslotsarcdesigned toproduce anumber ofcontiguous beamsin elevation withamplitudes controlled soa~toproduce acosecant-squared radiation pattern.
Onreception.
areceiver isinserted ateachendofthefeed.Theechosignalfromaparticular direction is(received atoneoftheslotsandisdividedinthewaveguide feed.The'twosignals travelinopposite directions andarcreceived ateachendofthefeed.Thephasedifference between thetwosignals(orthedifference intraveltime)depends onfromwhichslotthey originated.
whichinturndepends ontheelevation angleofarrival.Thusameasurement of phasedifference resultsinameasurement ofelevation angle.
Adetailed analysis oftheaccuracy ofthephase-in-space technique isnotavailable.
butin oneimplementation ithasheensaid34tohaveapotential elevation accuracy ofabout0.20 • Mullipath reflections canalsodegrade theaccuracy ofthismethod.
butsincethephase-in­ spacetechnique employs multiple beamstoshapeitselevation pattern.
itmighthepossible to control theradiation soastoilluminate thesurfacewithlessenergythantheconventional fan-beam antenna.
Multiple elevation (stacked) beams.Theuseofcontiguous beamsstackedinelevation hasbeen employed for3Dradar.Itissometimes calledastacked-beam radar.Itisagoodtechnique 544 INTRODUCTlON TO RADAR SYSTEMS  from a fundamental point of view since it uses simultaneous pencil-beam radiation patterns  from a single aperture to cover the elevation angles of interest.
Each beam can be considered a  separate radar.
It is, however, costly and complex.
The transmitter radiates a fan beam from  the summation of all overlapping pencil beams to give the desired elevation coverage.
A  separate receiver is provided each pencil beam and some means of interpolation between the  beams is used to refine the angle measurement.
If automatic detection, sidelobe cancellation, - - - --1_.
or MTI is needed-iFTKe-raar;-ttmemmd-kseparatey employed in each receiving channel,  thus adding to the cost and complexity of the radar.
The individual pencil beams, however,  limit the volume of space observed, which can be an advantage in rain clutter or chaff.
The  MTI in the lower beams can be optimized for surface clutter and MTI in the upper beams, ~f  used at all, can be optimized for rain and chaff.
The individual pencil beams have a higher gain  than a fan-beam antenna, and can provide a larger number of hits at a higher data rate than  can a 3D radar with a single scanning beam in elevation.
-)  Scanning pencil beam.
Three-coordinate, or 3D, information can be obtained on each rotation  of the radar by electronically scanning a single pencil hearn in elevation wllilc n~~~llii~li~ally  rotating the antenna in azimuth.
The beam is rapidly scanned tllro~tgh  coverage in the time the antenna rotates pne-azimuth beamwid*.
 -- - -/ obtained by the sequential scanningol a single kcmas  multiple -_ -.-_-- beams described in the above.
A relatively simple form of electronic scan in this  application is frequency scan (Sec.
8.4) in which a change in frequency results in a change of  elevation angle.37-38 The beam can also be scanned with phase ~hifters.~' ---.-.I One of the limitations of a long-range 3D radar with a single scanning beam is that the  angular coverage consists of a large number of individual beam positions so that tlie dwell  time in any one resolution cell is small.
The a:- -+-.
.
- in each pos~~~s  determined by the t.ime it takes for the radar energy to travel to maximirm range and back.
The  number of beam positions multiplied by the dwell time of each equals the scan time.
Long  dwell times and short scan time (high data rate) are not compatible.
For example, assume that  a 3D radar with a one-degree pencil beam must cover 20 elevation beam positions and 360  azimuth beam positions (a total of 7200 beam positions) every four seconds.
If there is but one  pulse per beam position, the pulse repetition frequency can be no less than 1800 Hz, which  corresponds to an unambiguous range of 83 km.
This is a rather short unambigi~ous rangc for  an air-surveillance radar.
A 3D radar that obtains only one pillse per bcani position cart s~ffer  a relatively large beam-shape loss.
Generally 2 or 3 pulses are required ys a minimum to  reduce this loss.
Also,one plllse pcr beam - position dous~xo~.all~I-M~ processing* / makes difficult the accurate measurement of elevation angle.
To obtain n~oZiliZn oile pulse  per beam position and/or increase the unambigilous range rcqi~ires some comprornises or an  increase in complexity.
The compromises require a fiittcr beamwidtit or a slower scau rate.
 Some benefit can be obtained by using a pulse repetition frequency (prf) that varies with  elevation angle.
At low angles where the ranges are long, a low prf is used.
At the higher angles  where the ranges are short, a high prf can be used.
If an increase in complexity can be tolerated,  a number of multiple elevation beams can be scanned simultaneously to increase the data rate,  unambiguous range, and/or number of pulses per beam position.
A separate receiver is  required for each of the simultaneous beams.
ne elevatj-&MY-of~fstngie-~~~~~j~n~t~eam -..- 3D radars -.
is ~lsually less than that  of other systems.
This is due to the relatively, few ..
pulses .
...
(sornetimes only one pulse) pccb-ea-m  wition, as well as the error introduced by t he_.target eclio.
a.mp!~tudt: .
.
.
.
.
.
, .
, .- ttuctuations -- when --  sequential rather than simultaneous angle measurements are made.
Changes in echo ampli- .
 tilde cause errors since the sequential measurements are necessarily made at different instants  .J544INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS fromafundamental pointofviewsinceitusessimultaneous pencil-beam radiation patterns fromasingleaperture tocovertheelevation anglesofinterest.
Eachbeamcanbeconsidered a separate radar.Itis,however, costlyandcomplex.
Thetransmitter radiates afanbeamfrom thesummation ofalloverlapping pencilbeamstogivethedesired elevation coverage.
A separate receiver isprovided eachpencilbeamandsomemeansofinterpolation between the beamsisusedtorefinetheanglemeasurement.
Ifautomatic detection, sidelobe cancellation, o"r"MTfisneede(J'J'f}Ine--ta<nrr;-these mustb"e-separately employed ineachreceiving channel, thusaddingtothecostandcomplexity oftheradar.Theindividual pencilbeams,however, limitthevolumeofspaceobserved, whichcanbeanadvantage inrainclutterorchaff.The MTIinthelowerbeamscanbeoptimized forsurfaceclutterandMTIintheupperbeams,if usedatall,canbeoptimized forrainandchaff.Theindividual pencilbeamshaveahighergain thanafan-beam antenna, andcanprovide alargernumberofhitsatahigherdataratethan cana3Dradarwithasinglescanning beaminelevation.
Scanning pencilbeam.Three-coordinate, or3D,information canbeobtained oneachrotation oftheradarbyelectronically scanning asinglepencilbeaminelevation whilemechanically rotating theantenna inazimuth.
Thebeam...israpidlyscanned through q.l.C~.en'tireelevation coverage inthetimetheantenna rotates9ne.._azim~.
The(3D ~nformation is obtained bythe.?eg~~~~~il:lL~<?~1!!li.~Lof asingle b~J.lllLas ~Q!!mared witli~ simultaneous ~!l~le beamsdescribed jntheabove.Arelatively simpleformofelectronic scaninthis application isfrequency scan(Sec.8.4)inwhichachangeinfrequency resultsinachangeof elevation angle.37.38Thebeamcanalsobescanned withphaseshifters.39 ~---~_.-----" Oneofthelimitations ofalong-range 3Dradarwithasinglescanning beamisthatthe angular coverage consists ofalargenumber ofindividual beampositions sothatthedwell tim~L£.lanyone resolution cellissmal\.The~ ineachp~itron Is determined bythetimeittakesfortheradarenergytotraveltomaximum rangeandback.The number ofbeampositions multiplied bythedwelltimeoreach equalsthescantime.Long dwelltimesandshortscantime(highdatarate)arenotcompatible.
Forexample, assumethat a3Dradarwithaone-degree pencilbeammustcover20elevation beampositions and360 azimuth beampositions (atotalof7200beampositions) everyfourseconds.Ifthereisbutone pulseperbeamposition, thepulserepetition frequency canbenolessthan1800Hz,which corresponds toanunambiguous rangeof83km.Thisisarathershortunambiguous rangefor anair-surveillance radar.A3Dradarthatobtainsonlyollepulseperbeamposition cansuffer arelatively largebeam-shape loss.Generally 2or3pulsesarerequired asaminimum to reducethisloss.Also,onef2.l.!lse PCL~)~<lm position docs.HotaHowgowLM.:!.:.! processing~ makesdifficult theaccurate measurement ofelevation angle.ToobtainmorethailOile pulse perbeamposition and/orincrease theunambiguous rangerequircs somecompromises oran increase incomplexity.
Thecompromises requircafatterbeamwidth oraslowerscanratc.
Somebenefitcanbeobtained byusingapulserepetition frequcncy (prf)thatvarieswith elevation angle.Atlowangleswheretherangesarelong,alowprfisused.Atthehigherangles wheretherangesareshort,ahighprrcanbellsed.Ifanincrease incomplexity canbetolerated, anumberofmultiple elevation beamscanbescanned simultaneously toincrease thedatarate, unambiguous range,and/ornumber orpulsesperbeamposition.
Aseparate receiver is required foreachofthesimultaneous beams.
Ih~,_eleYilJion angleacCtI+ae-y-ofsinglg-sca.QD.i.n.&.,beal." 3Dra~~,llsually lessthanthat ofothersystems.
Thisisduetotherelativel.Y.J~~ pulse~(sometimes onlyonepulse)p.e.rAream QOsiJip_n, aswellastheerrorintroduced bythe_.!<lrg~t echo aJ11pljtlld,~_,!~.!£!uations when ~...•---, ..-,.
- sequential ratherthansimultaneous anglemeasurements aremade.Changes inechoampli- tudecauseerrorssincethesequential measurements arenccessarily madeatditTerent instants OTHER RADAR TOPICS 545  of time.
This is similar to the effect of amplitude fluctuations on tracking radar, as discussed in  Sec.
5.5.
If freque~lcy scan is used, there is even more likelihood of echo fluctuations because of  the change in target echo with frequency.
 Another method for obtaining 3D coverage with a scanning pencil beam is to employ  helical scan, as in the renowned SCR-584 of World War 11.
A single pencil beam is rotated in  azimutll with its elevation angle increased one beamwidtli per revolution so as to trace a  helical pattern.
It is a simple technique, but is not of high accuracy since it is dificult to  interpolate between adjacent elevation beam positions.
 Within-pulse sca~ining.~~.~' In the frequency-scan 3D radar discussed above, a single pencil  bean1 is step-scanned in elevation.
Each pulse is at a constant frequency but the frequency is  cliatiged every pulse or every few pulses to position the beam at different elevation angles.
 Aliotlier r~letllod of utilizing a frequency-scan antenna is to sweep the frequency over the entire  I'recluuicy s;~~lgc or1 c~ccc.11 1111lsc so that energy is radiated tliroughout the entise elevatioti  coverage I'or tile duration of a single pulse.
The frequency of tlie received echo signal will  clcl>cti(l oti tlic clcvi~~ioti ;iriglc of tllc t:~rget.
A batik of corltigitoi~s receivers.
each tuned to :I  diflkrcnt I'sequcncy.
provides coverage of tlle elevation sector with the equivalent of parallel  rcceivitig beams.
The elevation angle of tlie target is determined by which receiver is excited.
 'I'his teclirtiquc lias beer1 called witllirr-l~lrlsc' scanning.
 Tlie height resolution depends on the antenna beamwidth, as in a conventional frequency-  scan aritenna; but the range resolution is determined by the frequency spectral components.
 received froni a given elevation angle, that corresporid to one beaniwidth.
As stated in Sec.
8.4.
 tiie echo from a target is freqi~ency niodulated when illuminated by such a frequency-scanned  bcarn.
Pulse-compression filtering (similar to chirp) can be used to achieve a range resolution  equal to the reciprocal of tiie one-way group delay along tlie dispersive delay line (snake feed)  feeding the frequency-scar1 array.
 I'licre is atlotlier array antentla teclinique called rrlitllirl-p~rlsc) scarlr~irly that is different  frorn tile frequency scat1 tecllnique described above.
This other technique, which is discussed in  Scc.
8.7.
is a method for generating niilltiple receiving beams at a single frequency and can be  corisidered Inore like the stacked-beam radar than a frequency-scan height finder.
 Interf~ronieter.~~ " An i~iterferorneter consists of two individual antennas spaced so as to  ohtaiti a tiarfow hcarnwidtii for accut'atc angle tneasuretnent.
The phase difference between tlic  signals of the two antenna elernents ol the interferometer provides the elevation angle, as giveti  I>y I'q.
(5f1).
Tliis type of angle mcasurernetit is sitnilar to the phase-comparison monopulse  radar.
cxcept that tlie size of the individual antennas is small compared to the spacing between  tliem.
Grating lobes (also called interferometer lobes) result from the wide spacing between the  antennas.
Tliese grating lobes can cause ambiguities in the measurement.
The ambiguities can  be resolved by ilse of more than two antennas with unequal spacings.
The outer two antennas  provide accurate.
but ambiguous, measurement of elevation angle.
The function of the one or  tnore inner antennas is to resolve the ambiguities.
 In otie iniplcrncntation, an interferometer was attached to the rotating antenna of a 2D  S-hand air-surveillaricc The 2D radar provided the range and azimuth as well as tile  tr ansniitled energy for tlic receivi~lg interferometer.
Tlie interferometer consisted of four linear  Ilorizontally oriented arrays, or sticks, with one stick mounted below tlie 2D radar antenna  and tlie other three sticks mounted above.
 The elevation hearnwidtlis of each of the individual antennas of the interferometer are  generally broad so that multipath due to ground reflections can cause errors.
Shaping the  underside of tlie 211 transmitting antenna to minimize the energy illuminating the surface can  OTHER RADAR TOPICS545 oftime.Thisissimilartotheeffectofamplitude fluctuations ontracking radar,asdiscussed in Sec.5.5.Iffrequency scanisused.thereisevenrnorelikelihoodofecho fluctuations because of thechange intargetechowithfrequency.
Another method forobtaining 3Dcoverage withascanning pencilbeamistoemploy helicalscan.asintherenowned SCR-584 ofWorldWarII.Asinglepencilbeamisrotated in azimuth withitselevation angleincreased onebeamwidth perrevolution soastotracea helicalpattern.Itisasimpletechnique.
butisnotofhighaccuracy sinceitisdifficult to interpolate hetween adjacent elevation beampositions.
Within-pulse scanning.40.4\Inthefrequency-scan 3Dradardiscussed above,asinglepencil beamisstep-scanned inelevation.
Eachpulseisataconstant frequency butthefrequency is changed everypulseoreveryfewpulsestoposition thebeamatdifferent elevation angles.
Another method ofutilizing afrequency-scan antenna istosweepthefrequency overtheentire frl:qUl:ncyrangeon('(lC"pulscsothatencrgy isradiatedthroughou ttheentireelevation covnag.c fortheduration ofasinglepulse.Thefrequency ofthereceived echosignalwill dl:pl:ndonthcelevation angleofthctarget.Abankofcontiguous receivers.
eachtunedtoa diflcrent frequency.
provides coverage oftheelevation sectorwiththeequivalent ofparallel rl:ceiving.
beams.Theelevation angleofthetargetisdetermined bywhichreceiver isexcited.
Thistechnique hasbecncalledwithill-/1lilse scanning.
Theheightresolution depends ontheantenna beamwidth.
asinaconventional frequency­ scanantenna; buttherangeresolution isdetermined bythefrequency spectral components.
received fromagivenelevation angle,thatcorrespond toonebeamwidth.
AsstatedinSec.8.4.
theechofromatargetisfrequency modulated whenilluminated bysuchafrequency-scanned beam.Pulse-compression filtering (similartochirp)canbeusedtoachieve arangeresolution equaltothereciprocal oftheone-way groupdelayalongthedispersive delayline(snakefeed) feedingthefrequency-scan array.
Thereisanother arrayantenna technique calledwithin-pulse scanning thatisdifferent fromthefrequency scantechnique described above.Thisothertechnique, whichisdiscussed in Sec.Pd.isamethod forgenerating multiple receiving beamsatasinglefrequency andcanbe considered morelikethestacked-beam radarthanafrequency-scan heightfinder.
Interferometer.42HAninterferometer consists oftwoindividual antennas spacedsoasto obtainanarrowhcamwidth foraccurate anglemeasurement.
Thephasedifference betwecn the signalsofthetwoantenna elements oftheinterferometer provides theelevation angle.asgiven byFq.(5~·1).Thistypeofanglemeasurement issimilartothephase-comparison monopulse radar.exceptthatthesizeoftheindividual antennas issmallcompared tothespacing between them.Grating looes(alsocalledinterferometer lobes)resultfromthewidespacing between the antennas.
Thesegratinglobescancauseambiguities inthemeasurement.
Theambiguities can beresolved byuseofmorethantwoantennas withunequal spacings.
Theoutertwoantennas provide accurate, butambiguous, measurement ofelevation angle.Thefunction oftheoneor moreinnerantennas istoresolvetheambiguities.
Inoneimplcmcntation, aninterferometer wasattached totherotating antenna ofa2D S-handair-surveillance radar.42The20radarprovided therangeandazimuth aswellasthc transmilled cnergyforthereceiving interferometer.
Theinterferometer consisted offourlinear horizontally oriented arrays.orsticks,withonestickmounted belowthe2Dradarantenna andtheotherthreesticksmounted above.
Theelevation beamwidths ofeachoftheindividual antennas oftheinterferometer are generally broadsothatmultipath duetoground reOections cancauseerrors.Shaping the underside orthe2Dtransmitting anlenna tominimize theenergyilluminating thesurfacecan reduce thc angular error.
The effective receiving area of the interferometer is usually less than  that of the conventional radar reflector antenna with which it is used.
Thus, the range capa-  bility of the interferometer angle measurement might be less than that of the 2D radar.
This  reduced range capability is acceptable in many situations since the height measuremcnt is  \~sually of more significance at shorter rather than longer ranges.
 Lobe recognition.
A coarse indication of height sometimes can be obtained by recognizing the  fading of the echo signal as an aircraft target flies through the multipath lobes of the antenna  pattern.
Meastiring the range at which the target is first seen on the bottom lobe, or the range  where it disappears because of the first null of the lobing pattern, can be related to the target  height.
This effect is more applicable at the lower microwave frequencies and for radars sited  ovcr water.
At the higher frequencies where the lobes are narrow, a coirnt of the lobes pzr unit  distance can be related to the target height.
Although the technique of lobe rycognition is  reiativcly 'simple and has been reported to have been used in World War 11,'' ~ts poor  reliability, low target capacity, and poor accuracy, make it unattractive.
 Timedifference height finding.
The several height-finding techniques included in this section  were described in terms of a ground-based radar.
Most can be modified to apply to an  airborne radar for the measurement of height of other aircraft or the depression angle if a  ground target.
The time-difference height-finding technique to be described is applicable, in  principle, to almost any radar situation, but in practice it is more applicable to an elevated  radar such as in an aircraft, especially one which operates over water.
It derives the height of a  target from the time difference between the radar signal reflected directly from the target and  the multipath signal that arrives via reflection from the surface of the earth.
 Consider the geometry of Fig.
12.1 for propagation over a plane reflecting surface.
There  are four possible paths by which the energy travels to the target and back.
These are:  1.
From radar to target and return by the same path (AB-BA).
 2.
From radar to target and return via reflection from the surface (AR-BMA).
 3.
From radar to target via reflection from the surface and return directly to the radar  (AMB-RA).
(This is the opposite of No.
2.)  4.
Irotn radar to target via reflection from the surface and return by the samc pat11  (AMB-BMA).
 Path 1 is the shortest, path 4 is the longest and paths 2 and 3 are equal.
Thus, there can be three  separate responses from a target, as illustrated in the idealized sketch of Fig.
14.1 1.
The  relative amplitudes of the three echoes are in the ratio of 1, 2p and p2, where p = surface  reflection coefficient.
A measurement of the time delay tn along with the range R to the target  and knowledge of the height h, of the radar antenna yields the height of the target.
This  technique works best over surfaces with large reflection coefficient, and when the pulse widths  Figure 14.11 Idealized echo response of a point target  located above a reflecting surface, for the case where  the pulse width is less than the time separation t, be-  tween the direct and surface-reflected signals.
The sur-  it--- '0 +-to--- -+ I face reflection coefficient is p.
 546INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS reducetheangularerror.Theeffective receiving areaoftheinterferometer isusuallylessthan thatoftheconventional radarreflector antenna withwhichitisused.Thus,therangecapa­ bilityoftheinterferometer anglemeasurement mightbeJessthanlhat orthe2Dradar.This reduced rangecapability isacceptable inmanysituations sincetheheightmeasurement is usuallyofmoresignificance atshorterratherthanlongerranges.
Loberecognition.
Acoarseindication ofheightsometimes canbeobtained byrecognizing the fadingoftheechosignalasanaircrafttargetfliesthrough themultipath lobesofthe'antenna pattern.
Measuring therangeatwhichthetargetisfirstseenonthebottomlobe,ortherange whereitdisappears becauseofthefirstnullofthelobingpattern,canberelatedtothetarget height.ThiselTectismoreapplicable atthelowermicrowave frequencies andforradarssited overwater.Atthehigherfrequencies wherethelobesarenarrow, acountofthelobesperunit distance canberelatedtothetargetheight.Although thetechnique ofloberfcognition is relatively 'simpleandhasbeenreported tohavebeenusedinWorldWar I1:~5itspoor reliability, lowtargetcapacity, andpooraccuracy, makeitunattractive.
Time-difference heightfinding.Theseveralheight-finding techniques included inthissection weredescribed intermsofaground-based radar.Mostcanbemodified toapplytoan airborne radarforthemeasurement ofheightofotheraircraftorthedepression angleifa groundtarget.Thetime-difference height-finding technique tobedescribed isapplicable, in principle, toalmostanyradarsituation, butinpractice itismoreapplicable toanelevated radarsuchasinanaircraft, especially onewhichoperates overwater.Itderivestheheightofa targetfromthetimedifference between theradarsignalreflected directly fromthetargetand themultipath signalthatarrivesviareflection fromthesurfaceoftheearth.
Consider thegeometry ofFig.12.1forpropagation overaplanereflecting surfa~e.There arefourpossible pathsbywhichtheenergytravelstothetargetandback.Theseare: 1.Fromradartotargetandreturnbythesamepath(AB-BA).
2.Fromradartotargetandreturnviareflection fromthesurface(AB-BMA).
3.Fromradartotargetviareflection fromthesurfaceandreturndirectly totheradar (AMB-BA).
(Thisistheopposite ofNo.2.) 4.Fromradartotargetviareflection fromthesurfaceandreturnbythesamepath (AMB-BMA).
Path1istheshortest, path4isthelongestandpaths2and3areequal.Thus,therecanbethree separate responses fromatarget,asillustrated intheidealized sketchofFig.14.11.The relativeamplitudes ofthethreeechoesareintheratioof1,2pandp2,wherep=surface reflection coefficient.
Ameasurement oftiletimedelaytDalongwiththerangeRtothetarget andknowledge oftheheighthaoftheradarantenna yieldstheheightofthetarget.This technique worksbestoversurfaces withlargereflection coefficient, andwhenthepulsewidths 2p 1--10 "I~p2 10---~Figure14.11Idealized echoresponse ofapointtarget locatedaboveareflecting surface, forthecasewhere thepulsewidthislessthanthetimeseparation tvbe­ tweenthedirectandsurface-reflected signals.Thesur­ facereflection coefficient isp. OTHER RADAR TOPICS 547  arc sllor t co~ril~atctl to tlic titlie tlillc.~c.~icc r,, .
I;OI a I1;1t c;11 tli.
tlic Iiciglil of 1111: 1:11gct is  (.l<t/) It, = 211,  wlicrc (.
= velocity of prol>;rgatiori.
Usually tlic rou~ld-cnstli gco~netry tnust bc cotlsidcrcd.
 wliicli results in a r~lore co~~lplex for~ilulat ion tliatl the simple expression given above.
 14.5 ELEC'I'HONIC COUN'I'ER-COUNTERMEASURES  All radars, civiliarl and military, must be able to operate in the crowded electro~riagnetic  environment that results from the transmissions of other radiating sources, both in tlie radar's  own band as well as from.
outside tile band." Tile radar must be designed to reject these  unwanted radiations and to minimize the likelihood of its own transmissions causing trouble  to other users of the spectrum.
This is tile subject of EMC, or electr.on~uyrletic con~l~trtil~ilit!~.
It  is important if the electromagnetic spectrum, considered as a natural resource, is to be effec-  tively and efficiently utilized for the benefit of all.
Military radars, however.
must also operate  in a hostile environment where they may be subjected to deliberate interference designed to  degrade their performance.
The various methods for interfering electronically with radar are  called t~lectrotlic.
cotr~rtrrri~c~cistrt~es, or ECM.
Actirtcj ECM is sometimes referred to as ,jrir~rrtti~~g.
 Ttiere is also passive ECM, such as chaff.
which reflects radar energy to create clutter and Palsc  targets.
The methods employed to combat ECM are called electror~ic co~rr~ter.-co~rirrr~-~~~~~~~strr~c.s.
 or ECCM.
 The several forms of ECM directed against radar may be categorized as noise jamming,  deception jamming, cl~afl; and decoys.
Intercept receivers and direction finders (which are  called tlluc-trorlic- strpport nrpustrres, or ESM), as well as antiradiation missiles (ARM) are also  aspects of e/ectrotlic wurJUr~ (EW) that must be of concern to the military radar systenls  designer.
 If a determined adversary is willing to pay the resultant price, sufficient ECM can be  brought to bear against any single radar to significantly reduce its effectiveness.
This should  not evoke pessimism on the part of the radar designer since it can be said that any military  objective can be accomplished by a determined force if the force is skillful and large enough,  and if cod is of no consequence.
Tlle goal of ECCM is to raise the cost of ECM' to the point  where it is prohibitive.
The effect of ECM on a single radar can seldom be considered in  isolation since it is seldorn that a single radar acts as an entity in itself.
A military radar is  almost always in support of a weapon system.
The question is not whether a single radar can  operate without degradation, but whether the weapon system of which the radar is a part can  f~tlfill its mission in spite of liostile ECM.
It is easier to ensure the accomplishment of tlie  weapon system's mission than to guarantee that operation of a single radar will not be  degraded.
This larger and more important goal, that of fulfilling a military mission, is what  sliould guide tile niilitary systerl~s planrler arid the radar systems designer.
Tliis broader.
 concept, however, is not appropriate for discussion here.
Instead, a brief review will be given of  the various .radar-ECCM options that can make the task of ECM more difficult.
 As a general rule, good radar design practice can reduce vulnerability to electronic  countermeasures.
Good design is based on maximizing the ratio of the signal energy to noise  power per hertz (EIN,), as well as employing techniques to reduce mutual interference.
It is  important to avoid receiver saturation, or overloading.
A wide dynamic range is desired.
and  OTHER RADAR TOPICS547 aresholtcompared tothetillledilTCll'llce t".Fora11atearth.I.heheightofthelargL'lis approximately I_cUt" ',-2"0(14.27) wherec=velocity ofpropagation.
Usually theround-earth geometry mustheconsidered.
whichresultsinamorecomplex formulation thanthesimpleexpression givenahove.
14.3ELECTRONIC COUNTER-COUNTERl\'lEASURES Allradars.civilianandmilitary, mustbeabletooperate inthecrowded electromagnetic environment thatresultsfromthetransmissions ofotherradiating sources.
bothintheradar's ownbandaswellasfrom.outside theband.50Theradarmustbedesigned torejectthese unwanted radiations andtominimize thelikelihood ofitsowntransmissions causing trouble tootherusersofthespectrum.
ThisisthesubjectofEMC,orelectromagnetic compatihility.
It isimportant iftheelectromagnetic spectrum, considered asanaturalresource, istobeeffec­ tivelyandefficiently utilizedforthebenefitofall.Military radars,however, mustalsooperate inahostileenvironment wheretheymaybesubjected todeliberate interference designed to degrade theirperformance.
Thevariousmethods forinterfering electronically withradararc calledelectronic COlll1temH'CISlIres, orECM.
Aclil~eECMissometimes referred toas.iammillq.
ThereisalsopassiveECM,suchaschaff,whichreflectsradarenergytocrcateclutterandfalse targets.Themethods employed tocombatECMarecalledelectrollic COll1lter-CVI/Ilterme(/Sl/res.
orECCM.
TheseveralformsofECMdirected againstradarmaybecategorized asnoisejamming, deception jamming.
chaff,anddecoys.
Intercept receivers anddirection finders(whichare calledelectronic sl/pport meaSl/res, orESM),aswellasantiradiation missiles (ARM)arealso aspectsofelectronic warFare (EW)thatmustbeofconcern tothemilitary radarsystems designer.
Ifadetermined adversary iswillingtopaytheresultant price,sufficient ECMcanbe brought tobearagainstanysingleradartosignificantly reduceitseffectiveness.
Thisshould notevokepessimism onthepartoftheradardesigner sinceitcanbesaidthatanymilitary objective canbeaccomplished byadetermined forceiftheforceisskillfulandlargeenough.
andifcostisofnoconsequence.
ThegoalofECCMistoraisethecostofEeM'tothepoint whereitisprohibitive.
TheeffectofECMonasingleradarcanseldombeconsidered in isolation sinceitisseldomthatasingleradaractsasanentityinitself.Amilitary radaris.
almostalwaysinsupport ofaweapon system.Thequestion isnotwhether asingleradarcan operate without degradation, butwhether theweapon systemofwhichtheradarisapartcan fulfillitsmission inspiteofhostileECM.Itiseasiertoensuretheaccomplishment ofthe weapon system's mission thantoguarantee thatoperation ofasingleradarwillnotbe degraded.
Thislargerandmoreimportant goal,thatoffulfilling amilitary mission.
iswhat shouldguidcthemilitary systcms planncr andtheradarsystems dcsigner.
Thisbroader concept, however.
isnotappropriate fordiscussion here.Instead.
abriefreviewwillbegivenof thevariousTadar-ECCM options thatcanmakethetaskofECMmoredifficult.
Asageneral rule,goodradardesignpractice canreducevulnerability toelectronic countermeasures.
Gooddesignisbasedonmaximizing theratioofthesignalenergytonoise powerperhertz(EINo),aswellasemploying techniques toreducemutualinterference.
Itis important toavoidreceiver saturation, oroverloading.
Awidedynamic rangeisdesired.
and linear rather than square-law detectors are preferred.
The radar shoi~ld he designed conserva-  tively with larger power and larger antenna apcrtirre than tile miriirni~n~ required for mirrginal  detection.
 One of the better measures against many forms of ECM is an alert, Iiighly niotivatcd, well  trained, and experienced operator.
 Noise jamming.
Receiver noise generally limits the sensitivity of most microwave radars.
 Raising the noise level by external means, as with a jammer, further degrades the sensitivity of  the radar.
Noise is a fundamental limitation to radar performance and t1ie1-efore Ciili bc all  effective countermeasure.
The ECCM designer nii~st minimize tlie amount of noise a jarnmcr  can introduce into the radar receiver.
It is difficult, however, to keep the noise out when the  jammer is being illuminated by the main beam of the radar antenna.
When this occurs, tile  narrow sector in the direction of the jammer will appear as a radial strobe on the )?PI display.
 The directbn to the jammer can be determined, but its range and the ranges of any targets  masked by the noise strobe is not likely to be known.
If noise enters the radar via the antznna  sidelobes, the entire display can be obliterated and no target information obtained.
Thus it is  essential that noise be prevented from entering the receiver via the antenna sidelobes.
 A jammer whose noise energy is concentrated within tile radar receiver bandwidth is  called a spot jammer.
The spot jammer can be a potent threat to the radar if it is allowed to  concentrate large power entirely within the radar bandwidth.
The radar systems designer mirst  prevent this by forcing the jammer to spread its power over a mi~cli wider band.
This can be  accomplished by changing the radar frequency from pulse to pi~lse in an unpredictable fasliion  over tlie entire tuning band available to tlie radar.
A radar capable of changing its frequency  from pulse to pulse is said to possess ji-eq~rency crgility.
(Even in tlle ahscl~ce of ECM, freqtrency  agility has advantages in filling in the nulls of the elevation radiation pattern and in decorrelar-  ing target echoes so ris to increase the probability of detection.) A jamnler call also bc forccd to  widen its jamming band if there are many radars operating withi11 the same geograpliic area,  each at a different frequency distributed over the available radar tuning range.
A jammer  which radiates over a wide band of frequencies is called a harrclge jltt~~t)l~v-.
 To take full advantage of frequency agility, the radar should employ a prrlt~ok 1.~1ruill~~r to  examine the jammer's spectrum and select a frequency for the next radar transmission where  the noise is a minimum.
The jamming power is seldom uniform over the band.
Prelook  sampling of tlie environment can take place during the radar interpulse period just prior to  each transmission, so as to select on a pulse-to-pulse basis that frequency wiiich offers tlie Iznst  jamming interference."  Pulse compression is sometimes credited as causing the jammer to spread its energy over  a wider band than that of a normal spot jammer.
However, pulse compression is seldom  deliberately employed as a prime ECCM technique.
It is almost always used as a nieans to  achieve good range resolution with a long pulse.
Furthermore, the jammer usually must be  forced to spread its power over a much wider hand than the spectral wicitli of most pirlse-  compression radars in order to significantly reduce its effectiveness.
Thus pirlse conipression  should not be given too large a credit as a major ECCM technique, although it is certainly a  positive factor.
 Forcing the jammer to spread power over the entire band available to a radar is generally  not sufficient in itself.
The jammer also must be forced to spread its available power over more  than one radar band.
This can be accomplished withfreqltency diversity by using two or more  radars.
A 2D air-surveillance radar in one band used with a height-finder radar in another  band is a good method for achieving frequency diversity.
Both radar bands have to be jammed  simultaneously if target location is to be denied.
 548INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS linearratherthansquare-law detectors areprderred.
Theradarshouldhedesigned conserva­ tivelywithlargerpowerandlargerantenna aperturc thantheminimum required formarginal detcction.
Oneofthebettermeasures againstmao)irorrl1s ofEeMisanalert,highlymotivah:d, well trained, andexperienced operator.
Noisejamming.
Receiver noisegenerally limitsthcsensitIvIty ofmostmicrowavc radars.
Raisingthenoiselevelbyexternal means,aswithajammcr, furthcrdegrades thescnsitivity of theradar.Noiseisafundamental limitation toradarperformancc andthcreforc canhean effective countermeasure.
TheECCMdesigncr mustminimizc theamount ofnoiseajammer canintroduce intotheradarreceiver.Itisdifficult, however, tokeepthenoiseoutwhenthe jammer isbeingilluminated bythemainbeamoftheradarantenna.
Whenthisoccurs,the narrowsectorinthedirection ofthejammer willappearasaradialstrobeontherPIdisplay..
.
Thedirection tothejammer canbedetermined, butitsrangeandtherangcsofanytargets masked bythenoisestrobeisnotlikelytobeknown.Ifnoiseentcrstheradarviathcantenna sidelobes, theentiredisplaycanbeobliterated andnotargetinformation ohtained.
Thusitis essential thatnoisebeprevented fromentering thereceivcr viatheantenna sidclobes.
Ajammer whosenoiseenergyisconcentrated withintheradarreceiver bandwidth is calledaspotjammer.
Thespotjammer canbeapotentthreattotheradarifitisallowed to concentrate largepowerentirely withintheradarbandwidth.
Theradarsystcms designer must prevent thisbyforcingthejammer tospreaditspoweroveramuchwidcrhand.Thiscanbe accomplished bychanging theradarfrequency frompulsetopulseinanunpredictable fashion overtheentiretuningbandavailable totheradar.Aradarcapahleofchanging itsfrequency frompulsetopulseissaidtopossessji-eql/ency agility.(EvcnintheahscnceofECM,frequency agilityhasadvantages infillinginthenullsoftheelevation radiation patternandindecorrelat­ ingtargetechoessoastoincrease theprobability ofddection.) Ajammer canalsobeforcedto widenitsjamming bandiftherearemanyradarsoperating withinthesamegeographic an~a, eachatadifferent frequency distributed overtheavailable radartuningrange.Ajammer whichradiates overawidebandoffrequencies iscalledabarragejammer.
Totakefulladvantage offrequency agility, th~radarshouldemployapre/on/':receiL,t'r to examine thejammer's spectrum and'selectafrequency forthenextradartransmission where thenoiseisaminimum.
Thejamming powerisseldom uniform overtheband.Prelook sampling oftheenvironment cantakeplaceduringtheradarinterpulse periodjustpriorto eachtransmission, soastoselectonapulse-to-pulse basisthatfrequency whichofferstheleast jamming interference.51 Pulsecompression issometimes credited ascausing thejammer tospreaditsenergyover awiderbandthanthatofanormalspotjammer.
However, pulsecompression isseldom deliberately employed asaprimeECCMtechnique.
Itisalmostalwaysusedasameansto achievegoodrangeresolution withalongpulse.Furthermore, thejammer usuallymustbe forcedtospreaditspoweroveramuchwiderhandthanthespectral widthofmoslpulse­ compression radarsinordertosignificantly reduceitseffectiveness.
Thuspulsecompression shouldnotbegiventoolargeacreditasamajorECCMtechnique, although itiscertainly a positive factor.
Forcing thejammer tospreadpowerovertheentirebandavailable toaradarisgenerally notsufficient initself.Thejammer alsomustbeforcedtospreaditsavailahle powerovermore thanoneradarband.Thiscanbeaccomplished withjrequency diversity byusingtwoormore radars.A2Dair-surveillance radarinonebandusedwithaheight-finder radarinanother bandisagoodmethodforachieving frequency diversity.
Bothradarbandshavetobejammed simultaneously iftargetlocation istobedenied. OTHER RADAR TOPICS 549  111 general, higher-frequency radars ~rsually are less vunerable to jamming than are iower-  freqi~ency radars.
Orie reasorl is that the barldwidtli over which the higher-frequency radar can  operate is greater, thus causing tlie jarnmer to spread its available power over a greater  llurntwr of megallertz.
Also, the antenna gain can be greater at the higher frequencies, a factor  often favoring the radar when confronted with jamming, as seen by Eqs.
(14.213) and (14.30).
 f~urtl~crrnore.
at tllc Iiigl~er frcqt~ericies tile ~tntetina sidelobe levels can be lower, making it  Illore diliicult for sidelolw jarr~illirig.
I lowever, tllc ;~dv:rn tsgcs of oper:tt ing against jarnnlers at  tile Iliglicr frcqt~crlcics arc balariccd in part by the disadvantages of the Iligher fseque~icics,  csljeci;~lly above 1, I>a~ld,.fo~ lorlg-r:~rlgc ail.-sirrveillance radar.
 .l.llc ~loisc that crltcrs tlic radar via tiic a~lterlrla sidelobes call be reduced by colic~.c~tt  sidelohe car~celcrs.
This collsists of otic or more omnidirectional antennas and cancelation  cil-cuitry ilscd ill cor!jt~~ictio~i wit11 tllc signal from the main radar antenna.
Jamming tloisc in  tile onltlidircctional antennas is made to ca~icel the jamming noise entering the sidelobes of tllc  ninin a~~tcnna."~ Ari antenna can also be designed to have very low sidelobe levels to reduce  tile effect of sidclobe jamming.
Low sidelobe antennas require unobstructed siting if reflectio~ls  l'ronl nearby objects are not to degrade the sidelobe levels.
 I3y en~ployi~ig some or all of the above techniques, tlle effect of the sidelobe noise jammer  can be sigr~ificantly reduced.
Some of tile above techniques can also reduce the jamming that  enters via tile main beam.
The effects of main-beam jamming can be further reduced by  eri~l~loying a narrow bearnwidtli to limit the region over which the jamming appears.
If tllc  main hcanl ca~lnot be rnade tiarrow bccaiise of constraints on the antenna size, an auxiliary  antenna can be ernployed to create a ~iotch in the main-beam radiation pattern in the direction  of the jammer.
With adaptive circuitry similar to that of the sidelobe canceler, this rtic~ir~-hrclr~r  r~otc.l~ can be at~tomatically adjusted to be maintained in the direction of the jammer.
 Mt~ltiple radars viewirlg tlie sanw coverage in a coordinated manner can provide some  benefit against a jammer since it is unlikely that jamming power can be distributed u~iiformly  in space.
Witti netting of radars.
those radars with less jamming can provide target data for  radars with rnorc janit~iirig.
Multil-rlc radar sites also allow a jammer to be located by tr.icirrgir-  ltrt iotl wlicri main-beam jamriii~lg denies a direct rneasureme~lt of range.
This may be a satisfac-  tory tactic for one or a few jammers, but triangulation cannot be used with a large number of  jammers becairsc of tile gc~lcratioti of ghost targets.
N jammers can produce NZ - N ghost  targets when two radars attempt triangulation.
 Locating the jarnrner might not be as important, however, as locating the attacking  nlissilcs or aircraft screened by the jammer, especially when tlie jamming aircraft is beyond the  r;lilge of d~fcrisivc weapons.
A jntnrncr that operates outside the range of normal defenses is  known as a stcrr~d-c?(;/'itr~?~~r~t~~'.
An important ECCM tactic is to engage hostile jammers with  I~orric~-orr-/trru (tlOJ) missile giritiancc.
If the jammer is radiating, HOJ is generally a better  guidance tecl.rniquc tliaii is radar guidance.
Stand-on jammers are also subject to direct attack  by interceptor aircraft.
 Increasing the radar energy in the direction of the jammer in the hope of increasing the  radar ecllo power above the jamming noise is called bunitltrotcgh.
This may be accomplished  with reserve transmitter power or by dwelling longer in the direction of the jammer.
Dwelling  longer on a target redilces the data rate, and thus can degrade the overall radar performance.
A  significant redirction in data rate ge~ierally is not desirable.
Dependence on burnthrough as a  rn;!jor 1'C:CM tactic is questionable.
It should be used where cost-effective and where tlic  rcdilction in data rate is tolerable.
 Impulsive noise, that can shock-excite the " narrow-band" radar receiver and cause it to  ring, can be reduced wit11 the Lamb noise-silencing circuit,53 or Dicke fix.54 This consists of a  widebard IF filter in cascade with a limiter, followed by the normal IF matched filter.
The  OTHER RADAR TOPICS549 Ingeneral, higher-frequency radarsusuallyarelessvunerable tojamming thanarelower­ frequency radars.Onereasonisthatthebandwidth overwhichthehigher-frequency radarcan operate isgreater, thuscausing thejammer tospread itsavailable poweroveragreater number ofmegahertz.
Also,theantenna gaincanbegreateratthehigherfrequencies, afactor oftenfavoring theradarwhenconfronted withjamming, asseenbyEqs.(14.28)and(14.30).
Furthermore, atthehigherfrequencies theantenna sidelobe levelscanbelower,making it lJlorcdiflicull forsidcJohe jamming.
Ilowever, lheadvantages ofoperaling againsljamlllers al thehigherfrequencies arcbalanced inpartbythedisadvantages ofthehigherfrequencies, especially ahove1.hand,forlong-range air-surveillance radar.
Thenoisethatenterstheradarviatheantenna sidelobes canbereduced bycoherent sidclohe cancelers.
Thisconsists ofoneormoreomnidirectional antennas andcancelation circuitry usedinconjunction withthesignalfromthemainradarantenna.
Jamming noisein theomnidircctionalantennas ismadetocancelthejamming noiseentering thesidelobes ofthe mainantenna.52Anantenna canalsobedesigned tohaveverylowsidelobe levelstoreduce theefTectofsidclobe jamming.
Lowsidelobe antennas requireunobstructed sitingifreflections 1'1'011\nearbyobjectsarcnottodegrade thesidelobe levels.
Byemploying someoralloftheabovetechniques, theeffectofthesidelobe noisejammer canbesignificantly reduced.
Someoftheabovetechniques canalsoreducethejamming that entersviathemainbeam.Theeffectsofmain-beam jamming canbefurther reduced by employing anarrow beamwidth tolimittheregionoverwhichthejamming appears.Ifthe mainbeamcannot hemadenarrow because ofconstraints ontheantenna size,anauxiliary antenna canbeemployed tocreateanotchinthemain-beam radiation pattern inthedirection ofthejammer.
Withadaptive cir~uitry similartothatofthesidelobe canceler, thismai/l-heam lIotchcanbeautomatically adjusted tobemaintained inthedirection ofthejammer.
Multiple radarsviewing thesamecoverage inacoordinated manner canprovide some henefitagainst ajammer sinceitisunlikely thatjamming powercanbedistributed uniformly inspace.Withnettingofradars,thoseradarswithlessjamming canprovide targetdatafor radarswithmorcjamming.
Multiple radarsitcsalsoallowajammer tobelocated bytriangu­ [atio/lwhcnmain-beam jamming dcniesadirectmeasurement ofrange.Thismaybeasatisfac­ torytacticforoneorafewjammers, buttriangulation cannotbeusedwithalargenumber of jammers becausc ofthegeneration ofghosttargets.Njammers canproduceN2-Nghost targetswhcntworadarsattempt triangulation.
Locating thejammer mightnotbeasimportant, however, aslocating theattacking missiles oraircraftscreened bythejammer, especially whenthejamming aircraft isbeyondthe rangeofdffcnsive weapons.
Ajammer thatoperates outside therangeofnorm~1 defenses is knownasasta/ld-of/jammer.
Animportant ECCMtacticistoengagehostilejammers with !roml'-OII-jam (IIOJ)missileguidance.
Ifthejammer isradiating, HOJisgenerally abetter guidance technique thanisradarguidance.
Stand-ofT jammers arealsosubjecttodirectattack hyinterceptor aircraft.
Increasing theradarenergyinthedirection ofthejammer inthehopeofincreasing the radarechopowerabovethejamming noiseiscalledbumthrough.
Thismaybeaccomplished withreservetransmitter powerorbydwelling longerinthedirection ofthejammer.
Dwelling longer Oilatargetreduces thedatarate,andthuscandegrade theoverallradarperformance.
A significant reduction indatarategenerally isnotdesirable.
Dependence onburnthrough asa majorFCCM tacticisquestionable.
Itshould beusedwherecost-elTectivc andwherethe reduction indatarateistolerable.
Impulsive noise,thatcanshock-excite the"narrow-band" radarreceiver andcauseitto ring,canbereduced withtheLambnoise-silencing circuit,53 orDickefix.54Thisconsists ofa widebandIFfilterincascade withalimiter, followed bythenormalIFmatched filter.The 550 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  wideband filter is designed to include most of the spectrum of tlle interfering signal.
Its purposc  is to preserve the short duration of the narrow impulsive spikes.
These spikes arc tl~en clippcd  by the limiter to remove a considerable portion of their energy.
If the large noise spikes are not  limited and are allowed to pass they would sllock-excite tile tlarrowband IF ampliticr and  produce an output pulse much wider in duration than the input pulse.
Therefore the interfer-  ence would be in the receiver for a much longer time and at a higher energy level than when  limited before narrowbanding.
Desired signals which appear simultaneously with the noise  spike might not be detected, but the circuit does not allow the noise to influence the receiver  for a time longer than the duration of a noise spike.
This device depends on tile use of a limiter.
 Limiters, however, can generate undesired spurious responses and small-signal suppression.
 and reduce the improvement factor that can be achieved in MTI processors.
It should therefore  be used with caution as an ECCM device.
If incorporated in a radar, provision should be  included for switching it out of the receiver when it does more harm than good.,  A c*otlsturrt ,/idsc~-alarm riltr (CFAR) receiver is used with automatic detection systems to  keep the false-alarm rate constant as the noise level at the receiver varies (Sec.
10.7).
Wittlo~rt  CFAR the computer in automatic systems can quickly become overloaded and ccasc to  function.
CFAR is sometimes classed as an ECCM, but in reality it is not in [he same category  as other ECCM.
CFAR does not give immunity to jamming; it merely makes operation in  he  presence of jamming more convenient by automatically reducing the effective sensitivity of the  receiver.
If the jamming is severe enough, CFAR can produce almost the same effect as turning  off the receiver.
In a jamming environment, it can lull the radar operator into a false sense of  security since the ideal CFAR, by maintaining the output noise level constant no matter what  the level of the input noise, provides no indication that jamming is present.
Additional means  must be incorporated into a CFAR to provide the operator with warning of the presence of  noise jamming.
 A sensitive receiver with a low noise figure may be desirable in many civilian applications  of radar, but in military applications it is not always an asset since it makes the receiver more  vulnerable to jamming.
Most low-noise receivers also have less dynamic range than one with a.
 mixer front-end.
 Since the jammer power received at the radar varies inversely as the square of the distance  between radar and jammer (one-way propagation), while the radar echo power varies with  distance inversely as the fourth power (two-way propagation), there will be some distance  below which the radar echo will exceed the jammer signal.
This is called the self~scrc~~~tiir~y  rcrnye, or the crossover range, and is approximately  P,, G, cr B, J ~,2, = - - -- -- -  PI, G, 411.
B, S  where PI, = radar transmitter power  I),, = jammer transmitter power  G, = radar antenna gain  Gj =jammer antenna gain  0 = target cross section  B, = jammer bandwidth  B, = radar signal bandwidth  J/S = jammer-to-radar signal (power) ratio at the output of the IF required to mask the  radar signal  A jammer located on a target of cross section a will overpower the radar if the jammer is at a  range R,, or greater.
 550INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS widcband filterisdesigned toincludemostofthespectrum oftheinterfering signal.Itspurpose istopreserve theshortduration ofthenarrowimpulsive spikes.Thesespikesarethenclipped bythelimitertoremoveaconsiderable portionoftheirenergy.Ifthclargenoisespikesarenot limitedandarcallowed topasstheywouldshock-cxcite thenarrowband IFampliticr and produce anoutputpulsemuchwiderinduration thantheinputpulse.Therefore theinterfer­ encewouldbeinthereceiver foramuchlongertimeandatahigherenergylevelthanwhen limitedbeforenarrowbanding.
Desired signalswhichappearsimultaneollsly withthenoise spikemightnotbedetected, butthecircuitdoesnotallowthenoisetointlucnce thereceiver foratimelongerthantheduration ofanoisespike.Thisdevicedepends ontheuseofalimiter.
Limiters, however, cangenerate undesired spurious responses andsmall-signal suppression.
andreducetheimprovement factorthatcanbeachieved inMTIprocessors.
Itshouldtherefore be used withcaution asanECCMdevice.Ifincorporated inaradar,provision shouldbe included forswitching itoutofthereceiver whenitdoesmoreharmthangood'J Acollstalltfalse-a/arm ratt'(CFAR)receiver isusedwithautomatic detection systcms to keepthefalse-alarm rateconstant asthenoiselevelatthereceiver varies(Sec.10.7).Without CFARthecomputer inautomatic systems canquickly become overloaded andceaseto function.
CFARissometimes classedasanECCM, butinrealityitisnotinthesamecategory asotherECCM.CFARdoesnotgiveimmunity tojamming; itmerelymakesoperation inthe presence ofjamming moreconvenient byautomatically reducing theeffective sensitivity ofthe receiver.Ifthejamming issevereenough,CFARcanproduce almostthesameeffcctasturning offthereceiver.
Inajamming environment, itcanlulltheradaroperator intoafalsesenseof security sincetheidealCFAR,bymaintaining theoutputnoiselevelconstant nomatll.~rwhat theleveloftheinputnoise,provides noindication thatjamming ispresent.
Additional means mustbeincorporated intoaCFARtoprovide theoperator withwarning ofthepresence of...nOiseJammIng.
Asensitive receiver withalownoisefiguremaybedesirable inmanycivilianapplications ofradar,butinmilitary applications itisnotalwaysanassetsinceitmakesthereceiver more vulnerable tojamming.
Mostlow-noise receivers alsohavelessdynamic rangethanonewitha· mixerfront-end.
Sincethejammerpowerreceived attheradarvariesinversely asthesquareofthedistance between radarandjammer (one-way propagation), whiletheradarechopowervarieswith distance inversely asthefourthpower(two-way propagation), therewillbesomedistance belowwhichtheradarechowillexceedthejammer signal.Thisiscalledthest'~rscr('etlitlg ratlge,orthecrossover range,andisapproximately R2_P,rGraBjJ $I- -------PoGj41tBrS(14.2H) whereP,r=radartransmitter power J>,j=jammer transmitter power Gr=radarantenna gain Gj=jammer antenna gain a=targetcrosssection Bj=jammer bandwidth Br=radarsignalbandwidth J/S=jammer-to-radar signal(power) ratioattheoutputoftheIFrequired tomaskthe radarsignal Ajammer locatedonatargetofcrosssectionawilloverpower theradarifthejammer isata rangeRssorgreater. OTHER RADAR TOPICS 551  A radar equation for detecting a target in the presence of jamming noise large compared  to receiver noise can be derived by substituting the jammer noise power per hertz received at  the radar for the receiver noise power per hertz, or kT, F,.
The jammer noise power per hertz  at the radar is  where .4,.
= crPtctivc receiving aperture of tlie radar antenna and R = range of jammer from  radar.
Substituting Eq.
(14.29) for k7;, F, in Eq.
(2.54).
the radar equation for a searchlighting  or tr:lcki~~g radar, yields  wlicrc r,, = I!;/, = ir~tcgratio~i tirt~c.
'Tlic system losses have been omitted.
Tlie remaining syrn-  bols I\avc bcc11 dcfirietf i~bove 01- ill Sec.
2.14.
Making tlie same substitution of Eq.
(14.29) into  tlic stir vcillaricc sad31 equation, Eq.
(2.57).
givcs  For jarnr~iing which enters via the antenna sidelobes rather than via the main beam, the  riglit-hand side of the above surveillance radar equation would be multiplied by tlie ratio of  rnaxirnum aliterina gain to tlie gain of the sidelobe in the direction of the jammer.
 Repeater jamming.
A target under observation by a radar can generate false echoes by delay-  ing the received radar signals and rctransrnitting at a slightly later time.
This is accomplished  in a r.cPpcJ~rrcrr.
ictnrrrrrr..
I)claying tlic rctrans;i~ission causes tlie repeated signals to appear at a  range and,/or ajlinlutli diffc~etit fro111 that of the jammer.
Thus the signal from the repeater  gcricrates a false target eclio at tlie output of tlie radar receiver which, in principle, cannot be  distirlgtrislicct fro111 a real targct.
A rr~rc r.illlt>trttJ~- is one wliicli retransmits the same signal that a  target woilld rcr a d' late.
 A rr~~crts~~ott~l~~r~ rcpcatcr plays bxk a stored replica of the radar signal after it is triggered  l~y tile radar.
.I'lie trarisn~ittcd signal is made to resemble the radar signal as closely as  practicable.
Tlie tr;~~isponder might also radiate a noise pulse.
It can be programmed to remain  silent wllcri illur~~irintcd by tl~c main radar bcarri and to transmit only when illumii~ated by tlie  sidclohcs.
creating spurious targets on tlie radar display at directions other than that of the  true targct  A r.trrrccc~-qrto src~c~lt~r is a repeater jammer whose function is to cause a tracking radar to  " hrca k lock " or1 t lie target.
It will be recalled from Sec.
5.6 that a tracking radar can track a  targct it1 range by generating a pair of range gates within tlie radar receiver and adjusting these  gates to center on tlic target.
Tlie tracking radar is said to be " locked on " the target when the  echo is rnaitiiained between tlie two range gates.
As the target moves, the range gates automat-  ically follow.
The range-gate stealer operates by initially transmitting a single pulse in synchro-  nism with each pulse received from the radar, thereby strengthening the target echo.
The  repeater slowly sliifts tile timing of its own pulse transmissions to cause an apparent change in  tlic target range.
If the jamming signal is larger than the echo signal, the radar tracking circuits  will follow the false signal fsorri the jammer arid ignore the weaker echo from the target.
In this  rnanner.
tile repeater "steals" the radar tracking circuits from the target.
The delay between  tllc true cclio arid tlie false eclio car1 be lengtlieried or shortened to sucli an extent that the  OTHER RADAR TOPICS551 Aradarequation fordetecting atargetinthepresence ofjamming noiselargecompared toreceivernoisecanbederivedbysubstituting thejammer noisepowerperhertzreceived at.
theradarforthereceivernoisepowerperhertz,orkToFn•Thejammer noisepowerperhertz attheradaris (14.29) whereA..=effective receiving aperture oftheradarantenna andR=rangeofjammer from radar.Substituting Eq.(14.29)forkl;)F ninEq.(2.54),theradarequation forasearchlighting ortracking radar,yields 11\"(J,(oE j(II) (TBj Hl1lox=4(SIN)'j>.C;.Tr !I))(14.30) (14.31)\",here (II=Iliff'=integration time.Thesystemlosseshavebeenomitted.
Theremaining sym­ holshaveheendefinedahoveorinSec.2.14.Makingthesamesuhstitution ofEq.(14.29)into thesurveillance radarequation, Eq.(2.57),gives R1=~:~~i~'.l~ ~~, max(SIN)!OPrjGj Forjamming whichentersviatheantenna sidelobes ratherthanviathemainbeam,the right-hand sideoftheabovesurveillance radarequation wouldbemultiplied bytheratioof maximum antenna gaintothegainofthesidelobe inthedirection ofthejammer.
Repeater jamming.
/\.targetunderobservation byaradarcangenerate falseechoesbydelay­ ingthereceived radarsignalsand retransmitting ataslightlylatertime.Thisisaccomplished illa"crearcr jamm('/".
Delaying theretrans'mission causestherepeated signalstoappearata rangeand/orazimuth different fromthatofthejammer.
Thusthesignalfromtherepeater generates afalsetargetechoattheoutputoftheradarreceiver which, inprinciple, cannotbe distinguished fromarealtarget./\.(r1/erereater isonewhichretransmits thesamesignalthata targetwouldreradiate.
1\(rw1sl'0lld('/' repeater playshackastoredreplicaoftheradarsignalafteritistriggered hytheradar.Thetransmitted signalismadetoresemble theradarsignalascloselyas practicable.
Thetransponder mightalsoradiateanoisepulse.Itcanbeprogrammed toremain silentwher{illuminated bythemainradarbeamandtotransmit onlywhenillumihated bythe sidelobes, creating spurious targetsontheradardisplayatdirections otherthanthatofthe truetarget.
/\.rclllw-ya(e stealerisarepeaterjammer whosefunction istocauseatracking radarto ..hreaklock" Oilthetarget.ItwillberecalledfromSec.5.6thatatracking radarcantracka targetinrangebygenerating apairofrangegateswithintheradarreceiverandadjusting these gatestocenter 011thetarget.Thetracking radarissaidtobe"lockedon"thetargetwhenthe echoismaintained between thetworange'gates.
Asthetargetmoves,therangegatesautomat­ icallyfollow.Therange-gate stealeroperates byinitiallytransmitting asinglepulseinsynchro­ nismwitheachpuIsereceived fromtheradar,therebystrengthening thetargetecho.The repeater slowlyshiftsthetimingofitsownpulsetransmissions tocauseanapparent changein thetargetrange,Ifthejamming signalislargerthantheechosignal,theradartracking circuits willfollowthefalsesignalfromthejammerandignoretheweakerechofromthetarget.Inthis manner.
therepeater" steals"theradartracking circuitsfromthetarget.Thedelaybetween thetrueechoandthefalseechocanbelengthened orshortened tosuchanextentthatthe range servo limits in the radar receiver are exceeded, or else the repeater can be turned off,  leaving the tracker without a target and forcing it to revert to the search mode.
 CW radars sometimes employ a tunable filter called a velocity gate to track the dopplcr  frequency shift.
A velocity-gate stealer transmits a signal which falsifies the target's speed or  pretends that it is stationary.
 Repeater jammers may also be designed to break conical-scan angle track by transmitting  a signal at the conical-scan frequency.
This will either confilse the operation of the radar  antenna servo or prevent it from following the target.
 A repeater can be very effective against an unprepared radar system.
Repeater jamming,  however, is generally easier to counter than is noise jamming.
Against a properly prepared  radar, repeater jamming can be made to have only minimal effect.
It is difficitlt to design a  repeater jammer that will play back an exact reproduction of the radar signal.
The radar echo  from a target can be considered as being linear, but the signal from a repeater is generally not > linearly related to that which was transmitted by the radar.
Thus one strategy for defeating  repeater jamming is to utilize radar transmissions with a form of identification difficlrlt to  mimic by the "nonlinear" repeater.
Repeater "false echoes" can be unmasked as such by  tltilizing in an unpredictable manner different pulse repetition frequencies, rf freqirencies, pt~lse  widths, internal pulse modulations, or polarizations.
Sidelohe bliinkers can prcvent repeater  signals from entering the radar via the antenna sidelobes and appearing on the display ill  directions different from that of the jammer.
In a tracking radar, circuitry can be devlscri to  prevent range-gate stealers from capturing the range gate.
Monopi~lse tracking radar can be  employed to avoid the vulnerability of conical-scan tracking radars to nlodulations that cause  it to break lock in angle.
 Passive ECM.
The noise jammer and the repeater jammer were examples of active 13CM.
 They internally generate or amplify electromagnetic energy, which is then radiated.
Passive  electronic countermeasures do not generate or amplify electromagnetic radiation.
They act in  a passive manner to change the energy reflected back to the radar.
Examples of passive ECM  are chafj decoys, and radar cross-section redirction.
 One of the earliest forms of countermeasures used against radar was cl~c!l/: Chaff consists  of a large number of dipole reflectors, usually in the form of metallic foil strips packagect as a  bundle.
Tlle many foil strips constituting tlte chaff bundle, on being released Srgnl all iiircraft,  are scattered by the wind and blossom to form a highly reflecting cloud.
A relatively small  buttdle of chaff can form a cloud with a radar cross section comparable to that of u large  aircraft.
 Chaff is used either to deceive or to confilse.
Sl~or cv/ic!lj'is tile nilme ~rst~aily associated wit11  t1te ~Ieceptio~l role, while col.ritlor c/ic!lj'is a conl'ilsion cotl1ltesrncast11'e.
Spot cl~irl'l'is clr.opl>cd its  individual bundles which appear as additional targets on the radar in an effort to deceive the  operator as to their true nature.
 A chaff corridor is produced by airscraft continuously releasing chaff to form a long  corridorlike cloud through which following aircraft can fly undetected.
Tlie effect is to mask  tile aircraft, much like a smoke screen.
 Chaff is a relatively slow moving target compared with aircraft.
Its vertical descent is  determined by gravity and by the drag characteristics of the individi~al foil strips.
Its Iiosi~oii-  tal component of velocity depends on the wind.
Chaff may be distinguished from moving  aircraft targets on the basis of its slower velocity.
Discrimination is performed eitlicr by tlic  radar operator or automatically with MTI.
 Chaff dropped from an aircraft can also be used to "break lock" or1 tracking radars; that  is, if a tracking radar is "locked on" and following a particular target, the dropping of cllaff  might cause the tracker to follow the chaff and not the target.
 552INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS rangeservolimitsintheradarreceiver areexceeded, orelsetherepeater canbeturnedoff, leavingthetrackerwithout atargetandforcingittoreverttothesearchmode.
CWradarssometimes employ atunable filtercalledavelocity gatetotrackthedoppler frequency shift.Avelocity=gate stealertransmits asignalwhichfalsifiesthetarget'sspeedor pretends thatitisstationary.
Repeater jammers mayalsobedesigned tobreakconical-scan angletrackbytransmitting asignalattheconical-scan frequency.
Thiswilleitherconfuse theoperation oftheradar antenna servoorprevent itfromfollowing thetarget.
Arepeater canbeveryeffective againstanunprepared radarsystem.Repeater jamming, however, isgenerally easiertocounter thanisnoisejamming.
Against aproperly prepared radar,repeater jamming canbemadetohaveonlyminimal effect.Itisdifficult todesigna repeater jammer thatwiJ.lplaybackanexactreproduction oftheradarsignal.Theradarecho fromatargetcanbeconsidered asbeinglinear,butthesignalfromarepeater isgenerally not linearly relatedtothatwhichwastransmitted byt,heradar.ThusonestrategyCdrdefeating repeater jamming istoutilizeradartransmissions withaformofidentification difficult to mimicbythe"nonlinear" repeater.
Repeater "Calseechoes" canbeunmasked assuchby utilizing inanunpredictable mannerdifferent pulserepetition frequencies, rffrequencies, pulse widths,internal pulsemodulations, orpolarizations.
Sidelobe blankers canprevent repeater signalsfromentering theradarviatheantenna sidelohes andappearing onthedisplay in directions different fromthatofthejammer.
Inatracking radar,circuitry canheLkvised to prevent range-gate stealersfromcapturing therangegate.Monopulse tracking radarcanhe employed toavoidthevulnerability ofconical-scan tracking radarstomodulations thatcause ittobreaklockinangle.
PassiveECM.Thenoisejammer andtherepeater jammer wereexamples ofactiveECM.
Theyinternally generate oramplify electromagnetic energy, whichisthenradiated.
Passive electronic countermeasures donotgenerate oramplifyelectromagnetic radiation.
Theyactin apassivemannertochangetheenergyreflected backtotheradar.Examples ofpassiveECM arechafr.decoys,andradarcross-section redllction.
Oneoftheearliestformsofcountermeasures usedagainstradarwas cJl(~frChaffconsists ofalargenumberofdipolereflectors, usuallyintheformofmetallic foilstripspackaged asa bundle.Themanyfoilstripsconstituting thechaffbundle,onbeingreleased fn,Hllanaircraft, arescattered bythewindandblossom toformahighlyreflecting cloud.Arelat!vely small bundleofchaffcanformacloudwitharadarcrosssectioncomparable tothatofalarge aircrart.
Chaffisusedeithertodeceiveortoconfuse.
S/)(}(chqfj'istheIlameusuallyassociated with thedeception role,whilecorridor cJ/l~fnsaconfusion countermeasure.
Spotchaffisdropped as individual bundles whichappearasadditional targetsontheradarinanefforttodeceivethe operator astotheirtruenature.
Achaffcorridor isproduced byair.craft continuously releasing chafftoformalong corridorlike cloudthrough whichfollowing aircraftcanflyundetected.
Theeffectistomask theaircraft, muchlikeasmokescreen.
Chaffisarelatively slowmoving targetcompared withaircraft.
Itsvertical descent is determined bygravityandbythedragcharacteristics oftheindividual foilstrips,Itshorizon­ talcomponent ofvelocity depends onthewind.Chaffmaybedistinguished frommoving aircrafttargetsonthebasisofitsslowervelocity.
Discrimination isperformed eitherhythe radaroperator orautomatically withMTI.
Chaffdropped fromanaircraftcanalsobeusedto"breaklock"ontracking radars;that is,ifatracking radaris"lockedon"andfollowing aparticular target,thedropping ofchaff mightcausethetrackertofollowthechaffandnotthetarget. ('IlafP was a very clfcctivc countcrliieasilrc wlictl used with tlic rcliltivcly slow bomber  aircraft of World War 11.
With modern high-speed aircraft, a bundle of chaff quickly separates  from the dispensirig aircraft and makes the job of discriminating between target and chaff  easier.
However, chaff need not be sii~lply dropped from the target.
It can be dispensed fro111  aerial rockets and fired ahead, behind, above, or below the target aircraft.
Forward-shot chaff  car1 deceive the range and velocity tracking gates of tracking radars.
 Tl~e effects of chafican be reduced by a ptoperly designed MTI.
The design of an MTI to  detect ~iiovirig targets in char is different from the design of an MTI for surface clutter since  the chaff is generally ill motion.
The MTI must be capable of coping with moving, rather than  statioiiary.
clutter.
Iii this regard the MTI design is more like that for detecting targets in  wcatllcr clutter.
I'lie MTI design is further cornplicated if tile moving chaff appears in the same  resolution cell as stationary surface clutter.
The MTI must then be made to cancel simulta-  neously both stationary surface clutter and moving volume clutter.
High range and angle  resolutiori is another technique effective in reducing the amount of clutter with which the  target must conipete.
 A decoy is a srnall aircraftlike vellicle made to appear to the radar as a realistic target.
If  tlie decoy and the aircraft are made indistinguishable to tlie radar, the radar operator may bc  deceived into thinking the decoy is hostile and commit a weapon to attack.
If sufficient decoys  ;\re present, the defense system could be overloaded.
 A small aircraft or missile decoy call be designed to have a radar cross section cotnparablc  with that of a large aircraft by fitting it wit11 radar signal enhancement devices such as corner  reflectors, Lutleburg reflectors, or active repeaters.
The decoy could also be outfitted with a  srnall jammer to mimic jammers on the target aircraft in order to make the two appear  identical.
 Decoys might be carried on board attacking bomber aircraft and launched outside the  normal radar detection ranges.
Since decoys can be made to closely resemble real targets, and  since a decoy might conceivably carry a bomb, one defensive strategy would be to destroy all  unfriendly targets, itlcluding known decoys.
 Reducing the radar cross section of the target by proper shaping is another possible  passive countermeasure.
A target with doubly curved surfaces (curvature in two dimensions)  will have small cross section.
It should not have any flat, cylindrical, or conical surfaces which  might be illuminated by the incident radar wave from a direction along the normal to the  surface.
The cone-sphere, described in Sec.
(2.7), is a good example of a target shape that yields  a low val,ue of cross section over a wide range of angles.
 The radar cross section of a target can also be reduced by ele~troma~neiic absorbent  n~aterials.~' One type of electrorriagrietic absorber is based on destructive interference.
It is a  quarter wavelengtli thick arid designed so that energy reflected from the front surface cancels  tllc energy wllicli enters tile rriaterial and is reflected from the inner surface.
A destructive  iriterference absorber is atialogous to the antireflection coatings applied to optical lenses.
It is  inherently narrowband.
 Another type of absorber is one which internally dissipates the energy incident upon it.
It  is irsually mucli thicker than the destructive interference absorber but has the advantage of  being broadband.
Relatively thin absorbers, however, can be obtained with magnetic materials  having appropriate dielectric proper tie^.^^.'^^.'^^  14.6 BISTATIC  RADAR^'.^^  Throughout this book, it has been assumed that a common antenna is used for both transmit-  ting and receiving.
Such a radar is called ntotlostatic.
A bistatic radar is one in which the  tranqrnitting arid receiving aritenrlas are separated by a considerable distance (Fig.
14.12).
If  OTHER RAlJAR TOPICS55) Chaffwasaveryeffective countermeasure whcnusedwiththerelatively slowbomber aircraftofWorldWarn.Withmodern high-speed aircraft, abundleofchaffquicklyseparates· fromthedispensing aircraftandmakesthejobofdiscriminating betwecn targetandchaff easier.However, chaffneednotbesimplydropped fromthetarget.Jtcanbedispensed from aerialrocketsandfiredahead,behind,above,orbelowthetargetaircraft.
Forward-shot chaff candeceive therangeandvelocity tracking gatesoftracking radars.
Theeffectsofchaffcanbereduced byaproperly designed MTI.ThedesignofanMTIto detectmoving targetsinchaffisdifferent fromthedesignofanMTIforsurfacecluttersince thechaffisgenerally inmotion.TheMTImustbecapableofcopingwithmoving, ratherthan stationary, clutter.
InthisregardtheMTIdesignismorelikethatfordetecting targetsin weather cluller.TheMTIdesignisfurthercomplicated ifthemovingchaffappears inthesame resolution cellasstationary surfacec1uller.TheMTImustthenbemadetocancelsimulta­ neously bothstationary surface clutterandmoving volume clutter.
Highrangeandangle resolution isanother technique effective inreducing theamount ofclutterwithwhichthe targetmustcompete.
Adecoyisasmallaircraftlikevehiclemadetoappeartotheradarasarealistic target.If thedecoyandtheaircraftaremadeindistinguishable totheradar,theradaroperator maybe deceived intothinking thedecoyishostileandcommit aweapontoattack.lfsufficient decoys areprescnt, thedefensesystemcouldbeoverloaded.
Asmallaircraftormissiledecoycanbedesigned tohavearadarcrosssectioncomparable withthatofalargeaircraftbyfittingitwithradarsignalenhancement devicessuchascorner rcOcctors, Luncburg reOcctors, oractiverepeaters.
Thedecoycouldalsobeoutfitted witha smalljammer tomimicjammers onthetargetaircraft inordertomakethetwoappear identical.
Decoys mightbecarriedonboardattacking bomber aircraftandlaunched outsidethe normalradardetection ranges.Sincedecoyscanbemadetocloselyresemble realtargets,and sinceadecoymightconceivably carryabomb,onedefensive strategy wouldbetodestroyall unfriendly targets,including knowndecoys.
Reducing theradarcrosssectionofthetargetbypropershaping isanother possible passivecountermeasure.
Atargetwithdoublycurvedsurfaces (curvature intwodimensions) willhavesmallcrosssection.Itshouldnothaveanyflat,cylindrical, orconicalsurfaces which mightbeilluminated bytheincident radarwavefromadirection alongthenormaltothe surface.Thecone-sphere, described inSec.(2.7),isagoodexample ofatargetshapethatyields alowvalueofcrosssectionoverawiderangeofangles.
\ .
Theradarcrosssectionofatargetcanalsobereduced byelectromagnetic absorbent materials.
SSOnetypeofelectromagnetic absorber isbasedondestructive interference.
Itisa quarter wavelength thickanddesigned sothatenergyretlected fromthefrontsurfacecancels theenergywhichentersthematerial andisreOected fromtheinnersurface.
Adestructive interference absorber isanalogous totheantireOection coatings appliedtoopticallenses.Itis inherently narrowband.
Another typeofabsorber isonewhichinternally dissipates theenergyincident uponit.It isusuallymuchthickerthanthedestructive interference absorber buthastheadvantage of beingbroadband.
Relatively thinabsorbers, however, canbeobtained withmagnetic materials havingappropriate dielectric properties.99.100.104 14.6BISTATIC RAOAR57.58 Throughout thisbook,ithasbeenassumed thatacommon antenna isusedforbothtransmit­ tingandreceiving.
SucharadariscalledmOlJostatic.
Abistaticradarisoneinwhichthe transmitting andreceiving antennas areseparated byaconsiderable distance (Fig.14.12).If 554 1NTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  Figure 14.12 Geometry of a bistatic radar.
 ,o many separated receivers are employed with one transmitter, the radar system is called n~ltlrr- *%  static.
Some of the characteristics, capabilities, and limitations of the bistatic radar w~ll be ,?  described in this section and compared with the more usual monostatic radar.
 Any radar which employs separate antennas for transmitting and receiving might he  called bistatic, but for purposes of this disct~ssion a bistatic radar is assumed to be one in whicti  tlie separation between transmitter and receiver is comparable with the target distance.
For  aircraft targets, the separations might be of the order of a few lniies to as much as several  hundred miles.
For satellite targets the separation might be hundreds or even thousands of  miles.
A distinction is made between radars with closely spaced antennas and radars with  widely spaced antennas because the former resemble the conventional monostatic radar more  than the type of bistatic radar to be discussed here.
 Description.
The bistatic radar is not a new concept.
Its principle was known and  demonstrated many years before the development of practical monostatic radar.
In Sec.
1.5 it  was mentioned that the first "radar" observations in both the United States and in Great  Britain were made with separated CW transmitters and receivers.
These early radars were  known as wave-interference equipments but were the same as what would now be called  bistatic radar.
Taylor and Young of the Naval Research Laboratory first demonstrated bistatic  radar for the detection of ships in 1922.
Their work was disclosed in a patent issued in 1934.~~  The early experiments with wave-interference (bistatic) radar led to the development of mono-  static radar in the late 1930s in both this country a11d abroad.
Further development was put  aside after the demonstration of the more versatile monostatic-radar principle.
Bistatic radar  lay dormant for about fifteen years until it was "reinvented " in the early 1950s and received  new intere~t.~'  Separating the transmitter and receiver in the histatic radar results in considerably differ-  ent radar characteristics than those obtained with the monostatic radar.
The physical  configuration of a bistatic radar is closer to that of a point-to-point microwave communica-  tions system than to the usual scanning monostatic radar.
In fact, bistatic-radar detection of  aircraft with point-to-point communications systems has often been reported in the literature.
 Perhaps the most common manifestation of the principle of the bistatic radar is the rhythmic  flickering observed in a TV picture when an aircraft passes overhead, especially if the television  receiver is tuned to a weak channel.
 The inherent geometry of the bistatic radar is more suited to a fixed (nonscanning)  fencelike coverage as in Fig.
14.12, as is obtained with fixed antennas generating fan beams.
 554iNTRODUCTiON TORADAR SYSTEMS Receiver-16 1-<------- Db---------1 Figure14.12Geometry ofahistaticradar.
manyseparated receivers areemployed withonetransmiuer, theradarsystemiscalled /1l1l/cj­ staCie.Someofthecharacteristics, capabilities, andlimitations ofthe bistatic radarwillbe described inthissectionandcompared withthemoreusualmonostatic radar.
Anyradarwhichemploys separate antennas fortransmitting andreceiving mighthe calledbistatic,butforpurposes ofthisdiscussion abistaticradarisassumed tobeoneinwhich theseparation between transmitter andreceiver iscomparable withthetargetdistance.
For aircrafttargets,theseparations mightbeoftheorderofafewmilestoasmuchasseveral hundred miles.Forsatellite targetstheseparation mightbehundreds oreventhousands of miles.Adistinction ismadebetween radarswithcloselyspacedantennas andradarswith widelyspacedantennas because theformerresemble theconventional monostatic radarmore thanthetypeofbistaticradartobediscussed here.
Description.
Thebistatic radarisnotanewconcept.
Itsprinciple wasknown and demonstrated manyyearsbeforethedevelopment ofpractical monostatic radar.InSec.1.5it wasmentioned thatthefirst"radar"observations inboththeUnitedStatesandinGreat Britainweremadewithseparated CWtransmitters andreceivers.
Theseearlyradarswere knownaswave-interference equipments butwerethesameaswhatwouldnowbecalled bistaticradar.TaylorandYoungoftheNavalResearch Laboratory firstdemonstrated bistatic radarforthedetection ofshipsin1922.Theirworkwasdisclosed inapatentissuedin1934.59 Theearlyexperiments withwave-interference (bistatic) radarledtothedevelopment ofmono­ staticradarinthelate1930sinboththiscountry andabroad.
Further development wasput asideafterthedemonstration ofthemoreversatile monostatic-radar principle.
Bistaticradar laydormant foraboutfifteenyearsuntilitwas"reinvented" intheearly1950sandreceived newinterest.6o Separating thetransmitter andreceiverinthebistaticradarresultsinconsiderably differ­ entradarcharacteristics thanthoseobtained withthemonostatic radar.Thephysical configuration ofabistaticradarisclosertothatofapoint-to-point microwave communica­ tionssystemthantotheusualscanning monostatic radar.Infact,histatic-radar detection of aircraftwithpoint-to-point communications systems hasoftenbeenreported intheliterature.
Perhaps themostcommon manifestation oftheprinciple ofthehistaticradaristherhythmic flickering observed inaTVpicturewhenanaircraftpassesoverhead, especially ifthetelevision receiver istunedtoaweakchannel.
Theinherent geometry ofthebistaticradarismoresuitedtoafixed(nonscanning) fencelike coverage asinFig.14.12,asisobtained withfixedantennas generating fanbeams. OTHER RADAR TOPICS 555  The fence coverage of the bistatic radar is seen to be quite different from the hemispherical  coverage of tile motiostatic radar.
Similar coverage can also be obtained with the monostatic  radar by operating wit11 fixed, rather tila11 scanning, antennas.
 The radiated signal f~om tlie bistatic transmitter as shown in Fig.
14.12 arrives at the  receiver via two sepa~atc putlis, one being tlle dirx~ct patli from transmitter to receiver, tlie  otlicr [wing tlie sc.trttt>r.cd pat11 wliich includes the target.
Tlie measurements which can be  made at thc bistatic rccciver arc:  1.
7.11~ total pat11 le~igtli (L), + L),), of tra~isit time, of the scattered signal.
 2.
The angle of arrival of the scattered signal.
 3.
I'he frequency of tlie direct arid tlie scattered signals.
These will be differknt if the target is in  motion (doppler effect).
 A knowledge of tlie transmitted signal is necessary at the receiver site if the maximum  information is to be extracted from the scattered signal.
The transmitted frequency is needed to  determine tlie doppler frequency shift.
A time or phase reference is also required if the total  scattered patti lengtli (D, + D,) is to be measured.
The frequency reference can be obtained  from the direct signal.
The time reference also can be obtained from the direct signal provided  tlie distance D, between transmitter and receiver is known.
If the separation between transmit-  ter arid receiver is sufficiently large.
the direct signal will be highly attenuated by propagation  losses and niiglit be too weak to be detected at the receiver.
(The signal scattered by the target  will riot be highly attenuated if tlie target lies above the radar line of sight, but the direct signal  milst overcome the losses due to its over-the-horizon path.) Wheri the direct signal is not  avnilabll: at the rccciver, its furiction may be performed by a stable clock or reference oscillator  synclironized to tlie transmitter.
It will be assumed, therefore, that a knowledge of the trans-  niittcd signal is always available at the receiver, whether from the direct signal or from a  suitable reference clock.
 The bistatic radar can be operated with either a pulse modulation or CW, just as can a  rnonostatic radar.
The simplicity of CW or modulated CW has an advantage in the bistatic  radar, not usually enjoyed by rnonostatic radar.
A CW radar requires considerable isolation  between transtnitter arid receiver to prevent the transmitted signal from leaking into the  receiver, Isolation is obtained in the bistat ic radar because of the inherent separation bet wee11  t rarisniitter and receiver.
 4  Information available from the bistatic-radar signal.
Radar, whet her bistatic or monostatic, is  capable of determining (1) the prrseilcr of a target (of sufficient size) within the coverage of tlie  radar.
(2) the [occitiot~ of the target position in space, and (3) a cornpotlent ofvelocity (doppler)  relative to the radar.
 The method of locating the target position is similar in either radar.
Both require the  measurement of a distance arid the angle of arrival in two orthogonal angular coordinates.
The  distance measured by the bistatic radar is the sum S = D, + D,, the total scattered path.
 Tlie slim D, + D, locates the target somewhere on the surface of a prolate spheroid (an ellipse  rotated ahout its major axis) wliose two foci are at the location of the transmitter and receiver.
 To further localize the target position the scattered-signal angle of arrival is required at  tlie receiver.
The intersection of the ray defined by the angle of arrival and the surface of  tlle prolate splieroid dctcrnii~ics tl~ position of tlie target ill space.
 Applying tlie law of cosines to tlie geometry of Fig.
14.12 gives  Df = D: + D: - 2D,Db cos rl/, (14.32)  OTHER RADAR TOPICS555 Thefencecoverage ofthebistaticradarisseentobequitedifferent fromthehemispherical coverage ofthemonoslatic radar.Similarcoverage canalsobeobtained withthemonostatic radarbyoperating withfixed.ratherthanscanning, antennas.
Theradiated signalfromthebistatictransmitter asshowninFig.14.12arrivesatthe receiver viatwoseparate paths.onebeingthedirectpathfromtransmitter toreceiver.
thc otherbeingthescattered pathwhichincludes thetarget.Themeasurements whichcanbe madeatthebistatic receiver are: l.Thetotalpathlength(Dr+Dr).01'transittime,ofthescattcred signal.
2.Theangleofarrivalofthescattered signal.
J.Thefrequcncy ofthedirectandthescattcred signals.Thesewillbedifferent ifthetargetisin motion(doppler cffect).
/\knowledge ofthetransmitted signalisnecessary atthereceiver siteifthemaximum information istobeextracted fromthescattered signal.Thetransmitted frequency isneededto determine thedoppler frequency shift.Atimeorphasereference isalsorequired ifthetotal scattered pathlcngth(Dr+Dr)istobemeasured.
Thefrequency reference canbeobtained fromthedirectsignal.Thetimereference alsocanbeobtained fromthedirectsignalprovided thedistance D"between transmitter andreceiver isknown.Iftheseparation between transmit­ terandreceiver issufficiently large.thedirectsignalwillbehighlyattenuated bypropagation lossesandmightbetooweaktobcdetectcd atthereceiver.
(Thesignalscattered bythetarget willnotbehighlyattenuated ifthetargetliesabovetheradarlineofsight,butthedirectsignal mustovercome thelossesduetoitsover-the-horizon path.)Whenthedirectsignalisnot availabk atthcreceiver.
itsfUllction maybeperformed byastableclockorreference oscillator synchronized tothetransmitter.
Itwillbeassumed, therefore.
thataknowledge ofthetrans­ mittedsignalisalwaysavailable atthereceiver, whether fromthedirectsignalorfroma suitahlc reference clock.
Thebistaticradarcanbeoperated witheitherapulsemodulation orCW,justascana monostatic radar.Thesimplicity ofCWormodulated CWhasanadvantage inthebistatic radar.notusuallyenjoyed bymonostatic radar.ACWradarrequires considerable isolation between transmitter andreceiver toprevent thetransmitted signalfromleaking intothe receiver.
Isolation isobtained inthebistaticradarbecauseoftheinherent separation between transmitter andreceiver.
( Information available fromthebistatic-radar signal.Radar,whether bistaticormonostatic, is capableofdetermining (1)thepresellce ofatarget(.ofsufficient size)withinthecoverage ofthe radar.(2)thelocation ofthetargetposition inspace,and(3)acomponellt ofvelocity(doppler) relativetotheradar.
Themethod oflocating thetargetposition issimilarineitherradar.Bothrequirethe measurement ofadistance andtheangleofarrivalintwoorthogonal angular coordinates.
The distancc measured bythebistatic radaristhesumS=D,+Dr.thetotalscattered path.
ThesumD,+Drlocatesthetargetsomewhere onthesurfaceofaprolatespheroid (anellipse rotatedaboutitsmajoraxis)whosetwofociareatthelocation ofthetransmitter andreceiver.
Tofurtherlocalize thetargetposition thescattered-signal angleofarrivalisrequired at thereceiver.
Theintersection oftheraydefined bytheangleofarrivalandthesurfaceof theprolatesphcroid determincs tl'cposition ofthetargetillspace.
Applying thelawofcosincstothegeometry ofFig.14.12gives D~=D;+D~-2DrDbcost/Jr (14.32) where I), is the angle of arrival measured in the plane of the fence, here assiinlcd to he vertical.
 The bistatic radar can measure t,b, and S = D, + Dr.
The separation 11, between transmitter  and receiver is assumed known.
Equation (14.32) may be written  The above equation locates the target in the plane of the angle $,.
.
The location of the target in  the third dimension is found from the measurement of the orthogonal angle coordinate 11/,  (not shown in Fig.
14.12).
 When the sum S = D, + Dr approaches the base-line distance Dbr the prolate sphcroid  degenerates into a'straight line joining the two foci.
Under these conditions, the location of the  target position is indeterminate other than that it lies somewhere along the line joining tile  transmitter and receiver.
.)  Locati'ng a target with bistatic radar is not unlike locating a target with monostatic radar.
 The latter measures the total path length from radar to target to receiver just as does the  bistatic radar.
Since the two parts of the path are equal, the distance to the target is one-half  the total path length.
The distance or range measurement in the monostatic radar locates tlic  target on the surface of a sphere.
(The spt~ere is the limiting case of the prolate spllcroid wlle11  the separation between the two foci becomes zero.) Hence the target position is found with  monostatic radar as the intersection of a ray (defined by the angle of arrival) and tlle surface of  a sphere.
 The doppler beat frequencyj; between the scattered and direct signals in the bistatic radar  is proportional to the time rate of change of the total path length of the scattered signal,  where II is the wavelength of the transmitted signal.
The doppler frequency shift provides a  means for discriminating stationary objects from moving targets, but it is r~or a measure of the  radial velocity as with the monostatic radar.
In principle, it is possible to determine tlle  trajectory of the target from doppler measurements only.57  Bistatic radar measurements.
The measurements made with a bistatic radar art: similar to  those of the conventional monostatic radar except they are usually more complicated and  difficult to accomplish.
The measurement of distance relative to one of the sites requires a  knowledge of both the angle of arrival at the receiving site and the distance between transmit-  ter and receiver, as was indicated by Eq.
(14.33).
Any of the methods for measuring range with  a monostatic radar can be applied to bistatic radar, including pulse and FM-CW modulations.
 If the direct signal from the transmitter is available at the receiving site, it can bc trsed as a  reference sig~~al to extract the doppler frequency shift.
However, the direct signal can serlo~isly  interfere with the measurement of the angle of arrival, just as does a multipath signal.
To  extract the angular location of the target, the direct signal must be separated in some manner  from the target signals.
This is not an easy task since the angles of arrival of the direct anti  scattc~.cd sig~lals are generally close to one anotller wllen tlie histatic radar is alru~igod lo  provide fence coverage.
 Bistatic Radar equation.
The simple form of the radar equation for monostatic radar is given  by the familiar expression  PI G2112a, P, = monostatic (47~)~ R~ L; L,  (14.34)556INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS where1/1,.istheangleofarrivalmeasured intheplaneofthefence,hereassumed tobevertical.
Thebistaticradarcanmeasure I/IeandS=D,+Dr.Theseparation Dbbetween transmitter andreceiver isassumed kQ9wn.
Equation (14.32)mayhewritten S2-Dl Dr=2(5_Dbcostfie) (14.33) Theahoveequation locatesthetargetintheplaneoftheangletfi,..Thelocation ofthetargetin thethirddimension isfoundfromthemeasurement oftheorthogonal anglecoordinate 1/1() (notshowninFig.14.12).
Whenthesum5=D,+Drapproaches thebase-line distance Db,theprolatespheroid degenerates intoa'straight linejoiningthetwofoci.Undertheseconditions, thelocation ofthe targetposition isindeterminate otherthanthatitliessomewhere alongthelinejoiningthe transmitter andreceiver.
,J Locating atargetwithbistaticradarisnotunlikelocating atargetwithmonostatic radar.
Thelattermeasures thetotalpathlengthfromradartotargettoreceiver justasdoesthe bistaticradar.Sincethetwopartsofthepathareequal,thedistance tothetargetisone-half thetotalpathlength.Thedistance orrangemeasurement inthemonostatic radarlocatesthe targetonthesurfaceofasphere.(Thesphereisthelimiting caseoftheprolatespheroid when theseparation between thetwofocibecomes zero.)Hencethetargetposition isfoundwith monostatic radarastheintersection ofaray(defined bytheangleofarrival)andthesurfaceof asphere.
Thedoppler beatfrequency Jdbetween thescattered anddirectsignalsinthebistaticradar isproportional tothetimerateofchangeofthetotalpathlengthofthescattered signal, fd=11:t(D,+Dr)I where,{isthewavelength ofthetransmitted signal.Thedoppler frequency shiftprovides a meansfordiscriminating stationary objectsfrommovingtargets,butitislIorameasure ofthe radialvelocity aswiththemonostatic radar.Inprinciple, itispossible todetermine the trajectory ofthetargetfromdoppler measurements only.57 Bistatic radarmeasurements.
Themeasurements madewithabistaticradararcsimilarto thoseoftheconventional monostatic radarexcepttheyareusuallymorecomplicated and difficult toaccomplish.
Themeasurement ofdistance relativetooneofthesitesrequires a knowledge ofboththeangleofarrivalatthereceiving siteandthedistance between transmit­ terandreceiver, aswasindicated byEq.(14.33).Anyofthemethods formeasuring rangewith amonostatic radarcanbeappliedtobistaticradar,including pulseandFM-CW modulations.
Ifthedirectsignalfromthetransmitter isavailable atthereceiving site,itcanbelIsedasa reference signaltoextractthedoppler frequency shift.However, thedirectsignalcanseriously interfere withthemeasurement oftheangleofarrival,justasdoesamullipatl1 signal.To extracttheangular location ofthetarget,thedirectsignalmustbeseparated insomemanner fromthetargetsignals.Thisisnotaneasytasksincetheanglesofarrivalofthedirectand scattered signalsaregenerally closetooneanother whenthebistaticradarisarrangl:d to provide fencecoverage.
BistaticRadarequation.
Thesimpleformoftheradarequation formonostatic radarisgiven bythefamiliar expression p,G2,{2(Jm Pr=(41t)3R4L~Lsmonostatic (1435) where P, = received signal power, W  P, = transmitted power, W  (; = antenna gain  /, = wavelength.
rn  rr, = monostatic cross section (backscatter).
m2  R = range to target, m  I-, = orie-way pr opiigatiori loss  L, = systelil losses  'I'lte correspondirlg equation for tile bistatic radar is  \\lli*rc (;, - 11;\11~11iittirig ;111terlr1;1 g;~iri ill dirt'ction of target  (;, = rcccivir~g arltcrlrla gi1i11 ill dircctior~ ol' target  rr, = I4sl;\tic cross sectioti.
m 2  I), = irarlsrnitter-to-hr gct distallcc, 111  I), = receiver-to-target distance, 111  L,(r) = propagation loss over trarisn~itter-to-target path  L,(r) = propagation loss over receiver-to-target path  Equations (14.35) and (14.36) represetit but one of the several forms in which the radar  equation may be written.
They are not meant to be complete descriptions of the performance  or radar systems since they do not cxplicitly include many important factors, but they are  suitable if or~ly relative comparisons are to be made.
 Target cross section.
The radar cross section oh of a target illuminated by a bistatic radar is a  measure of the energy scattered in the direction of the receiver.
Ellstatic radar cross sections for  various-sllaped objects have been reported in the literat~re.~' 68 TWO cases of bistatic radar  cross section will be considered.
In one the scattering angle P (defined in Fig.
14.12) is exactly  ccjt~al to 180".
In the otlicr, /I can take any value except 180".
 Consider first the case wlicre P # 18U0, for which the following theorem applies: " in tlic  limit of vanishing wavelengtl~ the bistatic cross section for the transmitter direction k^ and  rcceiver direclion ;I, is cqilal to the monostatic cross section for the transmitter-receiver  direction k + ;I, with k^ i: il,, for bodies which are sufficiently smooth." In the preceding.
is  the unit vector directed from the transmitter to the target and ;lo is the unit vector directed  from the receiver to tlic target.
The target is assumed to be located at the origin of the  coordinate systern.
This theorem permits bistatic cross sections to be determined from mono-  static cross sections provided the conditions under which the theorem is valid are met.
 It may be concluded from the above theorem that as long as P # 180" the rouge ofvalues  of bistatic cross section for a particular target will be comparable with the ratye of values of  monostatic cross section.
This does rlot necessarily imply that a monostatic radar and a  bistatic radar viewing the same target 'will see the same cross section.
In some cases the  monostatic cross section will be greater; in others, the bistatic cross section will be greater.
But  on the average, the two will vary over comparable values.
 The case where = 180" (forward scatter) is not covered by the above theorem.
The  forward-scatter cross section can be many times the monostatic (backscatter) cross section.
 Siege1 has sllowrl that the forward-scatter cross section of a target with projected area A is  uf = 411,4*/R2, where A, the wavelength of the radiation, is assumed small compared with the  OHlER RADAR TOPICS557 wherePr=received signalpower,W P,=transmitted power,W G=antenna gain ).=wavelength, m (Tm=monostatic crosssection(backscatter), m2 R=rangetotarget.m Lp=one-way propagation loss L.=systemlosses Thecorresponding equation forthebistaticradaris bistatic (14.36) will'll:(;/.,-transmitting antenna gainindirection oftarget (ir=receiving antenna gainindirection oftarget rr~=histaticcrosssection.
m2 /),=transmitter-tn-target distance.
III [)r=receiver-to-target distance, m Lp(t)=propagation lossoverIransmitter-to-target path Lp(r)=propagation lossoverreceiver-to-target path Equations (14.35)and(14.36)represent butoneoftheseveral formsinwhichtheradar equation maybewritten.Theyarenotmeanttobecomplete descriptions oftheperformance ofradarsystcms sincctheydonotexplicitly includemanyimportant factors, buttheyare suilable ifonlyrelativecomparisons arctobemade.
Targetcrosssection.
Theradarcrosssection 0bofatargetilluminated byabistaticradarisa measure oftheenergyscattered inthedirection ofthereceiver.
Bistaticradarcrosssections for various-shaped objectshavebeenreported intheliterature.6o68Twocasesofbistaticradar crosssectionwillbeconsidered.
Inonethescattering anglef3(defined inFig.14.12)isexactly equal10IHOO.Inlheolher,fJcanlakeanyvalueexcept1800 • Consider firstthecascwherefJ=1=180°,forwhichthefollowing theorem applies:"Inthe limitofvanishing wavelength thebistaticcrosssectionforthetransmitter directionkand receiver direction ;10isequaltothemonostatic crosssection forthetransmitter-receiver direclionk+frowithk=1=;'0forbodieswhicharesufficiently smooth." Inthepreceding,kis theunitvectordirected fromthetransmitter tothetargetand110istheunitvectordirected fromthereceiver tothetarget.Thetargetisassumed tobelocatedattheoriginofthe coordinate system.Thistheorem permitsbistaticcrosssections tobedetermined frommono­ staticcrosssections provided theconditions underwhichthetheorem isvalidaremet.
Itmaybeconcluded fromtheabovetheorem thataslongasf3=1=1800therangeofvalues ofbistaticcrosssectionforaparticular targetwillbecomparable withtherangeofvaluesof monostatic crosssection.
Thisdoesnotnecessarily implythatamonostatic radaranda bislatic radarviewing thesametarget·willseethesamecrosssection.
Insomecasesthe monostatic crosssectionwillbegreater; inothers,thebistaticcrosssectionwillbegreater.
But ontheaverage, thetwowillvaryovercomparable values.
Thecasewheref3=180°(forward scatter) isnotcovered bytheabovetheorem.
The forward-scatter crosssectioncanbemanytimesthemonostatic (backscatter) crosssection.
Siegelhasshownthattheforward-scatter crosssectionofatargetwithprojected areaAis Or=4nA2/)2,where), thewavelength oftheradiation, isassumed smallcompared withthe 558 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  target dirnensi~n.~' If a bistatic radar can be designed to take advantage of the large forward-  scatter cross section, a significant improvement in detection capability can be had, or for the  same detection capability as a radar with b # 180°, less power need be radiated.
However,  the radar applications in which-ad-vantage can be taken of the large forward-scatter signal are  limited.
The scattering angle must be exactly, or reasonably close to, 180' in order to obtain  forward scatter.
Therefore the target must lie along the line joining the transmitter and receiver.
 Thus the transmitting and receiving antennas must be within line of sight of each other or  nearly so.
(The forward-scatter beamwidth from a sphere of radius a is approximately 21/nu,  when u/l %  Another consequence of a bistatic radar designed to take advantage of the large forward-  scatter cross section is the loss ofdoppler and target-position information.
When fi = lXOO, the  doppler frequency is zero; therefore moving targets cannot be discriminated on the basis of  0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180  Scattering angle P, deg  Figure 14.13 Bistatic cross section a, of a sphere as a function of the scatter~ng angle 0 and two valucb of  ku = 2na/A, where a is the sphere radius and ).
is the wavelength Solid curves are for the E plane (fl  measured in the plane of the E vector); dashed curves are for the H plane (fl measured in the plane ofthe H  vector, perpendicular to the E vector) 6s.69  558INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS targetdimension.60Ifabistaticradarcanbedesigned totakeadvantage ofthelargeforward­ scattercrosssection,asignificant improvement indetection capability canbehad,orforthe samedetection capability asaradarwithP=f180°,lesspowerneedberadiated.
However.
theradarapplications inwhi-chJld-yantage canbe.taken ofthelargeforward-scatter signalare limited.Thescattering anglepmustbeexactly,orreasonably closeto,180°inordertoobtain forwardscatter.Therefore thetargetmustliealongthelinejoiningthetransmitter andreceiver.
Thusthetransmitting andreceiving antennas mustbewithinlineofsightofeachotheror nearlyso.(Theforward-scatter beamwidthfromasphereofradiusaisapproximately Ulna.
whena/A.~1.6°) Another consequence ofabistaticradardesigned totakeadvantage ofthelargeforward­ scattercrosssectionisthelossofdopplerandtarget-position information.
WhenfJ=UIO°,the doppler frequency iszero;therefore movingtargetscannotbediscriminated onthebasisof }.
+20 ka=20 enu+10 ka=.2.36,--'--I 1'[ -10- 140160180 6080100120 Scattering angle13.deg4020-20L-...i--~-----L---l_-L---L.--'--------'-_L--.J----'---'----'-",-----'--......J---L----' o Figure14.13Bistaticcrosssectionabofasphereasafunction ofthescattering anglefJandtwovaluesof ka=2rra(A.,whereaisthesphereradiusand).isthewavelength.
SolidcurvesarefortheEplane(fJ measured intheplaneoftheEvector);dashedcurvesarefortheHplane(fJmeasured intheplaneoftheH vector,perpendicular totheEvector).65.69 OTHER RADAR TOPICS 559  frequency alone and tl~e radar has no MTI capability.
Also.
the location of the target position  from ttie measurement of tlle total scattered path length S is indeterminate, as mentiorled  previously.
 It is concluded tflat the conditions for obtaining the large forward-scatter signal are too  restrictive to be applicable in most radar situations.
In general, the bistatic radar does not  possess an exploitable advantage over the monostatic radar because of any cross-section  enhancement.
When conditioris permit the utilization of the enhanced forward-scatter cross  section, it is obtained at tlie expense of position location and moving-target discrimination.
 Examples of the theoretical bistatic cross section of a sphere are shown in Fig.
14.13.
 Comparison of bistatic and monostatic radars.
It is difficult to make a precise comparison of  bistatic and rnonostatic radars because of the dissimilarity in their geometries.
The coverage of  a monostatic radar is basically hemispherical.
while the bistatic radar coverage is more or less  planar.
The rnonostatic radar is the more versatile of the two because of its ability to scan  a hernisplierical voluriie in space and because of the relative ease with which usable target  information can be extracted from the received signal.
Another advantage of monostatic radar  is that o~ily one site is required as compared with the two sites of the bistatic radar.
Thus a  bistatic-radar system might be more expensive than a monostatic radar of comparable detec-  tion ability since the cost of developing the additional site (building roads, sleeping quarters,  mess facilities, etc.) can be a significant fraction of the total.
 Alrh~ugh the bistatic radar cannot readily imitate the hemispherical coverage of mono-  static radar, it is possible for the n1onostat.i~ radar to give fence coverage by using fixed, rather  than rotating.
antennas.
In order to compare the two on the basis of similar coverage, it will be  assumed tliat a rionscanning monostatic radar is operated at each end of a radar fence.
The   non no static radar requires two transmitters, two receivers, and two antennas to generate tlie  fence.
The bistatic radar also needs two antennas, but only one transmitter and one receiver.
If  similar equipment is used in the two types of radars, that is, the same antenna, same transmit-  ter, etc..
and if for the sake of analysis it is assumed that ab = a,, Eqs.
(14.35) and (14.36) show  that tlie eclio signals from the monostatic and the bistatic radars will be equal when the target  is at the mid-point of the fence (R = D, = D,).
For targets at locations other than midway, the  detection capability of both radars improves, within the limits of tlie antenna coverage.
The  monostatic-radar signal increases quite rapidly as the target approaches the radar because of  the inverse relationship between the echo signal P, and R4 [Eq.
(14.35)].
The bistatic radar  signal also increases as either end of the fence is approached since the echo signal is inversely  proportiodal lo D:D: [Eq.
(14.36)] However, the total variation (dynamic rhnge) of the  received signal with target position is not as pronounced with bistatic radar as with monostatic  radar.
In bistatic radar.
as either D, or D, decreases, the other increases.
Thus the bistatic radar  docs not " overdetect " at short ranges as does monostatic radar.
 'I'lic ~lloriostatic radnr is wcll silitcd to volutilctric coverage.
If the bistatic radar were to  provide voli~metric coveragc with directive antenna beams, the transmitting and receiving  hearns would have to be scanned in synclironism.
If the receiving beam is always to observe the  volume of space illuminated by tlie transmitted pulse packet, the receiving beam must be  scaritled rapidly.
Since tlic pulse packet travels at the speed of light, the receiving beam  sometimes must be scanned more rapidly than possible by mechanical means.
This is called  prrlsc> c.ltusi~rg.
If the receiving antenna uses a broad fixed beam, the problem of pulse chasing is  alleviated.
However.
the smaller effective antenna aperture associated with the broad receiving  beam results in less eclio signal.
This must be compensated by greater transmitter power.
In  short.
tlie use of bistatic radar to obtain other than fence coverage usually results in more  complicated and less efficient systems.
 OTHER RADAR TOPICS559 frequency aloneandtheradarhasnoMTIcapability.
Also,thelocation ofthetargetposition fromthemeasurement ofthetotalscattered'path lengthSisindeterminate, asmentioned previously.
Itisconcluded thattheconditions forobtaining thelargeforward-scatter signalaretoo restrictive tobeapplicable inmostradarsituations.
Ingeneral, thebistaticradardoesnot possessanexploitable advantage overthemonostatic radarbecause ofanycross-section enhancement.
Whenconditions permittheutilization oftheenhanced forward-scatter cross section.
itisobtained attheexpense ofposition location andmoving-target discrimination.
Examples ofthetheoretical bistaticcrosssectionofasphereareshowninFig.14.13.
Comparison ofbistaticandmonostatic radars.Itisdifficult tomakeaprecisecomparison of bistaticandmonostatic radarsbecauseofthedissimilarity intheirgeometries.
Thecoverage of amonostatic radarisbasically hemispherical, whilethebistaticradarcoverage ismoreorless planar.Themonostatic radaristhemoreversatile ofthetwobecauseofitsabilitytoscan ahemispherical volume inspaceandbecause oftherelativeeasewithwhichusabletarget information canbeextracted fromthereceived signal.Another advantage ofmonostatic radar isthatonlyonesiteisrequired ascompared withthetwositesofthebistaticradar.Thusa bistatic-radar systemmightbemoreexpensive thanamonostatic radarofcomparable detec­ tionabilitysincethecostofdeveloping theadditional site(building roads,sleeping quarters.
messfacilities.
etc.)canbeasignificant fractionofthetotal.
Although thebistaticradarcannotreadilyimitatethehemispherical coverage ofmono­ staticradar,itispossible forthemonostat.ic radartogivefencecoverage byusingfixed,rather thanrotating.
antennas.
Inordertocompare thetwoonthebasisofsimilarcoverage, itwillbe assumed thatanonscanning monostatic radarisoperated ateachendofaradarfence.The monostatic radarrequires twotransmitters, tworeceivers, andtwoantennas togenerate the fence.Thebistaticradaralsoneedstwoantennas, butonlyonetransmitter andonereceiver.If similarequipment isusedinthetwo types ofradars,thatis,thesameantenna, sametransmit­ ter.etc..andifforthesakeofanalysis itisassumed thatab=am,Eqs.(14.35)and(14.36)show thattheechosignalsfromthemonostatic andthebistaticradarswillbeequalwhenthetarget isatthemid-point ofthefence(R=Dr=Dr).Fortargetsatlocations otherthanmidway.
the detection capahility ofbothradarsimproves.
withinthelimitsoftheantenna coverage.
The monostatic-radar signalincreases quiterapidlyasthetargetapproaches theradarbecauseof theinverserelationship between theechosignalPrandR4[Eq.(14.35)].
Thebistaticradar signalalso.increases aseitherendofthefenceisapproached sincetheechosignalisinversely proportiollal toDfD;[Eq.(14.36)].
However, thetotalvariation (dynamic range)ofthe received signalwithtargetposition isnotaspronounced withbistaticradaraswithmonostatic radar.Inbistaticradar.aseitherDrorDrdecreases.
theotherincreases.
Thusthebistaticradar docsnot"overdetect ..atshortrangesasdoesmonostatic radar.
TheIllonostatic radariswellsuitedtovolumetric coverage.
Ifthebistaticradarwereto provide volumetric coverage withdirective antenna beams.thetransmitting andreceiving heamswouldhavetohescanned insynchronism.
Ifthereceiving beamisalwaystoobservethe volumeofspaceilluminated hythetransmitted pulsepacket.thereceiving beammusthe scanned rapidly.
Sincethepulsepackettravelsatthespeedoflight.thereceiving beam sometimes mustbescanned morerapidlythanpossible bymechanical means.Thisiscalled pI/1st'clrasi"g.Ifthereceiving antenna usesabroadfixedbeam.theproblem ofpulsechasing is alleviated.
However.
thesmallerefrective antenna aperture associated withthebroadreceiving beamresultsinlessechosignal.Thismustbecompensated bygreatertransmitter power.In short.theuseofbistaticradartoobtainotherthanfencecoverage usuallyresultsinmore complicated andlessefficient systems. Although the bistatic radar has many interesting attributes, it cannot compete with  monostatic radar in most radar system applications.
The history of radar substantiates tllis  conclusion.
The monostatic radar is the more versatile of the two because of its ability to scan  a large volume in space and because of the relative ease with which trsahlc information  concerning the target's position and relative velocity can be extracted from the received signal.
 The superiority of the monostatic radar even seems to extend to the application of the radar  fence.
Although less equipment is needed with the bistatic-radar fence, this advantage is offset  to a large extent by the difficulties involved in extracting the target's position.
 The bistatic radar deserves credit for its historical role in the early days of radar in leading  to the development of monostatic radar.
It should be given consideration, along with other  possible radar techniques, in those applications where some inherent characteristic may be a  desirable attribute or when the application does not require complete target information.
But  as a means for the general detection and location of targets, it is overshadowed by,its offspring,  the monostatic radar.
 14.7 MILLIMETER WAVES AND BEYOND  Radar has been applied primarily in the microwave portion of the electromagnetic spectrum,  with K, band (35 GHz) representing the nominal upper limit for traditional radar applica-  tions.
There has been continual interest, however, in the extension of radar to higher frequen-  cies in the millimeter wave portion of the spectrum.
Figure 14.14 illustrates the  electromagnetic spectrum above the microwave region, showing the place of millimeter waves  in relation to the infrared and visible regions.
The millimeter region is defined from 40 (;Hz  (7.5 mm wavelength) to 300 GHz (1.0 mm ~avelength).'~ Although K, band (35 GHz)corre-  sponds to a wavelength of 8.6 mm, and radars at that band might qualify by some definition as  belonging to the millimeter wave region, the technology at K, band is basically that of the  microwave region.
At frequencies above K, band most microwave techniques are inadequate,  so that new technology is required.
Thus K, band should not usually be included as part of  the millimeter-wave region.
 Advantages of millimeter waves.
Interest in millimeter-wave applications stems from the  special properties exhibited by radar at these frequencies, as well as from the challenge of  exploiting a region of the spectrum not widely used.
The major attributes of the mtllimeter-  wave region of interest to radar are the large bandwidth, small antenna size, and the character-  istic wavelength.
Large bandwidth means that high range-resolution can be achieved.
It also  reduces the likelihood of mutual interference between equipments, and makes more difficult  Frequency GHz  30 300 3,000 3 x 104 3 lo5 3 ,.
lo6  1 I 1  I+- Mill~meter - -+-Submillimeler -+/+--Far infrared.
+/+ -- Infrared - +I I.+  resonance  KO 94 GHz  band w~ndow COP loser  1 t t 1 I I I  1.0 cm 1 0 mm 01 mm 10 pm 10pm 0 1 pm  Wovelength  Figure 14.14 The electromagnetic spectrum of frequencies above the microwave region.
 560INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS Although thebistatic radarhasmanyinteresting attributes, itcannotcompete with monostatic radarinmostradarsystemapplications.
Thehistoryofradarsubstantiates this conclusion.
Themonostatic radaristhemoreversatile ofthetwobecauseofitsabilitytoscan alargevolume inspaceandbecause oftherelative easewithwhichusableinformation concerning thetarget'sposition andrelativevelocitycanbeextracted fromthereceived signal.
Thesuperiority ofthemonostatic radarevenseemstoextendtotheapplication oftheradar fence.Although lessequipment isneededwiththebistatic-radar fence,thisadvantage isoffset toalargeextentbythedifficulties involved inextracting thetarget'sposition.
Thebistaticradardeserves creditforitshistorical roleintheearlydaysofradarinleading tothedevelopment ofmonostatic radar.Itshouldbegivenconsideration, alongwithother possible radartechniques, inthoseapplications wheresomeinherent characteristic maybea desirable attribute orwhentheapplication doesnotrequirecomplete targetinformation.
But asameansforthegeneraldetection andlocation oftargets,itisovershadowed by,itsoffspring, themonoStatic radar.
..
14.7MILLIMETER WAVES ANDBEYOND Radarhasbeenapplied primarily inthemicrowave portionoftheelectromagnetic spectrum, withKgband(35GHz)representing thenominal upperlimitfortraditional radarapplica­ tions.Therehasbeencontinual interest, however, intheextension ofradartohigherfrequcn­ ciesinthemillimeter waveportion ofthespectrum.
Figure 14.14illustrates the electromagnetic spectrum abovethemicrowave region,showing theplaceofmillimeter waves inrelationtotheinfrared andvisibleregions.
Themillimeter regionisdefinedfrom40GHz (7.5mmwavelength) to300GHz(1.0mmwavelength).70 Although Kgband(35GHz)corre­ spondstoawavelength of8.6mm,andradarsatthatbandmightqualifybysomedefinition as belonging tothemillimeter waveregion,thetechnology atKgbandisbasically thatofthc microwave region.Atfrequencies aboveKgbandmostmicrowave techniques areinadequate, sothatnewtechnology isrequired.
ThusKgbandshouldnotusuallybeincluded aspartof themillimeter-wave region.
Advantages ofmillimeter waves.Interest inmillimeter-wave applications stemsfromthe specialproperties exhibited byradaratthesefrequencies, aswellasfromthechallenge of exploiting aregionofthespectrum notwidelyused.Themajorattributes ofthemillimcier­ waveregionofinteresttoradararethelargebandwidth, smallantenna size,andthecharacter­ isticwavelength.
Largebandwidth meansthathighrange-resolution canbeachieved.
Italso reduces thelikelihood ofmutualinterference between equipments, andmakesmoredifficult 30 I300 IFrequency'" GHz 3,000 3 x104 I I ,...Millimeter -+-Submillimeler--+t+---Far infrared'+ ··Infrared· ~I 60GHz02 resonance ~94GHZbandwintdow 1.0cm 10mm 01mm WavelengthC02 laser 11 10JimVisible 10Jim Figure14.14Theelectromagnetic spectrum offrequencies abovethemicrowave region. OTHER RADAR TOPICS 561  the emective application of electronic countermeasures.
The short waveleng'ths allow narrow  beamwidths of high directivity witli pt~ysically small antennas.
Narrow beamwidths are impor-  tant for high-resolution imaging radar and to avoid multipath effects when tracking low-  altitude targets.
The short wavelengths of millimeter waves are also useful when exploring  scattering objects whose dimensions are comparable to the millimeter wavelengths, such as  insects and cloud particles.
These are examples of scatterers whose radar cross sections are  greater at millimeter wavelengths than at microwaves since they are generally in the resonance  region (Fig.
2.9) at millimeter wavelengths, but in the Rayleigh region at microwaves (where  the cross section varies as tlie fourth power of the frequency).
Another advantage of the short  wavclerlgths is that a dopplcr-frequency ~iieasuretnent of fixed accuracy gives a more accurate  velocity measurement than at lower frequencies.
The large attenuation of millimeter waves  propagating in the clear atmosphere sometimes can be employed to advantage in those special  cases where it is desired to reduce mutual interference or to minimize the probability of the  radar being intercepted by a hostile intercept (elint) receiver at long range.
 I'he above attributes of the millimeter-wave region suggest as potential applications  low-angle tracking, interference-free radar, ECCM, cloud-physics radar, high-resolution radar.
 fuzes, and missile guidance.
These, as well as other applications.
have not been widely  employed because of the concomitant limitations tliat occur with operation at millimeter  waves.
 l,in~itations of millimeter waves.
Tile application of millimeter wavelengths has been limited  by the availability of suitable components.
Transmitter powers are low, receiver noise figures  are high, transmission lines lossy, and equipment generally costly and unreliable.
Tllere is  reason to believe, however, that this is not fundamental and tliat equipment shortcomings  eventually can be overcome witli sufficient effort.
There exists adequate technology to either  side of the millimeter wave spectrum: at the longer wavelengths (microwaves) and at the  shorter wavelengths (iR and visual).
Also, there are compone~it developments at millimeter  wavelengths which indicate that technology is not basically limited.
For example, high power  has been demonstrated with the gyrotron, or electron cyclotron maser, comparable to tliat  achieved with microwave devices.
Kilowatts of CW power can be obtained in the vicinity of  I-rnnl wavelength and several tens of kilowatts at 3-mm wa~elength.~~ Over a megawatt of  pulse power is clairiled at 3-~nrn wavelength.
Millimeter-wave gyrotrolls require extremely  high voltages (the electrons travel at relativistic velocities) and superconducting magnets.
 Receivers with mixer front-ends using Schottky-barrier diodes at room temperature have  den~onstrhted respectable noise figures.
Double-sideband noise figures of 6.5 dB can be ob-  tained at 94 GHz, 8.5 dB at 140 GHz, and 11 dB at 325 GHz.
(It has been suggested that a  7-dH single-sideband noise figure is achievable over these  wavelength^.)'^ Even lower noise  figures are possible with supercooled J.osephson junctions operating at liquid-helium ternpera-  tures.
There has also beer1 significant development of high-gain antennas at millimeter wave-  lengths, especially for radio astr~nomy.'~ Unconventional transmission lines have also been  developed.95 97  Thus the advances in components made in the past as well as technology evident to either  side of tlie millimeter region give reason to believe that Nature has not ruled out attainment of  adequate capabilities at millimeter wavelengths.
 Unfortunately, the limited availability of suitable millimeter wave components is not the  major reason for the lack of significant applications.
The problem with millimeter wavelengths  is that several of its favorable characteristics are also factors that limit its performance; in  particular, the small antenna size and the consequences of its characteristic wavelengths.
 The pllysically small antenna sizes at millimeter wavelengths result in high gain, but the  OTHER RADAR TOPICS561 theeffective application ofelectronic countermeasures.
Theshortwavelengths allownarrow beamwidths ofhighdirectivity withphysically smallantennas.
Narrow beamwidths areimpor­ tantforhigh-resolution imaging radarandtoavoidmultipath effectswhentracking low­ altitude targets.Theshortwavelengths ofmillimeter wavesarealsousefulwhenexploring scattering objectswhosedimensions arecomparable tothemillimeter wavelengths, suchas insectsandcloudparticles.
Theseareexamples ofscatterers whoseradarcrosssections are greateratmillimeter wavelengths thanatmicrowaves sincetheyaregenerally intheresonance region(Fig.2.9)atmillimeter wavelengths, butintheRayleigh regionatmicrowaves (where thecrosssectionvariesasthefourthpowerofthefrequency).
Another advantage oftheshort wavelcngths isthatadoppler-frcqucncy mcasurement offixedaccuracy givesamoreaccurate velocity measurement thanatlowerfrequencies.
Thelargeattenuation ofmillimeter waves propagating intheclearatmosphere sometimes canbeemployed toadvantage inthosespecial caseswhereitisdesiredtoreducemutualinterference ortominimize theprobability ofthe radarbeingintercepted byahostileintercept (e1int)receiver atlongrange.
Thcaboveattributes ofthemillimeter-wave regionsuggest aspotential applications low-angle tracking, interference-free radar,ECCM,cloud-physics radar,high-resolution radar.
fuzes.andmissileguidance.
These,aswellasotherapplications.
havenotbeenwidely employed because oftheconcomitant limitations thatoccurwithoperation atmillimeter waves.
Uniitations ofmillimeter waves.Theapplication ofmillimeter wavelengths hasbeenlimited bytheavailability ofsuitahle components.
Transmitter powersarelow,receiver noisefigures arehigh.transmission lineslossy.andequipment generally costlyandunreliable.
Thereis reasontobelieve, however.
thatthisisnotfundamental andthatequipment shortcomings eventually canbeovercome withsufficient effort.Thereexistsadequate technology toeither sideofthemillimeter wavespectrum: atthelongerwavelengths (microwaves) andatthe shorter wavelengths (IRandvisual).Also,therearecomponent developments atmillimeter wavelengths whichindicate thattechnology isnotbasically limited.Forexample, highpower hasbeendemonstrated withthegyrotron, orelectron cyclotron maser,comparable tothat achieved withmicrowave devices.
Kilowatts ofCWpowercanbeobtained inthevicinityof I-nUllwavelength andseveraltensofkilowatts at3-mmwavelength.72Overamegawatt of pulsepowerisclaimed atJ-mmwavelength.
Millimeter-wave gyrotrons requireextremely highvoltages (theelectrons travelatrelativistic velocities) andsuperconducting magnets.
Receivers withmixerfront-ends usingSchottky-barrier diodesatroomtemperature have demonstrhted respectable noisefigures.Double-sideband noisefiguresof6.5dBcanbeob­ tainedat94GHz,8.5dBat140GHz,and11dBat325GHz.(Ithasbeensuggested thata 7-dAsingle-sideband noisefigureisachievable overthesewavelengths.)73 Evenlowernoise figuresarepossible withsupercooled J.osephsonjunctions operating atliquid-helium tempera­ tures.Therehasalsobeensignificant development ofhigh-gain antennas atmillimeter wave­ lengths.
especially forradioastronomy.74 Unconventional transmission lineshavealsobeen developed.95 97 Thustheadvances incomponents madeinthepastaswellastechnology evidenttoeither sideofthemillimeter regiongivereasontobelievethatNaturehasnotruledoutattainment of adequate capabilities atmillimeter wavelengths.
Unfortunately, thelimitedavailability ofsuitable millimeter wavecomponents isnotthe majorreasonforthelackofsignificant applications.
Theproblem withmillimeter wavelengths isthatseveralofitsfavorable characteristics arealsofactorsthatlimititsperformance; in particular, thesmallantenna sizeandtheconsequences ofitscharacteristic wavelengths.
Thephysically smallantenna sizesatmillimeter wavelengths resultinhighgain.butthe 562 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  small area means that less of the echo energy will be collected by the antenna.
A large antenna  aperture is important for long-range surveillance radars, as was shown by Eq.
(2.57).
The  capability of a surveillance radar is proportional to the product of its average power and  antenna aperture.
Thus a small antenna requires a large transmitter power.
Since large power  is not easy to achieve at millimeter wavelengths, it is not likely that radars in this portion of the  spectrum will find wide application for long-range surveillance.
 The characteristic wavelengths of the millimeter region are responsive to individual scat-  terers of size comparable to the wavelength.
Hence, information might be obtained about  some targets that cannot be as readily obtained at lower frequencies (long wavelengths).
Also  the cross sections will be greater for those scatterers which are comparable in size to the radar  wavelength.
In the millimeter region, however, resonances of the atmospheric constituents are  excited (in particular oxygen and water vapor) which result in attenuation that can be  relatively high, even in the clear atmosphere.
High attenuation might be a desiraye attribute  for a short-range radar that is required to avoid mutual interference with distant radars or to  avoid being detected at long range (if a military radar).
However, the relatively high attentla-  tion in tliis part of the spectrum is a serioiis obstacle to achizvitlg long-range radar.
 The attenuation of electromagnetic energy in the portion of the electromagnetic spectrum  above 10 GHz is shown in Fig.
14.15.
The absorption due to oxygen at 60 GHz (5-cm  wavelength) in the clear atmosphere is quite large (about 16 dB/km).
Operation at that  frequency is almost useless for radar applications within the earth's atmosphere.
The same  10 mrn 1 rnrn Olmrn 10 brn  Figure 14.15 One-way attenuation of electromagnetic energy propagating in the clear atmospheres7  (oxygen and water vapor at 7.5 g/m3, 1 atmosphere pressure, and absolute temperature equal 293 K),  rainee at 293 K, the total attenuation of fog with a visibility of 300 rn and at 293 K (~ncludes attenuation  through a clear standard atmosphere), and fair weather cumulus cloud with a mode radius of 4 pm, a  water content of 0.063 g/mJ, and a drop density of 100/cm3.sY~90  562INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS smallareameansthatlessoftheechoenergywillbecollected bytheantenna.
Alargeantenna aperture isimportant forlong-range surveillance radars,aswasshownby Eq.(2.57).The capability ofasurveillance radarisproportional totheprQduct .ofitsaveragepowerand antenna aperture.
Thusasmallantenna requires alargetransmitter power.Sincelargepower isnoteasytoachieveatmillimeter wavelengths, itisnotlikelythatradarsinthisportionofthe spectrum willfindwideapplication forlong-range surveillance.
Thecharacteristic wavelengths ofthemillimeter regionareresponsive toindividual scat­ terersofsizecomparable tothewavelength.
Hence,information mightbeobtained about sometargetsthatcannotbeasreadilyobtained atlowerfrequencies (longwavelengths).
Also thecrosssections willbegreaterforthosescatterers whicharecomparable insizetotheradar wavelength.
Inthemillimeter region,however, resonances oftheatmospheric constituents are excited(inparticular oxygenandwatervapor)whichresultinattenuation thatcanbe relatively high,evenintheclearatmosphere.
Highattenuation mightbeadesiral}le attribute forashort-range radarthatisrequired toavoidmutualinterference withdistantradarsorto avoidbeingdetected atlongrange(ifamilitary radar).However, therelatively highattenua­ tioninthispartofthespectrum isaseriousobstacle toachieving long-range radar.
Theattenuation ofelectromagnetic energyintheportionoftheelectromagnetic spectrum above10GHzisshowninFig.14.15.Theabsorption dueto oxygen at60GHz(5-cm wavelength) intheclearatmosphere isquitelarge(about16dB/km).
Operation atthat frequency isalmostuselessforradarapplications withintheearth'satmosphere.
Thesame 10mm lmm 01mm 10IJ.m 1fJom I I I J I 100 N 35GHz941402200 '"If)ClearatmosP"ere attenuation0NN::r:r<lgreaterthan30dB/kmin...'..Nt::>,,- ~1111thisregion , r<lII" "0CD "<.D" E10 -"Clear "- atmosphereen VIsible'tJ cregion .2Rain5mm/hr~~I '0 ::J C ~ 4 10.
riain025mm/hr Figure14.15One-way attenuation ofelectromagnetic energypropagating intheclearatmosphere87 (oxygen andwatervaporat7.5gjm3,1atmosphere pressure, andabsolute temperature equal293K), rain88at293K,thetotalattenuation offogwithavisibility of300mandat293K(includes attenuation through aclearstandard atmosphere).
andfairweather cumulus cloudwithamoderadiusof4jim,a watercontentof0.063g/mJ,andadropdensityoflOO/cm3.~9.9o applies for the region around 183 Gtlz.
Tlie relative minimum at 94 GHz with an attenuation  of 0.3 dB/km is a likely frequency for millimeter radar applications.
Note, however, that the  94-GHz " window" lias even greater attenuation than the 22-GHz water-vapor absorption line  (0.16 dB/km).
Rain adds to the absorption and eliminates the regions of relatively low attenu-  ation.
For example, a rain of about 5 mm/h increases the attenuation of the 94-GHz window  by almost an order of magnitude.
Figure 14.15 shows that a rain of 0.25 mm/h would not  significantly increase the clear-air attenuation.
(At microwave frequencies the backscatter from  rain lias far greater effect 011 radar performance than the attenuation.
The opposite is true in  the millimeter-wave region.) The effect of a fog with 300-m visibility is seen to increase slightly  the clear-air attenuation.
A fair-weather cumulus cloud has low attenuation at millimeter  wavelengths.
 A one-way attenuation of 0.3 dB/km at 94 GHz might not be significant for short-range  radar, but it can be overwhelming for long-range radar.
For example, a 5-km radar will  experience a two-way attenuation of 3 dB, which is tolerable in most situations.
A 50-km  radar, however, will have 30-dB attenuation, which is usually intolerable.
Thus long-range  radar is not likely at millimeter wavelengths under normal circumstances.
Although the atten-  uation at ~nillirnetcr wavelengths is far greater than that at microwave wavelengths, the losses  iticurred in propagating ~~lillimeter wavelengths through fog, haze, and smoke is less than at  infrared or visible wavelengths.
 Anotlier example where a particular property of millimeter-wave radar has both favor-  able and unfavorable aspects is that of the doppler frequency shift.
It was shown in Sec.
3.1  that tlic doppler frequeticy shift was proportional to the carrier (rf) frequency.
This rest~lts in  more accurate relative-velocity measurements with millimeter wavelengths than at lower  frequencies.
The large doppler shifts at millimeter wavelengths, however, can sometimes result  in the echo signal being outside the receiver bandwidth, which complicates the receiver design.
 Also, the large doppler frequencies at millimeter wavelengths cause the blind speeds of MTI  radars to appear at lower velocities than at microwaves, an undesirable property.
 Thus, a frustrating paradox of the millimeter-wavelength region is that some of its  claimed good points are also its weaknesses.
 Clutter at millimeter wavelengths.
In chap.
13 it was implied that knowledge of radar clutter  characteristics at microwaves was less than desired.
There is even less information on clutter at  frequencies above 10 GHz.
Details will not be given here, but the general trends will be  summarized for the several types of clutter that have been measured.
 The a&rage clutter cross section per unit area for one set of measurements of trees and  vegetation at millimeter wavelengths is given by75.102  aO(dB) = - 20 + 10 log (0125) - 15 log R (14.37)  wlicrc 0 is tl~e grazing angle in degrees and R is in centimeters.
Thus, a0 increases with  increasing frequency.
Vertical polarization produced echos 3 to 4 dB greater than horizontal  polarization.
These measurements were made in Georgia during the summer and fall months  and included deciduotis trees and pine trees.
The grazing angles were from 2 to 25".
The pulse  width was 100 ns and the antenna beamwidth was in the vicinity of one degree.
 The value of o0 for sea clutter at low grazing angle and low winds has been rep~rted'~ to  "not increase with frequency much above X band," but also77 the "trend of increasing  reflectivity with decreasing wavelength also holds for sea clutter although the effect is not  nearly as pronounced as for land clutter." However, both references state that for higher sea  states (the maximum wind speed was 14 knots) the value of a0 at 94 GHz is less than that at X  hand.
Another observation is that vertical polarization seems to produce lower values of a0 at  OTHER RADAR TOPICS563 appliesfortheregionaround183GHz.Therelativeminimum at94GHzwithanattenuation of0.3dB/kmisalikelyfrequency formillimeter radarapplications.
Note,however, thatthe 94-GHz"window" hasevengreaterattenuation thanthe22-GHz water-vapor absorption line (0.16dB/km).
Rainaddstotheabsorption andeliminates theregionsofrelatively lowattenu­ ation.Forexample, arainofabollt5mm/hincreases theattenuation ofthe94-GHz window byalmostanorderofmagnitude.
Figure14.15showsthatarainof0.25mm/hwouldnot significantly increase theclear-air attenuation.
(Atmicrowave frequencies thebackscatter from rainhasfargreatereffectonradarperformance thantheattenuation.
Theopposite istruein themillimeter-wave region.)Theeffectofafogwith300-mvisibility isseentoincrease slightly theclear-air attenuation.
Afair-weather cumulus cloudhaslowattenuation atmillimeter wavelengths.
Aone-way attenuation of0.3dBjkmat94GHzmightnotbesignificant forshort-range radar,butitcanbeoverwhelming forlong-range radar.Forexample, a5-kmradarwill experience atwo-way attenuation of3dB,whichistolerable inmostsituations.
A50-km radar,however, willhave30-dBattenuation, whichisusuallyintolerable.
Thuslong-range radarisnotlikelyatmillimeter wavelengths undernormalcircumstances.
Although theatten­ uationatmillimeter wavelengths isfargreaterthanthatatmicrowave wavelengths.
thelosses incurred inpropagating millimeter wavelengths through fog,haze,andsmokeislessthanat infrared orvisiblewavelengths.
Another example whereaparticular property ofmillimeter-wave radarhasbothfavor­ ableandunfavorable aspectsisthatofthedoppler frequency shift.ItwasshowninSec.3.1 thatthedoppler frequency shiftwasproportional tathecarrier(rf)frequency.
Thisresultsin moreaccurate relative-velocity measurements withmillimeter wavelengths thanatlower frequencies.
Thelargedoppler shiftsatmillimeter wavelengths, however, cansometimes result intheechosignalbeingoutsidethereceiverbandwidth, whichcomplicates thereceiverdesign.
Also,thelargedoppler frequencies atmillimeter wavelerigths causetheblindspeedsofMTI radarstoappearatlowervelocities thanatmicrowaves, anundesirable property.
Thus,afrustrating paradox ofthemillimeter-wavelength regionisthatsomeofits claimed goodpointsarealsoitsweaknesses.
Clutieratmillimeter wavelengths.
Inchap.13itwasimpliedthatknowledge ofradarclutter characteristics atmicrowaves waslessthandesired.Thereisevenlessinformation onclutterat frequencies above10GHz.Detailswillnotbegivenhere,butthegeneral trendswillbe summarized fortheseveraltypesofclutterthathavebeenmeasured.
Theav'hagecluttercrosssectionperunitareaforonesetofmeasurements oftreesand vegetation atmillimeter wavelengths isgivenby75.102 o-°(dB)=-20+10log(8/25)-1510g...1.
(14.37) where0isthegrazing angleindegrees and ...1.isincentimeters.
Thus, 0-0increases with increasing frequency.
Vertical polarization produced echos3to4dBgreaterthanhorizontal polarization.
Thesemeasurements weremadeinGeorgia duringthesummer andfallmonths andincluded deciduous treesandpinetrees.Thegrazingangleswerefrom2to25°.Thepulse widthwas.100nsandtheantenna beamwidth wasinthevicinityofonedegree.
Thevalueof0-0forseaclutteratlowgrazingangleandlowwindshasbeenreported 76to ..notincrease withfrequency muchaboveXband,"butalso77the"trendofincreasing reflectivity withdecreasing wavelength alsoholdsforseaclutteralthough theeffectisnot nearlyaspronounced asforlandclutter." However, bothreferences statethatforhighersea states(themaximum windspeedwas14knots)thevalueof0-0at94GHzislessthanthatatX hand.Another observation isthatverticalpolarization seemstoproduce lowervaluesof0-0at 94 GHz by about 5 dB (on average) than horizontal polarization, which is the opposite to the  experience at microwaves.
(It should be cautioned that the few meas~lrements available were  taken at low grazing angle and over a limited range of wind speeds.)  As with trees and grass, the value of a0 for snow increases with frequency and grazing  angle.77-78,102 Crusted snow (that which has melted and refrozen), produces higher valt~es of  o0 at 35 GHz and 94 GHz than wet snow, grass, or trees.
 At microwaves the backscatter from rain can be explained according to the Rayleigh  scattering model with the reflectivity varying as the fourth power of the frequency (Sec.
13.7).
 In the millimeter-wave region, the drop sizes of the raindrops span both the Rayleigh and the  Mie scattering regions so that a difference in behavior can be expected.
Experimental measure-  ments indicated that, on the average, the radar backscatter at 9.4 and 35 Gtfr appeared to  follow the Rayleigh scattering  la^.^^.'^^ Deviations from Rayleigh were found at 70 and  95 GHz, and the backscatter at 95 GHz was observed to be less than at 70 GHz.
The back-  scatter at.
millimeter waves was found to depend on the drop si~e distribhtion of the  pricipitation.102 Even though the rain rates were the same, the backscatter from rain contain-  ing drops 2 to 6 mm in diameter was approximately 10 dB greater than rain containing drops  1 mm in diameter or less.
The amplitude fluctuations of the rain backscatter were approxi-  mated by a log-normal probability distribution over the range from 9.4 to 94 GHz and at rain  rates from 1 mm/h to 60 mm/h.
The variance (and standard deviation) of the log-normal  distribution was independent of rain rate and decreased with increasing frequency.
The decor-  relation times at 95 GHz varied from about 3.4 ms at 5 mm/h rain rate to 1.4 ms at 100 mm/h.
 At X band the decorrelation times were longer and varied from 14 ms at 5 mm/h to 5.4 ms at  100 mm/h.
 Utility of millimeter waves.
Experimentation with millimeter wavelength radiation and  microwave radiation both date back to the end of the nineteenth century.
The first microwave  experiments were those of Hertz in 1886.
Experiments at 6-mm wavelength occurred in 1895.80  In the early 1920s, millimeter-wave research was reported in the United States, Germany, and  Russia, with wavelengths as short as 0.22 mm.81 Although many important applications of the  microwave region have been developed, there has been almost no comparable activity in the  millimeter-wave region.
There are many possible reasons for this lack of activity, including  lack of adequate millimeter-wave components, small antenna sizes, and difficult MTI.
Rut  the most restricting of all has been the relatively large attenuations experienced when propa-  gating through the clear atmosphere, as well as the added attenuation during rain.
The large  attenuations are likely to limit millimeter radar to short-range applications where the total  attenuations are tolerable or to applications where the atmosphere is absent, such as in space  or at very high altitudes.
Millimeter wavelengths might also find application when the propa-  gation path does not traverse a large part of the earth's atmosphere, as when a ground-based  radar directs its energy at or near the zenith.
(At 94 GHz the two-way loss In transiting  the entire atmosphere is about 1.7 dB at zenith, 3.5 dB at 60" from the zenith, and 10 dB at 80"  from the zenith.)82  Submillimeter wavelengths.83s84 The advantages of high resolution, wide bandwidth, and  small antenna aperture are even more prevalent in the submillimeter proportion of the electro-  magnetic spectrum than at millimeters.
The attenuation in the clear atmosphere, however, is  far worse than at millimeters and varies from about 10 dB/km at l-mm wavelength to more  than 100 dB/km at 0.1-mm wavelength.
 Laser radar.
The large attenuations experienced in clear air in the millimeter (60 GHz) and  submillimeter regions are not present in the infrared and visible regions of the spectrum  564INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS 94GHzbyabout5dB(onaverage) thanhorizontal polarization, whichistheopposite tothe experience atmicrowaves.
(Itshouldbecautioned thatthefewmeasurements available were takenatlowgrazingangleandoveralimitedrangeofwindspeeds.) Aswith'treesandgrass,thevalueof(Toforsnowincreases withfrequency andgrazing angle.77.78.102 Crusted snow(thatwhichhasmeltedandrefrozen), produces highervaluesof (Toat35GHzand94GHzthanwetsnow,grass,ortrees.
Atmicrowaves thebackscatter fromraincanbeexplained according totheRayleigh scattering modelwiththereflectivity varying asthefourthpowerofthefrequency (Sec.13.7).
Inthemillimeter-wave region,thedropsizesoftheraindrops spanboththeRayleigh andthe Miescattering regionssothatadirrerence inbehavior canbeexpected.
Experimental measure­ mentsindicated that,ontheaverage, theradarbackscatter at9.4and35GHzappeared to followtheRayleigh scattering law.79.102 Deviations fromRayleigh werefoundat70and 95GHz.andthebackscatter at95GHzwasobserved tobelessthanat70GHz.Theback­ scatter ~t..millimeter waveswasfoundtodepend onthedropsizedistrib~tion ofthe pricipitation.102Eventhoughtherainrateswerethesame,thebackscatter fromraincontain­ ingdrops2to6mmindiameter wasapproximately 10dBgreaterthanraincontaining drops 1mmindiameter orless.Theamplitude fluctuations oftherainbackscatter wereapproxi­ matedbyalog-normal probability distribution overtherangefrom9.4to94GHzandatrain ratesfrom1mm/hto60mm/h.Thevariance (andstandard deviation) ofthelog-normal distribution wasindependent ofrainrateanddecreased withincreasing frequency.
Thedecor­ relation timesat95GHzvariedfromabout3.4msat5mm/hrainrateto1.4msat100mm/h.
AtXbandthedecorrelation timeswerelongerandvariedfrom14msat5mm/hto5.4msat 100mm/h.
Utilityofmillimeter waves.Experimentation withmillimeter wavelength radiation and microwave radiation bothdatebacktotheendofthenineteenth century.
Thefirstmicrowave experiments werethoseofHertzin1886.Experiments at6-mmwavelength occurred in1895.80 Intheearly1920s,millimeter-wave research wasreported intheUnitedStates.Germany, and Russia,withwavelengths asshortas0.22mm.81Although manyimportant applications ofthe microwave regionhavebeendeveloped, therehasbeenalmostnocomparable activityinthe millimeter-wave region.Therearemanypossible reasons forthislackofactivity, including lackofadequate millimeter-wave components, smallantenna sizes,anddifficult MTI.But themostrestricting ofallhasbeentherelatively largeattenuations experienced whenpropa­ gatingthrough theclearatmosphere, aswellastheaddedattenuation duringrain.Thelarge attenuations arelikelytolimitmillimeter radartoshort-range applications wherethetotal attenuations aretolerable ortoapplications wheretheatmos'phere isabsent,suchasinspace oratveryhighaltitudes.
Millimeter wavelengths mightalsofindapplication whenthepropa­ gationpathdoesnottraverse alargepartoftheearth'satmosphere, aswhenaground-based radardirectsitsenergyatornearthezenith.(At94GHzthetwo-way lossintransiting theentireatmosphere isabout1.7dBatzenith,3.5dBat60°fromthezenith,and10dBat80° fromthezenith.)82 Submillimeter wavelengths.83.84Theadvantages ofhighresolution, widebandwidth, and smallantenna aperture areevenmoreprevalent inthesubmillimeter proportion oftheelectro­ magnetic spectrum thanatmillimeters.
Theattenuation intheclearatmosphere, however, is farworsethanatmillimeters andvariesfromabout10dB/kmatI-mmwavelength tomore than1000dB/kmatOJ-mm wavelength.
Laserradar.Thelargeattenuations experienced inclearairinthemillimeter (60GHz)and submillimeter regions arenotpresentintheinfrared andvisibleregionsofthespectrum (Fig.
14.15).
(Tile :tttentl;~tioti in rain.
Iiowcver.
is still large.) Thus laser radars operating in the  infrared and visible rcgiolis actiieve-tI~c ;lrIvantagcs of liigh angular resolution, wide bandwidth,  and doppler frequency sensitivity without the accompanying disadvantage of high attenuation  as expericficed ill the subniillinicter region.
13ecause of its sniall physical aperture a laser radar  is riot suited for most surveillance apl~lications.
It is, however, well suited for precision rneasure-  riletit and target iniaging.
The rfesigri of a laser radar follows the same general principles as  otlier radars.
but witli some exceptions.
R5.93.94.105  111 ndcfition to using a trnnsriiitter unlike those found at niicrowave frequencies, the laser  radar cxl~ihits otlicr difScrcr~ccs that n~irst be accounted for wlicn considering radar desigli.
For  cxnmidc.
tile receiver sensitivity is riot determined by thermal noise as at microwaves, hut by  qili~~itt~~ii eISect~.
'I'lic tio~sc I)OWCI.
per iltiit batidwidtli at most laser frequencies is given by  \vlicrc /I = Plalick's colistant = 6.626 x 10-" J .s, and./'= frequency.
The familiar expl.ession  for thernial noise power at rtiicrowave frequencies (No = kT, where k = Boltzmann's constant  arid 7' = absolute tenlperature) does not apply when kT Q It is the coarseness of the laser  signal itself, due to its quantized nature, tliat ultimately sets tlie limit to sensitivity as given by  I:q.
(14.3X).
13y settirig k7;, = lrfl an "eqi~ivaletit noise temperature" can be obtained for a laser  receiver.
At the CO, laser wavelength of 10.6 pm, T, = 1360 K and at 1.0 pm wavelength  7;.
= 14.400 K, which itldicates tliat laser radar receivers are generally of greater effective  tcriil?eri~ti~~.c (or noise figure) tlian low-noisc ~nicrowave receivers.
 Tlic laser radar can employ the equivalent of either the microwave video receiver or the  si~pcrlicterodync receiver.
Tlie fo~.riier is called an incoherent (envelope) receiver or direct  pliotodetcction.
-Plic Inttcr is called a coherent (heterodyne) receiver or photomixer.
Wlieri tlie  background noise is low and for short-pulse modulation the laser envelope detector can  operate :IS a qt~arit~~rn-litnitcd device and give essentially the same detectitlity (inverse of the  noise equivalent power) as heterodyne  detector^.^^ (This is unlike microwaves where the video  detector is far less sensitive.) Tlie heterodyne, or photomixing, receiver can have a narrow  passbarid arid significantly reduce tlie effects of background noise.
Its sensitivity also car1  approach that of an ideal quantum detector.
The photomixing receiver is more complicated  than the direct photodetection receiver and it requires a stable transmitter and local oscillator.
 Wlieri tlie target is in motion relative to the radar a large doppler frequency shift occurs which  can place the echo signal outside tlie receiver passband.
For example, with a relative velocity of  5 m/s (10 kt) thedoppler frequency shift at 1-pm wavelength is 10 MHz.
A rapidly tuning laser  local osciflator or a large bank of IF filters are necessary to compensate for tlie /arge doppler  freqilericy sliift.
 When the target is in tile far field of the laser antenna, and if the antenna beam is larger  tliari tlic target, tlie i~sual form of tlie simple radar equation of Sec.
1.2 applies.
However.
the  beatnwidtli rather tliari the antenna gain is usually measured at laser frequencies so that  (;, = nZ/Oi [nay be silbstitrlted into the radar equation.
Tlie minimum detectable signal for  quarituni-lirnitcd detcctiorl isR5  where 11, = required nuniber of signal photoelectrons, q = quantum efficiency of the detector,  and r = observation time.
Witli tliese substitutions, and with 2B = l/r (assuming a video  receiver) the radar equation can be written  OTHER RADAR TOPICS565 (Fig.14.15).(Thcattcnuation inrain.however.
isstilllarge.)Thuslaserradarsoperating inthe infrarcdandvisihlcregionsachicvc-thc advalltagcs ofhighangularresolution, widebandwidth, .
anddopplerfrequency sensitivity withouttheaccompanying disadvantage ofhighattenuation asexpericnccd inthesubmillimcter rcgion.Bccausc ofitssmallphysical apcrture alaserradar isnotsuitedformostsurveillance applications.
Itis,however, wellsuitedforprecision measure­ mentandtargetimaging..Thedesignofalaserradarfollowsthesamegeneralprinciples as otherradars.hutwithsomecxceptions.RS.93.94.I05 Inaddition tousingatransmitter unlikethosefoundatmicrowave frequencies, thelaser radaI'exlJibitsotherdirlercnces thatIllustbeaccounted forwhenconsidering radardesign.For example.
thereceiversensitivity isnotdetcrmined bythermalnoiseasatmicrowaves, butby quantumellccts.Thenoisepowerperunitbandwidth atmostlascrfrequencies isgivcnby No=hI' (14.3R) (14.39)\vhereII=Planck's constant=6.626x10-J-lJ .s,andf=frequcncy.
Thefamiliarexpression forthermalnoisepoweratmicrowave frequencies (No=kT,wherek=Boltzmann's constant andT=absolute temperature) doesnotapplywhenkT~hIItisthecoarseness ofthelaser signalitself.duetoitsquantized nature,thatultimately setsthelimittosensitivity asgivenby Fq.(14.3R).BysetlingkJ:.
=Ill:an"equivalent noisetemperature" canbeobtained foralaser recciver.
AttheCO2laserwavelength of10.611m,I;.=1360Kandat1.011mwavelength 7;.=14.400K.whichindicates thatlaserradarreceivers aregenerally ofgreatereffective temperature (ornoisefigure)thanlow-noise microwave receivers.
Thelaserradarcanemploytheequivalent ofeitherthemicrowave videoreceiverorthe superheterodyne receiver.
Theformeriscalledanincoherent (envelope) receiver ordirect photodctection.
Thelatteriscalledacoherent (heterodyne) receiverorphotomixer.
Whenthe hackground noiseislowandforshort-pulse modulation thelaserenvelope detector can operateasaquantum-limited deviceandgiveessentially thesamedetectil'ity (inverseofthe noiseequivalent power)asheterodyne detectors.8s(Thisisunlikemicrowaves wherethevideo detector isfarlesssensitive.) Theheterodyne, orphotomixing, receivercanhaveanarrow passband andsignificantly reducetheeffectsofbackground noise.Itssensitivity alsocan approach thatofanidealquantum detector.
Thephotomixing receiver ismorecomplicated thanthedirectphotodetection receiveranditrequiresastabletransmitter andlocaloscillator.
Whenthetargetisinmotionrelativetotheradaralargedopplerfrequency shiftoccurswhich canplacetheechosignaloutsidethereceiverpassband.
Forexample, witharelativevelocityof 5mls(10kt)thedopplerfrequency shiftatI-Jimwavelength is10MHz.Arapidlytuninglaser localoscihator oralargehankofIFfiltersarenecessary tocompensate forthefargedoppler frequency shift.
Whenthetargetisinthefarfieldofthelaserantenna, andiftheantenna beamislarger thanthetarget.theusualformofthesimpleradarequation ofSec.1.2applies.However.
the beamwidth ratherthantheantenna gainisusuallymeasured atlaserfrequencies sothat <i,=rr2I(}~mayhesuostituted intotheradarequation.
Theminimum detectable signalfor quantum-limited detection isR5 s .=~~TL'1.mIn'Tr where lip=required numberofsignalphotoelectrons, "=quantum efficiency ofthedetector.
andr=observation time.Withthesesubstitutions, andwith2B=llr(assuming avideo receiver) theradarequation canbewritten (14.40) If the target is much larger than the laser beam, as cau happen in so~rlc situations, the radar  equation becomes  In the above the surface is assumed to be a diffuse (Lambert) scatterer wit11 cross section  a = 4p(n/4)~2Bg cos 4, where p = surface reflectivity and 4 = angle between the s~~rface  normal and the incident radar energy.
These are only approximate equations.
Losses shoi~ld  be included for propagation through the atmosphere and in the systern optics.
 If a quantum-limited laser must search a given solid angle fl in a time t,, the following  relationship can be obtainedsS  Thus the higher the frequency (shorter the wavelengtli) the more difficult it is for a laser to  search a large solid angle in a short time.
The limited search capability of a laser meanb that \  some sort of other cueing sensor, either electro-optical and/or radar, may he needed in order  for the laser radar to acquire a target.86  The fundamental measurement capabilities of a properly dcsigtled laser radar cannot he  equalled with a microwave radar.
Thus laser radars are used for those special applicat~ons  where its exceptional measurement capabilities are required, and where the need to search a  large solid-angle and all-weather operation are not important.
 REFERENCES  1.
Kovaly, J.
J.: "Synthetic Aperture Radar," Artech House, Inc., Dedham, Mass., 1976.
(A colIcction of  33 reprints covering the development, theory, performance, effect of errors, nlotion compensation,  processing, and application of SAR.)  2.
Cutrona, L.
J.: Synthetic Aperture Radar; chap.
23 of "Radar Handbook," M.
I.
Skolnik (ed.),  McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York, 1970.
 3.
Harger, R.
0.: "synthetic Aperture Radar Systems: Theory and Design," Academic Prcss, New  York, 1970.
>  4.
Bayma, R.
W., and P.
A.
McInnes: Aperture Size and Ambiguity Constraints for a Synthetic Aperture  Radar, IEEE 1975 International Radar Conference, pp.
499-504, IEEE Publication 75 CHO 938- 1  AES.
(Also available in ref.
1.)  5.
Cutrona, L.
J.: Optical Computing Techniques, IEEE Sprctrirm, vol 1, pp.
101 106, October, 1964  6.
Kirk, J.
C., Jr.: A Discussion of Digital Processing in Synthetic Apcrtt~re Radar, lEEE Truns.,  pp.
326-337, May, 1975.
(Also available in ref.
1.)  7.
Leith, E.
N.: Optical Processing Techniques for Simultaneous Pulse Compression and Beam Sharp-  ening, IEEE Trans., vol.
AES-4, pp.
878-885, November, 1968.
(Also available in ref.
I.)  8.
Raney, R.
K.: Synthetic Aperture Imaging Radar and Movlng Targets, IEEE Trurrs, vol.
AES-7,  pp.
499-505, May, 1971.
(Also available in ref.
1.)  9.
van de Lindt, W.
J.: Digital Techniques for Generating Synthetic Aperture Radar Images, 1Bhf Jorrr  of Research and Droelopmrnt, vol.
21, no.
5, pp.
415-432, Srptemher, 1977  10.
Tomiyasu, K.: Phase and Doppler Errors in a Spaceborne Synthetic Aperture Raddr lmag~ng the  Ocean Surface, IEEE Jour.
of Oceanic Enginerring,\vol.
OE-I, no 2, pp 68-71, November, 1976  11.
Moore, R.
K.: Trade-off Between Picture Element Dimensions and Non-Coherent Avrrag~ng In  Side-Looking Airborne Radar, IEEE Trans., vol.
AES-15,, pp.
697-708, September, 1979.
 12.
Graham, L.
C.: Stereoscopic Synthetic Array Application in Earth Resource Monrtoring, lEEE  NAECON '75 Record, pp.
125-132, 1975.
 13.
Bair, G.
L., and G.
E.
Carlson: Comparative Evaluat~on of Stereo Radar Techniques Us~ng Com-  puter Generated Simulated Imaginary, IEEE NAECON '73 Record, pp 220 -227, 1974.
 (14.41)566INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS Ifthetargetismuchlargerthanthelaserbeam,ascanhappen insomesituations, theradar equationbecomes R2=1!.~!-}2!!)_ c~~c/J max 3211pI!/B Intheabovethesurface isassumed tobeadiffuse(Lambert) scattcrer withcrosssection (J=4p(1t/4)R2{)~ cos4>,wherep=surface reflectivity and4>=anglebetween thesurface normalandtheincident radarenergy.Theseareonlyapproximate equations.
Lossesshould beincluded forpropagation through theatmosphere andinthesystemoptics.
Ifaquantum-limited lasermustsearchagivensolidangleninatimets'thefollowing relationship canbeobtained85 nP A A.=const--ave t s(14.4~) Thusthehigherthefrequency (shorter thewavelength) themoredifficull itisforalasato searchalargesolidangleinashorttime.Thelimitedsearchcapability ofalasermeansthat somesortofothercueingsensor,eitherelectro-optical and/orradar,maybeneededinorder forthelaserradartoacquire atarget.86 Thefundamental measurement capabilities ofaproperly designed laserradarcannotbe equalled withamicrowave radar.Thuslaserradarsareusedforthosespecialapplications whereitsexceptional measurement capabilities arerequired, andwheretheneedtosearcha largesolid-angle andall-weather operation arenotimportant.
REFERENCES 1.Kovaly, J.J.:"Synthetic Aperture Radar," ArtechHouse,Inc.,Dedham, Mass.,1976.(Acolkction of 33reprints covering thedevelopment, theory,performance, effectoferrors,motioncompensation, processing, andapplication ofSAR.) 2.Cutrona, L.J.:Synthetic Aperture Radar;chap.23of"RadarHandbook," M.I.Skolnik (cd.).
McGraw-Hill BookCompany, NewYork,1970.
3.Harger, R.0.:"Synthetic Aperture RadarSystems: Theory andDesign," Academic Press,New York,1970.
4.Bayma, R.W.,andP.A.Mcinnes: Aperture SizeandAmbiguity Constraints foraSynthetic Aperture Radar,IEEE1975International RadarConference, pp.499-504, IEEEPublication 75CHO 93~-1 AES.(Alsoavailable inref.1.) 5.Cutrona, L.J.:Optical Computing Techniques, IEEESpectrum, vol.I,pp.101-IO!i, Octobt:r, 1964.
6.Kirk,J.c.,Jr.:ADiscussion ofDigitalProcessing inSynthetic Aperture Radar,/EEETrw/s., pp.326-337, May,1975.(Alsoavailable inref.1.) 7.Leith,E.N.:Optical Processing Techniques forSimultaneous PulseCompression andBeamSharp­ ening,IEEETrans.,vol.AES-4,pp.878-885, November, 1968.(Alsoavailable inref.1.) 8.Raney,R.K.:Synthetic Aperture Imaging RadarandMoving Targets, /EEETnHls.,vol.AES-7, pp.499-505, May,1971.(Alsoavailable inref.1.) 9.vandeLindt,W.J.:DigitalTechniques forGenerating Synthctic Apcrture RadarImages, /BMJOllr.
ofResearch andDevelopment, vol.21,no.5,pp.4t5-432, September, 1977.
to.Tomiyasu, K.:PhaseandDoppler ErrorsinaSpaceborne Synthetic Aperture RadarImaging the OceanSurface,IEEEJour.ofOceanicEngineering,\ vol.OE-I,no.2,pp.6!S-71,November, 1976.
11.Moore, R.K.:Trade-Off Between Picture Element Dimensions andNon-Coherent Averaging in Side-Looking Airborne Radar,IEEETrans.,vol.AES-15"pp.
697-708, September, 1979.
12.Graham, L.c.:Stereoscopic Synthetic ArrayApplication inEarthResource Monitoring.
/EEE NAECON '75Record, pp.125-132, 1975.
13.Bair,G.L.,andG.E.Carlson: Comparative Evaluation ofStereoRadarTechniques UsingCom­ puterGenerated Simulated Imaginary, IEEENAECON '74Record, pp.220-227,1974. 14.
Brown, W.
M..
and R.
J.
Fredricks: Range-Doppler Imagining with Motion Through Resolution  Cells.
IEEE Trtrns..
vol.
Af3-5.
pp.
98 102.
January.
1969.
..
.
.
 15.
Pettengill.
G.
H.: Radar Astronomy.
ctiap.
23 of" Radar Handbook." M.
I.
Skolriik (4.).
McCiraw-  Hill Rook Company.
New York.
1970.
 16.
fiidayct.
M..
 rid P.
A.
Mcl~itics: 011 tlic Specification of;tti Antenna Pattcrn Torn Syritlictic Apcrtirrc  Radar.
I~rrc~r~rt~rio~~~~l C'oir/c~rc,rrt.c, R:lDAK-77, pp.
39 I 395.
Oct.
25 2U.
1977.
ItlE (Lor~dor~) C'orlf.
 Pirhl.
no.
155.
 17.
Sondcrg;~;lrd.
I:.: A 1)u;tI Mode 1)igital P~.occssnr for Medium Resolution Synthetic Apcrtirrc  Radars.
Itrr~~r.irtrriorr~rI ('or~/c,r.c,trc~c~ R:ll):lK-77.
pp.
2%4 390.
Oct.
25 28.
1977.
IliE (I,o~itlo~i) C'onf.
 Pirhl.
no.
155.
 In.
'Tliravcs.
J.: A Yitw Stahililcd S.A.H.
Acrii~l.
Irrrc~t~t~c~~iorrt~l ('orr/c~r.c~trc~c~ RAD.4R-77.
pp.
423 426.
Oct.
 25 2%.
1977.
I Eli (Londori) Conf.
Puhl.
no.
155.
 19.
Kirk.
J.
C..
Jr.: A 1)iscrrssion of Iligital Processing in Synthetic Apcrturc Radar.
lEEE 7'i.arrs..
 vol.
Al!S-l I.
pi,.
326 227.
May.
1975.
(Also availahlc in ref.
I.)  20.
fteadrick.
J.
M..
and M.
I.
Skolriik: Over-the-Iiorizon Radar in tlic f1F Hand.
/'I.OL..
IEEE.
vol.
62.
 pp 664 673.
June, 1974.
 2 1.
Fcnstcr.
W.: 7'lie Applicatiori.
I)csigri, and Pcrformancc of Over-the-tlorizori Radars.
Itrrc~rtrtrrior~t~l  ('orr/i~rc,rrcx, R:lI):1R-77.
pp.
36 40.
Oct.
25 2%.
1977, IEE (London) C'onf.
Pitbl.
no.
155.
 22.
Ilavics.
K.: " lonnsplicric Ri~dio Propagation," National Hurcair of St;tndards Monograpli 80.
 Apr.
1.
1965.
(Avitilahlc from t J.S.
(iovcr~in~cnt Printing Officc.)  23.
Al'pert.
Ya.
L.: " Radio Wave Propagation and the lonosphcrc." Consultants Ht~reair.
New York.
 1973.
 24.
Tri7na.
O.
B..
J.
C.
Moore.
J.
M.
ticadrick.
and R.
W.
Boglc: Directional Sea Spectrum Ueterrnina-  tion Using f1F I)opplcr Radar Techniques.
IEEE Trut~s..
vol.
AP-25, pp.
4- 11.
January.
1977.
 25.
Barrick.
D.
E..
J.
M.
Headrick.
R.
W.
Bogle.
and I).
D.
Crombic: Sea Backscatter at HF: Interprcta-  tion and litilization of the Echo.
Proc.
IEEE, vol.
62, pp.
673-680.
June, 1974.
 26.
Rarrick.
I).
E.: First-Order Theory and Analysis of MF/HF/VHF Scatter from the Sea, IEEE Trans..
 vol.
AP-20.
pp.
2 10.
January.
1972.
 27.
1-aylor.
J.
W..
Jr..
and G.
Brunins: Long Range Surveillance Radars for Automatic Control Systcms.
 I EEE 1975 Itttc~r.ttcrriot~ul Rtrdur: C'or~l~rctrc.r~.
Arlington.
Va..
Apr.
2 1 --23.
1975, pp.
3 12- 3 17.
 28.
Sliradcr.
W.
W.: Radar Technology Applied to Air Traffic Control..IEEE Trutrs., vol.
COM-?I.
 pp.
591 605, May.
1973.
 29.
Sutherland, J.
W.: Marcorii S6(K) Series of Radars, Irtterucia.
vol.
23.
pp.
73-75.
January, 196X.
 30.
Ridenour.
L.
N.: " Radar System Engineering." vol.
I.
MIT Radiation Laboratory Series.
McGraw-  Hill Book Company.
New York.
1947.
sec.
6.12.
 3 1.
Vadus, J.
R.: A New Tactical Radar, Odnatlce, vol.
49, pp.
80-83, July-Aug., 1964.
 32.
Brown, B.
P.: Radar Height Finding.
chap.
22 of" Radar Handbook," M.
I.
Skolnik (ed.).
McGraw-  tiill Book Company.
New York.
1970.
 32.
I'vanzia.
W.
J.: Faster.
Lighter 3-11 Radars in Sight for Tactical Warfare.
Electronics, vol.
39,  pp.
XO 87, June 27.
1966.
 34.
Mavroides, W.
G..
L.
Ci.
Dennett, and L.
S.
Dorr: 3-D Radar Based on Phase-in-Space Principie.
 IEEEtTrans..
vol.
AES-2.
pp.
323-331.
May, 1966.
 35.
Mavroides.
W.
Ci.: Weather Tracking with the AFCL Experimental 3-D Radar, AFCRL-70-0006, Air  Force Cambridge Research Luhorarories.
lnsrrumentation Papers no.
163, January, 1970.
 36.
Holt.
F.
S..
H.
M.
Johanson.
C.
F.
Winter.
R.
B.
Mack, C.
J.
Sletten, W.
G.
Mavroides.
and R.
H.
 Beyer: V-Ream Antennas for tfeight Finding, AFCRC-TR-56-115.
Air Force Canthridge Xrsrurclr  Center, December, 1956.
AD 1 1701 5.
 37.
Hammer.
I.
W.: Frequency-scanned Arrays, chap.
13 of " Radar Handbook," M.
I.
Skolnik (ed.),  McGraw-Hill Book Company, Ney York, 1970.
 38.
Skolnik.
M.
I.: Survey of Phased Array Accomplishments and Requirements for Navy Ships,  "Phased Array Antennas." ed.
by A.
A.
Oliner and G.
H.
Knittel, Artech House, Dedham, Mass.,  1972.
 39.
Lain.
C.
M., and E.
J.
Cjersten: AN/TPS-59 Overview, IEEE 1975 Itrternational Radur Cot!/i~re~nc.r.
 Arlington, Va..
Apr.
21 23.
1975, pp.
527-532.
lEEE Publ.
75 CHO 939-1 AES.
 40.
Milne.
K.: The Combination of Pulse Compression with Frequency Scanning for Three-Dimensional  Radars, Radio and Electronic Engineer, vol.
28, pp.
89-106, August, 1964.
 41.
Motkin, D.
L.: Three-dimensionai Air Surveillance Radar, Systems Technology, no.
21, pp.
29-33,  June, 1975.
(Plessey Co., Ilford, England.)  42.
Watanabe.
M., T.
Tamama, and N.
Yamauchi: A Japanese 3-d Radar for Air Traffic Control.
 Electronics, vol.
44, pp.
68-72.
June 21.
1971.
 OTHER RADAR TOPIC'S567 14.Brown.
W.M..andR.J.Fredricks: Range-Doppler Imagining withMotion Through Resolution Cells.IEEETrellis..vol.A[S-5.pp.9X102.January.
/969.
15.Pettengill.
G.H.:RadarAstronomy.
chap.33of"RadarHandbook." M.I.Skolnik (cd.).McGraw­ HillRookCompany.
NewYork.1970.
16.Jlidayet.
M..andP.A.Mcinnes: OntheSpecifkation ofanAntenna Pattern foraSynthetic Aperture Radar.11Itt'fllelciOlwl ('011/('1'('11("(' R..tIJt1R-77.
pp.391395.Oct.252X.1977.lEE(London) Conf.
Puo/..no.155.
17.Sondergaard.
r.:ADualModeDigital Processor forMedium Resolution Synthetic Aperture Radars.
IIIC('I'/fClCioll<l1 COIl/('/'('II("(' IU/UR-77.
pp.3X4390.Oct.252X.1977.lEE(London) ('onL Puhl.no.155 IX.TIHaves.
J.:AYawStahili/ed S.A.R.Aerial.11It('/'II(/(iollell COII/t'r('II('(' RA/JAR-77.
pp.423426.Oct.
252X.1977.IFF(London) Conf.Puh!.no.155.
19.Kirk.J.C,Jr.:ADiscussion ofDigitalProcessing inSynthetic Aperture Radar.IEEE TUlliS..
vol.AFS-II.
pp.3263.'7.May.1975.(Alsoavailahle inrer.I.) 20.Headrick.
J.M..andM.I.Skolnik: Over-Ihe-Horizon RadarintheHFBand.
I'I'/IC.IEfE.vol.62.
pp.664673.June.1974.
21.Fenster.
W.:TheApplication.
Design.andPerformance ofOver-the-Horizoll Radars.IIIC('I'/f<lcicl/lal ('OIl/t'r('II('(' RMJ..tR-77.
pp.3640.Oct.252X.1977.lEE(London) Conr.Pub!.no.155.
22.Davies.
K.:"Ionospheric RadioPropagation." Nalional Rureau ofStandards Monograph 1'0.
Apr.l.1965.{Availahlc fromlJ.S.(iovcflIment Printing Office.) D.Al'pert.
Ya.L.:"Radio WavePropagation andtheIonosphere." Consultants Bureau.
NewYork.
1973.
.
24.Tri7l1a.D.B.J.C.Moore.
J.M.Headrick.
andR.W.Bogle:Directional SeaSpectrum Determina­ tionUsingHFDoppler RadarTechniques.
IEEETraIlS..vol.AP-25.pp.4-11.January.
1977.
25.Barrick.
D.E..J.M.Headrick.
R.W.Bogle.andD.
D.Crombie: SeaBackscalter atHF:Interpreta­ tionandUtilization oftheEcho.Proc.IEEE.vol.62.pp.673-680.
June.1974.
26.Barrick.D.L:First-Order TheoryandAnalysis ofMF/HF/YHF ScatterfromtheSea.IEEETraIlS..
\'01.AP-20.pp.210.January.
1972.
27.Taylor.
J.W..Jr..andG.Brunins: LongRangeSurveillance RadarsforAutomatic Control Systems.
IEEE1975l/lCe/'llC/ciOlwl RadarConfercnce.
Arlington, Va.•Apr.21·23.1975.
pp.312-317.
2X.Shrader.
W.W.:RadarTechnology Applied toAirTrameControL·IEEE Trans..vol.COM-21.
pp.591605.May.1973.
29.Sutherland.
J.W.:Marconi S600SeriesofRadars.Imaado.
vol.23.pp.73-75.January.
1961<.
30.Ridenour.
L.N.:"Radar System Engineering." vol.I.MITRadiation Laboratory Series.McGraw- HillBookCompany.
NewYork.1947.sec.6.12.
.
31.Vadus.J.R.:ANewTactical Radar,Ordnance.
vol.49,pp.80-83.July-Aug., 1964.
32.Rrown.B.P.:RadarHeightFinding.
chap.22of"RadarHandbook." M.I.Skolnik (ed.).McGraw­ HillBookCompany.
NewYork.1970.
:'.1.Fvanzia.
WJ.:Faster.
Lighler3-1)Radars inSightforTactical Warfare.
Electronics.
vol.39.
pp.ROR7.June27.1966.
34.Mavroides.
W.G..L.G.Dennett.
andL.S.Don:3-DRadarBasedonPhase-in-Space Principle.
IEEEtTram., vol.AES-2,pp.323-331, May.1966.
35.Mavroides.
W.G.:Weather Tracking withtheAFCLExperimental 3-DRadar,AFCRL-70-0006.
Air ForceCamhridge Research Lahoracories, Instrumentacion Papersno.163.January.
1970.
36.Holt.F.S..H.M.Johanson.
C.F.Winter.
R.B.Mack.C.J.Sletten,W.G.Mavroides.
andR.H.
Beyer:V-Beam Antennas forHeightFinding, AFCRC-TR-56-115.
AirForceCambridge Nesearch Cencer.
December.
1956.AD117015.
37.Hammer.
I.W.:Frequency-scanned Arrays,chap.13of"RadarHandbook." M.I.Skolnik (ed.).
McGraw-Hili BookCompany.
Ne~York.1970.
38.Skolnik, M.I.:SurveyofPhased ArrayAccomplishments andRequirements forNavyShips.
..Phased ArrayAntennas." cd.byA.A.OlinerandG.H.Knittel, ArtechHouse,Dedham.
Mass..
1972.
39.Lain,C.M..andE.J.Gersten: ANrrpS-59 Overview, IEEE1975Illternational RadarConfi'I'IJ/lu'.
Arlington, Va.,Apr.2123.1975.pp.527-532.
IEEEPub!.75CHO939-1AES.
40.Milne.K.:TheCombination ofPulseCompression withFrequency Scanning forThree-Dimensional Radars.
RadioandElectronic Engineer.
vol.28,pp.89-106.
August.
1964.
41.Motkin.D.L.:Three-dimensionai AirSurveillance Radar.Systems Technology, no.21,pp.29-33.
June,1975.(Plessey Co.,liford,England.) 42.Watanabe.
M..T.Tamama.
andN.Yamauchi: AJapanese 3-dRadarforAirTrafficConlro/' Electronics.
vol.44,pp.68-72,June21.1971. 568 INTRODUCTION TO RADAR SYSTEMS  43.
McAttlay, R.
I.: Intcrkrometer Design for 1llcv;ttion Atlglc l<stimation, II.:t-:l: .I'rtrtl.s..
vol.
AI'S-l  pp.
486-,503, September.
1977.
 44.
Potter, K.
E.: Experimental Design Stttdy of an Airborne Interferometer for Terrain Avoitiance,  !nt~r~~cttionul Cor!fc.rt~ncc R,4DAR-77, pp.
508 512.
IEE (Idondon) Conf.
Plrbl.
no.
155.
 45.
Ridenour, L.
N.: " Radar System Engineering," MIT Radiation Laboratory Series, McGraw-f-f ill  Book Company, New York, 1947, sec.
(6.1 1 ).
 46.
Westinghouse Brochure: The ARSR-3 Story, no date.
 47.
Hartley-Smith, A.: The Design and Performance of a Modern Surveillance Radar System, IEEE 1975  International Radar Cot!fPrrnce, Arlington, Va..
Apr.
2 1 - 23, 1975, pp.
306--3 1 1.
 48.
Edgar, A.
K., E.
J.
Dodsworth, and M.
P.
Warden: The Design of a Modern Stlrveillancc Katlar.
 Radar-Present and Ftrture, IEE Conf.
Publ.
no.
105, pp.
8--13, 1973.
 49.
Di Nardo, U.: Adaptivity Criteria of a Modern Air Traffic Control Radar, Rir~iscu Trc.tricu S~~It~tricr  (Rome), vol.
2, no.
4, pp.
17-32, 1975.
 50.
Murray.
J.
P.: Electromagnetic Compatibility, chap.
29 of" Radar Handbook," McGraw-Hill t3ook  Company.
New York.
1970.
 51.
Johnson, M.
A., and D.
C.
Stoner: ECCM from tile Radar Designer's Viewpoint.
IEEE Elt,c.rt.o 76.
 Boston, May 11--14, 1976, paper 30-5, Reprinted in h~icrowirl~c~ Jolrrtrtrl, vol.
21, pp.
59 63.
biarch.
 1978.
 52.
Howells, P.
W.: Explorations in Fixed and Adaptive Resoliltion at GE and S[JRC, IEEE 7'rrrr1s.
 vol.
AP-24.
pp.
575- 584, September, 1976.
 53.
Lalnh.
J.
J.: A noisc Silencing I.F.
Circuit for S~~erlieterodyl~c Kcceivers.
C).S'l'.
vc)l.
70, 1).
I I* t.el)l.[  ary.
1936.
 54.
Carpentier, M.
H.: " Radars: New Concepts," Gordon and Rrcucli, New York, 1968, scc.
4.h.
 55.
Scvcrin, 1-i.: Nonrellccting Absorbers (or Microwave Radiation, IKE 'i't.trr~.s., vul.
At'-4.
pp 3x5 302.
 July, 1956.
 56.
A Hriel Description of the ASR-8 Airport Surveillance Radar.
Tc~.~rrs I)tst~irn~~.trrs, Itrc.., SPO5A-I:.( i76.
 Equipment Group, August, 1976.
 57.
Skolnik, M.
I.: An Analysis of Bistatic Radar, IRE Trnns., vol.
ANE-8, pp.
19 27, Marcli, 1961.
 58.
Caspers.
J.
W.: Bistatic and Multistatic Radar, chap.
36 of" Radar Handbook." M.
1.
Skolnik (ed.).
 McGraw-Hill Book Company.
New York, 1970.
 59.
"Systen~ for Detecting Objects by Radio," U.S.
Patent 1.981.884.
granted Nov.
77.
1934, to A.
H.
 Taylor, L,.
C.
Young, and L.
A.
Hyland.
 60.
Siegel, K.
M.: Bistatic Radars and Forward Scattering.
Ncrrl.
Cot!/: Pt.oc..
.-l~,t.otru~rf.
El~l~.rt.ott~c~s  (Dayton.
Ohio), pp.
286--290, 1958.
 61.
Siegel, K.
M., H.
A.
Alperin, R.
R.
Bronski, J.
W.
Crispin, A.
L.
Moffett, C.
E.
Schenstcd, anti I.
V.
 Schensted: Bistatic Radar Cross Sections of Surfaces of Revolution.
J.
Appl.
Phj~s., vol.
26.
 pp.
297-305, March.
1955.
 62.
Koch, W.
E., J.
L.
Stone, J.
E.
Clark, and W.
D.
Friedle: Forward Scatter of Electromagnetic Waves  by Spheres, IRE WESCON Con[).
Record.
vol.
3.
pt.
I.
p.
86, 1958.
 63.
Kock, W.
E.: Related Experiments with Sound Waves and Electromagnetic Wavcs.
/'roc,.
IR  vol.
47.
pp.
1200-1201, July, 1959.
 64.
Crispin.
J.
W., R.
F.
Goodrich, and K.
M.
Siegel: A Theoretical Method for the Calctrlariori of tile  Radar Cross Sections of Aircraft and Missiles, Utlirl.
Michiyatr Rtidirrtiotr Llrh.
Kept., 2591 - 1 -H on  Contract AF' 19(604)- 1949.
July, 1959.
 65.
Weil, H., M.
L.
Barasch, and T.
A.
Kaplan: Scattering of Electromagnetic Wavcs hy Splicrcs.
(11111..
 .klir~lrigut~ R~diutiotr Lab.
Srlrdirs it1 Rudar Cross Sc~r.rions .Y.
Repr.
2255-70-T or1 Contract :It-.
 30(60?1)- 1070, July, 1956.
 66.
Schultz, F.
V..
R.
C.
Bi~rgener, and S.
King: Measurement of the Radar Cross-scctior~ of it Mitt\.
l'r~itc,.
 IRE.
vol.
46.
pp.
476 4XI.
Fchruary, 1958.
 67.
tliatt.
R.
E., K.
M.
Siegcl, and H.
Weil: Forward Scattering by Coated Objects Illuminated l>y Sllol-t  Wavelength Radar, Pror..
IRE.
vol.
48, pp.
1630- 1635, Septemhor, 1960.
 68.
C'rispin, J.
W..
Jr., and K.
M.
Siegel: "Methods of Radar Cross-Section Analysis." Academic f'scss.
 New York.
1968, chap.
5.
 69.
King, R.
W.
P., and T.
T.
Wu: "The Scattering and Diffraction of Waves." Harvard University Press,  Cambridge, Mass., 1959.
 70.
IEEE Standard Letter Designations for Radar-Frequency Bands.
IEEE Std 52 1 - 1976.
Nov.
30.
1976.
 71.
Skolnik.
M.
I.: Millimeter and Submillimeter Wave Applications.
"Submillimeter Waves." vol XX.
 h!ic.r.orr~rr[~c~ Resrarcl~ Itrsrit~rtr S~ltnposiu Series, Jerome Fox (ed.), Polytechnic Press, Brooklyn.
New  York, 1971, pp.
9-25.
 568INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS 43.McAulay, R.J.:Interferometer DesignforElevation AngleEstimation, IEEETrl/II.\.•vol.AI·S·I pp.4g6-503, September, 1977.
44.Potter,K.E.:Experimental DesignStudyofanAirborne Interferometer forTerrain AvoiJam:c.
Intel"llational COt!(t'I"t'nCL' RADAR-n, pp.50g512,JEE (London) ConLPllbl.
no.155.
45.Ridenour, L.N.:"Radar System Engineering," MITRadiation Laboratory Series,McGraw-Hili BookCompany, NewYork,1947,sec.(6.11).
46.Westinghouse Brochure: TheARSR-3 Story,nodate.
47.Hartley-Smith, A.:TheDesignandPerformance ofaModern Surveillance RadarSystem.
IEEE1975 International RadarC01!(erence, Arlington, Va.,Apr.21-23,1975.pr.306..311.
48.Edgar,A.K.,E.J.Dodsworth.
andM.P.Warden: TheDesignofaModern Surwillance Radar.
Radar-Present andFull/re,lEEConLPubl.no.105,pp.8--13,1973.
49.DiNardo,U.:Adaptivity CriteriaofaModern AirTrafficControl Radar,Ril'islaTI!('f1ica Se/t'l/ia (Rome).
vol.2.no.4,pp.17-32,1975.
50.Murray, 1.P.:Electromagnetic Compatibility, chap.29of"RadarHandbook," McGraw-Hili Book Company, NewYork,1970.
51.Johnson, M.A.,andD.C.Stoner:ECCMfromtheRadarDesigner's Viewpoint, IEEEEledro70.
Boston.
May11--14,1976,paper30-5,Reprinted inMierolVtll'e JOllrl/al.
vol.21,pp.5963.March.
1978.
52.Howells, P.W.:Explorations inFixedandAdaptive Resolution atGEandSlJRe.IEEETrtllls.
vol.AP-24.pp.575-584.
Septemher.
1976.
53.Lamb.J.J.:AnoiseSilencing I.F.CircuitforSuperheterodyne Receivers.
QST.vol.211.p.II.h:brll­ ary.1936.
54.Carpentier, M.H.:..Radars: NewConcepts," Gordon andBreach, NewYork.I96H.sec.4.6 55.Severin, H.:Nonretlecting Absorbers forMicrowave Radiation.
IRETrailS.,vol.AP-·,t,pp.~X51l)2.
July,1956.
56.ABriefDescription oftheASR-8AirportSurveillance Radar.Tl'XlISJllsrrl/ml'llfs.
Jill'..SP05A-Hi76.
Equipment Group, August, 1976.
57.Skolnik, M.I.:AnAnalysis ofBistaticRadar,JRETrailS.,vol.ANE-~.
pp.1927.March.1961.
58.Caspers, 1.W.:BistaticandMultistatic Radar.chap.36of"RadarHandhook." M.I.Skolnik (l:d.).
McGraw-Hili BookCompany, NewYork,1970.
59."System forDetecting Objects byRadio." U.S.Patent 1.9~l.884.
granted Nov.27.1934.
toA.H Taylor,L.C.Young,andL.A.Hyland.
60.Siegel,K.M.:Bistatic RadarsandForward Scattering.
Natl.Calit:Proc..-IaO/wl/l.
Electrollies (Dayton, Ohio),pp.286-290, 1958.
61.Siegel,K.M.,H.A.Alperin, R.R.Bronski, J.W.Crispin, A.L.Moffett.
C.E.Schensted.
andI.V Schensted: Bistatic RadarCrossSections ofSurfaces ofRevolution, J.Appl.P/I\'S.,vol.26.
pp.297-305, March,1955.
62.Koch,W.E.,J.L.Stone,J.E.Clark.andW.D.Friedle: Forward ScatterofElectromagnetic Wavl:s bySpheres.
IREWESCONCQrW.RecD/'d,vol.2,pt.I.p.86,1958.
63.Kock,W.E.:Related Experiments withSoundWavesandElectromagnetic Waves.
ProcIRE.
vol.47.pp.1200-1201,July,1959.
64.Crispin, J.W..R.F.Goodrich, andK.M.Siegel:ATheoretical Method fortheCalculation ofthe RadarCrossSections ofAircraft andMissiJes,UIIiI'.MichigallRadiatiOIlLal>.RefIt..2591-1-Hon Contract AF19(604)-1949.
July,1959.
65.Wei!,H.,M.L.Barasch, andT.A.Kaplan: Scattering ofElectromagnetic WaveshySpheres.
Ullit· .\1ichigall Radiatioll Lal>.Studies illRadarCrossSectiolls X.Rept.2255-20- TonConIract:\F 30(6ll2)-107ll, July,1956.
66.Schultz, F.V..R.C.Burgener.
andS.King:Measurement oftheRadarCross-section ofaMan./'w('.
IRE.vol.4o,pp.4764XI.
February, 1958.
67.Hiatt,R.E..K.M.Siegel,andH.Weil:Forward Scattering byCoatedOhjects Illuminated hyShorl Wavelength Radar,Proc.IRE.vol.48.pp.1630-1635, Septemher.
1960.
6~.Crispin.
J.W..Jr..andK.M.Siegel:"Methods ofRadarCross-Section Analysis." Academic Press.
NewYork.
196~.chap.5.
69.King.R.W.P..andT.T.Wu:"TheScattering andDiffraction ofWaves." Harvard University Press.
Cambridge.
Mass.,1959.
70.IEEEStandard LetterDesignations forRadar-Frequency Bands.IEEEStd521-1976.
Nov.30.1976 71.Skolnik, M.I.:Millimeter andSubmillimeter WaveApplications.
"Submillimeter Waves." volXX.
Microl1'lll'l' Research Illstitute Symposia Series,JeromeFox(ed.).Polytechnic Press.Brooklyn.
New York,1971.pp.9-25. 72, Godlove, T.
F., V.
L.
Granatstein, and J.
Silverstein: Prospects for High Power Millimetcr Radar  Sources and Componen_ts.; IEEE EASCON-77 Record.
pp.
16-2A to 16-2F.
Sept.
26-28.
1977..
 Arlington, VA, IEEE Puhlicatio~r 77 CH 1255--9 EASCON; see atso' Microwave Systettt News, vol.
7,  pp.
75 -82, November 1977.
 73.
Waldman, J.: Millimeter arid Submillirneter Wave Receivers, U.S.
Army Missill* Rt..~c.nrc.h r~rd  Det~elopmer~t Commarld.
Techriical Report TE-77-17.
July 14.
1977.
Redstone Arsenal.
Alabama.
 (Distribution unlimited.)  74.
Cogdell, J.
R., et at.: High Resolution Millimeter Reflector Antennas.
IEEE Trnrts..
vol.
AP-18.
 pp.
515-529.
July, 1970.
 75.
Hayes, R.
13..
F.
H.
Dyer.
arid N.
C.
Currie: Backscatter from Ground Vegetation at Frcqirencics  Hetween 10 and lo() Gllz, I976 IEEE Ar~tetrtras utrd Proptlyurior~ Society Synlposiloi~.
Oct.
11 15,  1976.
pp.
93 -96.
IEEE Cat.
no.
76 CH 1121-3AP.
 76.
Dyer.
F.
B..
M.
J.
Gary, arid G.
W.
Ewell: Radar Seaclutter at 9.5.
16.5, 35, and 95 GHz, 1974 IEEE  Arrr tvrrrus ur~d Propugof io/i Socirfy Symposiii~n, June 10-.I 2.
1974, pp.
3 19-322.
I EEE Cat.
no.
74  Ci108S 1-3AP.
 77.
Dyer.
F.
H..
N.
C'.
Currie.
arid M.
J.
Applegate: Radar Backscatter from Land.
Sea, Rain, and Snow at  h.iiliirilctcr Wavel~ngt 11s.
Ir~tc~r~rnt~ott(~l Cor!/i~rer~c~> R ADA R-77, pp.
559- 563, IEE (London) Conf.
 P~thl.
no.
15.5.
 7H.
Ctrrric: N.
C'..
I:.
13.
Ilycr n~itl (i.
W.
[lwcll: Cliaractcristics of Snow at Millimetcr Wavclcngtlls.
1976  Il.;I:E rrrc~rrrrc~s trrrd I'r~olrcrqc~tiorr Soc.iclry Syrrtposi~rrtr, Oct.
11 15, 1976, pp.
5X9 582, 1131:l'.
Cat.
no.
76  <.*I! 1121-3AP.
 79.
Cur-rie, N.
C..
F.
1%.
I>ycr, arid R.
I>.
Hayes: Some P.roperties of Radar Returns frorn Rain at 9.375, 35.
 70, arid 95 <ill?.
I EEE I975 Irrtc~rrrctriorrt~l Rtrdur Cor!/i~rcrrcc>, Apr.
2 1 -23.
1975.
Arlirigtoli, VA.
 pp.
215 220.
If:I!I~ Cat.
no.
75 Cl10 938-1 AES.
 80.
Meyer.
J.
W.: Millimeter Wave Research: Past, Present, and Future, h117' Lirrcolrr Ltrh.
'l'cc.11.
 Rept.
389.
May 17.
1965.
 81.
Karrfrnan.
I.: Tlie Band Retween Microwave and Infrared Regions, Proc.
IRE.
vol.
47.
pp.
371 --396,  Mar..
1959.
 82.
Hlake, L.
V.: Prediction of Radar Range.
cliap.
2 of " Radar.
Handbook," M.
1.
Skolnik (ed.).
 McGraw-Hill Hook Company, New York, 1970, fig.
30.
 83.
Fox.
J.
(ed.): " Proceedings of the Symposium on Submillimeter Waves," Polytechnic Press of the  Polytechnic Institute of Brooklyn, Brooklyn, New York, 1971.
 84.
Batt, R.
1..
and D.
J.
Harris: Submillimeter Waves.
The Radio ar~d Elrctror~ic Enginerr, vol.
46,  pp.
379 392.
August/September 1976.
 85.
Johnson, C.
M.: Laser Radars, chap.
37 of" Radar Handbook." M.
1.
Skolnik (ed.), McGraw-Hill  Book Company, New York, 1970.
 86.
Mendez, A.
J., A.
C.
Layton, and P.
K.
Schefel: A Quasi Linear FM/CW Laser Radar.
IEEE 1975  lnterrit~tio~tul Rodirr Cot!fi~rrrrcr.
Apr.
21 -23, 1975, Arlington, VA, pp.
128- 131, IEEE Cat.
no.
75  Cfi0 938-1 AES.
 87.
(iucnther.
13.
I)..
J.
J.
Hennelt.
W.
L.
Gamble, and R.
L.
Hartman: Submillinictcr Research: A  Propagation Bibliography, U.S.
Arrrty Missile Command, Rerlstot~e Arsenal.
Alabarrta, Teci~r~ical  Rt~port RR-77-3, November.
1976.
(Distribution unlimited.)  88.
~okcrs.
U.
V..
and R.
L.
Olsen: Calculation of Radiowave Attenuation Due to Rain at Frequencies  i~p lo 1 OW Ci Hz.
('otrttrt~rt~ic~afio~~.~ Rrst~c~rclr Ccr~trc~ (Ottawa, Canada, CRC Rcpt.
no.
1299.
Novcm-  her.
1976.
 89.
(;amble.
W.
L..
and T.
I>.
Hodgcris: Propagation of'Millimeter and Submillimeter Waves.
U.S.
,41.1?ry  Missile Reseurclr UII(/ Dt~t~eloptr~e~~r COI)~I?I~II~.
T~cII.
Repr.
TE-77-14, June.
1977.
 90.
Deirmendjian.
D.: Far-Infrared and Submillimeter Wave Attenuation by Clouds and Rain, J.
Appl.
 Afc~trorology.
vol.
14.
pp.
1584- 1593.
December, 1975.
 9 1.
Tomiyasu.
K.: Tutorial Review of Synthetic- Aperture Radar (SAR) with Applications to Imaging of  the Ocean Surface.
1'1.o~.
IEEE.
vol.
66, pp.
563-583, May, 1978.
 92.
Cindrich.
I., J.
Marks, and A.
~loosfer: Coherent Optical Processing of Synthetic Aperture Radar  Data, Proc.
Soc.
Photo-Oplicnl Instr~rmerrtution  engineer.^, vol.
128, "Effective UIilization of Optics in  Radar Systems." pp.
128-143.
1977.
 93.
Cooke.
C.
R.: Laser Radar Systems, Some Examples.
Proc.
Soc.
Plroto-Optical lnstrtinrerrtatiorl Er~gi-  neers, vol.
128, "Erective Utilization of Optics in Radar Systems," pp.
103- 107, 1977.
 94.
Fit zmaurice.
M.
W.
: NASA Ground-Rased and Space-Based Laser Ranging Systems.
Pr.oc..
Soc.
 Phoro-Optical Irrstr~rnrerrttltio~~ Etrgineers.
vol.
128, "Etfective Utilization of Optics in Radar  Systems," pp.
155 - 164.
1977.
 OTHER RADAR TOPICS569 72.Godlove.
T.F.•V.L.Granatstein, andJ.Silverstein: Prospects forHighPowerMillimeter Radar Sources andComponent!>." IEEEEASCON-77 Record.
pp.16-2Ato16-2F.Sept.26-28.1977.
Arlington.
VA.IEEEPublicatioll 77CH1255--9EASCON; seealsoMicrowave SystemNews.vot.7, pp.75-H2.November 1977.
73.Waldman.
1.:Millimeter andSubmiJlimeter WaveReceivers, U.S.ArmyMissileResellrch lIlId Det'elopmellt Commalld.
Technical ReportTE-77-I7.
July14.1977.Redstone Arsenal.
Alabama.
(Distribution unlimited.) 74.Cogdell, J.R..etat.:HighResolution Millimeter Reflector Antennas.
IEEETrails..vot.AP-18.
pr.515-529.
July.1970.
75.Hayes,R.D.,f.H.Dyer.andN.C.Currie: Backscatter fromGround Vegetation atFrequencies Between 10and100GHz.1976IEEEAlltellllas WIdPropagatioll SocietySymposium.
Oct.II15.
1976.pp.93·96.IEEECat.no.76CH1121-3AP.
76.Dyer.F.B..M.J.Gary.andG.W.Ewell:RadarSeaClutterat9.5.16.5.35.and95GHz,/974IEEE Alltcnnas andPropagation SocietySymposium.
June10-12.1974.pp.319-322.
IEEECat.no.74 CH0851-1A P.
77.Dyer.F.B..N.C.Currie.andM.J.Applegate: RadarBackscatter fromLand.Sea.Rain.andSnowat Millimeter Wavelengths.
IlItematiO/wl COII(i.'rellce RADAR-n.
pp.559-563.
lEE(London) Conf.
Puhl.no.155.
78.Currie:N.C..F.B.DyerandG.W.Ewell:Characteristics ofSnowatMillimeler Wave1engtlls.
11)7ti IEEE Alllc'III1C/S C1l1dI'l'OpCl{/C1licl/I SoddySymposium.
Oct.II15.1976.
pp.589582,IEEECal.no.76 CIf1121-3i\r.
79.Currie.N.C.f.B.Dyer,andR.D.Hayes:SomeProperlies ofRadarRelurns fromRainat9.375.35.
70,and95Gltz,IEEE1975IIIlel"/wtiC)/llIlRadarCc)/!(en'llce.
i\pr.2123.1975.i\rlington.
Vi\.
rr.215220,liTECal.no.75CliO938-1i\ES.
RO.Meyer, J.W.:Millimeter WaveResearch: Past.Present, andFuture.IHITLillcolllLah.Tech.
Repr.3119,May17.1965.
RI.Kaufman.
I.:TheBandBetween Microwave andInfrared Regions, Proc.IRE, vol.47.pp.381-396.
Mar..1959.
82.Blake,L.V.:Prediction ofRadarRange,chap.2of"Radar, Handbook," M.1.Skolnik (ed.).
McGraw-Hili BookCompany.
NewYork.1970.fig.30.
83.Fox.J.(ed.):"Proceedings oftheSymposium onSubmillimeter Waves." Polytechnic Pressofthe Polytechnic Institute ofBrooklyn.
Brooklyn.
NewYork.1971.
84.Ball.R.J..andD.J.Harris:Submillimeter Waves.TheRadioalldElectrOllic Ellgilleer, vol.46.
pro379392.August/September 1976.
85.Johnson.eM.:LaserRadars, chap.37of"RadarHandbook," M.l.Skolnik (cd.).McGraw-Hill BookCompany.
NewYork.1970.
116.Mendez.
A.J..A.C.Layton, andP.K.Schefel: AQuasiLinearFM/CW LaserRadar.IEEE1975 IlfIematicJ/lal RadarCOIl!t'I"I.'/lce.
Apr.21-23.1975.Arlington.
VA,pp.128-131.
IEEECat.no.75 CliO938-1AES.
117.Guenther, BD.,J.
J.Bennett.
W.L.Gamble.
andR.L.Hartman: SubmiJlimeter Research: i\ Propagation Bibliography, U.S.Arm.vMissileCommand.
Redstone Arsenal.
Alabama, Tedlllical ReportRR-77-J.
November.
1976.(Distribution unlimited.) 118.Rogers.
D.V..andR.L.Olsen:Calculation ofRadiowave Allenuation DuetoRainatFrequencies up101000GHz,Communica/iolls Research Cel//re(Ollawa.
Canada.
CRCRep!.no.1299,Novem­ ber.1976.
89.Gamhle.
W.L..andT.D.Hodgens: Propagation ofMillimeter andSubmillimeter Waves.U.s.Army MissileResearch ollClDC!'elopmellt Command, Tech.Rept.TE-77-14.
June.1977.
90.Dcirmendjian.
D.:Far-Infrared andSubmillimeter WaveAttenuation byCloudsandRain.J.Af'I'[ Meteorology.
vol.14.pp.1584-1593.
December.
1975.
91.Tomiyasu.
K.:Tutorial ReviewofSynthetic-Aperture Radar(SAR)withApplications toImaging of theOceanSurface.
Pmc.IEEE.vol.66.pp.563-583.
May,1978.
92.Cindrich.
I..J.Marks.andA.Klooster: Coherent Optical Processing ofSynthetic Aperture Radar Data,Proc.Soc.Photo-Optical Instrumentation Engineers.
vol.128,"Effective Utilization ofOpticsin RadarSystems." pp.12R143.1977.
93.Cooke,C.R.:LaserRadarSystems, SomeExamples.
Proc.Soc.Photo-Opticallnslrumelllation Engi­ neers.vol.128."ElTective Utilization ofOpticsinRadarSystems," pp.103-107, 1977.
94.Fitzmaurice, M.W:NASi\Ground-Based andSpace-Based LaserRanging Systems.
Pmc.Soc.
Photo-Oplical IlIslrumen/alioll Ellgineers.
vol.128,"Effective Utilization ofOptics inRadar Systems," pp.155-164.
1977. 570 1NTRODUCTlON TO RADAR SYSTEMS  95.
Tischer, F.
J.: The Groove Guide.
a Low-Loss waveguide for Millimeter Waves.
IEEE Tratls,  vol.
MTT- 1 1.
pp.
29 1-296.
September, 1963.
 96.
Tischer, F.
J.: H Guide and Laminated Dielectric Slab, IEEE TI-am..
vol.
MTT-18, pp.
9-15.
Janu-  ary.
1970.
 97.
Millimeter Waveguide Systems.
Microwave J., vol.
20, pp.
24 and 26, March, 1977.
 98.
Skolnik, M.
I.: A Perspective of Synthetic Aperture Radar for Remote Sensing, Naval Rrsrarch  Laboratory Memorandlrm Rept.
3783, May, 1978, Washington, D.C.
 99.
Weston, V.
H.: Theory of Absorbers in Scattering, Trans.
IEEE, vol.
AP-I 1, pp.
578-584.
September,  1963.
 100.
Crispin, J.
W., Jr., and K.
M.
Siegel: "Methods of Radar Cross-Section Analysis," Academic Press,  Inc., New York, 1968, chap.
7.
 101.
Graf, G.: On the Optimization of the Aspect Angle Windows for the Doppler Analysis of the Radar  Return of Rotating Targets, IEEE Trans., vol.
AP-24, pp.
378-381, May, 1976.
 102.
Trebits, R.
N., R.
D.
Hayes, and L.
C.
Bomar: mm-wave Reflectivity of Land and Sea, M~crowu~lr J .
 vol.
21, pp.
49-53, 83, August, 1978.
 103.
Giaccari, E., and G.
Nucci: A Family of Air Traffic Control Radars, IEEE Trans..
yol.
AES-15,  pp.
378-396, May, 1979.
,  104.
Wickenden, B.
V.
A., and W.
G.
Howell: Ferrite Quarter Wave Type Absorber, Conference Proceed-  ings Military Microwave, London, 1978, Microwave Exhibitions and Publishers Ltd., pp.
310-317.
 105.
Bachman, C.
G.: "Laser Radar Systems and Techniques," Artech House, Inc., Dedharn, Ma, 1979.
 570INTRODUCTION TORADAR SYSTEMS 95.Tischer.
F.J.:TheGroove Guide.aLow-Loss Wav~guide forMillimeter Waves.IEEETrails..
vol.MIT-It.
pp.291-296.
September.
1961 96.Tischer, F.J.:HGuideandLaminated Dielectric Slab.IEEETrails.•vol.MIT-18.
pp.9-15.Janu­ ary.1970.
97.Millimeter Waveguide Systems.
Microwave J.,vol.20.pp.24and26.March.1977.
98.Skolnik, M.I.:APerspective ofSynthetic Aperture RadarforRemote Sensing, NavalRest?arch Laboratory Memorandum Rept.3783,May,1978,Washington, D.C.
99.Weston, V.H.:TheoryofAbsorbers inScattering, Trans./EEE,vol.AP-IJ.pp.578-584.
September.
1961 100.Crispin,J.W.,Jr.,andK.M.Siegel:..Methods ofRadarCross-Section Analysis." Academic Press, Inc.,NewYork,1968,chap.7.
101.Graf,G.:OntheOptimization oftheAspectAngleWindows fortheDoppler Analysis oftheRadar ReturnofRotating Targets,IEEETrans.,vol.AP-24,pp.378-381.
May.1976.
102.Trebits,R.N.,R.D.Hayes,andL.C.Bomar:mm-wave Reflectivity ofLandandSea,MicrowUL't' J..
vol.21,pp.49-53,83,August, 1978.
' 103.Giaccari, E.,andG.Nucci:AFamilyofAirTrafficControl Radars,IEEETrans.,raJ.AES-J5, pp.378:396, May,1979., .
104.Wickenden, B.V.A.,andW.G.Howell: FerriteQuarter WaveTypeAbsorber, Conference Proceed­ ingsMilitaryMicrowave, London, 1978,Microwave Exhibitions andPublishers Ltd.,pp.310--317.
105.Bachman, C.G.:..LaserRadarSystems andTechniques," ArtechHouse,Inc.,Dedham, Ma,1979. INDEX  A posteriori probability, 377-378  A priori probability, 378  A sandwich radome, 267  A-scope, 6, 354  Absorbers, and radar cross section, 553  Accuracy, FM-CW altimeter, 86-87  Accuracy, radar measurement, 400-41 1  Acoustic delay lines, MTI, 126  Acquisition radar, 153  Acquisition, in tracking radar, 177-178  Active-switch modulator, 215  A/D converter, in MTI, 120  Adaptive antennas, 332-333  Adaptive array, in MTI, 145  ~da~tive'~~~, 142  Adaptive tracking, 180, 185  Adaptive threshold, in MTD, 128  Adaptive video threshold (AVT), 392, 488  ADT, 153, 183-186, 392  Air-supported radomes, 265  Air-surveillance radar, 536-541  Air traffic control radar, 536-541  HF OTH, 533  Aircraft, radar cross sections of, 39-44  Aircralt radornes, 267-268  Alpha-beta (a$) tracker, 184-185  Altimeter, FM-CW, 84-87  Altimeter, and snow, 482  Altitude return, in pulse doppler radar, 145  Ambiguity diagram, 41 1-420  Amplitron.
209.
212 Amplitude-comparison monopulse, 160-165  Amplitude fluctuations, in tracking radar,  167- 168  AMTI, 140-147  and SAR, 528  AN/FPS-85, 213  computer control of, 324, 328  AN/SPS-48, 301-302  AN/SPY-1, 309  AN/TPN- 19, 259-260  AN/TPS-59, 219  Angel echoes, 508-512  Angle fluctuations, 168-169  Angular accuracy, 409-41 1  of tracking radar, 167-172 -  Anomalous propagation, 450-456  Antenna scanning modulation, in MTI,  134-136, 144  Antenna temperature, 461, 464  Antennas, 223-337  adaptive, 332-333  aperture blocking in, 223-224, 239, 241, 266  aperture efficiency of, 288, 232  artificial dielectric lens, 249-252  Bayliss pattern for, 258  beam shape loss of, 58-59  az-el mount for, 271  Bootlace, 3 16  Butler beam-forming, 31 1-314  Cassegrain, 73, 240-242  constrained lens, 251  Aposteriori probability, 377-378 Aprioriprobability, 378 Asandwich radome, 267 A-scope, 6,354 Absorbers, andradarcrosssection,553 Accuracy, FM-CW altimeter, 86-87 Accuracy, radarmeasurement, 400-411 Acoustic delaylines,MTI,126 Acquisition radar,153 Acquisition, intracking radar,177-178 Active-switch modulator, 215 AIDconverter, inMTI,120 Adaptive antennas, 332-333 Adaprivearray, inMTI,145 Adaptive'MTl, 142 Adaptive tracking, 180,185 Adaptive threshold, inMTD,128 Adaptive videothreshold (AVT),392,488 ADT,153,183-186,392 Air-supported radomes, 265 Air-surveillance radar,536-541 Airtrafficcontrolradar,536-541 HFOTH,533 Aircrafi, radarcrosssections of,39-44 Aircraftradomes, 267-268 Alpha-beta (cx-P)tracker,184-185 Altimeter, FM-CW, 84-87 Altimeter, andsnow,482 Altitude return,inpulsedoppler radar,145 Ambiguity diagram, 411-420 Amplitron, 209.212INDEX Amplitude-comparison monopulse, 160-165 Amplitude fluctuations, intracking radar, 167-168 AMTI,140-147 andSAR,528 AN/FPS-85, 213 computer controlof,324,328 AN/SPS-48, 301-302 AN/SPY-l,309 AN(fPN-19,259-260 AN(fPS-59,219 Angelechoes,508-512 Anglefluctuations, 168-169 Angular accuracy, 409-411 oftracking radar,167-172 Anomalous propagation, 450-456 Antenna scanning modulation, inMTI, 134-136, 144 Antenna temperature, 461,464 Antennas, 223-337 adaptive, 332-333 aperture blocking in,223-224, 239, 241, 266 aperture efficiency of,288,232 artificial dielectric lens,249-252 Baylisspatternfor,258 beamshapelossof,58-59 az-elmountfor,271 Bootlace, 316 Butlerbeam-forming, 311-314 Cassegrain, 73,240-242 constrained lens,251 572 INDEX  Antennas :  cosecant-squared, 55-56, 258-261  coverage patterns of, 446-447  cross level of, 273  delta-a scanner, 298  dielectric lens, 248-250  directive gain of, 224  double-curvature reflector, 259  Eagle scanner, 298  effective aperture of, 226-227  errors in, 262-264  far field of, 229  f/D ratio of, 239  feeds for, 236  field-intensity pattern of, 229  Fraunhofer region of, 229  Fresnel region of, 229  gain of, 224-226  ice, effect of, 240  lenses as, 248-254  low sidelobe, 227-228, 333, 549  Luneburg lens, 252-253  metal-plate lens, 250-252  mirror-scan, 242-244  motor drives for, 273  Mubis, 316  multimode feeds for, 164  multipath in, 442-447  n-bar scan, 178  near field of, 228  offset feed for, 239  organ-pipe scanner, 247-248  parabolic cylinder, 235-236  parabolic reflector, 235-243  parabolic torus, 236, 246-247  paraboloid, 235  pattern synthesis for, 254-258  polarization of, 227  polarization twist, 242-243  power gain of, 54, 225-226  radiation pattern of, 224, 228-235, 280-282  radomes for, 264-270  random errors in, 262-264  resonant frequency of, 179  scanning feed, 244-248  sidelobe radiation from, 227-228  sidelobes, in MTI, 145  in pulse doppler, 145-146  stabilization of, 270-273  surfaces for, 239-240  synthetic aperture, 517-529  systematic errors in, 262  Taylor illumination for, 257-258  torque fins for, 269 Antennas:  transreflect or, 242  twist reflector, 242-243  Aperture blocking, 223- 224, 239  in Cassegrain antenna, 241  by radomes, 266  Aperture efficiency, 228, 232  Aperture illtrminations, 228 235  Area MTI, 148  Array antennas, 2723-337  Array factor, 281 -282  Arrays:  beam steerlng of, 282-285  beam steering computer for, 323  Blass beam-forming, 3 1 1-3 12  computer control of, 322-328  constrained feed for, 306-308  conformal, 330-33 1  corporate feed for, 285  digital phase shifters for, 287-288  diode phase shifters for, 288-291  Dolph-Chebyshev, 257  dome, 329-330  duai-mode ferrite phase shifter for, 295-296  electromechanical phase shifters for, 297-298  elements for, 305-306  endfire, 279  errors in, 318-322  feeds for, 306310  ferrimagnetic phase shifters for, 291 -297  ferroelectric phase shifters for, 297  flux drive ferrite phase shifter for, 295  Fox phase shifter for, 296297  frequency-scan, 298-305  grating lobes in, 281, 283, 300, 332  hemispherical coverage, 328-329  Huggins phase shifters for, 303-305  hybrid-coupled phase shifter for, 289  latching ferrite phase shifter for, 293-294  lens, 308-309  limited scan, 334  linear, 279  loaded-line phase shifter for, 289  mixer-matrix feed for, 305, 308  MOSAR, 315  multifunction, 323  multiple beam, 3 10-3 18  mutual coupling in, 306  parallel-fed, 283, 285  parallel-plate feed for, 309  phase-frequency, 303, 334  phase-phase, 335  phase shifter quantization in, 32 1-322  phase shifters for, 286-298  572INDEX Antennas: cosecant-squared, 55-56,258-261 coverage patterns of,446-447 crosslevelof,273 delta-ascanner, 298 dielectric lens,248-250 directive gainof,224 double-curvature reflector, 259 Eaglescanner, 298 effective aperture of,226-227 errorsin,262-264 farfieldof,229 flDratioof,239 feedsfor,236 field-intensity patternof,229 Fraunhofer regionof,229 Fresnelregionof,229 gainof,224-226 ice,effectof,240 lensesas,248-254 lowsidelobe, 227-228, 333,549 Luneburg lens,252-253 metal-plate lens,250-252 mirror-scan, 242-244 motordrivesfor,273 Mubis,316 multimode feedsfor,164 multipath in,442-447 "-barscan,178 nearfieldof,228 offsetfeedfor,239 organ-pipe scanner, 247-248 parabolic cylinder, 235-236 parabolic reflector, 235-243 parabolic torus,236,246-247 paraboloid, 235 patternsynthesis for,254-258 polarization of,227 polarization twist,242-243 powergainof,54,225-226 radiation patternof,224,228-235, 280-282 radomes for,264-270 randomerrorsin,262-264 resonant frequency of,179 scanning feed,244-248 sidelobe radiation from,227-228 sidelobes, inMTI,145 inpulsedoppler, 145-146 stabilization of,270-273 surfaces for,239-240 synthetic aperture, 517-529 systematic errorsin,262 Taylorillumination for,257-258 torquefinsfor,269Antennas: transrcfkctor, 242 twistreflector, 242-243 Aperture blocking, 223-224, 239 inCassegrain antenna, 241 byradomes, 266 Aperture efficiency, 228,232 Aperture illuminations, 228235 AreaMTI,148 Arrayantennas, 278-337 Arrayfactor,281-282 Arrays: beamsteering of,282-285 beamsteeringcomputer for,323 .> Blassbeam-forming, 311-312 computer controlof,322-328 constrained feedfor,306-308 conformal, 330-331 corporate feedfor,285 digitalphaseshiftersfor,287-288 diodephaseshiftersfor,288-291 Dolph-Chebyshev, 257 dome,329-330 dual-mode ferritephaseshifterfor,295-296 electromechanical phaseshiftersfor,297-298 elements for,305-306 endfire,279 errorsin,318-322 feedsfor,30~310 ferrimagnetic phaseshiftersfor,291-297 ferroelectric phaseshiftersfor,297 fluxdriveferritephaseshifterfor,295 Foxphaseshifterfor,29~297 frequency-scan, 298-305 gratinglobesin,281, 283, 300,332 hemispherical coverage, 328-329 Huggins phaseshiftersfor,303-305 hybrid-coupled phase shifterfor,289 latching ferritephaseshifterfor,293-294 lens,308-309 limitedscan,334 linear, 279 loaded-line phaseshifterfor,289 mixer-matrix feedfor,305,308 MOSAR,315 multifunction, 323 multiple beam,310-318 mutualcoupling in,306 parallel-fed, 283,285 parallel-plate feedfor,309 phase-frequency, 303,334 phase-phase, 335 phaseshiflerquantization in.321-322 phaseshiftersfor,286-298 INDEX 573  Arrays:  postamplification beam forming, 310-31 1  quantization in, 321-322, 334  radiation pattern of, 280-282  random errors in, 318-322  reflectarray.
309  Reggia-Spencer phase sliifter for, 291 -293  series-fed.
285  signal matiagemerit in, 324  sriakc feed for.
301  space-fcd, 308 -309  strharrays in, 309 310  switched-line phasc shiftcr for, 288  thinned, 309, 319, 331 -332  triangular element spacing in, 333-334  twin-slab phase shifters for, 294  unequally spaced, 331-332  ARSR-3, 538-541  Artificial dielectric lenses, 249-252  ASR.
536-537  Asymmetric monopulse, 175  Atmospheric attenuation, 459-461  Atmospheric noise, 461-463  Attenuation in waveguides, 57  Automatic detection, 183-184, 388-392  Automatic detection and track (ADT), 153,  183-186, 392  Automatic gain control, 157- 158  and amplitude fluctuations, 168  and angle fluctuations.
169  in monopulse, 164  Automobile, radar cross section of, 44  Az-el mount.
271  B sandwich radome, 267  Balanced duplexers, 360-36 1  Balanced mixers, 348-349  BAM.
510,  Bandwidth:  CW radar, 75-76  efkctive.
404 -405  klystron, 203  noise, 18  tracking, 178  Barker code, 428-429, 432  Bayes' rule, 377-378  Bayliss pattern, for monopulse, 258  Beam shape loss, 58-59  Ream-sharpening mode, SAR.
527  Deam splitting, 184, 390, 392, 400  Beam steering, array, 282-285  Beam-steering computer, 323  Bed of spikes ambiguity diagram, 418-419  Binary moving-window detector, 388-390 Binomial coefficients, in MTI, 110  Bipolar video, 103- 104  Birds, 508-510  Bistatic radar, 553-560  Black-hole effect, in MTI, 137  Blass beam-forming array, 311-312  Blind phases, MTI, 119  Blind speeds, MTI, 108  Blip-scan ratio, 63  Blocking, of antenna aperture, 223-224, 239  Bootlace antenna, 316  Boxcar generator, 117, 156  Bragg scatter, 480, 534  Branch-type duplexer, 360  Brewster's angle, 444  Bright band, 502  Bright displays, 357-358  Brightness temperature, 461-462  Burnout, diode, 350  Burnthrough, 549  Butler beam-forming array, 31 1-314  C sandwich radome, 267  Cancellation ratio, MTI, 130  Canonical MTI comb filter, 112  Capillary waves, 480  Cassegrain antenna, 240-242  in Hawk system, 73  Cathode-driven CFA, 212  Cathode pulsing, of CFA, 210  Cathode ray tube display, 353-359  Cell-averaging CFAR, 392-393  CFAR, 392-395  in ECCM, 550  log-FTC, 506  and pulse compression, 433  Chaff, 552-553  Channel tuning, klystron, 204  Charge transfer device (CTD), fo; MTI, 126  Chi-square probability density function, 49-51  Chirp pulse compression, 422-427  Circular polarization, and rain, 504-506  Circulator, in duplexer, 365  Clear-air turbulence, 5 10-51 1  Clouds, scattering from, 502-503  Clutter, 470-512  angel, 508-512  land, 489-498  at millimeter wavelengths, 563-564  sea, 474-489  weather, 498-508  Clutter attenuation, MTI, 11 1, 130  Clutter doppler spread, AMTI, 142-145  Clutter fluctuations, MTI, 13 1- 134  Arrays: postamplification beamforming.
310-311 quantization in.321-322.
334 radiation patternof.280-282 randomerrorsin,318-322 reflectarray.309 Reggia-Spencer phaseshifterfor.291-293 series-fed.
285 signalmanagement in,324 snakefeedfor.301 space-fed.
3U8-309 suharrays in.309310 switched-line phaseshifterfor,2R8 thinned, 3U9.319.331-332 triangular elementspacingin,333-334 twin-slah phaseshiftersfor.294 unequally spaced.331-332 ARSR-3,538-541 Artificial dielectric lenses,249-252 ASR,536-537 Asymmetric monopulse.
175 Atmospheric attenuation, 459-461 Atmospheric noise.461-463 Attenuation inwaveguides.
57 Automatic detection.
183-184.388-392 Automatic detection andtrack(ADT).153, 183-186.392 Automatic gaincontrol.
157-158 andamplitude fluctuations, 168 andanglefluctuations.
169 inmonopulse.
164 Automobile, radarcrosssectionof,44 Az-e!mount,271 Bsandwich radome, 267 Balanced duplexers.
360-361 Balanced mixers.348-349 BAM, 510~ Bandwidth: CWradar,75-76 effective.
404-405 klystron.
203 noise,18 tracking.
178 Barkercode.428-429, 432 Bayes'rule,377-378 Baylisspattern,formonopulse, 258 Beamshapeloss.58-59 Ream-sharpening mode,SAR,527 Reamsplitting, 184.390,392.400 Beamsteering, array.282-285 Beam-steering computer.
323 Bedofspikesambiguity diagram.
418-419 Binarymoving-window detector, 388-390INDEX573 Binomial coefficients, inMTI.110 Bipolarvideo,103-104 Birds,508-510 Bistaticradar,553-560 Black-hole effect,inMTI,137 Blassbeam-forming array,311-312 Blindphases,MTI.119 Blindspeeds,MH.108 Blip-scan ratio,63 Blocking, ofantenna aperture.
223-224.
239 Bootlace antenna.
316 Boxcargenerator.
117,156 Braggscatter,480.534 Branch-type duplexer.
360 Brewster's angle,444 Brightband.502 Brightdisplays, 357-358 Brightness temperature.
461-462 Burnout.
diode,350 Burnthrough, 549 Butlerbeam-forming array,311-314 Csandwich radome, 267 Cancellation ratio.MTI,130 Canonical MTIcombfilter,112 Capillary waves,480 Cassegrain antenna, 240-242 inHawksystem,73 Cathode-driven CFA,212 Cathode pulsing,ofCFA,210 Cathode raytubedisplay,353-359 Cell-averaging CFAR,392-393 CFAR.392-395 inECCM,550 log-FTC, 506 andpulsecompression, 433 Chaff,552-553 Channel tuning,klystron, 204 Chargetransferdevice(CTD),forMTl,126 Chi-square probability densityfunction, 49-51 Chirppulsecompression, 422-427 Circular polarization, andrain,504-506 Circulator, induplexer, 365 Clear-air turbulence, 510-511 Clouds,scattering from,502-503 Clutter,470-512 angel,508-512 land, 489-498 atmillimeter wavelengths, 563-564 sea.474-489 weather.
498-508 Clutterattenuation, MTl,111,130 Clutterdopplerspread,AMTI,142-145 Clutterfluctuations, MTI,131-134 574 INDEX  Clutter-lock MTI.
142  Clutter map.
184  in MTD.
127  Coaxial magnetron, 193- 198  Coaxitron, 21 3  Coded pulse, 428-431  Coherent detector, 385-386  Coherent reference, in MTI, 102  Coho, 105, 141  Cold-cat hode emission, 2 10  Collapsing loss.
59-60  Color CRTs, 357  Complex angle monopulse, 176  Computer control of array radar.
322-328  Cone sphere, radar cross section of.
35-37  Conformal arrays, 330-33 1  Conical scan, 155.- 159, 182- 183  Conopulse.
164  Constant-false-alarm-rate receiver (srr CFAR)  Const rained feed, 306-308  Constrained lens.
25 1  Control electrode, CFA.
2 1 1  Convective cell, 5 10  Conversion efficiency, 19 1  Conversion loss, mixer, 347  Cookie cutter tuner, 199  Corporate feed, 285  Correlation detection, 375-376  Correlation function, 373  Correlation time, sea echo, 484-485  Cosecant-squared antenna, 55-56, 258-261  Cosmic noise, 461  COSRO, 159  Coupled cavity TWT, 207  Coverage pattern, elevation, 446-447  Cross-correlation receiver, 375  Cross level, antenna, 273  Cross section (see radar cross section)  Cross talk, in tracking radar, 158  Crossed-field amplifiers, 208-2 13  Crossed linear polarization, 506  Crowbar, for tube protection, 216  Crown-of-t horns tuner, 199  CRT screens, 355-357  Cumulative probability of detection, 64  CW radar, 68 -8 1  CW wave-interference radar, 9  Data stabilization, antenna, 270  d-c operation, of CFA, 21 1  Decorrelation time, sea echo, 484-485  Decoy, 553  Delay-line canceler, 104, 106- 1 14  Delay lines, pulse compression, 424-426 Delta-a scanner.
298  Density modulation.
2 13  Density taper.
332  Detection crileria, 376-382  with non-Rayleigh clutter, 485-486  Detector characteristics, 382-386  Dicke fix, 394.
549-550  Dieiect ric lenses, 248-250  Diffraction, 156-459  Digital phase shifters, 287 --288  Digital processing:  MTI, 119-125  SAR, 526  Diode burnout, 350 .' Diode phase shifters, 288-291 .-'  Diodes, microwave, 2 17  Directive gain, antenna, 224  1)ispcrsivc dclay lines, 424 426  Displaced PIlase Center Antenna (DPCA).
 143 144  I)isplays, 353 359  definitions of.
354 355  Dither tuning, of magnetron.
200  Dolph-Chebyshev array, 257  Dome antenna.
329-330  Dpppler filter bank, MTD.
127  Doppler frequency shift, 68-69, 79-80  in FM-CW radar, 83  Doppler measurement accuracy.
47-48  Doppler navigation.
92-95  Doppler-tolerant waveform, 427  Doppler tracking, 182  Double-curvature reflector, 259  Double delay line cancclcr, 109  Double-null diffcrcncc pattern, 175  Double-threshold detector, 388  DPCA, 143- 144  Dual-mode ferrite phase shiiter, 295--296  Ducting, 450--456  Duplexers, 359 366  and diode burnout, 350  Duty cycle, 52  Dynamic programming, 332  Dynamic range, 352  and low-noise receivers, 352  Eagle scanner, 298  ECCM, 542, 547-553  Effective aperture, antena, 226-227  Effective bandwidth, 404-405  Effective earth's radius, 449  Effective noise temperature, 345  Efficiency :  aperture, 228-232  574INDEX Clutter-lock MTI.142 Cluttermap,184 inMTD,127 Coaxial magnetron, 193-198 Coaxitron,213 Codedpulse,428-431 Coherent detector, 385-386 Coherent reference, inMTI,102 Coho,105,141 Cold-cathode emission, 210 Collapsing loss,59-60 ColorCRTs.357 Complex anglemonopulse, 176 Computer controlofarrayradar,322-328 Conesphere1radarcrosssectionof,35-37 Conformal arrays,330-331 Conical scan,155--159, 182-183 Conopulse, 164 Constant-false-alarm-rate receiver(seeCFAR) Constrained feed,306-308 Constrained lens,251 Control electrode, CFA,211 Convective cell,510 Conversion efficiency, 191 Conversion loss,mixer,347 Cookiecuttertuner,199 Corporate feed,285 Correlation detection, 375-376 Correlation function, 373 Correlation time,seaecho,484-485 Cosecant-squared antenna, 55-56,258-261 Cosmicnoise,461 COSRO, 159 Coupled cavityTWT,207 Coverage pattern,elevation, 446-447 Cross-correlation receiver, 375 Crosslevel,antenna, 273 Crosssection(seeradarcrosssection) Crosstalk,intracking radar,158 Crossed-field amplifiers, 208-213 Crossed linearpolarization, 506 Crowbar, fortubeprotection, 216 Crown-of-t hornstuner,199 CRTscreens, 355-357 Cumulative probability ofdetection, 64 CWradar, 6~H~I CWwave-interference radar,9 Datastabilization, antenna, 270 d-coperation, ofCFA,211 Decorrelation time,seaecho,484-485 Decoy,553 Delay-line canceler, 104,106-114 Delaylines,pulsecompression, 424-426Delta-ascanner, 298 Densitymodulation, 213 Density taper,332 Detection criteria, 376-382 withnon-Rayleigh clutter,485-486 Detector characteristics, 382-386 Dickefix,394,549-550 Dielectric lenses,248-250 Diffraction, ~56-459 Digitalphaseshifters, 287-288 Digitalprocessing: MTI,119-125 SAR,526 Diodeburnout, 350 Diodephaseshifters, 288-291 Diodes,microwave, 217 Directive gain,antenna, 224 Dispersive delaylincs,424 426 Displaced PhaseCenterAntenna (DPCA).
143144 Displays, 353 359 definitionsof,354355 Dithertuning,ofmagnetron, 200 Dolph-Chebyshev array,257 Domeantenna, 329-330 Doppler filterbank,MTD.127 Doppler frequency shift,68-69.79-80 inFM-CW radar,83 Doppler measurement accuracy, 407-408 Doppler navigation.
92-95 Doppler-tolerant waveform, 427 Doppler tracking, 182 Double-curvature reflector.
259 Doubledelaylinecanceler, 109 Double-null diffcn:ncc pattcrn, 175 Double-threshold detector, 388 DPCA,143-144 Dual-mode ferritephaseshifter,295296 Dueling, 450-456 Duplexers, 359366 anddiodeburnout, 350 Dutycycle,52 Dynamic programming, 332 Dynamic range,352 andlow-noise receivers, 352 Eaglescanner, 298 ECCM,542,547-553 Effective aperture, antena,226-227 Effective bandwidth, 404-405 Effective earth'sradius,449 Effective noisetemperature, 345 Efficiency: aperture, 228-232 INDEX 575  Efficiency :  klystron.
204  tube, 191  Electromeclianical phase shifters, 297-298  Electron-bombarded semiconductor (EBS)  device.
217 218  Electron gun.
201  Electronic counter-countermeasures.
542,  547 553  Elevated ducts, 453  Eridfire array.
279  Engine modulations, 435  Envelope detector, 23.
382-385  I:~~virotlrnenld noisc, 461 465  l!q\ripmctit instabilities.
ill M 1'1, 130 131  Frrors.
 irr it1 ray ar~tcnniis.
3 1 H 322  in reflector antennas.
262- 264  Fvaporation duct, 453 455  1:xponcrttial probability density function, 23  Externally collerent MTI, 138  False alarm, 17  False alarm number.
30  False alarm probability.
24  False alarm time, 24-26, 32  Far field.
antenna.
229  Faraday rotator.
296  Fast Fourier Transform, 123  and multiple beams.
3 17  (ID ratio.
antenna.
239  Feeds :  array antenna.
306-310  paraboloid.
226  Fences.
radar, 175.
497 -498  Ferrimagnetic phase shifters, 29 1-297  Ferrite limiter.
264  Ferrite pfyse shifters, 291-297  Ferroelectric phase shifter, 297  Field-intensity pattern, 229  Filter bank: .
 CW radar.
76- 77  digital, for MTI.
121- 125  Fixed error, FM-CW altimeter.
86-87  Flicker noise, 74, 347-348  Fluid-cooled helix TWT, 207  Flux drive ferrite phase shifter, 295  FM-CW radar.
82-92  FM pulse compresoion.
422-427  Foam shell radome, 267  Focused SAR, 519  Forward scatter.
553  Fox phase shifter.
296-297  Fraunhofer region, antenna, 229 Frequency agility:  ECCM, 548  for glint reduction, 170- 172  and sea echo, 485  Frequency diversity, 548  Frequency measurement accuracy, 407-408  Frequency modulated CW radar, 81-92  Frequency-scan arrays, 298-305  Frequency-scan radar.
and pulse compression.
 433  Fresnel region, antenna, 229  Fresnel zone plate, 523, 527  Gain.
antenna.
224-226  Gaseous discharge pliase shifter, 297  Gaussian probability density function, 22  Geodesic dome.
265  Glirrt, 168-172  Grating lobes, 281, 283, 300, 332  Grazing angle, 473  Grid-controlled tubes, 2 13  Ground-wave OTH radar, 536  Half-wave wall radome, 267  Hard-tube modulator, 215-2 16  Height finder radar, 541 -546  Helical scan, 177, 545  Hemispherical coverage arrays, 328-329  HF OTH radar, 529-536  High-range-resolution monopulse, 18 1 - 182,  High-range-resolution radar, 434-435  Hologram, 523-526  Home on jam, 549  Huggins phase shifter, 303-305  Hybrid-coupled phase shifter, 289  IAGC, 488  Ice:  on antennas, 240  on radomes, 269  sea, 48 1-482  Ice spheres, scattering from, 502  Ideal observer, 380  IF cancellation, MTI, 126  Image frequency, of mixer, 347  Image-recovery mixer, 349  Improvement factor, MTI:  antenna scanning, 134- 136  antenna sidelobes, 145  clutter fluctuations, 131-134  defined, 11 1, 129  equipment instability, 130-13 1  limiting.
136-138  quantization, 120  Efficiency: klystron.
204 tube.191 Electromechanical phaseshifters.297-298 Electron-bombarded semiconductor (EBS) device.21721R Electron gun.201 Electronic counter-countermeasures.
542.
54755] Elevated ducts.453 Endfirearray.279 Enginemodulations.
435 Envelope detector.
D.3R2-3R5 Environmcntal noisc.461465 Equipmcnt instahilities.
inMTI.1.10131 Errors: inarrayantcnnas.
31R322 inrcnector antennas.
262--264 rvaporation ducl,453455 F:llponcntial prohahility densityfunction.
23 bternally coherent MTI.138 Falsealarm.17 Falsealarmnumber.
30 Falsealarmprobability.
24 Falsealarmtime.24-26,32 Farfield.antenna.
229 Faraday rotator.296 FastFourierTransform.
123 andmultiple beams.317 fJDratio.antenna.
239 Feeds: arrayantenna.
306-310 paraboloid.
236 Fences.radar.175.497498 Ferrimagnetic phaseshifters, 291-297 Ferritelimiter.264 Ferrite pl~seshiftas.
291-297 Ferroelectric phaseshifter.297 Field-intensity pattern.
229 Filterbank: CWradar.76-77 digital.forMTI.121-125 Fixederror.FM-CW altimeter.
86-87 Flickernoise.74.347-348 Fluid-cooled helixTWT.207 Fluxdriveferrilephaseshifler.295 FM-CW radar.82-92 FMpulsecompresiion.
422-427 Foamshellradome.
267 Focused SAR.519 Forward scatter.557 Foxphaseshifter.296-297 Fraunhofer region.anlenna.
229INDEX575 Frequency agility: ECCM.548 forglintreduction, 170-172 andseaecho,485 Frequency diversity, 548 Frequency measurement accuracy, 407-408 Frequency modulated CWradar,81-92 Frequency-scan arrays,298-305 Frequency-scan radar.andpulsecompression.
433 Fresnelregion,antenna, 229 Fresnelzoneplate,523.527 Gain.antenna.
224-226 Gaseous discharge phaseshifter,297 Gaussian probability densityfunction.
22 Geodesic dome.265 Glint.168-172 Grating lobes.281,283.300,332 Grazing angle.473 Grid-controlled tubes,213 Ground-wave OTHradar,536 Half-wave wallradome, 267 Hard-tube modulator, 215-216 Heightfinderradar,541-546 Helicalscan,177,545 Hemispherical coverage arrays,328-329 HFOTHradar,529-536 High-range-resolution monopulse, 181-182.
High-range-resolution radar.434-435 Hologram.
523-526 Homeonjam,549 Huggins phaseshifter.303-305 Hybrid-coupled phaseshifter.289 IAGC,488 Ice: onantennas, 240 onradomes, 269 sea.481-482 Icespheres, scattering from,502 Idealobserver, 380 IFcancellation, MTI,126 Imagefrequency, ofmixer.347 Image-recovery mixer,349 Improvement factor,MTI: antenna scanning, 134-136 antenna sidelobes, 145 clutternuctuations, 131-134 defined, 111,129 equipment instability, 130-131 limiting, 136-138 quantization, 120 Incidence angle, 473  Index of refraction, for air, 448  Insects, 510  Integration improvement factor, 30-31  for Swerling models, 49  Integration loss, 30-33  Integration, of radar pulses, 29-33  Integrators, 388-392  Interclutter visibility, 130, 494-495  Interferometer:  in height finding, 545  radar, 165  Intermediate-frequency receiver, CW radar, 74  Interrupted CW (ICW), 147  Inverse probability receiver, 377-379  Inverse SAR, 528-529  Inverse scattering, 437-438  Inverted coaxial magnetron, 195  Ion oscillations, 74  Ionosphere, 530  IREPS, 456  Isolation, in CW radar, 71-73  in FM-CW radar, 88-91  Kalman filter, 185  Kalmus clutter filter, 497  Keep-alive, in TR tube, 362-363  Klystron amplifier, 200-205  Knife-edge ambiguity diagram, 41 8-419  Lambert surface, 497  Land clutter, 489-498  at millimeter wavelengths, 563  Laser radar, 564-566  Latching ferrite phase shifters, 293-294  Lens antennas, 248-254  Lens array, 308-309  Letter-band nomenclature, 8  Likelihood-ratio receiver, 377, 379  Limited-scan arrays, 334  Limiting, in MTI, 136-138  Limiting loss, 59  Lin-log receiver, 507  Linear array, 279  Linear beam tubes, 200-208  Linear FM pulse compression, 422-427  Linear recursive sequences, 429  Line-of-sight stabilization, 270  Line-type modulator, 214-215  Loaded-line phase shifter, 289  Lobe recognition, in height finding, 546  Lobe switching, 153  Lobing, due to multipath, 442-447 Log-FTC, 506-507  and sea clutter, 486-488  Log-log.receiver, 486-488  Log normal probability density function, 51  and sea clutter, 479  Logarithmic detector, 384  LORO, 159  Loss, integration, 30-33  Losses, system, 56-6 1  Low-angle tracking, 172- 176  Low-noise front ends, 351-353  Low-sidelobe antenna, 227-228, 333, 549  Luneburg lens, 252-253  m-out-of-,I detector, 388-390, 486  Magnetron, 192-200  Man, radar cross section of, 44  Matched filter, 5, 16, 369-375  in FM-CW radar, 91-92  Maximal length sequences, 429  Maximum unambiguous range, 2-3  Measurement accuracy, 400-41 1  Median detector, 486  Metal-plate lens, 250-252  Metal space-frame radome, 266  Metallic radomes, 268  METRRA, 437  Microwave radiation hazards, 465-466  Microwave refractometer, 455  Mie region, 34  Millimeter wave radar, 560-564  Minimum detectable signal, 16- 18  Mirror-scan antenna, 242-244  Mixer-matrix feed, 305, 308  Mixers, 347-35 1  Modulating anode, 201, 203  Modulators, 2 14-216  Module, solid-state, 2 17-21 8  Monopulse radar, 160-167, 182-183  in height finding, 543  and high-range-resolution, 18 1 - 182, 435  Monostatic radar, 553  MOPA (master-oscillator power amplifier), 106  MOSAR, 315  Motor drives, for antennas, 273  Moving Target Detecior, 127-129  Moving target indication (see MTI)  Moving-window detector, 184, 388-390  MTD, 127-129  MTI radar, 101-148  acoustic delay line, 126  A/D converter, 120  adaptive, 142  576INDEX Incidence angle,473 Indexofrefraction, forair,448 Insects,510 Integration improvement factor,30-31 forSwerling models,49 Integration loss,30-33 Integration, ofradarpulses,29-33 Integrators, 388-392 Interclutter visibility, 130,494-495 Interferometer: inheightfinding,545 radar,165 Intermediate-frequency receiver, CWradar,74 Interrupted CW(ICW),147 Inverseprobability receiver, 377-379 InverseSAR,528-529 Inversescattering, 437-438 Inverted coaxialmagnetron, 195 Ionoscillations, 74 Ionosphere, 530 IREPS,456 Isolation, inCWradar,71-73 inFM-CW radar,88-91 Kalman filter,185 Kalmusclutterfilter,497 Keep-alive, inTRtube,362-363 Klystron amplifier, 200-205 Knife-edge ambiguity diagram, 418-419 Lambert surface,497 Landclutter, 489-498 atmillimeter wavelengths, 563 Laserradar,564-566 Latching ferritephaseshifters,293-294 Lensantennas, 248-254 Lensarray, 308-309 letter-band nomenclature, 8 Likelihood-ratio receiver, 377,379 Limited-scan arrays,334 Limiting, inMTI,136-138 Limiting loss,59 Lin-logreceiver, 507 Lineararray,279 Linearbeamtubes,200-208 LinearFMpulsecompression, 422-427 Linearrecursive sequences, 429 Line-of-sight stabilization, 270 Line-type modulator, 214-215 Loaded-line phaseshifter,289 Loberecognition, inheightfinding,546 Lobeswitching, 153 lobing,duetomultipath, 442-447Log-FTC, 506-507 andseaclutter,486-488 Log~log.receiver; 486-488 Lognormalprobability densityfunction, 51 andseaclutter,479 Logarithmic detector, 384 LORa, 159 Loss,integration, 30-33 Losses,system,56-61 low-angle tracking, 172-176 Low-noise frontends,351-353 Low-sidelobe antenna, 227-228, 333,549 Luneburg kns,252-253 J m-out-of-Il detector, 388-390,486 Magnetron, 192-200 Man,radarcrosssectionof,44 Matched filter,5,16,369-375 inFM-CW radar,91-92 Maximal lengthsequences, 429 Maximum unambiguous range,2-3 Measurement accuracy, 400-411 Mediandetector, 486 Metal-plate lens,250-252 Metalspace-frame radome, 266 Metallic radomes, 268 METRRA,437 Microwave radiation hazards, 465-466 Microwave refractometer, 455 Mieregion,34 Millimeter waveradar,560-564 Minimum detectable signal,16-18 Mirror-scan antenna, 242-244 Mixer-matrix feed,305,308 Mixers,347-351 Modulating anode,201,203 Modulators, 214-216 Module, solid-state, 217-218 Monopulse radar,160-167, 182-183 inheightfinding,543 andhigh-range-resolution, 181-182, 435 Monostatic radar,553 MOPA(master-oscillator poweramplifier).
106 MOSAR,315 Motordrives,forantennas, 273 MovingTargetDetector, 127-129 Movingtargetindication (seeMTI) Moving-window detector, 184,388-390 MTD,127-129 MTIradar,101-148 acoustic delay line,126 AIDconverter, 120 adaptive, 142 INDEX 577  M.T.1.:  adaptive array, 145  cancellation ratio, 130  ca~ionical comb filter, 112  cllarge transfer device.
126  clutter attcnuntion.
11 1.
130  clutter fluctuations, 131 134  clutter-lock.
142  cluttcr map.
127  coliercnt reference, 385 386  colto, 105.
141  delay-line canceler, 104- 1 14  digital processing.
119 -125  doppler filter bank.
127  double delay-line canceler, 109  DPCA, 143-144  externally coherent, 138  filter bank.
121-125, 127  1 F cancellation, 126  improvement factor:  antenna scanning, 134- 136  antenna sidelobes, 145  clutter fluctuations.
131 - 134  definition.
I1 I.
129  equipment instabilities, 130 131  limiting, 136- 138  quanti7ation.
120  interclutter visibility, 130, 494-495  limiting in, 136- 138  Moving Target Detector, 127-129  multiple prf's, 114-1 17  noncoherent, 138-139  nonrecursive filter, 110  phase detector, 105  quadrature channel, 119  quantization, 120  recursive filter, 1 13  reference gdin, I I I  second-time-around echoes, 1 17  staggered prl 114-1 17  .
stalo, 105  storage tube, 126  subclutter visibility, 129-1 30  TACCAR, 142  three-pulse canceler, 109 - 1 10  transient response.
1 13 1 14  transversal filter, 1 10- 1 14  two-frequency, 147 148  visibility factor, 130  Mubis antenna, 316  Multifunction array, 323  Multifunction radar, 337  Multimode feeds, in monopulse, 164  Multipactor duplexer, 365 Multipalli:  and antenna lobing.
442-447  in tracking radar, 172  Multiple beams, it] arrays, 310-318  Multiple-frequency CW radar, 95-98  Multiple prf, in MTI, 114-1 17  Mutual coupling, 306  ?I-bar scan, 178  Near field, antenna, 228  Neyman-Pearson observer, 376  Nodding-beam height finder, 541-542  Nodding scan, 178  Noise:  in angle tracking, 167-170  atmospheric, 461 -463  environmental, 461-465  in range tracking, 177  Noise bandwidth, 18  Noise factor, 344  Noise figure, 344-347, 350-35 1  Noise jamming, 548-55 1  Noise temperature, 345-346  Noise-temperature ratio, 347  Nomenclature, letter band, 8  Noncoherent AMTI, 147  Noncoherent integration, 29-32  Noncoherent MTI, 138- 139  Nonlinear-contact scattering effects, 437  Nonlinear FM pulse compression, 431  Nonmatched filter, 374-375  Nonparametric detector, 393  Nonrecursive filter, 110  Nonwhite noise matched filter, 375  0-type tube, 200  Off-axis tracking, 174  Offset feed, 239  Oil slicks, 482  On-axis tracking, 180- 18 1  Operator loss, 60-61  Operator, radar, 386-387  Optical processing, 523-526  Optimum detector law, 382-384  Organ-pipe scanner, 247-248  Over-the-horizon (OTH) radar, 529-536  Overall noise figure, 345  Palmer scan, 177  Parabolic cylinder, 235-236  Parabolic reflector antennas, 235-243  Parabolic torus, 236, 246-247  Paraboloid, 235  Parallel-fed array, 283, 285  M.T.I.: adaptive array,145 cancellation ratio,130 canonical combfilter,112 chargetransfer device.126 c1ullerattenuation.
Ill.130 clutterOuctuatiolls.
131-134 clutter-lock.
142 cluttermap,127 cohercnt rcfcrcncc.
385386 coho,1U5.141 delay-Iinccancelcr, 104-114 digitalprocessing.
119--125 doppler filterbank.127 doubledelay-line canceler, 109 DPCA.
143-144 externally coherent, 138 filterbank.121-125, 127 1Fcancellation, 126 improvement factor: antenna scanning.
134-136 antenna sidelobes, 145 clutterOuctuations, 131-134 definition.
Ill.129 equipment instahilities.
130-131 limiting, lJ6-138 quantization.
120 interclutter visibility, 130.494-495 limiting in,136-138 Moving TargetDetector, 127-129 multiple prf's,114-117 noncoherent, 138-139 nonrecursive filter.110 phasedetector, 105 quadrature channel, 119 quantization, 120 recursive filter,113 reference gain,III second-time-around echoes,117 staggered pr~114-117 stalo,105 storagetube,126 suhclutter visibility, 129-130 TACCAR,142 three-pulse canceler, 109--110 transient response, 113 114 transversal filter,110-114 two-frequency, 147-148 visibility factor,130 Mubisantenna, 316 Multifunction array,323 Multifunction radar,337 Multimode feeds,inmonopulse, 164 Multipactor duplexer, 365INDEX577 Multipath: andantenna lobing,442-447 intracking radar,172 Multiple beams,inarrays,310-318 Multiple-frequency CWradar,95-98 Multiple prf,inMTI,114-117 Mutualcoupling, 306 n-barscan,178 Nearfield,antenna,228 Neyman-Pearson observer, 376 Nodding-beam heightfinder,541-542 Nodding scan,178 Noise: inangletracking, 167-170 atmospheric, 461-463 environmental, 461-465 inrangetracking, 177 Noisebandwidth, 18 Noisefactor,344 Noisefigure,344-347, 350-351 Noisejamming, 548-551 Noisetemperature, 345-346 Noise-temperature ratio,347 Nomenclature, letterband,8 Noncoherent AMTJ,J47 Noncoherent integration, 29-32 Noncoherent MTI,138-139 Nonlinear-contact scattering effects,437 Nonlinear FMpulsecompression, 431 Nonmatched filter,374-375 Nonparametric detector, 393 Nonrecursive filter,110 Nonwhite noisematched filter,375 O-typetube,200 Off-axis tracking, 174 Offsetfeed,239 Oilslicks,482 On-axis tracking, 180-181 Operator loss,60-61 Operator, radar,386-387 Optical processing, 523-526 Optimum detector law,382-384 Organ-pipe scanner, 247-248 Over-the-horizon (OTH)radar,529-536 Overall noisefigure,345 Palmerscan,177 Parabolic cylinder, 235-236 Parabolic reflector antennas, 235-243 Parabolic torus,236,246-247 Paraboloid, 235 Parallel-fed array,283,285 578 INDEX  Parallel-plate feed, 309  Parametric amplifier, 35 1  Passive TR-limiter, 363, 364  Pattern synthesis, 254-258  Penetration color tube, 357  Performance chart, magnetron, 195- 197  Performance figure, radar, 63  Permanent magnet focusing, 202  Phase-coded pulse compression, 428-431  Phase-comparison monopulse, 165-167  Phase detector, in MTI, 105  Phase-frequency array, 303, 334  Phase-in-space 3D radar, 543  Phase-phase array, 335  Phase-sensitive detector, 156, 160  Phase shifter quantization, 321-322  Phase shifters, 286-298  Phased array antennas, 278-337  Phasers, 287  Pi mode, magnetron, 193  PIN diode, 290  Pincushion radar, 316  Pipology, 387  Plumbing loss, 57-58  Polarization:  antenna, 227  circular, 504-506  for target classification, 436  Polarization agility, and glint reduction, 172  Polarization-twist Cassegrain, 242-243  Polyphase codes, 432 .
I  Postamplification beam forming, 3 10-3 11  Postdetection integration, 29-32  Power gain, antenna, 225-226  Protector TR, 364  Power programming, in 3D radar, 302  PPI, 6, 355  Precipitation:  attenuation by, 503  scattering from, 498-503  Predetection integration, 29  Prelook receiver, 548  Probability density function, 20-23  Probability distribution function, 23, 26  Probability of detection, 27-29  cumulative, 64  for Swerling mudels, 48  Probability of false alarm, 24  Propagation of radar waves, 62, 441-461  Propeller modulation, 76  Proximity (VT) fuze, 71  Pseudorandom code, 429  Pulling figure, magnetron, 199  Pulse chasing, in bistatic radar, 559 Pulse compression, 420 434  and frequency scan, 303  Pulse compression ratio, 422  Pulse doppler radar, 139- 140  Pulse-forming network (PFN), 2 14  Pulse repet it ion frequency, 2  staggered, 1 14- 1 17  Pulser, 214  Pushing figure, magnetron, 196  Quadrature channel, in MTI, 119  Quadrature component, in monopulse, 176  Quantization:  in MTI, 120 )  in phase shifters, 321-322  Quantization error, FM-CW altimeter, 87  Quantization lobes, 32 1-322  and triangular spacings, 334  Rabbit-ear oscillations :  in CFA, 2 11  in TWT, 207, 208  RADAM, 437  Radar applications, 12- 13  Radar block diagram, 5-7  Radar cross section, 33-46  aircraft, 39-44  bird, 509  bistatic, 557-559  cone-sphere, 35  definition, 4, 33  example values, 44  fluctuation models, 46-52  insect, 510  man, 44  reduction of, 553  ,rod, 34-35  ships, 142-143  sphere, 34  and target classification, 435  Radar definition, 1-2  Radar frequencies, 7-8  Radar equation, 17-65  bistatic, 556-557  derivation of, 3-4  laser, 565-566  OTH, 530-531, 535  SAR, 521-522  surface clutter, 471-474  surveillance, 64  for weather radar, 499-500  Radar history, 8-12  Radar operator, 386-387  578INDEX Parallel-plate feed,309 Parametric amplifier, 351 PassiveTR-Iimiter, 363,364 Patternsynthesis, 254-258 Penetration colortube,357 Performance chart,magnetron, 195-197 Performance figure,radar,63 Permanent magnetfocusing, 202 Phase-coded pulsecompression, 428-431 Phase-comparison monopulse, 165-167 Phasedetector, inMTI,105 Phase-frequency array,303,334 Phase-in-space 3Dradar,543 Phase-phase array,335 Phase-sensitive detector, 156,160 Phaseshifterquantization, 321-322 Phaseshifters,286-298 Phasedarrayantennas, 278-337 Phasers, 287 Pimode,magnetron, 193 PINdiode,290 Pincushion radar,316 Pipology, 387 Plumbing loss,57-58 Polarization: antenna, 227 circular, 504-506 fortargetclassification, 436 Polarization agility,andglintreduction, 172 Polarization-twist Cassegrain, 242-243 Polyphase codes,432 Postamplification beamforming, 310-311 Postdetection integration, 29-32 Powergain,antenna, 225-226 Protector TR,364 Powerprogramming, in3Dradar,302 PPI,6,355 Precipitation: attenuation by,503 scattering from,498-503 Predetection integration, 29 Prelookreceiver, 548 Probability densityfunction, 20-23 Probability distribution function, 23,26 Probability ofdetection, 27-29 cumulative, 64 forSwerling models,48 Probability offalsealarm,24 Propagation ofradarwaves,62,441-461.
Propeller modulation, 76 Proximity (VT)fuze,71 Pseudorandom code,429 Pullingfigure,magnetron, 199 Pulsechasing, inbistaticradar,559Pulsecompression, 420434 andfrequency scan,303 Pulsecompression ratio,422 Pulsedoppler radar,139-140 Pulse-forming network (PFN~214 Pulserepetition frequency, 2 staggered, 114-117 Pulser,214 Pushing figure,magnetron, 196 Quadrature channel, inMTI,119 Quadrature component, inmonopulse, 176 Quantization: inMTI,120 ..,> inphaseshifters,321-322 Quantization error,FM-CW altimeter, 87 Quantization lobes,321-322 andtriangular spacings, 334 Rabbit-ear oscillations: inCFA,211 inTWT,207,208 RADAM,437 Radarapplications, 12-13 Radarblockdiagram, 5-7 Radarcrosssection,33-46 aircraft,39-44 bird,509 bistatic,557-559 cone-sphere, 35 definition, 4,33 example values,44 fluctuation models,46-52 insect,510 man,44 reduction of,553 ,rod,34-35 ships,142-143 sphere,34 andtargetclassification, 435 Radardefinition, 1-2 Radarfrequencies, 7-8 Radarequation, 17-65 bistatic,556-557 derivation of,3-4 laser,565-566 OTH,530-531, 535 SAR,521-522 surfaceclutter,471-474 surveillance, 64 forweatherradar,499-500 Radarhistory,8-12 Radaroperator, 386-387 INDEX 579  Radial velocity direction, in CW radar, 78-79  Radiation hazards, 465-466  Radiation intensity, 224  Radiation pattern:  antenna, 224, 228-235  array, 280-282  Radomes, 264-270  Rain:  and radomes, 269-270  scattering from, 500-502  at millimeter waves, 564  Random errors:  in array antennas, 318-322  in reflector antennas, 262-264  Range accuracy, 401-407  Range ambiguities, 53-54  Range-gate stealer, 551  Range-gated doppler filters, 117-1 19  Range measurement, in CW radar, 95-98  Range resolution, and automatic detection, 186  Range tracking, 176- 177  Raster scan, 178  Rayleigh probability density function, 22-23, 47  and sea echo, 478  Rayleigh region, 33-34  Rayleigh scattering, 499  Rear-port display, 358-359  Receiver noise, 18-19  Receiver protector, 362-363  Receivers, 343-353  Recirculatingdelay-line integrator, 390-392  Recursive filter, 113  Reference gain, MTI, 1 11  Reflectarray, 309  Reflection coefficient, of sea, 445  Reflective-array compressor, 425  Refraction, 447-450, 455-456  ~efractivitf.
448  Refractometer, 455  Reggia-Spencer phase shifter, 291-293  Repeater jamming, 551-552  Resolution, of SAR, 518-519  Resonance region, in scattering, 34  Resonant-charging, modulator, 215  Resonant frequency, of tracking antennas, 179  RF keying, of CFA.
21 1  Rice probability density function, 26, 50  Rieke diagram, magnetron, 195-1 98  Ring-bar TWT, 206  Ring echoes, 512  Ring-loop TWT, 207  Ring tuner, magnetron, 200  Rising-sun magnetron, 193, 194  Rod, radar cross section of, 34-35 Roll stabilization, 27 1  Rotodome, 268  Sample and hold, 156  SAR, 517-529  SAW delay lines, 424-426  SCAMP, 163  Scan with compensation, 164  Scan converter, 358  Scanning-feed reflector antennas, 244-248  Schottky-barrier diodes, 347  Schwartz inequality, 372  Sea clutter, 474-489  HF radar, 533-535  at millimeter waves, 563-564  Sea state, 475  Second-time-around echo, 3  in MTI, 117  Self-screening range, 550  Semiactive homing, 80  Sensitivity time control (see STC)  Sequential detection, 38 1-382  in array radar, 324  Sequential lobing, 153-154  Sequential observer, 380-382  Series-fed array, 285  Servo noise, 170  Servo system, 178-179  Shadow grid, 203  Ships, radar cross section of, 42-45  Short pulse, applications of, 421  Sideband superheterodyne receiver, 84-85  Sidelobe canceler, 333, 549  Sidelobes, antenna, 227-228  Sidelobes, FM pulse compression, 426427  Sidelooking radar, 5 17  Sigma zero, 471  Signal management, in array radar, 324  Signal-to-noise ratio:  for detection, 28, 48  .
for Swerling models, 47-49  Simultaneous lobing, 160  Sinusoidal modulation, in FM radar, 88-91  Smith chart, 196  Snake feed, 301  Snow, scattering from, 502  Snow-covered terrain, 490-491  Solar noise, 463  Sole, CFA, 209  Solid-state limiters, 363-364  Solid-state transmitters, 216220  Space feeds, 308-309  Space-frame radome, 265-266  SPASUR, 80  Radialvelocitydirection, inCWradar,78-79 Radiation hazards, 465-466 Radiation intensity, 224 Radiation pattern: antenna, 224,228-235 array,280-282 Radomes, 264-270 Rain: andradomes, 269-270 scattering from,500-502 atmillimeter waves,564 Random errors: inarrayantennas, 318-322 inreflector antennas, 262-264 Rangeaccuracy, 401-407 Rangeambiguities, 53-54 Range-gate stealer,551 Range-gated dopplerfilters,117-119 Rangemeasurement, inCWradar,95-98 Rangeresolution, andautomatic detection, 186 Rangetracking, 176-177 Rasterscan,178 Rayleigh probability densityfunction, 22-23,47 andseaecho,478 Rayleigh region,33-34 Rayleigh scattering, 499 Rear-port display,358-359 Receiver noise,18-19 Receiver protector, 362-363 Receivers, 343-353 Recirculating-delay-Iine integrator, 390-392 Recursive filter,113 Reference gain,MTI,111 Reflectarray, 309 Reflection coefficient, ofsea,445 Reflective-array compressor, 425 Refraction, 447-450, 455-456 Refractivity: 448 Refractometer, 455 Reggia-Spencer phaseshifter,291-293 Repeater jamming, 551-552 Resolution, ofSAR,518-519 Resonance region,inscattering, 34 Resonant-charging, modulator, 215 Resonant frequency, oftracking antennas, 179 RFkeying,ofCFA,211 Riceprobability densityfunction, 26,50 Riekediagram, magnetron, 195-198 Ring-bar TWT,206 Ringechoes,512 Ring-loop TWT,207 Ringtuner,magnetron, 200 Rising-sun magnetron, 193,194 Rod,radarcrosssectionof,34-35INDEX579 Rollstabilization, 271 Rotodome, 268 Sampleandhold,156 SAR,517-529 SAWdelaylines,424-426 SCAMP, 163 Scanwithcompensation, 164 Scanconverter, 358 Scanning-feed reflector antennas, 244-248 Schottky-barrier diodes,347 Schwartz inequality, 372 Seaclutter,474-489 HFradar,533-535 atmillimeter waves,563-564 Seastate,475 Second-time-around echo,3 inMTI,117 Self-screening range,550 Semiactive homing, 80 Sensitivity timecontrol(seeSTC) Sequential detection, 381-382 inarrayradar,324 Sequentiallobing, 153-154 Sequential observer, 380-382 Series-fed array,285 Servonoise,170 Servosystem,178-179 Shadowgrid,203 Ships,radarcrosssectionof,42-45 Shortpulse,applications of,421 Sideband superheterodyne receiver, 84-85 Sidelobecanceler, 333,549 Sidelobes, antenna, 227-228 Sidelobes, FMpulsecompression, 426-427 Sidelooking radar,517 Sigmazero,471 Signalmanagement, inarrayradar,324 Signal-to-noise ratio: fordetection, 28,48 .forSwerling models,47-49 Simultaneous lobing,160 Sinusoidal modulation, inFMradar,88-91 Smithchart,196 Snakefeed,301 Snow,scattering from,S02 Snow-covered terrain,490-491 Solarnoise,463 Sole,CFA,209 Solid-state limiters, 363-364 Solid-state transmitters, 216-220 Space ~eds,308-309 Space-frame radome,265-266 SPASUR,80 580 INDEX  Speckle, in SAR, 528  Speed gate, 8 1  Sphere, radar cross section of, 33-34  Spherical reflectors, 245-246  Spike leakage, and diode burnout, 350  Spikes, and sea clutter, 477  Spin-tuned magnetron, 199  Spiral scan, 178  Split range gate, 176-177  Spotlight mode, SAR, 527  Spread spectrum, 434  Squint angle, 155, 158-159  Squint mode, SAR, 527  Stabilization of antennas, 270-273  Stacked-beam 3D radar, 543-544  Staggered prf, in MTI, 114-1 17  Stalo, 105  Standard deviation, 21  Standard temperature, 19  STC :  in ARSR-3, 540  and duplexer, 366  and logarithmic receiver, 507  and sea clutter, 488  and shaped beams, 261  Storage tube, 357-358  MTI, 126  Straddling loss, 61  Straps, magnetron, 193  Stretch pulse compression, 432  Structure constant, 51 1  Subarrays, 309-310  Subclutter visibility, 129-130  Submillimeter wavelengths, 564  Surface acoustic wave delay lines, 424-426  Surface duct, 451,453-455  Surface, for reflector antennas, 239-240  Surveillance radar range equation, 64  Swerling cross section models, 46-49  Switched-line phase shifter, 288  Synthesis of antenna patterns, 254-258  Synthetic aperture radar, 517-529  Synthetic video displays, 359  System losses, 56-61  System noise figure, 346  System noise temperature, 345, 463-465  Systematic errors :  antenna, 262  tracking, 180  TACCAR, 142  Tapped-delay-line integrator, 390  Target classification, 434-438  Taylor aperture illumination, 257-258 Tellurometer, 97  Thermal noise, 18  Thin-wall radome, 267  Thinned arrays, 309, 319, 331-332  Three-axis mount, 271  3D radar, 301, 541, 544  Three-pulse canceler, 109- 1 10  Threshold detection, 16-17, 27  Thumbtack ambiguity diagram, 418-419  Time-difference height finding, 546-547  Time-frequency coded waveform, 43 1  Tolerances, in lenses, 253-254  Torque fins, antenna, 269  TR tube, 361-362  Track initiation and maintenance, 325-326  Track-while-scan radar, 152-1 53, 183  sector scanning, 248  Tracking, automatic, 153, 183- 186, 392  Tracking illuminator, CW, 73, 81  Tracking radar, 152-186  angular accuracy, 167- 172  conical scan, 155-159, 182- 183  conopulse, 164  glint, 168-172  lobe switching, 153  low-angle, 172- 176  monopulse, 160-167, 181-183,435  off-axis tracking, 174  on-axis tracking, 180-18 1  scan with compensation, 164  sequential lobing, 153-154  simultaneous lobing, 160  Tracking with surveillance radar, 183-186  Transient response, in MTI, 113-1 14  Transistors:  low noise, 351, 352  power, 2 17  Transmitter noise, 73-74  Transmitter power, 52-53  Transmitters, 190-220  Amplitron, 209  crossed-field amplifiers, 208-2 13  grid-controlled tubes, 2 1 3  klystron, 200-205  magnetron, 192-200  modulators, 2 14-2 16  solid-state, 2 16-220  traveling-wave tube, 206-208  Twystron, 208  Transreflector, 242  Transversal filter, 110- 1 14  Traveling-wave tube phase shifter, 297  Traveling-wave tubes, 206-208  Triangular element spacing, 333-334  580INDEX Speckle, inSAR,528 Speedgate,81 Sphere,radarcmsssection of,33-34 Spherical reflectors, 245-246 Spikeleakage,anddiodeburnout, 350 Spikes,andseaclutter,477 Spin-tuned magnetron, 199 Spiralscan,178 Splitrangegate,176-177 Spotlight mode,SAR,527 Spreadspectrum, 434 Squintangle,155,158-159 Squintmode,SAR,527 Stabilization ofantennas, 270-273 Stacked-beam 3Dradar,543-544 Staggered prf,inMTI,114-117 Stalo,105 Standard deviation, 21 Standard temperature, 19 STC: inARSR-3, 540 andduplexer, 366 andlogarithmic receiver, 507 andseaclutter,488 andshapedbeams,261 Storagetube,357-358 MTI,126 Straddling loss,61 Straps,magnetron, 193 Stretchpulsecompression, 432 Structure constant, 511 Subarrays, 309-310 Subclutter visibility, 129-130 SubmiJIimeter wavelengths, 564 Surfaceacoustic wavedelaylines,424-426 Surfaceduct,451,453-455 Surface,forreflector antennas, 239-240 Surveillance radarrangeequation, 64 Swerling crosssectionmodels,46-49 Switched-line phaseshifter,288 Synthesis ofantennapatterns, 254-258 Synthetic aperture radar,517-529 Synthetic videodisplays, 359 Systemlosses,56-61 Systemnoisefigure,346 Systemnoisetemperature, 345,463-465 Systematic errors: antenna, 262 tracking, 180 TACCAR,142 Tapped-delay-line integrator, 390 Targetclassification, 434-438 Tayloraperture iJlumination, 257-258Tellurometer, 97 Thermal noise,18 Thin.,.wall radome, 267 Thinned arrays,309,319,331-332 Three-axis mount,271 3Dradar,301,541,544 Three-pulse canceler, 109-110 Threshold detection, 16-17,27 Thumbtack ambiguity diagram, 418-419 Time-difference heightfinding,546-547 Time-frequency codedwaveform, 431 Tolerances, inlenses,253-254 Torquefins,antenna, 269 TRtube,361-362 , Trackinitiation andmaintenance, 325-326 Track-while-scan radar,152-153, 183 sectorscanning, 248 Tracking, automatic, 153,183-186, 392 Tracking illuminator, CW,73,~1 Tracking radar,152-186 angularaccuracy, 167-172 conicalscan,155-159, 182-183 conopulse, 164 glint,168-172 lobeswitching, 153 low-angle, 172-176 monopulse,160-167, 181-183,435 off-axistracking, 174 on-axistracking, 180-181 scanwithcompensation, 164 sequential lobing,153-154 simultaneous lobing,160 ,Tracking withsurveillance radar,183-186 Transient response, inMTI,113-114 Transistors: lownoise,351,352 power,217 Transmitter noise,73-74 Transmitter power,52-53 Transmitters, 190-220 Amplitron, 209 crossed-field amplifiers, 208-213 grid-controlled tubes,213 klystron, 200-205 magnetron, 192-200 modulators, 214-216 solid-state, 216-220 traveling-wave tube,206-208 Twystron, 208 TransretJector, 242 Transversal filter,110-114 Traveling-wave tubephaseshifter,297 Traveling-wave tubes,206-208 Triangular elementspacing, 333-334 INDEX 581  True-hearing display, 27 1  True time delays.
in arrays.
288  Tuning:  klystron.
203  magnetron, 199 - 200  Twin-slab toroidal phase shifter, 294  Twist reflector, 242 ,243  'l'wo-frequency CW.
95 97  'Two-frequency MTI.
147 148  Twystron.
208  Type I1 servo system, 178.
I86  Uncertainty relation.
408-409  l lneqilally spaced arrays, 33 1 -332  Ilnfocused SAR, 518 -519  l lriiforr~i prohahility density function.
 Il~~ipr it!.
203  V-I~calii radar, 542  Varactor diode, 29 1  Variance.
21  Vrlocily rl~otl~~li~tior~.
20() 201  Visihility factor, for clutter.
130 VSWR, and isolation in CW radar, 72  Wave-interference radar, 554  Weather clutter, 498-507  Weather effects, on radomes, 269-270  Weather fix, 507  Weibull probability density function:  land clutter, 496  sea clutter, 480  Weighting, for time sidelobes, 426  Weinstock cross section models, 50  Whitening filter, 375  Wing-beat frequency, bird, 509  Within-pulse scanning, 314-316  by frequency scanning, 302-303  21--22 in 3D radar, 545  Wrap-up factor.
299  X-ray hazard, 466  Z, radar reflectivity factor, 500-501  Zero-crossings detector, 384-385  Zoning of lenses, 249, 251  True-hearing display.
271 Truetimedelays.inarrays.
21<1< Tuning: klystron.
203 magnelron.
199200 Twin-slah toroidal phaseshiner.294 Twistreflector.
242243 Two-frequency CWo95 97 Two-frequency MT\.14714R Twystron.
20R TypeIIservosystem.
17R.186 Uncertainty relation.
408-409 l'nequally spacedarrays.331-332 Unfocused SAR.SIR519 tJniforll1 prohahility density function.
2122 Unigrid.
21U V-heamradar.542 Varactor diode.291 Variance.
21 Velocity modulation.
2002UI Visihility factor.forclutter.l30INDEX581 VSWR.
andisolation inCWradar.72 Wave-interference radar,554 Weather clutter,498-507 Weather effects,onradomes.
269-270 Weather fix.507 Weibull probability density function: landclutter, 496 seac1uller,480 Weighting, fortimesidelobes, 426 Weinstock crosssectionmodels.
50 Whitening filter,375 Wing-beat frequency, bird,509 Within-pulse scanning, 314-316 byfrequency scanning, 302-303 in3Dradar.545 Wrap-up factor.299 X-rayhazard,466 Z,radarreOectivity factor,500-501 Zero-crossings detector.
384-385 Zoningoflenses,249,251 