10.16x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 10 The Radar Transmitter Thomas A.
Weil and Merrill Skolnik 10.1 INTRODUCTION Role of the Transmitter in Radar.
 If a radar systems designer could ask for  anything he or she wanted in a radar transmitter, that wish might be something like  the following: Provide the necessary transmitted energy with the needed average and peak  power, as well as the required stability and low noise for good doppler process - ing; operate with high efficiency; have wide bandwidth and be easily tunable;  be readily modulated in amplitude, frequency, or phase as necessary; have high  reliability and long life; require minimum maintenance; have no dangerous X-ray  emissions; require no personnel to operate; be of an affordable price; and be of  reasonable size and weight for the desired application.
Of course, not all of these desirable attributes can be achieved in any given radar trans - mitter application.
Compromises need to be made depending on the application.
The radar equation for a surveillance radar (one that has to cover a fixed volume  of space on a regular basis) indicates that the maximum range of such a radar is pro - portional to ( Pav A)1/4, where Pav is the average power of the transmitter and A is the  area of the antenna aperture.1 A fundamental measure of the radar range performance  is therefore the power-aperture product .
One can obtain a long range by having a  large antenna, a large transmitter, or a combination of both.
It is not usual, under most  circumstances, for a radar to have a huge, costly antenna and a small, inexpensive  transmitter, or vice versa.
There has to be a reasonable balance between these two  major subsystems of a radar.
(In a surveillance radar, straightforward calculus will  show that under simple assumptions the minimum total cost of a radar occurs when  the cost of the transmitter equals the cost of the antenna; but this is true only when  there are no criteria, other than minimum cost, that have to be satisfied—and there  are usually other criteria that need to be considered.) As is well known in radar, the doppler effect is extensively used to detect moving  targets in the presence of large clutter echoes.
It is the basis for several of the chapters  in this Handbook.
Some transmitter types, however, are far better than others when the  radar has to employ the doppler-shifted signal to detect moving targets in the midst of  heavy clutter echoes.
Examination of the basic radar equation for detection of targets at long range indi - cates that the average power is far more important than the peak power as a measure Chapter 10 ch10.indd   1 12/17/07   2:19:27 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Source: RADAR HANDBOOK 10.2  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 10 of the radar’s capability.
A vacuum tube * with a given average power can usually be  designed to handle the high voltages associated with a large peak power without break - down.
A solid-state transmitter cannot.
In the past, average powers of radar transmit - ters have been from a small fraction of a watt to the order of a megawatt.
Types of Radar Transmitters.
 The very first “radars,” such as those used by  Heinrich Hertz (the first radar scientist) in the late 1880s and the shipboard radar  invented by Christian Hulsmeyer (the first radar engineer) in the early 1900s used the  spark gap  as the transmitter.
It was a very poor transmitter, but that is not unusual in the  early days of a new and different development.
The DeForest grid-controlled vacuum  tube (triode) was invented shortly thereafter, and by the early 1930s, it had been well  developed to where it was successfully and extensively used in those countries that  built the first VHF and UHF radars used for air defense early in World War II.
Some  UHF radars effectively used the grid-controlled vacuum tube well into the early part of  the current century.
It has been a very competitive power source for UHF radar appli - cations.
The drawback of the grid-controlled vacuum tube is that transit-time effects  limit its application at microwave frequencies, but variants of grid-controlled vacuum  tubes have been successfully used up to about 1000 MHz.
The barrier of transit time effects was overcome with the invention of the micro - wave cavity magnetron  early in World War II in 1940 by the United Kingdom (UK).
 The introduction of the magnetron allowed high-power radar to be successfully  developed for use at the higher frequencies where smaller size antennas could be  used.
(It is of interest to note that the Japanese invented the magnetron before the  UK did, and Soviet Union engineers published a paper describing their magnetron  in the March 1944 issue of Proceedings of the Institute of Radio Engineers,  now the  Proceedings of the IEEE ; but the wartime chaos in the military developments of both  the Soviet Union and Japan was such that these inventions were not fully exploited  by these two countries during WWII.) The invention of the magnetron was important  because it allowed radar to be developed for use at microwave frequencies rather than  be limited to VHF and UHF frequencies.
It caught the German electronic counter - measures effort off guard because they had no idea that the United Kingdom and the  United States could produce microwave radar.
The success of the magnetron was a  large factor in the effective application of military radar by the United States and the  United Kingdom during World War II.
The magnetron is an example of what is called a crossed-field tube  in that it employs  a magnetic field and an electric field that are orthogonal to one another.
The magnetron  is an oscillator but the grid-controlled vacuum tube could be operated as either an oscil - lator or an amplifier.
The other electronic tubes mentioned in this chapter are usually  operated as amplifiers.
Amplifiers at microwave frequencies have generally produced  higher powers than oscillators; but, probably more important, they allow the use of  stable, modulated waveforms needed for waveforms in radars that depend on the use of  pulse compression and for the doppler effect to detect moving targets in clutter.
The microwave klystron  amplifier was invented before the magnetron and was  described in a paper in the May 1939 issue of the Journal of Applied Physics .
  For the most part, the klystron amplifier was ignored during WWII and didn’t attract  *  In the United States, the device that generates the RF power is called a tube, but in the United Kingdom, it is called  a valve .
A book on microwave power sources4 suggests that these devices be called microwave vacuum electronic  devices (MVED) .
In this chapter, however, the name tube will be retained.
ch10.indd   2 12/17/07   2:19:28 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	The Radar Transmitter  THE RADAR TRANSMITTER  10.36x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 10 the attention of radar engineers until the announcement in a paper in the November  1953 Proceedings of the IEEE  by Stanford University engineers of the development  of an S-band multicavity klystron capable of 20 MW peak power and 2.4 kW average  power for use in a linear accelerator.
This was a great accomplishment in its time.
The  high power, high efficiency, good stability, and wide bandwidth (at high power) of the  microwave klystron amplifier have caused some radar design engineers to say that the  klystron should be the first microwave power source to consider when designing a new  high-performance radar.
(There was, at one time, a single-cavity klystron oscillator  called the reflex klystron  that was of low power and mainly used as a receiver local  oscillator, but it has generally been replaced by solid-state devices and is not discussed  further in this chapter.) The klystron is an example of a linear-beam tube  because the direction of the dc  electric field that accelerates the electron beam coincides with the axis of the magnetic  field that focuses and confines the beam.
It generates a highly concentrated high-energy  linear beam of electrons that interacts with the microwave structure (two or more micro - wave cavities) to achieve amplification.
Another example of the linear-beam tube is the  traveling wave tube  (TWT) amplifier.
It generally can do almost what a klystron can  do, but it is capable of very wide bandwidth at low powers, which the klystron is not.
 The TWT usually has slightly less gain than a klystron and less stability.
It should be  noted, however, that as the power of a TWT increases, its bandwidth decreases; and as  the power of a klystron amplifier increases, its bandwidth increases.
Thus, at the high  powers needed for many radar applications, the bandwidths of these two types of linear- beam tubes are approximately comparable.
There also have been hybrids  of the klystron and the TWT that have been of interest  for radar applications, and which have interesting characteristics.
The crossed-field amplifier , like the magnetron, is a crossed-field tube that employs  a magnetic field orthogonal to the electric field.
It is capable of wide bandwidth and  generally is of smaller size and does not require the very high voltages of the linear- beam tube.
Although it has some advantages not found in other tubes, it has lower  gain than linear-beam amplifiers (so multiple stages of amplification are required),  and its noise level is higher than the linear-beam tube, which makes it less capable  for detecting moving targets in clutter.
The gyrotron , which can be either an oscillator or an amplifier, is an RF * power  source that can produce very high power at millimeter wavelengths.
Conventional  microwave power sources utilize resonant structures in which the phase velocity of the  electromagnetic field propagating along the RF structure is slowed so as to be close to  the electron beam velocity.
Thus, they are known as slow-wave tubes .
The characteristic  size of the increments of the RF structure of slow-wave tubes is typically a fraction  of a wavelength.
They become smaller as the frequency is increased (wavelength is  decreased).
Smaller size means that a tube cannot dissipate heat as well as a larger  tube, so that the power capability of microwave power tubes decreases approximately  inversely as the square of the frequency.
The gyrotron, on the other hand, does not have  this type of frequency dependence since it uses what is called a fast-wave  structure.
 This is usually a smooth waveguide or a large resonator.
No attempt is made to reduce  the propagation velocity of the electromagnetic wave within this structure.
The electron  beam is not close to the RF structure so it is not as limited in size as are the structures of  *  In electrical engineering, RF stands for radio frequency, but in radar, it is often used to mean the radar frequency.
ch10.indd   3 12/17/07   2:19:28 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	The Radar Transmitter 10.4  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 10 slow-wave tubes.
The larger size of the fast-wave tube means that it can handle larger  power at the higher frequencies.
The gyrotron has mainly been of significance for high- power applications at millimeter-wave frequencies.
The solid-state transistor amplifier  has been of interest for radar applications.
Such  interest in solid state has also been due, in part, to its completely replacing vacuum  tubes in receiver and computer applications.
The solid-state transmitter is discussed in  Chapter 11, and a brief comparison of it with the vacuum tube transmitter is given at  the end of this chapter.
The chief advantages of a solid-state radar transmitter are that  it can operate with wide bandwidths; it has the potential for long life; and it is favored  by some buyers of radar.
It cannot, however, employ high peak-power waveforms.
The  limitation on peak power in a solid-state transmitter results in compromises that have  to be made in the design of the overall radar system.
Oscillator Versus Amplifier.
 The power amplifier is often preferred over the  power oscillator as the transmitter power source in high power, high performance  radar systems.
In an amplifier, the signal to be transmitted is precisely generated at  a low power level and is then amplified to achieve the required power to be radi - ated from the antenna.
Amplifiers have the advantage of being able to provide stable  waveforms, coded or frequency modulated pulse compression waveforms, frequency  agility, as well as combining and arraying.
The magnetron is an oscillator that has less flexibility and is usually noisier than  a linear-beam amplifier.
Each time a pulse is transmitted, its phase is different from  the phase of previous pulses.
That is, its phase is random from pulse to pulse.
To  detect the doppler frequency shift for MTI processing, the phase cannot change in a  random manner at the receiver from pulse to pulse.
This limitation is overcome by  taking a sample of the random phase of each transmitted pulse and using it to reset  the phase of the local oscillator in the receiver to match the phase of the transmitted  signal.
This is sometimes called coherent on receive .
Generally, the MTI improve - ment factor that can be obtained with a magnetron is not as good as can be obtained  with a linear-beam amplifier.
In the past, there might have been debate as to whether to use an oscillator or an  amplifier for a high-performance radar transmitter.
There is usually no question that  the amplifier is usually the preferred choice, except in situations where the low cost of  a magnetron transmitter is more important than the lower MTI improvement factor it  provides compared to a linear-beam transmitter.
The magnetron oscillator, however,  has been used in some short or medium range radars and in the widely popular civil  marine radar (Chapter 22), which requires only a small power transmitter and has no  need for MTI capability.
10.2 LINEAR-BEAM AMPLIFIERS2 The klystron, TWT, and hybrids of the two have been important sources of RF power for  many successful radar systems.
The electrons emitted from the cathode are formed into  a long cylindrical beam that receives the full potential energy of the electric field before  the beam enters the microwave interaction region.
The electron beam, generated by an  “electron gun,” essentially flows in a straight line in linear-beam tubes to interact with  a microwave circuit to produce amplification of an input signal.
The major difference  among the several types of linear-beam tubes is the type of microwave circuit employed  ch10.indd   4 12/17/07   2:19:28 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	The Radar Transmitter  THE RADAR TRANSMITTER  10.56x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 10 and the nature of the interaction that produces amplification.
Transit-time effects, which  limit the high frequency performance of grid-controlled tubes, are taken advantage of in  linear-beam tubes to velocity modulate the uniform electron beam to create bunches of  electrons from which RF energy can be extracted at the output of the tube.
Linear-beam  tubes as amplifiers can produce high power with good efficiency and high gain and with  wide bandwidth.
They have been capable of producing average powers of a megawatt,  as well as average powers of many kilowatts in a size suitable for use in a military  fighter/attack aircraft.
Klystron.
 The klystron amplifier has been an important RF power source for  many radar applications.
As mentioned, it is capable of high average and high peak  power, high gain, good efficiency, stable operation, low interpulse noise, large band - width at high power; and being an amplifier, it can work well with the frequency  and phase modulated waveforms needed for pulse compression.
Klystrons have oper - ated at frequencies from UHF to millimeter wavelengths and have found use in such  diverse applications as airport surveillance radars where the average powers might be  more than one kilowatt, in airborne military aircraft where the average power might be  of the order of 10 kW or more, and in long range detection of intercontinental ballistic  missiles where the average power per tube can be greater than 100 kW .
Figure 10.1 depicts the principal parts of a three-cavity klystron.
At the left is the  heater that heats the cathode and the cathode  that emits a stream of electrons that are  collimated into a narrow cylindrical beam of high electron density.
The electron gun   that generates the beam consists of the cathode,  the modulating anode  (also called  the beam control grid ), and the anode .
The modulating anode provides the means to  pulse the electron beam on and off.
The RF cavities  are the microwave equivalent of  a resonant circuit.
Electrons are not intentionally collected at the anode (as they are  in grid-controlled tubes and crossed-field tubes), but in the collector,  shown at the  right-hand side of the illustration, after the electron beam has given up its RF energy  at the output cavity.
A low-power signal is applied to the input of the first cavity and  appears at the interaction gap .
Those electrons in the beam that arrive at the first  interaction gap when the input signal voltage is at a maximum (the positive peak  of the sine wave) are speeded up compared to those electrons that arrive at the gap  when the input signal voltage is a minimum (the negative trough of the sine wave).
 FIGURE 10.1  Representation of the principal parts of a three-cavity klystron amplifierRF ca vities Electron beam Cathode Heater Modulating anode Electron gunRF inDrift space RF out RF section CollectorAnodeInteraction gaps Collector ch10.indd   5 12/17/07   2:19:29 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	The Radar Transmitter 10.6  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 10 In the first drift space,  those electrons speeded up during the peak of one cycle catch  up to those that were slowed down during the minimum of the previous RF cycle.
 The result is that the electrons become “bunched” periodically.
This bunching can  be thought of as producing a modulation of the density of electrons.
The bunches  pass through the interaction space of the second cavity, which reinforces the density  modulation  to enhance the bunching.
This process of impressing a time variation  in velocity that results in bunching of the electrons of an initially uniform electron  beam is called velocity modulation .
Three or more RF cavities might be used.
The  interaction gap of the output cavity is placed at the point of maximum bunching so  that the RF power can be extracted from the density modulated electron beam by a  coupling loop in a lower power tube or by a waveguide (not shown) in a high power  tube.
In essence, the dc energy of the electron beam at the first cavity is converted  to RF energy at the output cavity by the velocity modulation process.
The larger the  number of cavities the greater can be the gain of the klystron.
The gain of a four-cav - ity klystron can be more than 60 dB, depending on the bandwidth.
After the bunched  electrons deliver their RF power to the output, the spent electrons are removed by the  collector  electrode.
An axial magnetic field is employed to counteract the mutual repulsion of the  electrons that form the electron beam.
The magnetic field confines the electrons  to a relatively long, thin beam and prevents them from dispersing.
It can be gener - ated by a long solenoid that has iron shielding around its outside diameter, or by a  lighter weight periodic-permanent-magnetic (PPM) system that consists of a series  of magnetic lenses.
A multicavity klystron can have its bandwidth increased by stagger tuning the  cavities, similar to the manner in which stagger tuning is done in an IF amplifier  of a superheterodyne receiver to obtain broader bandwidth.
It is more complicated,  however, to do this in the klystron since the velocity modulation that appears at each  interaction gap contributes a component to the exciting current at the succeeding gaps,  something that does not occur in an IF amplifier.
The early V A-87 four-cavity S-band  klystron had a 20 MHz bandwidth and a gain of 61 dB when its four cavities were  synchronously tuned, but when stagger-tuned, its bandwidth was 77 MHz (2.8%) and  a gain of 44 dB.3 Theory shows that the bandwidth of a klystron can be significantly increased by  increasing its current and thus its power.
A 10 MW peak power klystron, for example,  can have an 8% bandwidth as compared to a 200 kW tube, which might have a 2%  bandwidth, and a 1 kW tube having only a 0.5% bandwidth.
High-power multicav - ity klystrons can be designed with bandwidths as large as 10 to 12%.
The klystron is  sometimes thought of as having a narrow bandwidth and the traveling wave tube is  thought of as having wide bandwidth; but at the high power levels needed for long  range radars, their bandwidths are comparable.
It is sometimes unfortunate that this  fact is not always understood.4 The klystron, as an example of a linear-beam tube, is capable of high power  because the generation of the electron beam, its interaction with the electromagnetic  field, and the collection of the spent electrons are performed in separate parts of the  tube where the generated heat can be dissipated effectively.
The klystron and other linear-beam tubes can have long life.
Gilmour5 reports  that the mean time between failures (MTBF) of 11 different applications of klys - trons in radar systems varied from 75,000 hours to 5,000 hours, with an average of  37,000 hours for all 11 applications.
(There are 8,760 hours in a year.) The VA-842  ch10.indd   6 12/17/07   2:19:30 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	The Radar Transmitter  THE RADAR TRANSMITTER  10.76x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 10 high-power klystron tube used in the original Ballistic Missile Early Warning System  had a demonstrated life in excess of 50,000 hours.
Symons6 reports that one of the  BMEWS tubes that he designed was still operating after 240,000 hours when the  radar in Greenland was replaced by the solid-state Pave Paws radar.
The VA-812E  was also a high-power UHF klystron that had a 20 MW peak power, 25 MHz 1 dB  bandwidth, 40 dB gain, and an average power of 300 kW at a duty cycle of 0.015 and  a 40 µs pulse width.
The V A-87E (originally developed by Varian Associates, Inc) is a 6-cavity S-band  pulse klystron that operates from 2.7 to 2.9 GHz, produces a peak power of from 1  to 2 MW, an average power up to 3.5 kW, has a gain of about 50 dB, an efficiency  between 45 and 50%, and a 1 dB bandwidth of 39 MHz.
It has demonstrated a mean- time-between-failures of 72,000 hours.
It was used in the ASR-9 airport surveillance  radar and in the WSR-88D Nexrad doppler weather radar (where its operating band is  from 2.7 to 3.0 GHz), as well as in other radars.
Very high-power klystrons are employed in linear accelerators such as found at the  Stanford Linear Accelerator Center.7 Klystrons for this application, for example, might  have 75 MW peak power with 50% efficiency using solenoid magnets; or 60–75 MW  peak power with 60% efficiency using periodic permanent magnets.
Improvements to the klystron as a radar power source are discussed later in the  subsection on hybrids, of which the clustered-cavity klystron is a good example of  what can be provided in the way of high power and wide bandwidth.
Multiple-Beam Klystron (MBK).
 The klystron amplifier is an important tube  for high-power, high-performance radar applications.
However, it requires a large  voltage when high power is needed.
High voltage results in greater size and the need  for shielding from the X-rays that are generated.
In a klystron, the power available for  conversion of the dc power of the electron beam to RF power of an electromagnetic  wave is given by the product of the beam current and the beam voltage.8 Although  klystrons have been operated at very high voltages, it is usually preferred to operate it  at a lower voltage, if possible, because lower voltages generally make the power sup - plies simpler, lighter, and more reliable.9 A reduction of beam voltage in a conventional  klystron means an increase of the beam current in order to maintain the same power.
 An increase in beam current, however, results in an increase in the current density  where space charge effects may not be negligible, and the repulsive forces that occur  among the electrons are increased and can cause the electron density bunches to lose  coherence.
The result is a decrease in efficiency.
Higher current densities also require  stronger magnets to keep the electron beam confined, leading to larger volume and  weight.
Thus, simply lowering the beam voltage and increasing the current density  does not usually provide a net advantage.
The limitations of lower beam voltage, however, can be overcome by separating  the single electron beam into a number of smaller beams, called beamlets,  so that each  of the beamlets has a low enough current density to avoid the undesirable repulsive  effects of a high current-density beam.
According to Nusinovich et al.,9 each beamlet  is transported down its own individual drift channel (a metallic-walled tube), parallel  to, but isolated from, the other beamlets.
They are allowed to interact only over the  small axial extent of the cavity gap.
After passing by the cavity gap, the beamlets  reenter their individual drift channels and propagate in isolation from one another.
 Such klystrons are called multiple-beam klystrons,  or MBK .
It has been said10 that the  number of beamlets in an MBK might be from 6 to 60.
ch10.indd   7 12/17/07   2:19:30 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	The Radar Transmitter 10.8  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 10 The chief motivation for the multiple-beam klystron is the efficient generation of  high RF power at a lower voltage than in a conventional klystron.
Because of its lower  voltage (two or three times lower), an MBK can be more compact, have a lower magnet  weight (up to ten times less), be of lower weight and volume, generate less X-rays, have  high electronic efficiency (up to 65 percent), and have the potential for a higher instan - taneous bandwidth than does a conventional klystron.9 The lower voltages at which  they operate result in power supplies that can be simpler, lighter, cheaper, and more  reliable.
The MBK can have a high output-power-to-weight ratio that might be two  to three times greater than that of an equivalent single-beam klystron.
They can also  have reduced noise and less phase sensitivity to deviations in voltage, which aids in the  detection of low cross-section moving targets in clutter.
Compared to a crossed-field  amplifier, they have a larger dynamic range.
Compared to a TWT, they are capable of  higher peak and average powers, and they are less sensitive to vibrations.
The Russian company known as Federal State Unitary Enterprise, RPC Istok11  (usually shortened to Istok) has been productive in the development of MBKs for  radar.
At X band, they report an MBK with 24 beamlets producing 200 kW peak  power, 17 kW average power, 6% bandwidth, an anode voltage of 26 kV, with a mag - net weighing 16 kg.
At S band, one of their tubes with 36 beams had a peak power  of 600 kW, 12 kW average power, operated with 31 kV anode voltage, had a 6.5%  bandwidth, and a weight without magnet of 25 kg.
An apparent extension of the multiple beam concept is to employ a sheet electron  beam, which is as thin and as wide and has as much current as can be achieved con - sistent with other constraints.
It has been considered for very high-power klystrons  (150 MW peak power and periodic permanent magnetic, or PPM, focusing) designed  for a very large linear accelerator.12 It is claimed that the beam current density and the  focusing magnetic field can be reduced, be made with fewer parts, might be more reli - able, and can have lower acquisition and operating costs.
One possible disadvantage  is that sheet-beam klystrons might not be wideband.
The principle of the multiple-beam linear-beam tube has also been considered for  the traveling wave tube,9 but it is not obvious whether it has any significant advantages  over the MBK.
Traveling Wave Tube (TWT).
 The TWT linear-beam tube is similar to the  klystron in that the cathode, RF circuit, and collector are all separate from one another.
 There is, however, continuous interaction of the electron beam and the RF field over  the entire length of the microwave propagating structure of the TWT as compared  to the klystron where the interaction occurs only at the gaps of a relatively few reso - nant cavities.
The TWT was originally conceived with a helix as the slow-wave RF  structure, as in the illustration shown in Figure 10.2.
The electron beam is similar to  FIGURE 10.
2 Representation of the principle parts of a traveling wave tube,  showing a helix slow-wave circuit shown for simplicityGun anodeAttenuationCollector Helix (interaction region) RF InputRF outputElectron beamHeaterCathode ch10.indd   8 12/17/07   2:19:31 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	The Radar Transmitter  THE RADAR TRANSMITTER  10.96x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 10 that of the klystron, and they both use the process of velocity modulation to cause the  electron beam to be periodically bunched (density modulation).
The electron beam  passes through the RF interaction circuit.
In the example shown in Figure 10.2, where  a helix is shown as the slow-wave structure, the RF signal is slowed down by the  helix so that its forward velocity is very nearly equal to that of the velocity of the  electron beam.
This near match of velocities is what causes the cumulative interac - tion that transfers dc energy from the electron beam to amplify the electromagnetic  wave propagating on the helix.
After delivering its energy to the RF field, the spent  electrons are removed by the collector, usually a multistage depressed collector.
An  axial magnetic field keeps the electron beam from dispersing as it travels down the  tube, just as in the klystron.
The helix TWT is capable of bandwidth in excess of an octave (2 to 1), which is  much higher than other radar tubes.
The TWT is often thought of as a very broadband  tube, but the broad bandwidth of a helix TWT is not of great significance in radar  applications since the helix TWT is limited in its peak power to a few kW.
This means  that the helix TWT is best used in CW or high duty cycle radar applications, if at all.
 Also, such broad bandwidths are seldom available for radar applications because of  regulatory restrictions in the use of the electromagnetic spectrum.
To achieve high  power in a TWT, other types of slow-wave structures have to be employed, and  these usually provide less bandwidth than the helix.
Such structures are the coupled  cavity13 (of which the cloverleaf is an example), ring-bar, and the so-called ladder  network.
The bandwidth of a coupled-cavity TWT can be 10 to 15%.
The ring-bar  has broader bandwidth and higher efficiency than the coupled-cavity circuit, but   it is not capable of as high a power as the coupled cavity.
Thus, the bandwidth of a  TWT decreases as its power increases.
On the other hand, as mentioned previously,  the bandwidth of a klystron increases with increasing power, so that the bandwidths  of the TWT and the klystron are generally comparable for many high-power   radar applications.
Both forward and backward waves may propagate along the microwave structure  of a TWT, leading to a possibility of backward-wave oscillations.
In Figure 10.2,  attenuation is shown along the helix so as to prevent oscillation due to reflections  at the output and the input of the structure.
The attenuation may be distributed or  lumped, but it is usually found in the middle third of the tube.
Although oscillation  can be prevented by distributing loss along the structure, it results in lower effi - ciency—something unattractive in high-power tubes.
Instead, oscillations may be  prevented by the use of discontinuities called severs, with one sever for every 15 to  30 dB of tube gain.
At each sever, the power traveling in the reverse direction is  dissipated in the sever loads without seriously affecting the power traveling in the  forward direction.
The sever loads may be placed external to the tube to reduce dis - sipation within the RF structure itself.
The efficiency of a TWT is usually less than  that of a klystron because of the loss due to the attenuation of the severs, as well as  by the presence of relatively high RF power over an appreciable part of the entire  structure.
A technique for improving the efficiency of high-power TWTs is called  velocity tapering .
This technique consists of tapering the length of the last few sec - tions of the slow-wave circuit to take into account the slowing down of the beam  as the energy is extracted from it.
Velocity tapering permits extracting more of the  energy from the beam and significantly improves the power-bandwidth performance  of the tube.3 Nevertheless, high-power TWTs generally show an appreciable falloff of  power output toward the band edges, so that the rated bandwidth depends very much  on how much power falloff can be tolerated by the system.
ch10.indd   9 12/17/07   2:19:31 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	The Radar Transmitter 10.10  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 10 If a TWT using a coupled-cavity circuit is cathode-pulsed (Section 10.7), there is  an instant during the rise and fall of voltage when the beam velocity becomes synchro - nous with the cutoff frequency (the so-called p  mode) of the microwave circuit, and  the tube can generate oscillations.
These oscillations at the leading and trailing edges  of the RF output pulse have a characteristic appearance on a power-time presentation  that has given them the name rabbit ears .
Only in rare cases has it been possible to sup - press these oscillations completely.
However, since this particular oscillation depends  on electron velocity, which in turn depends on beam voltage, the problem is avoided by  the use of mod-anode or grid pulsing (Section 10.7).
In this case, it is only necessary  to be sure not to let the modulator begin pulsing the beam current during turn-on of the  high-voltage power supply until the voltage is safely above the oscillation range, which  is typically somewhere between 60 and 80% of full  operating voltage.
A modification of the helix slow-wave structure is the ring-bar circuit, which can be  used if the peak power is less than 100 to 200 kW.
The Raytheon QKW-1671A is an  example, with a peak power of 160 kW, 0.036 duty cycle, and 50 dB gain.
It operates at  L band from 1215 to 1400 MHz.
The U.S.
Air Force Cobra Dane, operating from 1175 to  1375 MHz, is a long range radar located in the Aleutian Islands that uses 96 ring-bar TWTs  (QKW-1723), each with a peak power of 175 kW and average power of 10.5 kW.
The S band V A-125A TWT amplifier employs a cloverleaf coupled cavity micro - wave slow-wave structure.
With the use of liquid cooling, it is capable of 3 MW peak  power over a 300 MHz bandwidth.
Its duty cycle is 0.002, with a gain of 33 dB, and a  2 µs pulse width.
This TWT was originally designed to be used interchangeably with  the popular V A-87 klystron, except that the V A-125A TWT has a wider bandwidth than  the V A-87 klystron.
It also requires a greater power input signal because of its lower  gain than the klystron.
When high power is required, the klystron tends to be preferred  over the TWT since it doesn’t experience the stability problems of the TWT.
Gilmour14 gives the mean time between failures (MTBF) for nine different types  of coupled-cavity TWTs as varying from 17,800 hours to 2,200 hours, with an aver - age of 7,000 hours for all nine classes of tubes.
(He also says that TWTs for space  application, which are of lower power than radar TWTs, have MTBFs of the order of  one million hours.) Depressed Collector.
 The efficiency of a TWT or a klystron can be improved  by the use of a so-called depressed collector .15,16 With a single collector, a significant  fraction of the power input to the tube is dissipated as heat in the collector.
If the volt - age on the collector is reduced (depressed) below the body voltage, the velocity of the  electrons striking the collector is reduced and so is the heat generated in the collector.
 Thus, the collector recovers some of the power in the spent electron beam.
The use of  multiple depressed collectors at intermediate voltages, rather than a single collector,  allows catching each spent electron at a voltage near optimum.
Up to ten collector sec - tions have been used in some communication tubes, but three sections are more typical  for high-power TWTs for radar systems.
The several different voltages needed for  the depressed collectors add complexity to the high-power voltage supply, but these  voltages need not be as well regulated as the main-beam voltage.
It is usually easier  to design a depressed collector for a TWT than for a klystron since the spent electron  beam of a TWT might have a 20% spread in velocity, but the klystron might have a  velocity spread of almost 100%.17 Because the efficiency in a conventional TWT is  usually lower than that of a klystron, the increase in efficiency in the TWT provided  by a depressed collector has a greater relative effect than with a klystron.
ch10.indd   10 12/17/07   2:19:32 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	The Radar Transmitter  THE RADAR TRANSMITTER  10.116x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 10 Variants of the Klystron and the TWT.
 It was mentioned that the bandwidth of  a klystron increases as its power is increased.
The bandwidth can also be increased by  combining the best features of the klystron and the traveling wave tube to obtain better  bandwidth, efficiency, and gain flatness than either the conventional klystron or the  TWT.
In these tubes, the basic structure is that of a klystron, but instead of a number  of single cavities being used, the single cavity is replaced by a more complex multiple  cavity.
Three such variants are the Twystron,  extended interaction klystron,  and the  clustered cavity klystron .
Most high-performance radar klystrons tend to employ the  more intricate cavity structure because of the better performance it provides.
Comparison of Various Linear-Beam Tube Structures .
Figure 10.3 illustrates  the basic structure of the RF circuits that characterize the various types of linear- beam tubes.
Twystron .
The bandwidth of a conventional klystron is limited primarily by  the bandwidth of the output resonant cavity.
If a coupled cavity slow-wave circuit,  as is used in the TWT, is substituted for the output resonant cavity of a klystron  (Figure 10.3 d), the bandwidth of the klystron can be increased significantly, and there  is a slight increase in efficiency.
This requires that the intermediate cavities and the  input cavity of such a tube be stagger-tuned to accommodate the increased bandwidth  offered by the output circuit.
Because this type of tube is part klystron and part TWT,  it was named Twystron .
The V A-145 S-band Twystron has a bandwidth of 14% with  a 35% efficiency, 41 dB gain at midband, peak power of 3.5 MW, and average power  of 7 kW.19 Extended Interaction Klystron (EIK) .
In the EIK, the single-gap resonant cavities  of the klystron are replaced by a resonated slow-wave TWT-like circuit that contains two  or more interaction gaps (Figure 10.3 c).
Such cavities can be used for the prior cavities  as well as the output cavity.
This allows wider bandwidth and greater power than the  conventional klystron amplifier.
Staprans et al.2,18 state that the high-power V A-812C  EIK operated over a frequency range from 400 to 450 MHz (12% bandwidth), with a  peak power of 8 MW and an average power of 30 kW, and an efficiency of 40%.
EIK devices have been of interest for millimeter-wave applications.
According to  the Communications & Power Industries (CPI) brochure, its VKB 2475 millimeter- wave EIK when operating at a center frequency of 94.5 GHz with a 1 GHz bandwidth,  has a peak power of 1.2 kW, average power of 150 W, about 10% duty cycle, gain  of 47 dB, pulse width of 20 µs, and is liquid cooled.
It has much lower power than a  gyroklystron (discussed later) at this frequency, but its 18 cm by 10 cm (diameter) size  is considerably smaller and it costs considerably less than a gyroklystron.
A similar EIK, also built by CPI, has been used in the NASA CloudSat spaceborne  radar that provides the vertical profile of clouds for understanding cloud effects on  both the weather and climate.20 It operates at a center frequency of 94 GHz with a  250 MHz bandwidth, 1.5 kW peak power, 3.3 µs pulse duration, 4300 Hz prf, and an  efficiency of 32%.
It is conduction cooled.
Each cavity is a short piece of resonant  slow-wave structure based on ladder geometry.
The tube weighs 6.2 kg and can oper - ate over a temperature range from −15 to +60oC.
It was predicted that this EIK would  be capable of two years of continuous operation with a 92% confidence level.
Two  EIKs were employed in CloudSat (one prime, one redundant) so as to achieve a 99%  confidence of meeting the two-year life requirement.
ch10.indd   11 12/17/07   2:19:32 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	The Radar Transmitter 10.12  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 10 Clustered-Cavity Klystrons .
This is a good example of the technique of grouping  cavities to improve the operation of a klystron.
The individual intermediate cavities of  a multicavity klystron are each replaced by a cluster of two or three artificially loaded  low-Q cavities with Qs of one half to one third of the single cavity they replace.21  Figure 10.4 compares schematically the basic difference between the conventional  stagger-tuned klystron and the clustered-cavity klystron.
It has been said for a given FIGURE 10.
3 Basic structure of several types of linear  beam tubes: ( a) klystron, ( b) coupled-cavity TWT, ( c) extended  interaction klystron, and ( d) Twystron ( after A.
Staprans et al.18   © IEEE 1973 )Interaction structureP P IN Gun Interaction Impedance Distance (a)Out Collector Z0 Impedance (b) (c)Impedance Input Output load Impedance (d) ch10.indd   12 12/17/07   2:19:33 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	The Radar Transmitter  THE RADAR TRANSMITTER  10.136x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 10 gain-bandwidth product, this form of structure can produce a tube of much shorter  length so that there can be substantial savings in magnet weight and power.
Symons,22  the inventor of the clustered-cavity klystron, states that one of these wide bandwidth  tubes can be used to replace the two narrower-band klystrons in the AWACS radar.
 When each of the two narrow-band tubes is replaced by a wideband clustered-cavity  tube, redundant operation can be provided with higher reliability and without a large  weight penalty because either of these clustered-cavity klystrons provide full opera - tional capability similar to the redundancy commonly employed in FAA air-traffic  control radars.
Microwave Power Module (MPM ).23,24 A novel variant of the linear-beam tube is  the microwave power module,  which is an amplifier that employs a solid-state micro - wave integrated-circuit amplifier to drive a moderate-power helix traveling wave tube,  along with an integrated circuit power conditioner, all in a lightweight package.
It can  provide high efficiency, wide instantaneous bandwidth, low noise, and average power  levels from several tens to several hundreds of watts.
It is said to be smaller and lighter  than comparable TWT and solid-state power sources, and is capable of operating at  high ambient temperatures.
The gain of an MPM might be nominally 50 dB and is  divided between the solid-state driver and the TWT power booster in the ratios from  20/30 to 30/20.
The MPM seems best suited for the higher microwave frequencies,  perhaps from 2 to 40 GHz.
A serious constraint of the MPM for radar applications is that the helix TWT limits  its use to CW or high duty cycle transmissions (preferably greater than 50%).
It also  is of relatively modest power for many radar applications.FIGURE 10.
4 Comparison of the structures of a conventional stagger-tuned klystron  (top) and clustered-cavity klystron (bottom)16 (Courtesy of the IEEE )RF inputRF outputIntermediate cavities Cathode Collector Stagger tuned klystron Intermediate cavity clusters Clustered–cavityTM klystronCathode CollectorRF input RF output ch10.indd   13 12/17/07   2:19:33 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	The Radar Transmitter 10.14  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 10 10.3 MAGNETRON Unlike linear-beam tubes that are normally operated as amplifiers, the magnetron  is an oscillator.
As example of a commonly used early magnetron was the 5J26, an  L-band tube that was mechanically tunable from 1250 to1350 MHz.
It could operate  with a peak power of 500 kW, a 1 µs pulse width, and a pulse repetition frequency of  1000 Hz that provided an average power of 500 W.
Its 40% efficiency was typical for  magnetrons at that time.
The compact size and efficient operation of the magnetron  at microwave frequencies allowed radars in World War II to be small enough to fly in  military aircraft and to be mobile for ground warfare.
Magnetrons, however, seem to  be limited to about a few kilowatts of average power, which can restrict their utility.
 They also have limitations in stability and, therefore, in the MTI improvement factor  they can achieve, and they often have a shorter life than linear-beam tubes.
Because the magnetron is an oscillator rather than an amplifier, the starting phase  of each pulse is random from pulse to pulse.
This random change of phase can be  accommodated in a MTI radar receiver by use of a coherent oscillator (coho) as the  reference signal in the phase-detector stage of the receiver.
On each pulse, the phase  of the magnetron pulse sets the phase of the coho.
In this manner, the received signal  appears to be coherent pulse to pulse.
This is sometimes called coherent on receive .
 The MTI improvement factor obtained with a magnetron and a coherent-on-receive  operation usually is not as good as can be obtained with an MTI system that uses a  power amplifier as the transmitter.
Automatic frequency control (AFC) is often employed to keep the receiver tuned  to the frequency of the transmitter since the magnetron frequency can slowly drift  with changes in ambient temperature and self-heating.
The AFC can be applied to the  magnetron itself to keep it operating on its assigned frequency, within the limits of the  accuracy of the tuning mechanism.
A magnetron can be mechanically changed in frequency over a 5 to 10% frequency  range and, in some cases, as much as 25%.
Rapid mechanical tuning can be achieved  with a slotted disk suspended above the anode cavities.
When rotated, it alternately  provides inductive and capacitive loading of the cavities to raise and lower the fre - quency.
Such a rotary-tuned magnetron can provide very fast tuning rates.
For exam - ple, at a rotation rate of 1800 rpm, a magnetron with 10 cavities can tune across a band  300 times per second.
Coaxial Magnetron.25 A significant improvement in the power, efficiency, sta - bility, and life of the original form of the magnetron occurred with the introduction of  the coaxial magnetron.
The key difference is the incorporation of a stabilizing cavity  surrounding the conventional magnetron cavities, with the stabilizing cavity coupled  to the magnetron cavities so as to provide better stabilization.
The frequency of a  coaxial magnetron can be changed by mechanically moving one of the end plates,  called a tuning piston, of the stabilizing cavity.
The tuning piston can be positioned  mechanically from the outside of the vacuum by means of a vacuum bellows.
In the coaxial magnetron, the output of every other resonant cavity is coupled to the  stabilizing cavity that surrounds the anode structure.
The output power is then coupled  from the stabilizing cavity.
p Mode of Operation .
A magnetron, whether conventional or coaxial, can oscil - late at a number of different, closely spaced frequencies due to various possible con - figurations of the RF field that can exist between the cathode and the resonant cavities.
 ch10.indd   14 12/17/07   2:19:34 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	The Radar Transmitter  THE RADAR TRANSMITTER  10.156x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 10 These different RF field configurations, along with coupling among the cavity reso - nators of the magnetron, result in different modes of oscillation.
The magnetron can  shift, almost unpredictably, from one mode to another (which means the frequency  shifts unpredictably) as the voltage changes or as the input impedance that the mag - netron experiences changes.
The shift from one mode to another, often called moding ,  is especially bad since it can occur when the radar antenna scans and views different  environments.
It is important to avoid moding.
The preferred magnetron mode of operation is the so-called p mode  that occurs  when the RF field configuration is such that the RF phase alternates 180o (p radians)  between adjacent cavities.
The advantage of the p mode is that its frequency can be  more readily separated from the frequencies of the other possible modes.
(An N-cavity  magnetron can have N/2 possible modes.
The p  mode oscillates at a single frequency,  but the other modes can oscillate at two different frequencies so that the magnetron  can oscillate at N - 1 different frequencies.) Coaxial Magnetron Life .
The power that can be produced by a magnetron depends  on its size.
A larger size means more resonators, which makes it more difficult to  separate the various modes of oscillation in a conventional magnetron.
The coaxial  magnetron, however, with stabilization controlled by the outer cavity, permits stable  operation with a larger number of cavities, and thus with greater power.
The anode  and cathode structures of a coaxial magnetron can also be bigger, which further allows  operation at higher power.
The larger structures permit more conservative design, with  the result that it has longer life and better reliability than conventional magnetrons,  as well as more stable operation.
The operating life of a coaxial magnetron has been  said26 to be between 5,000 and 10,000 hours, which is a five- to twentyfold increase  compared to conventional high-power magnetrons.
Limitations of Magnetrons.
 When the magnetron was first introduced, it pro - vided a capability not available with the grid-controlled tubes used for early radars.
 As time passed, the demands for improved radar performance outran the capabilities  available from the magnetron.
Fortunately, other tube types were invented that over - came the limitations of the magnetron.
Although the magnetron has had important applications in the past, it has also had  serious limitations that constrain its usefulness for radar.
Its major limitations are its  poor stability which limits the ability to detect moving targets in clutter, its relatively  modest average power, and its signal cannot be readily modulated for pulse compres - sion.
These and others are discussed next.
The use of the doppler frequency shift to detect moving targets in the midst of  large clutter echoes requires that the transmitter produce a stable signal with little  extraneous noise.
Because of their poor stability and noisy transmissions, magnetrons  are limited in the amount of MTI Improvement Factor they can achieve to about 30 or  perhaps 40 dB.
Many radar applications require greater MTI Improvement Factors.
 Some radars also require the use of pulse-compression waveforms to obtain the reso - lution of a short pulse with the energy of a long pulse.
It is difficult to phase or fre - quency modulate the waveform of a magnetron, as is needed for pulse compression.
 Thus, power amplifiers are almost always used for pulse compression applications.
 Magnetrons are not stable enough to be suitable for very long pulses (e.g., 100 µs), and  starting jitter limits their use at very short pulse widths (e.g., 0.1 µs), especially at high  power and at the lower frequency bands.
Its maximum average power is of the order   of several kilowatts, which is less than that required for some military applications.
 ch10.indd   15 12/17/07   2:19:34 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	The Radar Transmitter 10.16  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 10 Since the magnetron is an oscillator with a random starting phase on each pulse, it can - not be used to eliminate second-time-around clutter echoes—as can an amplifier trans - mitter.
Similarly, combining the power outputs of multiple magnetrons has not been  attractive.
Magnetrons can produce considerable electromagnetic interference across  a bandwidth much wider than the signal bandwidth (coaxial magnetrons are somewhat  better in this respect).
Also, magnetrons do not have precise frequency control nor are  they able to perform precise frequency jumping.
In spite of its many unfavorable characteristics, the magnetron is a tube that can be  considered for less demanding radar tasks.
For a long time, it was the transmitter of  choice for use in the civil marine radar, one of the most widely used radars, as briefly  discussed next.
Civil Marine Radar Magnetrons .27 The magnetron has been well-suited for  application in civil marine radars used on small pleasure boats or large commercial  ships.
Its success has been due in part to the radar needing only small transmitter  power, and the radar does not require doppler processing to separate moving targets  from large fixed clutter echoes.
Thus, many of the problems that occur with magne - trons when used in other applications are not found is this application.
Also important  is that the civil marine radar business is very competitive because of the large world - wide need for such radars.
This has resulted in the development of low-cost, highly  reliable magnetrons for this important radar application.
These magnetrons generate peak powers from 3 to 75 kW and have relatively low  average powers of a few watts to a few tens of watts.
An example of a magnetron for  a civil marine radar is the MG5241 manufactured by EEY of Chelmsford, England.
 It is an 18 cavity X-band magnetron that operates at a fixed frequency within the  band from 9380 to 9440 MHz with a peak power of 12.5 kW and an efficiency of  43%.
It operates with an anode voltage of 5.8 kV and an anode current of 5.0 amps.
 Typically, its pulse width might be 1.0 µs with a duty cycle of 0.001.
The manufac - turer claims an expected typical life of over 10,000 hours and guarantees a minimum  life of 3,000 hours.
It might also be mentioned that the magnetron has had outstanding success as the  power source for the microwave oven.
Over the years, it has developed into a very  low cost and highly reliable generator of microwave power that is well-suited for this  application.
10.4 CROSSED-FIELD AMPLIFIERS28 The crossed-field amplifier, or CFA, like the magnetron, has a magnetic field that is  orthogonal to the electric field, but it is an amplifier rather than an oscillator.29 It is  similar in appearance to a magnetron except that the RF circuit is interrupted to pro - vide the input and output connections as needed for an amplifier.
CFAs might have  an efficiency from 40 to 60%, use a lower voltage than linear-beam tubes, are lighter  in weight and smaller in size, and have been found from UHF to K band.
However,  they have relatively low gain and their stability and noise are not as good as found in  linear-beam tubes, so their application for MTI radar has been limited.
Because of the  CFA’s low gain, the crossed-field amplifier transmitter needs more than one stage of  RF amplification, each with its own power supply, modulator, and controls.
All these  stages must be stable to achieve good MTI performance.
ch10.indd   16 12/17/07   2:19:34 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	The Radar Transmitter  THE RADAR TRANSMITTER  10.176x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 10 Because the CFA has relatively low gain, it is sometimes used only in one or two  of the highest-power stages of an amplifier chain, where it may offer an advantage in  efficiency, operating voltage, size and/or weight compared to other tubes.
The output- stage CFA might be preceded by a medium-power TWT that provides most of the gain  of the total amplifier chain.
(When comparing the CFA with the linear-beam tube, the  entire transmitter system needs to be compared and not just the tube itself.) The CFA  has also been considered as a means to boost the power output of previously existing  radar systems that employed magnetrons.
There have been both backward-wave and  forward wave CFAs.
The backward-wave CFA is also known as the Amplitron .
It is possible to pulse some CFAs, which have cold cathodes, to employ what is  called DC operation , where the transmitter is turned on and off to generate a pulse  waveform without the need for a high-power modulator.
In dc operation the high volt - age is continuously present between anode and cathode, and the current is turned on  by applying the RF drive and turned off by pulsing the control electrode.
(The control  electrode consists of a segment of the cathode structure in the drift region.) To prevent  the tube from starting without RF drive, the cathode must be kept cool enough to pre - vent thermionic emission.
The control electrode needs only a short, medium-power  pulse, typically one-third of the anode voltage and one-third of the anode peak current.
 Since the control electrode is insulated and since some energy is dissipated on the  control electrode, it can be difficult to cool.
This can limit the maximum pulse repeti - tion frequency that can be used.
In spite of it requiring no modulator, dc operation has  seldom been used because of its many limitations.30 Crossed-field amplifiers have been used in radars in the past, but they have signifi - cant disadvantages, as was described in the second edition of this Radar Handbook,   that make it less likely they will be widely used in the future.
10.5 GYROTRONS31,32,33 It has been noted previously that the power handling capability of the microwave  power tubes discussed thus far in this chapter decreases as the frequency is increased.
 This results because the resonant structures of the slow-wave microwave circuitry of  these tubes become smaller with increasing frequency.
The smaller the device the more  difficult it is to dissipate the heat that is generated.
Thus, the power output decreases  approximately inversely as the square of the radar frequency.
The gyrotron RF power generator, however, does not have this limitation because  it does not employ slow-wave resonant microwave structures.
These devices employ a  fast-wave structure, such as a smooth circular tube, * one where the phase velocity of the  electromagnetic wave is greater than the velocity of light.
(With a slow-wave device,  the phase velocity is less than the velocity of light.) The diameter of the gyrotron circuit  can be many wavelengths, and the electron beam need not be placed close to delicate  RF structures.
Because a fast-wave structure rather than a slow-wave structure is used,  they do not have the size limitations of other microwave power sources as the frequency  is increased.
Thus, they can generate greater power at the higher frequencies than can  other RF power sources, something especially attractive at millimeter wavelengths.
*  Tube  is used here as being a “hollow elongated cylinder.” ch10.indd   17 12/17/07   2:19:35 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	The Radar Transmitter 10.18  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 10 The magnetic field in a gyrotron serves a different function from the magnetic field  in a slow-wave device.
In the slow-wave device, the magnetic field keeps the electronic  beam collimated.
In the fast-wave device, however, the magnetic field determines the  frequency; but the frequency of a conventional slow-wave device is determined by  the circuit dimensions.
An electron in an applied axial magnetic field Bo will rotate at  what is called the electron cyclotron frequency,  which is given by wc = eBo/mγ, where  e = electron charge, m = electron rest mass, and γ is the relativistic factor, which is   [1 + ( e/mc2)Vo], where c = velocity of light and Vo = beam voltage.
The beam voltage  and the corresponding electron velocity in a gyrotron are high enough to cause relativ - istic effects.
The electrons follow helical paths around the magnetic field lines when in  the presence of an electromagnetic wave with a transverse component of electric field.
 Electrons that lose energy to the electromagnetic wave become lighter and accumulate  phase lead and then catch up with the electrons that gain energy and become heavier  and accumulate phase lag.
Thus, electrons become phase-bunched in their cyclotron  orbits as a result of the relativistic mass change of the electrons.
The gyrotron bunching  operation also can be obtained at harmonics of the cyclotron frequency, but there can  be problems with higher circuit losses and competition with modes operating at lower  harmonics so that most high-power gyrotrons operate at the fundamental frequency or  its second harmonic.33 Because the frequency of a gyrotron is determined by the magnetic field and  not by the size of the fast-wave structure, the structure can be large, and it is then  possible to generate quite high power at millimeter-wave frequencies.
The large  magnetic fields needed for millimeter-wave gyrotrons often have to be generated by  superconducting magnets.
The gyrotron with a single cavity operates as an oscillator.
It is sometimes called  a gyro-oscillator  to differentiate it from a gyro-amplifier  that utilizes several resonant  cavities or a traveling wave circuit to operate as an amplifier.
The gyro-amplifier that  employs several resonant cavities is called a gyroklystron , and when a traveling-wave  circuit is used, it is called a gyro-traveling-wave-tube , or, more commonly, gyro-TWT .
 There is also a gyrotwystron  with the resonant output cavity replaced by a TWT cir - cuit so as to achieve greater bandwidth than can be obtained with a resonant cavity.
 Although gyro-oscillators have been capable of greater power than gyro-amplifiers,  the gyro-amplifier has usually been preferred for radar applications for the same rea - son the amplifier has been preferred at microwave frequencies, especially when dop - pler processing is important.
An example of a high power gyroklystron for radar applications is the VGB- 819434,35 that was used in the experimental W-band radar known as Warloc  at the U.S.
 Naval Research Laboratory.
It had five cavities, operated over a 700 MHz bandwidth  centered at 94.2 GHz with an average power of 10.2 kW, a peak power of 102 kW,  10% duty cycle, and 31% efficiency with a 55 kV , 6 A electron beam.
It used a super - conducting magnet with a closed-cycle cooling system (so that no liquid cryogens  were required).
It provided a magnetic field of 36.6 kG.
The five-cavity gyroklystron  could achieve a bandwidth of 1050 MHz at an average power of 4 kW.
The radar used  a 6 ft diameter antenna that provided a beamwidth of 0.1°.
This W-band Warloc was  installed in a van and was used for various experiments.
The Warloc radar was about  three orders of magnitude more capable than most previous radars used for millime - ter-wave radar.
This experimental Warloc radar was employed to demonstrate at W  band the ISAR imaging of moving targets, cloud structure, low-angle operation, and  unusual atmospheric research including what have been called “air spikes.” ch10.indd   18 12/17/07   2:19:35 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	The Radar Transmitter  THE RADAR TRANSMITTER  10.196x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 10 The above discussion was mainly about the gyrotron amplifier.
The gyrotron has  also been operated as an oscillator to produce very high power, but the oscillator ver - sion has not been as popular as the amplifier for radar applications.
This might be due  to the amplifier being better able to produce the desired radar waveforms.
10.6 TRANSMITTER SPECTRUM CONTROL The increasing demand for electromagnetic spectrum for both civilian and military  applications has accentuated the need to control the spectrum of radar transmitters  to avoid interference with users of the electromagnetic spectrum operating at other  frequencies.
The aspects of concern here are those that affect RF tube selection and  achievement of minimum spectrum occupancy by the transmitters discussed previously  in this chapter.
Reduction of Spurious Outputs.
 RF tube spurious outputs may be grouped into  three kinds: harmonics, adjacent-band, and in-band.
All RF tubes produce some harmonic output.
In general, little can be done in tube  design to reduce harmonic outputs, but it is feasible to filter out harmonics (30 to  60 dB reduction) with high-power filters.
Adjacent-band spurious output can also occur in some cathode-pulsed TWTs and  CFAs.
Adjacent-band spurious output is affected by tube and modulator selection, but  it can be filtered by a high-power microwave filter if necessary .
All RF tubes produce some in-band background noise level.
In a 1-MHz bandwidth,  this noise might be 50 to 60 dB down in conventional CFAs, 70 to 80 dB down in the  low-noise-high-gain CFA, and 90 dB down or better in linear-beam tubes.
In-band  spurious cannot normally be improved with filters because it occurs within the same  frequency range as the desired signal spectrum.
Attempts to use noise degeneration to  reduce the inherent RF tube noise levels are subject to limitations.
In-band spurious  signals can also result from power supply and modulator instabilities.
Reduction of Spectrum Amplitude Exceeding (sin x)/x.
The spectrum of a  perfectly rectangular pulse has the familiar (sin x)/x form, where x is p (fo − f)t, fo is  the radar carrier frequency, and t is the pulse width.
If 1/ t is called the nominal band - width of the signal, the envelope of the spectrum peaks falls off at the rate of 6 dB  per octave of bandwidth, and this reduction will continue until the envelope reaches  the inherent noise output level of the transmitter.
This rate of spectrum falloff is too  slow to meet most system requirements.
Nevertheless, without special care the actual  spectrum envelope might be even worse than this, depending on tube characteristics,  as a result of phase modulation during the finite rise and fall of practical modulator  and RF drive pulse shapes.
In these cases, either the leading and trailing edges must  be appropriately tailored, or else (in linear-beam tubes) the RF drive may be withheld  during the rise and fall time.
Although this may slightly reduce apparent efficiency, it  should be noted that energy outside the approximately 1/ t generated during rise and  fall with the RF drive present is not utilized by the receiver anyway .
Improvement by Means of Shaped Pulses .
Since the energy in the spectrum  beyond plus or minus 1/ t from fo is not used by the receiver, it is desirable for  ch10.indd   19 12/17/07   2:19:35 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	The Radar Transmitter 10.20  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 10 electromagnetic compatibility purposes to avoid transmitting energy beyond those  limits.
This objective may be approached by using a pulse shape different from the  convenient and conventional rectangular pulse.36 Highly shaped pulses have not  been used often in radar systems because of the loss of efficiency that results.
(These  limitations, however, do not apply when using the grid-controlled tubes known as  the Constant Efficiency Amplifier  or the Inductive-Output Tube , as discussed later in  Section 10.7.) Another approach to spectrum improvement is to shape the rise and fall of a rect - angular pulse.37 This attenuates the spectrum of frequencies far from fo, while the flat- topped portion of the pulse retains the high transmitter efficiency for most of the pulse  duration.
Since a rectangular pulse has the best transmitter efficiency but has high  spectral energy at frequencies far from the center frequency, whereas a highly shaped  pulse has less far-out spectral energy but poor transmitter efficiency, the fraction of  the pulse length to be used for the shaped rise and fall is a crucial decision.
Although the improvement attainable in practice is limited by phase modulation in  the transmitter during the rise and fall,38,39 significant improvements can be obtained.
 In a linear-beam-tube transmitter with properly shaped RF drive, for example, the  spectrum width at 60 dB down can usually be narrowed by about an order of magni - tude at a cost of about 1 dB in transmitter efficiency.
Amplifier chain radar systems, whether tube or solid state, often use some shaping  of the edges of the transmitted RF pulse to reduce the RF spectrum width.
This can be  done by simply slowing the rise and fall times of the exciter signal to the transmitter,  and this approach generally has been adequate to satisfy Military Standards and related  system requirements.
Spectral Noise in Doppler Radars.
 The doppler frequency shift is widely used  to detect moving target echo signals in the presence of large clutter echoes.
However,  if the radar transmitter generates noise or its pulse waveform has significant spec - tral energy at the doppler frequencies expected from moving targets, this unwanted  noise or spectra will degrade the detection of desired targets.
The transmitter noise  is reflected back from the clutter and enters the receiver and is sometimes called  “transmitted clutter.”40 Some types of microwave tubes are more of a problem than  others.
Extraneous noise in a microwave amplifier tube at the frequencies expected  from doppler-shifted target echoes can be produced by ion oscillations.
According  to A.
A.
Acker,40 “these are periodic instabilities that can occur in the electron beam  at video frequencies, resulting in signals other than the carrier frequency, causing  severe problems to doppler radar performance.” Acker also states that ion oscillations  require a finite time to develop so that if a tube is operated with less than a 10 µs pulse  width, ion noise is usually not of concern.
Advances in digital technology have allowed a method to reduce intra-pulse trans - mitter noise and power supply instabilities that affect radar performance by the presence  of strong clutter echoes.
The technique,41 known as Transmitter Noise Compensation   (TNC),  captures and processes an accurate replica of each transmitted pulse.
By means  of pulse-to-pulse comparisons, the measured transmitter errors are used to derive a  digital filter that compensates for the transmitter noise that arrives in the receiver  digital signal processor.
TNC compensates for intra-pulse transmitter noise as well  as power supply instabilities.
Although TNC works only in a single unambiguous  range interval, it is said that it should be able to operate with some medium PRF  radars if significant clutter is not likely to extend over more than one PRF interval.
  ch10.indd   20 12/17/07   2:19:36 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	The Radar Transmitter  THE RADAR TRANSMITTER  10.216x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 10 An experimental implementation using data collected on an operational radar with  a CFA transmitter showed that “the TNC technique can improve radar detection of  targets in clutter by 15 dB or more.” 10.7 GRID-CONTROLLED TUBES The grid-controlled tube is a modern version of the classical triode or tetrode vacuum  tube that dates back to the early years of the 20th century.
These devices employ a  cathode to generate electrons, one (for a triode) or two (for a tetrode) control grids,  and an anode to collect the electrons.
A small voltage applied to the control grid acts to  control the number of electrons traveling from cathode to anode.
The process by which  the electron density of the electron stream is modulated by the signal on the control  grid to produce amplification is called density modulation .
In the latter half of the 20th  century, grid-controlled tubes were successfully employed in such important radar  applications as HF over-the-horizon radar, VHF and UHF aircraft surveillance radars,  and satellite surveillance radars.
Grid-controlled tubes are capable of high power, wide  bandwidth, good efficiency, and inherent long life, but they are of low or moderate  gain.
Their chief limitation is that they are not capable of operating at higher frequen - cies, but they are capable up to frequencies approaching 1 GHz.
Grid-controlled tubes  have been operated at UHF and higher frequencies by using microwave techniques in  their construction, as was done in the Coaxitron.
They can also be made to operate with  constant efficiency when shaping of the pulse amplitude is used to reduce interference  caused by its far-out spectrum, something not as practical to do with other types of  microwave tubes.
Coaxitron.
 The performance of conventional grid-control tubes at the higher fre - quencies is limited by the time it takes for the electrons to transit from the cathode to  the anode of the tube.
This transit time must be small compared to the period of the RF  signal to be amplified.
To minimize the undesired transit-time effects, the complete RF  input and output circuit and the electrical interaction system can be placed within the  vacuum envelope.
Such a grid-controlled tube is called a Coaxitron .42 In one embodi - ment of the Coaxitron, the electron-interaction structure consisted of a cylindrical  array of 48 essentially independent grounded-grid unit triodes.
The so-called A15193F Coaxitron, described in Vingst et al.,42 operated over a  frequency range from 406 to 450 MHz with a peak power of 1.25 MW, a pulse width  of 13 µs, a duty cycle of 0.0039, an average power of just under 5 kW, and a plate  efficiency of 47%.
The Coaxitron has been successfully employed for UHF radars,  including airborne.
Constant Efficiency Amplifier (CEA).
 It has been said43 that “a constant- efficiency amplifier has been a goal for transmitter engineers ever since Lee  DeForest and Ambrose Fleming invented the first electronic amplifiers.” This goal  seems to have been achieved by the CEA grid-controlled tube.
It is customary to think of the shape of a conventional radar pulse as being  rectangular.
It is seldom, however, perfectly rectangular with very short rise and  fall times because such a waveform has a very large bandwidth, as one can observe  from its Fourier transform.
Even if a large bandwidth were available to support a  ch10.indd   21 12/17/07   2:19:36 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	The Radar Transmitter 10.22  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 10 rectangular pulse, a large bandwidth would likely cause interference to other radars  and other electromagnetic systems.
For this reason, government frequency allocation  agencies usually require that the frequency spectrum from a radar not contain large  energy at other frequencies.
This is becoming more important as the occupancy of the  electromagnetic spectrum is increasingly crowded with transmitters.
The classical  way to reduce the far-out spectrum from a radar transmitter is to shape, or taper,  its waveform, such as by using a trapezoidal shape, a gaussian-like pulse shape, a  truncated gaussian, perhaps a cosine on a pedestal, or other type of nonrectangular  shape.
The problem with using conventional transmitters such as discussed in this  chapter is that when using a shaped waveform some loss in efficiency results.
Thus,  it is seldom that a radar designer would want to use a highly shaped pulse waveform  in order to reduce the spectrum radiated outside of the radar’s normal operating  signal bandwidth.
The CEA, however, is an RF power source that does not have its  efficiency decreased when a nonrectangular, or shaped, waveform is used.
The CEA  has been widely used for commercial TV transmitters that have highly modulated,  nonconstant amplitude waveforms.
The CEA is based on a grid-controlled tube known as an Inductive Output Tube,   or IOT.
(The CEA is similar to something called a Klystrode44 except that the CEA  employs the IOT with a multistage depressed collector similar to that used in klys - trons and TWTs.37) In the IOT, the wire grid of a grid-controlled tube is replaced  with an aperture that does not intercept the electrons, and it has a coaxial magnetic  field that confines the electron stream as in a klystron or a TWT.
Although an RF  cavity is used in an IOT, the beam is density modulated, or bunched, with a grid  similar to how it is modulated in a triode or tetrode grid-controlled tube.
This makes  it smaller and lighter than a comparable klystron.
The density modulated electrons  thus form bunches, and RF energy is extracted by passing the beam through the  resonant cavity.
The CEA has been widely used for UHF-TV transmitters, a highly  competitive industry concerned with cost.
It has been said that in UHF-TV, the use  of a CEA reduces the required prime power by one-half compared to a conventional  tube transmitter45 and by one-third of the prime power of a silicon-carbide solid- state transmitter.46 The CEA achieves these efficiencies since there is no loss of effi - ciency when using shaped pulse waveforms, as there is with other microwave tubes.
 This is an important reason for its use for UHF-TV with its time-varying-amplitude  waveform.
It also should be an advantage for radar applications that require shaped  waveforms at frequencies up to 1000 MHz, when it is required to reduce the far-out  spectral energy.
A CEA, such as manufactured by L-3 Communications, can operate within the  UHF-TV band from 470 to 806 MHz with an 8 MHz bandwidth (the spectral width  of a TV channel), 130 kW peak power at 60% efficiency, and an average power of  6 kW or greater.
The single input cavity can be made to tune over the entire band  with low VSWR.
Thus, the constant efficiency amplifier is a grid-controlled tube, operating as class- AB, that consists of an inductive-output tube with a multistage depressed collector.
It  is a linear amplifier whose prime power can be proportional to the output power, pro - viding constant efficiency over a wide range of output powers.
The CEA seems to be  the preferred tube for UHF-TV transmitters, rather than other types of grid-controlled  tubes, solid-state, or klystrons.
It would seem that the CEA ought to be of interest for  radar applications at frequencies as high as 1000 MHz when highly shaped pulses  need to be used.
ch10.indd   22 12/17/07   2:19:36 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	The Radar Transmitter  THE RADAR TRANSMITTER  10.236x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 10 Application of Grid-Controlled Tubes.
 There has been important application of  the grid-controlled tube for radars in the past at HF, VHF, and UHF.
It is still of value for  applications in these frequency regions and should be considered as a candidate when  designing a radar to operate at the lower frequencies.
The constant efficiency ampli - fier should be of interest because of its higher efficiency when shaped waveforms are  needed for control of the radiated spectrum.
10.8 MODULATORS This section briefly reviews the modulator,  sometimes called the pulser,  which is the  device that turns the transmitter tube on and off to generate the desired pulse wave - form.
Those desiring more information might examine Chapter 9 in L.
Sivan’s book  on transmitters,47 the chapter by T.
A.
Weil in the second edition of Radar Handbook,48  the Conference Records of the International Power Modulator Symposia, and the  Conference Proceedings of the IEEE Pulse Power Conferences.
The type of tube determines, to some extent, the type of modulator.
A modula - tor basically consists of an energy storage device, which may be a capacitance or a  pulse forming network, and a switch for triggering the dc pulse.
The switch in the  past might have been a vacuum tube, thyratron, ignitron, silicon-controlled rectifier  (SCR), reverse-switching rectifier, spark gap, or magnetic.
However, the solid-state  switch seems to be the switching mechanism that should be considered initially when  designing a transmitter modulator.
Modulators can be classed as either low power or  high power, depending on how the tube is modulated.
If the tube has a grid, a small and relatively inexpensive type of modulator can be  used, but grids usually are not feasible with high power tubes.
A widely used switching  element for low-power modulators is the MOSFET transistor.47 Low-power modulators can be used with tubes that employ a modulating anode,  as does the linear-beam amplifier.
The modulating anode in a linear-beam tube is part  of the electron gun and is separated from the body of the tube.
The voltage of the  modulating anode is varied over a large range in order to vary the electron-beam cur - rent, but the power needed to drive the modulating anode is small because the current  intercepted by the modulating anode is very small.
Very high-power tubes cannot use a modulating anode because the control electrode  might not be able to handle the power.
When this occurs, a high-power modulator,  called a cathode pulser  might have to be used to switch the tube on and off.
Cathode  pulsers must switch the full beam voltage and current simultaneously, which involves  high instantaneous powers.
They must control the full beam power of the RF tube, either  directly or through a coupling circuit.
The energy storage device might be made up of  capacitors, inductors, or some combination of the two as in pulse-forming networks.
 The energy in the energy storage device is discharged by a very capable switch.
The line-type modulator  uses a delay line or a pulse-forming network (PFN) as the  energy storage element.
A switch initiates the discharge of the energy stored in the  PFN.
The shape and duration of the pulse are determined by the passive elements of  the PFN.
The switch has no control over the pulse shape, other than to initiate it.
The  pulse ends when the PFN has discharged sufficiently.
A disadvantage of this action is  that the trailing edge of the pulse is usually not sharp since it depends on the discharge  characteristics of the PFN.
It has been widely used in the past for magnetron pulsing.
ch10.indd   23 12/20/07   11:09:01 AMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	The Radar Transmitter 10.24  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 10 In an active-switch modulator,  the switch has to be turned off as well as turned on.
 Originally, the switch was a vacuum tube and the modulator was called a hard-tube  modulator to distinguish it from the gas-tube switch often used in a line-type modulator.
 Since other than vacuum tubes can be used as the switch in an active-switch modulator,  the “hard-tube” designation (meaning a vacuum tube) might not always apply.
Unlike  the line-type modulator, the switch in the active-switch modulator controls both the  beginning and end of the pulse.
Since the energy storage device is a capacitor, the  pulse can droop, something that can be prevented by extracting only a small fraction  of the stored energy from the capacitor.
This requires a large capacitance, which may  be obtained with a collection of capacitors called a capacitor bank .
The active-switch  modulator permits greater flexibility and precision than the line-type modulator.
It can  provide excellent pulse shape, varying pulse durations, and pulse repetition frequen - cies, including mixed pulse lengths and bursts of pulses with close pulse spacings.
Microwave tubes and their high-voltage switches can sometimes produce an  unwanted arc discharge that effectively places a short circuit across the power sup - ply and/or modulator delivering power to the tube.
Since 50 J of energy can usually  cause damage to an RF tube (or the switching device) and since the capacitor bank  for an active-switch modulator must often store far more than 50 J (to prevent exces - sive droop), some means must be provided to divert the stored energy when an arc  discharge occurs.
Such a device is the crowbar,  so called because it is equivalent to  placing a heavy conductor (like a crowbar) directly across the power supply to divert  the energy and thus prevent the energy from discharging through the tube and caus - ing serious damage.
A crowbar is, therefore, needed for a high-power active-switch  modulator because of the large amount of energy stored in its capacitor bank.
On the  other hand, crowbars are not usually needed with line-type modulators, which store  less energy in their pulse-forming network.
Certain crossed-field amplifiers can be pulsed by means of a control electrode,  located in the tube’s drift region, without a separate full-power pulse modulator.49  This is called dc operation .
Even though dc operation avoids a high power modula - tor, it has seldom been used because it requires a much larger capacitor bank to limit  droop, an arc in the tube requires a crowbar that interrupts operation for a few seconds  instead of only for a single pulse, and the adjacent radars might inject enough RF  power into the radar antenna and back to the transmitter to turn on a dc operated CFA  at the wrong times.
There has been at least one example in the past where a major  radar system originally designed with CFAs based on dc operation had to have its dc  operated CFAs replaced during the middle of its development with CFAs that used  conventional pulse modulators.
At the beginning of the 21th century, the solid-state modulator  was developed and  began to be used for radar transmitters as either cathode pulsed or modulating anode  pulsed modulators, as well as grid pulsed.
Solid-state modulators offer improved trans - mitter performance by allowing a wide variation in parameters (pulse width, pulse  repetition frequency, pulse agility, and pulse-to-pulse consistency).
They also provide  cost savings that result from the inherent reliability of these switch modules compared  to conventional switch tubes, and the elimination of numerous auxiliary components  needed for the operation of switch tubes.50,51 Lower operating costs and smaller cool - ing requirements occur because of their higher conversion efficiency.
They are also  said to have higher reliability with longer component life.
The ability of the solid-state  switch to open quickly (less than one microsecond) when a fault is detected eliminates  the need for a crowbar.
The energy-storage device does not discharge during an arc,  so when the fault has cleared, the transmitter can resume operation in microseconds.
 ch10.indd   24 12/17/07   2:19:37 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	The Radar Transmitter  THE RADAR TRANSMITTER  10.256x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 10 A solid-state cathode modulator can provide pulse widths varying from 50 ns to “dc”  on a pulse-to-pulse basis and can support pulse repetition frequencies up to 400 kHz.52  The high voltage solid-state switches are built from modules that might contain from  4 to 20 individual transistors connected in series to provide the required transmitter  cathode voltage.
Rise times can be as low as 30 ns.
10.9 WHICH RF POWER SOURCE TO USE? There is no good, simple answer to this question, but in this section we shall attempt  to discuss some of the various issues that might be involved.
This chapter has briefly described the various vacuum tubes that have been used or  considered for radar applications, and the next chapter discusses the solid-state transmit - ter, which has also been widely used in radar.
A question that naturally arises is which  RF power source should be used for some particular radar application.
Radar system  design usually involves making choices among the various possibilities available.
When  trying to determine which RF power source to use, a choice can be made by doing a  separate system design with each RF power source that seems promising.
The decision  as to which to use can be based on how well each system design performs the desired  task according to some pre-established criteria.
This, unfortunately, is seldom done.
It  is suspected that sometimes the decision as to which RF power source to use is deter - mined by what the radar system designer thinks the buyer (or customer) of the radar  desires.
Sometimes the buyer will actually specify the type of transmitter to be delivered.
 Manufacturing a product based on what the buyer thinks he or she wants may be a good  marketing strategy for many products, but in something like a radar, it might be better  for a customer to clearly specify what performance is wanted and then leave the decision  as to what RF power source should be used to the radar system designer.
It is usually  better if the radar design can be determined by the radar system designer and not by the  manufacturer’s marketing department.
The goals of the radar designer and the market - ing department are not always the same.
It is appreciated, however, that sometimes the  marketing manager’s opinion has to prevail if the company is to remain in business.
A number of different RF power sources have been considered that, at one time or  other, have been employed in radar.
Not all might be popular or desired at some partic - ular time but most should be considered, even if briefly, by the radar system designer  when trying to determine a new radar system design or an upgrade of some existing  system.
Opinions about the utility of the various vacuum tube transmitters mentioned  here will be briefly given next, with the suggestion to the reader to keep in mind that  circumstances can change and these opinions can change as well.
These opinions are  not “written in stone,” and are not likely to be universally agreed to by all those who  work in radar.
But that is the nature of any engineering endeavor.
Brief Opinions About the Utility of Various Radar Vacuum Tubes.
 The types  of RF power sources are mentioned below in no particular order.
Grid-Controlled Tube .
Although some might think these should have disappeared  along with the old radio vacuum tube, there have been many HF, VHF, and UHF radars  that successfully operated with grid-control tubes.
Often with such radars, it would cost  more to replace them with solid-state transmitters, and there might be little gained by  doing so.
The grid-controlled tube known as the constant efficiency amplifier (CEA)  ch10.indd   25 12/17/07   2:19:37 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	The Radar Transmitter 10.26  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 10 and its predecessors (the IOT and the Klystrode) are the only RF power sources that  can operate efficiently when amplitude shaped waveforms are desired for minimizing  out-of-band interference to other radars.
Thus, the CEA probably should be a candidate  when considering any new UHF radar system, as well as radars at lower frequencies,  especially if mutual interference is a potential problem.
Magnetron .
It was mentioned that the magnetron was what made microwave  radar possible in the 1940s.
The magnetron is still a valid candidate for small, non- doppler radars such as civil marine radars, although such radars also have been manu - factured with solid-state transmitters.
It is not likely that magnetrons will be used in  high performance radars, especially those that require average powers more than one  or two kilowatts or where MTI improvement factors have to be greater than 30 to  40 dB.
For example, during the procurement of the Nexrad doppler weather radar in  the mid-1980s, the magnetron was considered, but it could not meet the clutter can - cellation specifications, which is why Nexrad employs a klystron.
In the past, some  long-range Air Traffic Control Air Route Surveillance Radars used a magnetron, but  the klystron seems to be the preferred choice for this application.
Crossed-Field Amplifier .
Although these tubes were employed for some major  radar applications because they have good efficiency, require relatively low voltage,  and have wide bandwidth (about 10%), they are less likely to be used because they are  noisy (which affects their doppler-processing performance), they are of relatively low  gain (which requires the transmitter to have multiple stages), and because the klystron  is usually a better overall choice.
Klystron .
The original klystrons employed resonant cavities that restricted their  bandwidth.
The bandwidth of a klystron, however, increases as its power increases.
 Resonant cavities were later replaced by wider-band circuits, which were related to  the type of circuits used in TWTs.
Such klystrons are known as the Clustered Cavity  Klystron, Extended Interaction Klystron, and the Twystron.
When considering a trans - mitter for high-performance radar, these variants of the klystron are likely to be highly  favored for many applications.
The klystron has good stability and low noise so as to  enable larger MTI improvement factors to be obtained when using the doppler shift  to detect moving targets in clutter.
At high power, high voltages have to be used and  protection from X-rays generated by the high voltage must be employed.
However,  the MBK (multiple-beam klystron) version of the klystron can be used to achieve high  power with lower voltage.
Traveling Wave Tube .
As mentioned, the TWT and the klystron can have compa - rable bandwidths when the tube produces high power.
The performance of a TWT is  similar to that of a wideband klystron, except that it might not be as stable as the klystron  and have slightly less gain.
The microwave power module (MPM), which is a combina - tion of helical TWT and solid-state device, has not had significant application in radar.
Gyrotrons .
If very high power is needed at millimeter-wave frequencies, the  gyrotron amplifier or oscillator is the only RF power source available.
For low-power  radar applications at millimeter waves, the EIK can be used.
Solid-State Amplifiers for Radar Transmitters.
 Solid-state transmitters and  vacuum tube transmitters have significant differences, yet they are both employed   ch10.indd   26 12/17/07   2:19:38 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	The Radar Transmitter  THE RADAR TRANSMITTER  10.276x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 10 in radar.
Some of these differences are mentioned in Section 11.1 of Chapter 11 “Solid- State Transmitters.” Briefly, proponents of solid state might say that they do not need  a hot cathode as does a vacuum tube, do not require high voltages or magnets, do not  produce X-ray radiations as some vacuum tubes do, have “graceful degradation,” and  that maintainability is its key asset.
On the other hand, proponents of vacuum tubes  might say that radars using solid-state transmitters have limited peak power and thus  need to operate with a long pulse and a high duty cycle, which require the use of  pulse compression.
The long pulse can mask or eclipse target echoes at short range so  that an additional short pulse transmission is needed to unmask the eclipsed echoes  at short ranges.
When Sensitivity Time Control (which has a varying receiver gain  with range) is used with a long pulse and pulse compression, distortion can result in  the compressed pulse.
It has also been said that solid-state transmitters are often less  efficient, they might be heavier, and their cost might be greater than an equivalent  vacuum tube radar system.
The above have all been said at one time or another, but  there is not universal agreement about the importance of these characteristics for all  radar applications.
The radar engineer should not simply compare the particular differences between  a solid-state transmitter and a vacuum tube transmitter when determining what type  of RF power source to use in any particular application.
The choice between the two  should be made by comparing a radar system designed to effectively use solid state  and a radar system designed to effectively use vacuum tubes.
Assuming the solid state  and vacuum tube radars are designed to provide identical performance for the desired  application, then the choice should be based on comparing cost, size, weight, reliabil - ity, maintainability, and any other system requirement that is important for decision  making.
Unfortunately, this is not always done.
Buyers of radars should be encour - aged not to insist that the radar designer use some particular technology because it is  considered the fashionable thing to do at the time.
They might not always be getting  the best radar for the particular application.
There have been at least three ways to apply solid-state transmitters to high-perfor - mance radars: (1) as a replacement for a vacuum tube transmitter in an already exist - ing radar; (2) as the transmitter for a new radar design; and (3) as an active aperture  phased array radar.
An example of replacing an existing vacuum tube transmitter with a solid-state  transmitter is the U.S.
Navy’s AN/SPS-40, a relatively modest capability UHF radar  for air surveillance.53 This radar was chosen for having its vacuum tube transmitter  replaced with a solid-state transmitter using transistor amplifiers because it already  used a long pulse waveform with a high duty cycle and pulse compression, which is  what solid-state radars usually require.
The solid-state transmitter was put into produc - tion and installed in existing radars.
It did the job it was supposed to do, but it is not  obvious that the solid-state transmitter had a net advantage over the tube transmitter.
 The solid-state transmitter was supposed to occupy the same floor space as the vacuum  tube transmitter, but it occupied about the same floor space as the entire AN/SPS-40  radar, which used a vacuum tube.
Also the solid-state transmitter cost more than the  tube version.
One highly significant advantage of the solid-state version of the SPS-40,  however, was that it could include spare solid-state modules as part of the transmitter  itself, so that time to repair was reduced.
An example of the second approach to achieving a solid-state radar transmitter is  the ASR-12 airport surveillance radar.
In the mid-1980s, the ASR-9 air surveillance  radar at S band was developed by Northrop Grumman (then Westinghouse) for use  at major airports to control local air traffic.54 It was an excellent radar that used a  ch10.indd   27 12/17/07   2:19:38 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	The Radar Transmitter 10.28  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 10 well-tested klystron amplifier vacuum tube, and it was installed throughout the United  States.
(The same tube is used in the Nexrad doppler weather radar.) However, in the  late 1990s solid-state technology had advanced sufficiently so that Northrop Grumman  developed the ASR-12, also at S band, using a solid-state transmitter.
Its overall radar  performance was similar to the ASR-9, but it was not just a replacement of the transmit - ter but a new design to use solid-state transmitters effectively.
It also took important  advantage of advances in digital receivers and digital processing that occurred since the  development of the ASR-9 to significantly improve what could be accomplished with  this radar.55 As mentioned, solid-state transmitters require the use of long pulses.
The  ASR-12 employed a 55 µs pulse duration at a peak power of 21 kW.
This means that  targets out to a range of about 5 nmi would be masked, or eclipsed, by the long pulse  and might not be detected.
To detect targets at ranges masked by the long pulse, a sec - ond (short) pulse 1 µs in duration, and at a different frequency from the long pulse, was  transmitted almost immediately after the long pulse.
It detects targets within the range  from 0.5 nmi or less to a range of about 5.5 nmi.
The long pulse employs nonlinear FM  pulse compression with a 55:1 pulse compression ratio to achieve a range resolution of  less than 1/8 nmi as required for an air-traffic control radar.
Typical time-sidelobes with  the nonlinear FM waveform were 58 dB below the peak response.
It might be noted that  Cole et al.55 state that in order “to ensure continued availability of the power transistors  required to produce the power amplifier panels, Northrop Grumman has developed an  in-house manufacturing capability for high-power S-band transistors.” The third approach to employing solid-state transmitters is the active aperture phased  array radar.
At each element of a phased array radar antenna is a solid-state module,  known as a T/R module,  that contains a transmitter, receiver, and duplexer.
The vacuum  tube is not usually competitive for this application.
In Chapter 5, “Multifunctional Radar  Systems for Fighter Aircraft,” the active aperture radar is called an Active Electronically  Scanned Antenna  (AESA).
The subsection entitled “Active Electronic Scanned Array  (AESA)” (in Section 5.1) describes quite well the military airborne application of solid- state radar, and enumerates its advantages and why it is important.
There it is stated  that “one of the principal advantages of an AESA is the ability to manage both power  and spatial coverage on a short-term basis (10s of ms).” It is also said that “bandwidth  of several GHz on transmit” is required, and this is within the capability of solid-state  transmitters.
The reader is referred to Section 5.1, Chapter 11, and Section 13.10 for  further information about this important application of solid-state.
Although any of the RF power sources mentioned here could be used in future  radar systems, it seems likely that the linear-beam amplifier, particularly one of the  variants of the klystron, might be the first RF power source to consider for a high  performance microwave radar that employs a mechanically steered antenna or a con - ventional phased array radar that does not employ the active aperture.
For active  aperture phased array radars, it is likely that the solid-state transistor amplifier will  be the choice.
REFERENCES  1.
M.
I.
Skolnik, Introduction to Radar Systems , New York: McGraw-Hill 2001, p.
88.
 2.
A.
S.
Gilmour, Jr., Microwave Tubes , Norwood, MA: Artech House, 1986.
 3.
W.
J.
Dodds, T.
Moreno, and W.
J.
McBride, Jr., “Methods for increasing the bandwidth of high  power microwave amplifiers,” IRE WESCON Conv.
Rec .
1, pt.
3, 1957, pp.
101–110.
ch10.indd   28 12/17/07   2:19:38 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	The Radar Transmitter  THE RADAR TRANSMITTER  10.296x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 10  4.
R.
J.
Barker et al., Modern Microwave and Millimeter-Wave Power Electronics , New York: IEEE  Press and Willey Interscience, 2005, p.
108.
 5.
A.
S.
Gilmour, Jr., Principles of Traveling Wave Tubes , Boston, MA: Artech House, 1994, Sec.
18.4.
 6.
R.
S.
Symons, “Tubes: Still vital after all theses years,” IEEE Spectrum , vol.
35, pp.
52–63,  April 1998.
 7.
R.
M.
Phillips and D.
W.
Sprehn, “High-power klystrons for the next linear collider,” Proc.
IEEE ,  vol.
87, pp.
738–751, May 1999.
 8.
R.
H.
Abrams, B.
Levush, A.
A.
Mondelli, and R.
K.
Parker, “Vacuum electronics for the 21st  century,” IEEE Microwave Magazine , pp.
61–72, September 2001.
 9.
G.
S.
Nusinovich, B.
Levush, and D.
Abe: “A review of the development of multiple-beam  klystrons and TWTs,” Naval Research Laboratory, Washington, DC, MR/6840-03-8673,  March 17, 2003.
10.
R.
H.
Abrams, B.
Levush, A.
A.
Mondelli, and R.
K.
Parker, “Vacuum electronics for the 21st  century,” IEEE Microwave Magazine , pp.
61–72, September 2001.
11.
A.
N.
Korolyov, E.
A.
Gelvich, Y .
V .
Zhary, A.
D.
Zakurdayev, and V .
I.
Poognin, “Multiple-beam  klystron amplifiers: performance parameters and development trends,” IEEE Trans ., vol.
PS-32,  pp.
1109–1118, June 2004.
12.
R.
J.
Barker et al., Modern Microwave and Millimeter-Wave Power Electronics , New York: IEEE  Press and Willey Interscience, 2005, Sec.
3.5.3.
13.
W.
H.
Yocom, “High power traveling wave tubes: Their characteristics and some applications,”  Microwave J ., vol.
8, pp.
73–78, July 1965.
14.
A.
S.
Gilmour, Jr., Principles of Traveling Wave Tubes , Boston, MA: Artech House, 1994,   Sec.
18.4.
15.
H.
G.
Kosmahl, “Modern multistage depressed collectors—A Review,” Proc.
IEEE , vol.
70,   pp.
1325–1334, November 1982.
16.
A.
S.
Gilmour, Jr., Microwave Tubes , Norwood, MA: Artech House, 1986, Sec.
12.2.
17.
M.
J.
Smith and G.
Phillips, Power Klystrons Today , New York: John Wiley, 1995, Sec.
7.2.3.
18.
A.
E.
Staprans, W.
McCune, and J.
A.
Ruetz, “High-power linear-beam tubes,” Proc.
IEEE ,   vol.
61, pp.
299–330, March 1973.
19.
A.
S.
Gilmour, Jr., Microwave Tubes , Norwood, MA: Artech House, 1986, Sec.
11.3.
20.
A.
Roitman, D.
Berry, and B.
Steer, “State-of-the-art W-band extended interaction klystron for  the CloudSat program,” IEEE Trans ., vol.
ED-52, pp.
895–898, May 2005.
21.
R.
S.
Symons and J.
R.
M.
Vaughan, “The linear theory of the clustered cavity klystron,” IEEE  Trans.
, vol.
PS-22, pp.
713–718, October 1994.
22.
R.
S.
Symons, “Tubes: Still vital after all these years,” IEEE Spectrum , vol.
35, pp.
52–63,  April 1998.
23.
R.
H.
Abrams, Jr., “The microwave power module: A ‘supercomponent” for radar transmitters,”  Record of the 1994 IEEE National Radar Conf ., Atlanta, GA, pp.
1–6.
24.
C.
R.
Smith, C.
M.
Armstrong, and J.
Duthie, “The microwave power module: A versatile building  block for high-power transmitters,” Proc.
IEEE , vol.
87, pp.
717–737, May 1999.
25.
M.
I.
Skolnik, Introduction to Radar Systems , 3rd Ed., New York: McGraw-Hill, 2001, Sec.
10.4.
26.
N.
Butler, “The microwave tube reliability problem,” Microwave J ., vol.
16, pp.
41–42,   March 1973.
27.
P.
D.
L.
Williams, Civil marine radar , London: Institution of Electrical Engineers, 1999,   Sec.
10.3.
28.
M.
I.
Skolnik, Introduction to Radar Systems , 3rd Ed., New York: McGraw-Hill Companies,  2001, Sec.
10.5.
29.
A.
S.
Gilmour, Jr., Microwave Tubes , Norwood, MA: Artech House, 1986, Sec.
13.3.
30.
L.
L.
Clampitt, “S-Band amplifier chain,” Raytheon Company, Waltham.
MA, presented at NATO  Conf.
Microwave Techniques, Paris, March 5, 1962.
31.
V .
L.
Granatstein and I.
Alexoff, High Power Microwave Sources , Boston: Artech House, 1987.
32.
A.
S.
Gilmour, Jr., Microwave Tubes , Norwood, MA: Artech House, 1986, Chap.
14.
ch10.indd   29 12/17/07   2:19:39 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	The Radar Transmitter 10.30  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 10 33.
K.
L.
Felch et al., “Characteristics and applications of fast-wave gyrodevices,” Proc.
IEEE ,  vol.
87, pp.
752–781, May 1999.
34.
M.
Blank et al., “Development and demonstration of high-average power W-band gyro-amplifiers  for radar applications,”  IEEE Trans .
vol.
PS-30, pp.
865–875, June 2002.
35.
G.
J.
Linde et al.
(private communication), “Warloc: A high-power coherent 94 GHz radar.” 36.
J.
P.
Murray, “Electromagnetic compatibility,” Chap.
29 in Radar Handbook , 1st Ed., 1970,  pp.
29.18 to 29.23.
37.
T.
A.
Weil, “Efficient spectrum control for pulsed radar transmitters,” Chap.
27 in Radar  Technology , E.
Brookner (ed.), Norwood, MA: Artech House, 1977.
38.
J.
P.
Murray, “Electromagnetic capability,” Chap.
29 in Radar Handbook , 1st Ed., M.
Skolnik  (ed.), New York: McGraw-Hill, 1970.
39.
E.
Brookner and R.
J.
Bonneau, “Spectra of rounded trapezoidal pulses having an AM/PM  modulation and its application to out-of-band radiation,” Microwave J ., vol.
16, pp.
49–51,  December 1983.
40.
A.
A.
Acker, “Eliminating transmitted clutter in doppler radar systems,” Microwave J ., vol.
18,  No.
11, pp.
47–50, November 1975.
41.
M.
T.
Ngo, V .
Gregers-Hansen, and H.
R.
Ward, “Transmitter noise compensation—A signal  processing technique for improving clutter suppression,” Proc.
 2006 IEEE Conference on Radar ,  24–27 April 2006, pp.
668–672.
42.
T.
E.
Vingst, D.
R.
Carter, J.
A.
Eshleman, and J.
M.
Pawlikowski, “High-power gridded tubes— 1972,” Proc.
IEEE , vol.
61, pp.
357–381, March 1973.
43.
R.
S.
Symons, “Tubes: Still vital after all these years,” IEEE Spectrum , vol.
35, pp.
52–63,  April 1998.
44.
V .
L.
Granatstein, R.
K.
Parker, and C.
M.
Armstrong, “Vacuum electronics at the dawn of the  twenty-first century,” Proc.
IEEE , vol.
87, pp.
702–718, May 1999.
45.
R.
S.
Symons, “The constant efficiency amplifier,” NAB Broadcast Engr.
Conf.
Proc ., 1977,  pp.
523–530.
46.
R.
S.
Symons et al., “The constant efficiency amplifier—A progress report,” presented at NAB  Broadcast Engr.
Conf.
Proc., 1998.
47.
L.
Sivan, “The modulator,” Chap.
9 in Microwave Tube Transmitters , London: Chapman   & Hall, 1994.
48.
T.
A.
Weil, “Transmitters,” Chap.
4 in Radar Handbook , 2nd Ed., New York: McGraw-Hill, 1990,  Sec.
4.8, “Pulse modulators.” 49.
T.
A.
Weil, “Transmitters,” Chap.
4 in Radar Handbook , 2nd Ed., New York: McGraw-Hill 1990,  pp.
4.13 to 4.14.
50.
M.
P.
J.
Gaudreau et al., “Solid state radar modulators,” presented at 24th International  Power Modulator Symposium, June 2000.
(Available from Diversified Technologies, Inc.,  www.divtecs.com.) 51.
M.
Gaudreau et al., “Solid-state upgrade for the COBRA JUDY S-band phased array radar,” pre - sented at 2006 IEEE Radar Conference.
(Available from DTI Internet site www.divtecs.com.) 52.
M.
Gaudreau et al., “High performance, solid-state high voltage radar modulators,” presented at  2005 Pulsed Power Conference.
(Available from DTI Internet site www.divtecs.com.) 53.
K.
J.
Lee, C.
Corson, and G.
Mols, “A 250 kW solid-state AN/SPS-40 radar transmitter,”  Microwave J , vol.
26, pp.
93–105, July 1983.
54.
J.
W.
Taylor, Jr.
and G.
Brunnis, “Design of a new airport surveillance radar (ASR-9),” Proc.
 IEEE , vol.
73, pp.
284–289, February 1985.
55.
E.
L.
Cole et al., “ASR-12: A next generation solid state air traffic control radar,” Proc.
for  RADARCON 98, 1998 IEEE Radar Conference , 12–14 May 1998, pp.
9–14.
ch10.indd   30 12/17/07   2:19:39 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	The Radar Transmitter 