6.16x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 6
Radar Receivers*
Michael E. Yeomans
Raytheon Company
6.1 THE CONFIGURATION  
OF A RADAR RECEIVER
The function of a radar receiver is to amplify, filter, downconvert, and digitize the 
echoes of the radar transmission in a manner that will provide the maximum discrimi -
nation between desired echo signals and undesired interference. The interference com -
prises not only the self noise generated in the radar receiver but also the energy received 
from galactic sources, neighboring radars and communication equipment, and possibly 
jammers. The portion of the radar’s own radiated energy that is scattered by undesired 
targets (such as rain, snow, birds, insects, atmospheric perturbations, and chaff) may 
also be classified as interference and is commonly categorized as clutter. Where air -
borne radars are used for altimeters or mapping, other aircraft are undesired targets, and 
the ground is the desired target. In the case of weather radars, ground, buildings, and 
aircraft are clutter, and rain or snow is the desired target. More commonly, radars are 
intended for detection of aircraft, missiles, ships, surface vehicles, or personnel, and the 
reflection from weather, sea, or ground is classified as clutter interference.
Although the boundaries of the radar receiver are somewhat arbitrary, this chapter 
will consider those elements identified in Figure 6.1 as the receiver. The radar exciter 
generates the transmit waveforms as well as local oscillator (LO), clock, and timing 
signals. Since this function is usually tightly coupled to a radar receiver, it is also 
shown in Figure 6.1 and will be discussed in this chapter. The purpose of Figure 6.1 is 
to illustrate the functions typical of a modern radar receiver and exciter .
Virtually all radar receivers operate on the superheterodyne principle shown 
in Figure 6.1. Through this architecture, the receiver filters the signal to separate 
desired target signals from unwanted interference. After modest RF amplifica -
tion, the signal is shifted to an intermediate frequency (IF) by mixing with a local-  
oscillator (LO) frequency. More than one conversion stage may be necessary to 
reach the final IF without encountering serious image- or spurious-frequency prob -
lems in the mixing process. The superheterodyne receiver varies the LO frequency to 
follow any desired tuning variation of the transmitter without disturbing the filtering 
at IF. This simplifies the filtering operation as the signals occupy a wider percentage Chapter 6
*  This chapter incorporates material written by John W. Taylor, Jr. for the first and second editions and updated 
by Michael Yeomans for this edition.
ch06.indd   1 12/17/07   2:02:53 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Source: RADAR HANDBOOK 6.2 RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 6
bandwidth at the IF frequency. These advantages have proven to be so significant 
that competitive forms of receivers have virtually disappeared.
In conventional antenna systems, the receiver input signal is derived from the 
duplexer, which permits a single antenna to be shared between transmitter and 
receiver. In active array systems, the receiver input is derived from the receive beam -
forming network. Active array antennas include low-noise amplifiers prior to forming 
the receive beams; although these are generally considered to be antenna rather than 
receiver components, they will be discussed in this chapter.
FIGURE 6.1  General configuration of a radar receiverSTC 
Attenuator
IF LimiterAGC 
Attenuator
COHODirect 
Digital 
SynthesizerSingle 
Receiver 
Channel 
replicated 
N timesReceiver InputExciter Output
I I Q Q
Data to Digital Signal ProcessorI/Q 
DemodulatorReference 
Oscillator
A/DA/DSTAL O
Direct 
Digital 
ConversionA/DIF Limiter
Clock 
Generator
A/D Clocks
STC = Sensitivity Time Control 
AGC = Automatic Gain Control STALO = Stable Local Oscillator COHO = Coherent Local Oscillator A/D = Analog-to-Digital ConverterBandpass 
Filter
Bandpass 
FilterBandpass 
Filter
Bandpass 
Filter
A/D ClocksA/D 
ClockSTC & 
AGC
Control
ch06.indd   2 12/17/07   2:02:54 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Radar Receivers  RADAR RECEIVERS  6.36x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 6
The block diagram shown in Figure 6.1 includes sensitivity time control (STC) 
attenuation at the RF input. Alternatively adjustable RF attenuation may be used. 
Either form provides increased dynamic range above that provided by the analog-
to-digital (A/D) converters. RF attenuation is described in more detail in Section 6.6. 
The STC attenuator is followed by an RF amplifier, often referred to as a low-noise 
amplifier (LNA). This amplifier provides sufficient gain with a low noise figure to 
minimize the subsequent degradation of the overall radar noise figure by subsequent 
components. If sufficient gain is provided in the antenna prior to the receiver, it may 
be possible to eliminate this gain stage. The RF filter provides rejection of out-of-band 
interference, including rejection at the RF image frequency. After downconversion to 
IF, a bandpass filter provides rejection of unwanted signals and sets the receiver ana -
log-processing bandwidth. Additional gain is provided at IF to overcome losses and 
raise the signal level required for subsequent processing and to set the correct signal 
level into the A/D converters. An IF limiter provides graceful limiting of large signals 
that would otherwise overload the A/D converters.
The two dominant methods of digitization, IF sampling and analog I/Q demodula -
tion with baseband A/D conversion, are included for illustration in Figure 6.1, though 
in general, receivers will not include both techniques. Prior to the availability of afford -
able digital signal processing, a number of functions, such as monopulse comparison, 
currently performed in the digital domain, were performed using analog processing 
within the receiver. Readers interested in the details of these analog processing tech -
niques will find details in the first and second editions of this handbook.1,2
All but the simplest of radars require more than one receiver channel. Figure 6.1 
shows a single receiver channel that may be replicated any number of times depending 
on the radar system requirements. Monopulse radars typically include three receiver 
channels, sum, delta azimuth, and delta elevation channels, used to provide improved 
angle accuracy. Additionally, many military radar systems include a sidelobe blanker 
or several sidelobe canceler channels to combat jamming. Since the advent of digital 
beamforming radar systems, the number of receiver channels required has increased 
dramatically, with some systems now requiring hundreds of receiver channels. In 
these multichannel receiver systems, close matching and tracking of gain and phase is 
required. Receiver channel tracking and equalization are discussed in Section 6.1 1.
The stable local oscillator (STALO) block provides the local oscillator frequencies 
for downconversion in the receiver and upconversion in the exciter. For true coherent 
operation, the STALO is locked to a low frequency reference, shown by the reference 
oscillator in Figure 6.1 that is used as the basis for all clocks and oscillators such as the 
coherent local oscillator (COHO) within the receiver and exciter. The clock generator 
provides clocks to the A/D converters and the direct digital synthesizer and provides 
the basis for the signals that define the radar transmit and receive intervals.
The direct digital synthesizer in Figure 6.1 is used to generate the transmit wave -
forms at an IF frequency prior to upconversion to the RF output frequency. Filtering 
in the exciter is required to reject aliased signals from the direct digital synthesizer and 
unwanted mixer products. RF gain is typically required to provide a sufficient drive 
level to the transmitter or phased array antenna.
Almost all modern radar systems use digital signal processing to perform a variety 
of functions, including pulse compression and the discrimination of desired targets from 
interference on the basis of velocity or the change in phase from one pulse to the next. 
Previously, pulse compression was performed using analog processing with dispersive 
delay lines, typically surface acoustic-wave (SAW) devices. Analog pulse compres -
sion has largely been replaced by pulse compression using digital signal processing.  
ch06.indd   3 12/17/07   2:02:54 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Radar Receivers 6.4 RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 6
In the case of very wideband waveforms, analog stretch processing (see Section 6.3) may 
be used to reduce the signal bandwidth before subsequent digital signal processing.
The receiver discussed herein focuses on those functions that provide analog pro -
cessing and digitization of the individual pulse signals with the minimum of distortion, 
enabling subsequent digital signal processing to maximize the performance of the 
radar. The digital signal processing function is not normally considered to be part of 
the receiver.
6.2 NOISE AND DYNAMIC-RANGE 
CONSIDERATIONS
Receivers generate internal noise that masks weak signals being received from the radar 
transmissions. This noise contribution, which can be expressed as either a noise tem -
perature or a noise figure, is one of the fundamental limitations on the radar range.
The noise temperature or noise figure of the radar receiver has been reduced 
to the point that it no longer represents a dominant influence in choosing between 
available alternatives. It is a paradox that a noise parameter is usually the first char -
acteristic specified for a radar receiver, yet few radars employ the lowest-noise 
receiver available because such a choice represents too great a sacrifice in other 
performance parameters.
Cost is rarely a consideration in rejecting a lower-noise alternative. A reduction in 
requirements for antenna gain or transmitter power invariably produces cost savings 
far in excess of any added cost of a lower-noise receiver. Other vital performance 
characteristics that generally dictate the choice of receiver front end include:
● Dynamic range and susceptibility to overload
● Instantaneous bandwidth and tuning range
● Phase and amplitude stability
A direct compromise must be made between the noise figure and the dynamic range 
of a receiver. The introduction of an RF amplifier in front of the mixer necessarily 
involves raising the system noise level at the mixer to make the noise contribution of 
the mixer itself insignificant. Even if the RF amplifier itself has more than adequate 
dynamic range, the mixer dynamic range has been compromised, as indicated below:
Example 1 Example 2 Example 3
Ratio of front-end noise to mixer noise 6 dB 10.0 dB 13.3 dB
Sacrifice in mixer dynamic range 7 dB 10.4 dB 13.5 dB
Degradation of system noise temperature due 
to mixer noise1 dB  0.4 dB  0.2 dB
The same considerations apply to the setting of the noise level at the input to the 
A/D converters. Traditionally, the noise contribution of the A/D converter was con -
sidered by the system engineers as a separate contribution to the overall radar system 
noise, distinct from receiver noise, and was accounted for at the system level. Today, it 
has become common to include the A/D converter noise as part of the overall receiver 
noise. Consequently, it is important to understand whether or not the contribution of 
the A/D converter is included in the specification for the noise figure of a receiver.
ch06.indd   4 12/17/07   2:02:55 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Radar Receivers  RADAR RECEIVERS  6.56x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 6
In active array antennas, and many conventional antennas, low-noise amplifiers 
(LNAs) establish the system noise floor prior to the receiver input. The noise from the 
antenna is usually set well above the receiver noise floor such that the receiver has 
only a small impact on overall system noise. Again, the trade-off must be performed 
between system dynamic range and noise figure.
Definitions.  Dynamic Range represents the range of signal strength over 
which the receiver will perform as expected. It requires the specification of a 
minimum level, typically the noise floor, the maximum level that can be handled 
with some allowable deviation from the ideal response, and the type of signal to 
be handled. These parameters are defined through a variety of characteristics as 
described below.
Modern radars systems increasingly rely solely on linear receiver channels fol -
lowed by digital signal processing, providing both increased flexibility and near 
ideal signal-detection characteristics. Previously, a variety of limiting or logarithmic 
receiver approaches were used to perform various signal-processing functions. These 
receivers must define an allowable error in their outputs relative to their ideal nonlin -
ear response.
Receivers that include some form of gain control must distinguish between instan -
taneous dynamic range and the total dynamic range that is achieved as a result of 
programmed gain variation.
Receiver Input Noise Level.  Because many radar systems include low-noise 
amplifiers prior to the input of the receiver, it is important to understand and specify 
the noise level at the receiver input. This noise level is set by the antenna noise tem -
perature and its total effective noise gain or loss. The noise level can be specified either 
as an rms power in a specified bandwidth or as a noise power spectral density .
System Noise.  The system noise level is the combined antenna and receiver noise. 
Typically, the receiver input noise will exceed that of the noise due to the receiver 
itself, so that the receiver has only a small impact on the system noise temperature or 
noise figure. Thus, when defining dynamic-range parameters, such as signal-to-noise 
ratio, it is important to specify whether the noise level being referenced is the receiver 
noise or total system noise.
Minimum Signal of Interest.  Minimum signal definitions such as minimum-
detectable-signal or minimum-discernable-signal have been used in the past; how -
ever, these definitions have become less common due to the extensive use of digital 
signal-processing techniques. Digital signal processing of the receiver output allows 
the detection of signals well below the receiver noise floor and the minimum detect -
able level depends on the nature of the processing performed.
Signal-to-Noise Ratio (SNR).  SNR is the ratio of the signal level to that of the 
noise. SNR is typically expressed in decibels (dB). The maximum receiver SNR is 
set by the noise contribution and maximum signal capability of every component 
in the chain; however, since the limiting technology is often the Analog-to-Digital 
(A/D) converter, the preceding components and gain structure are often chosen such 
that the maximum SNR is driven by the performance of the A/D converter. More 
details of the relationship between A/D converter and receiver SNR are included in 
Sections 6.10 and 6.11.
ch06.indd   5 12/17/07   2:02:55 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Radar Receivers 6.6 RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 6
Spurious Free Dynamic Range (SFDR).  SFDR is the ratio of the maximum sig -
nal level to that of largest spurious signal created within the receiver. SFDR is typi -
cally expressed in decibels (dB). This parameter is determined by a variety of factors 
including the mixer intermodulation spurious (described in more detail in Section 
6.4), the spurious content of the receiver local oscillators, the performance of the A/D 
converter, and the many sneak paths that may result in unwanted signals coupling onto 
the receiver signal path.
Intermodulation Distortion (IMD).  Intermodulation distortion is a nonlinear pro -
cess that results in generation of frequencies that are linear combinations of the fun -
damental frequencies of the input signals. Second and third order intermodulation are 
the most commonly specified, and the performance of the receiver is usually specified 
in terms of two-tone second and third order input intercept points. The intercept point 
is the extrapolated level at which the power in the intermodulation product equals that 
of the two fundamental signals.
For input signals at frequencies f1 and f2, second order intermodulation distortion 
produces signals at frequencies: 0, f 1 – f 2, f 1 + f2, 2f1 and 2 f2. Third order intermodu -
lation distortion produces signals at frequencies: 2 f1 – f2, 2f2 – f1, 2f1 + f2, f1 + 2f2, 3f1 
and 3 f2. For narrow band signals, only the third order products 2 f1 – f2 and 2 f2 – f1 fall 
in band, and consequently, third order distortion is typically the primary concern. The 
power levels of these third order intermodulation products are given by
 P dBm P dBm P dBm P d Bmf f f f 2 1 2 1 2 2 2− = + − ( ) ( ) ( ) ( )IP (6.1)
 P dBm P dBm P dBm P d Bmf f f f 2 2 1 1 22 2− = + − ( ) ( ) ( ) ( )IP (6.2)
where Pf 1(dBm) = power of input signal at frequency f1 in dBm
 Pf 2(dBm) = power of input signal at frequency f2 in dBm
 PIP(dBm) = third order intercept point in dBm
Intermodulation can result in a variety of undesirable effects such as
● Intermodulation of clutter returns causing broadening of clutter doppler width, 
resulting in the masking of targets
● Unwanted in-band signals due to out-of-band interfering signals, resulting in 
false targets
● Intermodulation products from in-band signals that cannot be readily cancelled 
through linear cancellation techniques, resulting in susceptibility to jammers
Intermodulation distortion occurs throughout the receiver chain. Consequently, the 
receiver will have a significantly different input intercept point, depending on the 
signal frequency relative to the radio frequency (RF), IF, and video filter bandwidths. 
It is, therefore, important to distinguish between the requirements for in-band and 
out-of-band intermodulation distortion as different signals have different effects on 
the receiver.
Cross-Modulation Distortion.  Cross-modulation occurs as a result of third order 
intermodulation, whereby the amplitude modulation (AM) of one signal, typically an 
unwanted interference signal in the operating RF band but usually outside the tuned 
signal bandwidth, is transferred onto the desired signal.
ch06.indd   6 12/17/07   2:02:58 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Radar Receivers  RADAR RECEIVERS  6.76x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 6
The resultant percent AM modulation, % d, on the desired signal is given by3
 % %d uP
P PU
U=+4
2IP (6.3)
where  % u = percent AM modulation of the unwanted signal
  PU = power of unwanted signal
  PIP = third order intercept point
Cross modulation can result in the modulation of clutter and target returns due to 
large amplitude modulated out-of-band interferences resulting in poor clutter cancel -
lation and poor range sidelobe performance.
1 dB Compression Point.  The input 1 dB compression point of a receiver 
is a measure of the maximum linear signal capability and is defined as the input 
power level at which the receiver gain is 1 dB less than the small signal linear gain. 
Receiver gain compression can result from compression in amplifiers, mixers, and 
other components throughout the receiver chain. Typically, the receiver is designed 
to provide controlled gain compression through a limiting stage at the final IF as 
described in Section 6.8.
Analog-to-Digital Converter Full Scale.  The A/D converter full scale level deter -
mines the maximum level that can be digitized. Receivers typically provide controlled 
limiting (Section 6.8) to prevent the signal level from exceeding the full scale level 
of the A/D converter. Practical considerations mean that the hard limit level is typi -
cally set 1 dB below full scale to prevent overload as a result of component tolerance 
variations.
Types of Signals.  Various types of signals are of interest in determining 
dynamic-range requirements: distributed targets, point targets, wideband noise jam -
ming, and narrow band interference. If the radar employs a phase-coded signal, the 
elements of the receiver preceding the decoder will not restrict the dynamic range 
of a point target as severely as they will for distributed clutter; the time-bandwidth 
product of the coded pulse indicates the added dynamic range that the decoder will 
extract from the point targets. Conversely, if the radar incorporates an excessively 
wide-bandwidth RF amplifier, its dynamic range may be severely restricted due to 
wideband noise interference.
When low-noise amplifiers (LNAs) are included in the antenna, prior to forming 
the receive beams, the antenna sidelobe levels achieved are dependent upon the degree 
to which gain and phase characteristics are similar in all LNAs. Dynamic range has 
an exaggerated importance in such configurations because matching nonlinear char -
acteristics is impractical. The effect of strong interference—mountain clutter, other 
radar pulses, or electronic countermeasures (ECM)—entering through the sidelobes 
will be exaggerated if it exceeds the dynamic range of the LNAs because sidelobes 
will be degraded. The LNAs are wideband devices, vulnerable to interference over 
the entire radar operating band and often outside this band; although off-frequency 
interference is filtered in subsequent stages of the receiver, strong interference signals 
can cause clutter returns in the LNA to be distorted, degrading the effectiveness of 
doppler filtering and creating false alarms. This phenomenon is difficult to isolate as 
the cause of false alarms in such radars owing to the nonrepetitive character of many 
ch06.indd   7 12/17/07   2:03:00 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Radar Receivers 6.8 RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 6
sources of interference. In modern radar architectures that employ digital beamform -
ing, nonlinearity at any stage of the receiver channel will create similar problems.
System calibration techniques and adaptive beamforming techniques can com -
pensate for linear gain and phase deviations; however, as for the case of the LNA 
nonlinearities described above, compensation for nonlinear characteristics is either 
impractical or impossible when the cause of the nonlinear distortion is outside the 
digitized bandwidth.
Evaluation.  A thorough evaluation of all elements of the receiver is nec -
essary to prevent unanticipated degradation of noise figure or dynamic range. 
Inadequate dynamic range makes the radar receiver vulnerable to interference, 
which can cause saturation or overload, masking or hiding the desired signals. 
A tabular format for such a computation (a typical example of which is shown in 
Table 6.1) will permit those components that contribute significant noise or restrict 
the dynamic range to be quickly identified. “Typical” values are included in the 
table for purposes of illustration.
Units Input
STC Attenuator
Amplifier
Bandpass Filter
Mixer
Bandpass Filter
Amplifier
AGC Attenuator
Limiter
A/D Converter
Component  
 Noise FiguredB 3.0 5.0 0.5 6.5 5.0 4.0 6.0 14.0
Component Gain dB −3.0 12.0 −5.0 −6.5 −0.2 20.0 −6.0 0.0
Component Output  
 3rd Order InterceptdBm 43.0 32.0 50.0 20.0 50.0 38.0 40.0 30.0
Component Output 1dB  
 Compression PointdBm 30.0 18.0 40.0 10.0 40.0 23.0 30.0 −1.0
Cumulative Gain dB −3.0 9.0 8.5 2.0 0.0 20.0 14.0 14.0
Cumulative  
 Noise FiguredB 3.00 8.00 8.01 8.33 9.13 9.86 9.88 10.29
Cumulative Output  
 3rd Order InterceptdBm 43.0 32.0 31.4 18.8 16.8 34.3 28.1 25.9
Cumulative Output 1dB  
 Compression Poin tdBm 30.0 18.0 17.5 7.4 5.4 21.0 14.9 −1.1
Receiver Noise Level dBm/Hz −174.0−157.0−157.5−163.7−164.9−144.1−150.1−149.7
System  Noise Level dBm/Hz −149.0 −152.0−139.0−140.4−146.9−148.9−128.9−134.9−134.9
Bandwidth MHz 1000 1000 100 100 10 10 10 10
A/D SNR in  
 Nyquist BWdB 70.0
A/D Converter  
 Sample RateMHz 100.0
A/D Full Scale Level dBm −14.0 −17.0 −5.0 −5.5−12.0 −14.0 6.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
A/D Noise Level dBm/Hz −147.0
System Noise Relative  
 to A/D NoisedB 12.1
Maximum Point Clutter  
 or Target LeveldBm −20.0 −23.0−11.0−11.5−18.0−20.00.0 −6.0 −6.0TABLE 6.1  Noise and Dynamic-Range Characteristics
ch06.indd   8 12/17/07   2:03:01 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Radar Receivers  RADAR RECEIVERS  6.96x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 6
6.3 BANDWIDTH CONSIDERATIONS
Definitions.  The instantaneous bandwidth of a component is the frequency band 
over which the component can simultaneously process two or more signals to within a 
specified accuracy. When the term instantaneous bandwidth  is used as a radar receiver 
parameter, it refers to the resulting bandwidth set by the combination of RF, IF, video, 
and digital filtering that occurs within the receiver.
When the radar receiver employs stretch processing (defined later in this sec -
tion), the RF processing bandwidth is significantly larger than the IF bandwidth. 
Consequently, the term instantaneous bandwidth  can be confusing. Confusion can be 
avoided by using the terms RF waveform bandwidth , LO linear FM (chirp) bandwidth , 
and IF processing bandwidth . The relationship between RF, LO, and IF bandwidths 
used in stretch processing is explained in more detail later.
The tuning range is the frequency band over which the component may operate 
without degrading the specified performance. Tuning is typically accomplished by 
adjusting the local oscillator frequency and adjusting the RF filtering characteris -
tics. The frequency range over which the radar operates is often referred to as the 
operating bandwidth .
Important Characteristics.  The environment in which a radar must operate 
includes many sources of electromagnetic radiation, which can mask the relatively 
weak returns from its own transmission. The susceptibility to such interference is 
determined by the ability of the receiver to suppress the interfering frequencies if the 
sources have narrow bandwidth or to recover quickly if they are more like impulses in 
character. One must be concerned with the response of the receiver in both frequency 
and time domains.
Generally, the critical response is determined in the IF portion of the receiver; this 
will be discussed in Section 6.7. However, one cannot ignore the RF portion of the 
receiver merely by making it have wide bandwidth. Section 6.2 discussed how exces -
sively wide bandwidth can penalize dynamic range if the interference is wideband 
noise. Even more likely is an out-of-band source of strong interference (e.g., other 
radars, TV stations, or microwave communication links) that, if allowed to reach this 
point, can either overload the mixer or be converted to IF by one of the spurious 
responses of the mixer.
Ideal mixers in a superheterodyne receiver act as multipliers, producing an output 
proportional to the product of the two input signals. Except for the effect of nonlineari -
ties and unbalance, these mixers produce only two output frequencies, equal to the sum 
and the difference of the two input frequencies. The nonlinearities and imbalance of 
mixers is described in more detail in Section 6.4.
The best radar receiver is one with the narrowest RF instantaneous bandwidth com -
mensurate with the radiated spectrum and hardware limitations and with good frequency 
and impulse responses. A wide tuning range provides flexibility to escape interference, 
but if the interference is intentional, as in the case of jamming, a change in RF fre -
quency on a pulse-to-pulse basis may be required using switchable or electronically 
tuned filters. If the RF filtering is located prior to RF amplification, the filter insertion 
loss will have a dB for dB impact on the receiver noise figure, another sacrifice in noise 
temperature to achieve more vital objectives. Yttrium iron garnet (YIG) filters and pin 
diode switched filters have been used to provide the necessary frequency agility.
ch06.indd   9 12/17/07   2:03:01 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Radar Receivers 6.10  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 6
Stretch Processing.  Stretch processing is a technique frequently used to pro -
cess wide bandwidth linear FM waveforms. The advantage of this technique is that it 
allows the effective IF signal bandwidth to be substantially reduced, allowing digitiza -
tion and subsequent digital signal processing, at more readily achievable sample rates. 
By applying a suitably matched chirp waveform to the receiver first LO, coincident 
with the expected time of arrival of the radar return, the resultant IF waveform has 
a significantly reduced bandwidth for targets over a limited range-window of inter -
est. Provided that the limited-range window can be tolerated, a substantially reduced 
processing bandwidth allows more economical A/D conversion and subsequent digital 
signal processing. It also allows a greater dynamic range to be achieved with lower-
rate A/D converters than would be achievable if digitization of the entire RF signal 
bandwidth were performed.
If the LO chirp rate is set equal to the received signal chirp rate of a point target, 
the resultant output is a constant frequency tone at the output of the stretch processor 
receiver, with frequency ∆tB/T, where ∆t is the difference in time between the received 
signal and the LO chirp signal, and B/T is the waveform chirp slope (chirp bandwidth/
pulse width). Target doppler is maintained through the stretch processing, producing 
an output frequency offset equal to the doppler frequency, though the wide percentage 
bandwidth often used means that the doppler frequency can change significantly over 
the duration of the pulse.
Ignoring the effect of target doppler, the required RF signal bandwidth is equal to 
the transmitted waveform bandwidth. Given the RF signal bandwidth BR, the received 
pulse width TR, and the range interval ∆T, the required LO reference waveform dura -
tion is given by
 T T TL R= + ∆ (6.4)
the LO reference chirp waveform bandwidth is given by
 BT T
TBLR
RR =+ ∆ (6.5)
and the IF processing bandwidth is given by
 BT
TBI
RR =∆ (6.6)
6.4 RECEIVER FRONT END
Configuration.  The radar front end  consists of a low-noise amplifier (LNA) and 
bandpass filter followed by a downconverter. The radar frequency is downconverted 
to an IF, where filters with suitable bandpass characteristics are physically realiz -
able. The mixer itself and the preceding circuits are generally relatively broadband. 
Tuning of the receiver, between the limits set by the preselector or mixer bandwidth, 
is accomplished by changing the LO frequency. Occasionally, receivers will include 
filtering before the LNA in order to limit the effects of intermodulation distortion that 
can occur in the LNA. Even when filtering is included before the LNA, a second filter 
is often still required between the LNA and the mixer in order to reject the amplifier 
noise at the image frequency. Without this filter, the noise contribution of a broadband 
LNA would be doubled.
ch06.indd   10 12/17/07   2:03:04 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Radar Receivers  RADAR RECEIVERS  6.116x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 6
The receiver front end may also include a limiter, used to protect the receiver cir -
cuitry from damage due to high power that may occur either from leakage during 
transmit mode or as a result of interference from another system such as a radar at close 
range. Front-end limiters are discussed in more detail in Section 6.8.
The radar or receiver front end often includes some form of gain or attenuation con -
trol as shown in Figure 6.1. Gain control is described in more detail in Section 6.6.
Effect of Characteristics on Performance.  Noncoherent pulse radar perfor -
mance is affected by front-end characteristics in three ways. Noise introduced by the 
front end increases the radar noise temperature, degrading sensitivity, and limits the 
maximum range at which targets are detectable. Front-end saturation on strong signals 
may limit the minimum range of the system or its ability to handle strong interference. 
Finally, the front-end spurious performance affects the susceptibility to off-frequency 
interference.
Coherent radar performance is even more affected by spurious mixer characteris -
tics. Range and velocity accuracy is degraded in pulse doppler radars; stationary target 
cancellation is impaired in MTI (moving-target indication) radars; and range sidelobes 
are raised in high-resolution pulse compression systems.
Spurious Distortion of Radiated Spectrum.  It is a surprise to many radar engi -
neers that components of the radar receiver can cause degradation of the radiated 
transmitter spectrum, generating harmonics of the carrier frequency or spurious dop -
pler spectra, both of which are often required to be 50 dB or more below the carrier. 
Harmonics can create interference in other electronic equipment. Spurious doppler 
spectra levels are dictated by requirements to suppress clutter interference through 
doppler filtering.
Harmonics are generated by any component that becomes nonlinear when sub -
jected to the power level created by the transmitter and that passes those harmonics to 
the antenna. Gaseous or diode receiver-protectors are designed to be nonlinear during 
the transmitted pulse and reflect the incident energy back toward the antenna. Isolators 
or circulators are often employed to absorb most of the reflected fundamental, but they 
are generally much less effective at the harmonics. Moreover, these ferrite devices are 
nonlinear devices and can generate harmonics.
Spurious doppler spectra are created by any process that does not reoccur identi -
cally on each transmitted pulse. Gaseous receiver-protectors ionize under transmitter 
power levels, but there is some small statistical variation in the initiation of ioniza -
tion on the leading edge of the pulse and in its subsequent development. In radars 
demanding high clutter suppression (in excess of 50 dB), it has sometimes been found 
necessary to prevent this variable reflected power from being radiated by use of both 
a circulator and an isolator in the receive path.
Spurious Response of Mixers.  The ideal mixer acts as a multiplier, producing an 
output proportional to the product of the two input signals. The input RF signal at fre -
quency fR is frequency shifted or modulated by the LO signal at frequency fL. Balanced 
mixers are used to minimize conversion loss and unwanted spurious responses. In 
active mixers, modulation is performed using transistors, and in passive mixers, the 
modulation is performed using Schottky-barrier diodes or other solid-state devices 
(e.g., MESFET) where increased dynamic range is required.
The resulting output signal frequencies ( fL + fR and fL – fR) are the sum and difference 
of the two input frequencies. In practice, all mixers produce unwanted intermodulation 
ch06.indd   11 12/17/07   2:03:04 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Radar Receivers 6.12  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 6
spurious responses4 with frequencies +nfL +mfR (where m and n are integers), and the 
degree to which these spurious products impact the radar performance depends upon the 
type of mixer and the overall radar performance requirements. Analysis of mixer spuri -
ous levels is nontrivial, and the receiver designer typically requires tabulated data gener -
ated through mixer characterization measurements to predict mixer spurious levels.
Advances in mixer technology have resulted in a wide variety of commercially 
available devices employing balanced, double balanced, and double-double balanced 
topologies covering a wide range of RF, LO, and IF frequencies and a range of per -
formance characteristics.
Mixer Spurious-Effects Chart.  A graphical display of mixer spurious compo -
nents up to the sixth order is shown in Figure 6.2. This chart allows identification of 
those combinations of input frequencies and bandwidths that are free of strong low-
order spurious components. Such charts are most useful in determining optimum IF and 
LO frequencies during the initial design phase. Once the frequency plan has been deter -
mined, computer analysis of spurious responses is typically used to ensure spurious free 
performance over the entire range of LO frequencies and RF and IF bandwidths.
The heavy line in Figure 6.2 represents the desired signal and shows the variation 
of normalized output frequency ( H – L)/H with normalized input frequency L/H. 
All other lines on the chart represent the unwanted spurious signals. To simplify 
use of the chart, the higher input frequency is designated by H and the lower input 
frequency by L.
FIGURE 6.2  Downconverter spurious-effects chart: H = high input frequency; L = low 
input frequency
ch06.indd   12 12/17/07   2:03:06 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Radar Receivers  RADAR RECEIVERS  6.136x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 6
Seven particularly useful regions have been outlined on the chart. Use of the chart 
is illustrated by means of the region marked A, which represents the widest available 
spurious-free bandwidth centered at L/H = 0.63. The available RF passband is from 
0.61 to 0.65, and the corresponding IF passband is from 0.35 to 0.39. However, spuri -
ous IF frequencies of 0.34 (4 H – 6L) and 0.4 (3 H – 4L) are generated at the extremes 
of the RF passband. Any extension of the instantaneous RF bandwidth will produce 
overlapping IF frequencies, a condition that cannot be corrected by IF filtering. The 
4H – 6L and 3 H – 4L spurious frequencies, like all spurious IF frequencies, arise from 
cubic or higher-order intermodulation.
The available spurious-free bandwidth in any of the designated regions is roughly 
10% of the center frequency or ( H – L)/10H. Thus, receivers requiring a wide band -
width should use a high IF frequency centered in one of these regions. For IF frequen -
cies below ( H – L)/H = 0.14, the spurious frequencies originate from high-order terms 
in the power-series model and are consequently low enough in amplitude that they 
can often be ignored. For this reason, a low IF generally provides better suppression 
of spurious responses.
The spurious-effects chart also demonstrates spurious input responses. One of the 
stronger of these occurs at point B, where the 2 H – 2L product causes a mixer output in 
the IF passband with an input frequency at 0.815. All the products of the form N(H – L) 
produce potentially troublesome spurious responses. These frequencies must be fil -
tered at RF to prevent their reaching the mixer. If sufficient filtering cannot be applied 
prior to the mixing process, spurious products that fall within the operating band will 
no longer be filterable, which will seriously degrade system performance.
Spurious responses not predicted by the chart occur when two or more RF input sig -
nals produce other frequencies by intermodulation that lie within the RF passband.
Image-Reject Mixer.  A conventional mixer has two input responses at points 
above and below the LO frequency where the frequency separation equals the IF. The 
unused response, known as the image , is suppressed by the image-reject or single-
sideband mixer shown in Figure 6.3. The RF hybrid produces a 90 ° phase differential 
between the LO inputs to the two mixers. The effect of this phase differential on the 
IF outputs of the mixers is a +90° shift in one sideband and a −90° shift in the other. 
The IF hybrid, adding or subtracting another 90 ° differential, causes the high-sideband 
signals to add at one output port and to subtract at the other. Where wide bandwidths 
are involved, the IF hybrid is of the all-pass type. In practice, image reject mixers often 
do not provide sufficient rejection of the image response alone without filtering. In 
this case, they can be used in conjunction with an image rejection filter, reducing the 
magnitude of rejection required by the filter.
FIGURE 6.3  Image reject mixerIn-phase 
power 
dividerRF 
SIGNALLOCAL 
OSCILLA TOR−90º
−180º
−180ºHIGH 
SIDEBAND
LOW 
SIDEBAND+90º−
ch06.indd   13 12/17/07   2:03:07 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Radar Receivers 6.14  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 6
Characteristics of Amplifiers and Mixers.  Noise figure, amplifier gain, mixer 
conversion loss, 1 dB compression point, and third order intercept point are the most 
common performance parameters specified for amplifiers and mixers. Occasionally, a 
second order intercept point specification is also required for very wide bandwidth sig -
nals. It should be noted that for amplifiers, compression point and third order intercept 
are usually specified at their output whereas for mixers these parameters are usually 
specified at their input.
Additional specifications for mixers include LO drive power, port-to-port isolation, 
and single tone intermodulation levels. The LO drive power specification defines how 
much LO power is required by the mixer to meet its specified performance levels. 
Typically, the higher the LO power, the higher the 1 dB compression point and third 
order intercept point. Radar receivers often require high LO drive level mixers in 
order to meet the challenging dynamic-range requirements. The port-to-port isolation 
is used to determine the power level coupled directly between the mixer ports without  
frequency translation. The single tone intermodulation levels specify the levels of  
the +nfL + mfR spurious signals, as discussed previously.
6.5 LOCAL OSCILLATORS
Functions of the Local Oscillator.  The superheterodyne receiver utilizes one 
or more local oscillators and mixers to convert the signal to an intermediate fre -
quency that is convenient for filtering and processing operations. The receiver can 
be tuned by changing the first LO frequency without disturbing the IF section of the 
receiver. Subsequent shifts in intermediate frequency are often accomplished within 
the receiver by additional LOs, generally of fixed frequency. These LOs are gener -
ally also used in the exciter to upconvert modulated waveforms to RF for output to 
the transmitter.
In many early radars, the only function of the local oscillators was conversion of 
the input signal frequency to the correct intermediate frequency. Many modern radar 
systems, however, coherently process a series of returns from a target. The local oscil -
lators act essentially as a timing standard by which the signal delay is measured to 
extract range information, accurate to within a small fraction of a wavelength. The 
processing demands a high degree of phase stability throughout the radar .
STALO Instability.  The first local oscillator, generally referred to as a stable 
local oscillator (STALO) , typically has the greatest effect on receiver-exciter stability; 
however, when evaluating the overall performance, other contributions should not be 
neglected. Advances in state-of-the-art STALO oscillator performance and the strin -
gent clutter cancellation requirements of modern radars means that the phase noise of 
all oscillators and timing jitter of A/D converter and D/A converter clocks and T/R 
strobes may be significant.
The short-term stability requirements of the STALO are generally characterized 
by device noise relative to carrier (dBc), specified in terms of a phase noise spectrum 
and measured in the frequency domain. Long-term stability is typically character -
ized by aging and environmental effects, specified in terms of frequency drift and 
measured using an Allan Variance5 technique. Requirements are typically specified 
in terms of an absolute frequency tolerance or a maximum frequency deviation over 
some time interval.
ch06.indd   14 12/17/07   2:03:07 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Radar Receivers  RADAR RECEIVERS  6.156x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 6
It should be noted that measurements of phase noise are typically performed by 
measurement of double-sideband noise, the sum of the power in both the upper and 
lower sidebands, but more typically reported and specified as single sideband (SSB) 
values. Double-sideband noise can be translated to a single-sideband value by sub -
tracting 3 dB. Unequal sideband power can only result from additive signals or noise 
or correlated amplitude and phase noise components.
Amplitude modulation (AM) of the STALO is typically not a significant factor as 
it is usually at a lower level than the phase noise (at small offset frequencies from car -
rier) and can be further reduced through limiting. Modern mixers typically provide a 
significant reduction in the effect of STALO amplitude modulation as their conversion 
gain is relatively insensitive to LO power variation when operated at their specified 
drive level.
For systems requiring high sensitivity, AM noise can become disruptive if unin -
tentional conversion of AM to PM noise occurs in the receiver chain. This process 
can occur via suboptimum component bias techniques where high amplitude signals 
or noise create a phase shift resulting in another phase noise contribution to the 
receiver chain.
Vibration Sensitivity.  In addition to the phase noise generated by the STALO in 
a benign environment, sources of unwanted phase modulation include the effects of 
power supply ripple and spurious signals as well as mechanical or acoustic vibration 
from fans, motors, and other sources. The effects of vibration can be severe, espe -
cially in airborne environments where high vibration levels are present. The vibration 
sensitivity of an oscillator is specified by the factional frequency vibration sensitivity, 
commonly know as the g-sensitivity . Typically, a single constant value is specified. In 
practice, the sensitivity varies significantly with vibration frequency and is different 
for each axis. Equation 6.7 can be used to determine the effect on oscillator phase noise 
due to random vibration in each axis.6
 L ff f
fvi i v
v( ) log( )=



20100Γ γ   dBc SSB in a 1 Hz bandwidth  (6.7)
where fv = vibration frequency (Hz)
 f0 = oscillator frequency (Hz)
 Γi = oscillator fractional frequency vibration sensitivity ( g−1) in axis i
 gi (  fv) =  vibration power spectral density ( g2/Hz) in axis i at the vibration  
frequency fv
The composite STALO vibration sensitivity ( Γ) is defined by the root sum square 
of the sensitivity in each of the three prime axes, as shown in Eq. 6.8
 | |Γ Γ Γ Γ= + +x y z2 2 2  (6.8)
Range Dependence.  Most modern radars use the STALO in both the receiver 
for downconversion and the exciter for upconversion. This double use of the STALO 
introduces a dependence on range of the clutter and exaggerates the effect of certain 
unintentional phase-modulation components by 6 dB, the critical frequencies being 
those which change phase by odd multiples of 180° during the time period between 
transmission and reception of the clutter return from a specified range.
ch06.indd   15 12/17/07   2:03:10 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Radar Receivers 6.16  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 6
This range-dependent filter characteristic is given by
 | ( ) | sin ( / ) sin ( ) F f f R c f TR m m m2 2 24 2 4 = = π π  (6.9)
where fm = modulation frequency (Hz)
 R = range (m)
 c = propagation velocity, 3 × 108 (m/s)
 T = time delay = 2R/c (s)
A short time delay can tolerate much higher disturbances at low modulation fre -
quencies, as illustrated by the two cases in Figure 6.4. Consequently, the effects of 
STALO stability need to be computed for several time delays or ranges to ensure suf -
ficient stability exists for the intended application.
Close to carrier phase modulation is typically dominated by that of the oscillators 
due to the inherent feedback process within the oscillator circuitry. Noise contribu -
tors within the oscillator loop that exhibit a 1/ f characteristic (10 dB/decade) noise 
slope, are enhanced by 20 dB via the feedback mechanism with a resulting net 1/ f 3 
characteristic (30 dB/decade) noise signature close to carrier, within the oscillator loop 
bandwidth. Outside this loop bandwidth, the oscillator noise signature resumes a 1/ f 
slope until reaching a flat thermal noise floor. At larger frequency offsets, significant 
noise contributions can result from other components such as amplifiers in the STALO 
signal path. Depending on the location of these amplifiers, they may either create 
phase modulation that is common to both the receiver and exciter (correlated noise) 
or add phase noise to only the receiver or exciter (uncorrelated noise). Uncorrelated 
or uncommon noise is not subject to the range dependent factor described above so it 
must be accounted for separately. Other significant contributors of uncommon noise 
are the noise on the exciter waveform before upconversion, along with amplifiers in 
the receiver and exciter signal paths.
The undesired SSB phase noise after downconversion by the STALO is the sum of 
the uncommon phase noise and the common phase noise reduced by the range factor. 
FIGURE 6.4  Effect of range delay on clutter cancellation
ch06.indd   16 12/17/07   2:03:12 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Radar Receivers  RADAR RECEIVERS  6.176x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 6
Figure 6.5 illustrates typical common and uncommon phase noise components and the 
resulting mixer output phase noise as calculated using
 L f L f F f L fC R U '() ( ) | ( )| ( ) = +2 (6.10)
where
 LC(f) = STALO SSB phase noise spectrum common to the receiver and exciter
 LU(f) = total receiver-exciter uncorrelated STALO SSB phase noise
 FR(f) = range dependence factor
Residue Power and MTI Improvement Factor.  Subsequent stages of the receiver 
and signal processor have responses that are functions of the doppler modulation fre -
quency, so the output spectrum can be obtained by combining the responses of these 
filters with the spectrum present at the mixer input. In MTI systems, it is common to 
describe the ability to suppress clutter in terms of an MTI improvement factor. The 
MTI improvement factor I is defined as the signal-to-clutter ratio at the output of 
the clutter filter divided by the signal-to-clutter ratio at the input of the clutter filter, 
averaged uniformly over all target radial velocities of interest. The MTI improvement 
factor limitation due to the STALO may be expressed as the ratio of the STALO power 
to the total integrated power of the return modulation spectrum it creates at the output 
of the MTI filters. Figure 6.6 illustrates the effect of the overall filtering, consisting of 
MTI filtering and receiver filtering on the residue power spectrum.
The integrated residue power due to the STAMO phase noise is given by
 P H f L f dfresidue= ′
−∞∞∫| ( ) | ( )2  (6.11)
where
 H(f) =  combined response of receiver and doppler filters, normalized to 0 dB 
noise gain
 L' (f) = phase noise after downconversion as defined in Eq. 6.10FIGURE 6.5  Phase noise componentsFrequencySingle Sideband Phase Noise (dBc/Hz)
100 Hz 1 kHz 10 kHz 100 kHz 1 MHzSTALO Common Phase Noise LC(f)
STALO Uncommon Phase Noise LU(f)Phase Noise after Do wncon version L ’(f) −120
−130
−140
−150
−160
−170−110−100
ch06.indd   17 12/17/07   2:03:15 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Radar Receivers 6.18  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 6
and the limit on the MTI improvement factor due to the STALO phase noise is 
given by
 I P= −1010logresidue (6.12)
If the radar utilizes more than one doppler filter, the effect of STALO instability 
should be calculated for each individually.
Pulse Doppler Processing.   In pulse doppler systems, a series of pulses are trans -
mitted at a fixed pulse repetition frequency (PRF), and doppler processing is per -
formed within the digital signal processor, using samples separated at the PRF rate. 
The resulting sampling of the receiver output at the PRF produces aliasing of the phase 
noise spectrum periodically at the PRF interval, as shown in Figure 6.7, where each 
curve represents the phase noise at the output of the receiver, including the effects 
of receiver filtering and offset by a multiple of the PRF frequency. The combined 
phase noise due to each aliased component is calculated using Eq. 6.13 with the result 
illustrated in Figure 6.8. This sampled phase noise spectrum provides a method for 
comparing different LO phase noise profiles and their relative impact on the overall 
performance of the system.
 ˆ( ) ( ) | ( ) | L f L f kf H f kf
k= ′+ + 
=−∞∞
∑ PRF PRF2 (6.13)
Sinusoidal Modulations.  Radar performance is affected by both random and sinu -
soidal modulations. Sinusoidal modulations can have a significant impact on radar 
performance, though the degree to which they cause degradation often depends on 
their relationship to the radar PRF and their magnitude relative to the random modu-
lations. Examples of such undesired sinusoidal modulations are in-band, unfilterable 
mixer products, or leakage due to insufficient isolation between signal sources within 
a receiver or exciter. In addition to external sources of interference, the radar designer FIGURE 6.6  Clutter residue due to LO phase noiseH(f)Phase Noise after 
Downconv ersion
Frequency100 Hz 1 kHz 10 kHz 100 kHz 1 MHzCombined Doppler Filter 
and Receiv er Filter 
Response
Clutter ResidueNoise Level (dBc/Hz)0
−10
−20
−30
−40
−5010
Filter Response (dB)−120
−130
−140
−150
−160
−170−110L’(f)
ch06.indd   18 12/17/07   2:03:18 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Radar Receivers  RADAR RECEIVERS  6.196x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 6
must be concerned with internal signal sources. MTI and pulse doppler radars are 
particularly susceptible to any such internal oscillators that are not coherent, i.e., that 
do not have the same phase for each pulse transmission. The effect of the spurious 
signal is then different for each return, and the ability to reject clutter is degraded.  FIGURE 6.7  Phase noise aliasing in a pulse doppler systemL(f)
Frequency0fPRF −fPRF2fPRF 3fPRF −3fPRF−2fPRFPhase Noise after Downconversion 
and Receiver Filtering
Phase Noise Shifted kfPRF
FIGURE 6.8  Sampled phase noise spectrum due to phase noise aliasingFolded Phase Noise 
Spectrum
Doppler FrequencyfPRF 0Phase Noise (dBc/Hz)L(f)^
ch06.indd   19 12/17/07   2:03:20 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Radar Receivers 6.20  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 6
A truly coherent radar generates all frequencies, including its inter-pulse periods, from 
a single frequency reference. This fully coherent architecture insures that both the 
desired frequencies and all the internally generated spurious signals are coherent, 
eliminating the degradation of clutter rejection.
Many radar systems are pseudo-coherent. The same oscillators are used in both 
transmit and receive but not necessarily coherent with each other. The result is that 
the phase of the target remains constant, but the phase of many of the spurious signals 
varies from pulse to pulse. In this type of configuration, signal isolation and frequency 
architecture is critical to minimize the occurrence of spurious signals that could erro -
neously be interpreted as false targets.
COHO and Timing Instability.  The majority of this discussion has focused 
on the STALO as the major contributor to receiver stability. Other contributors 
such as the second LO, the coherent oscillator (COHO) (if used), A/D and D/A 
converter clocks can all become significant. A/D and D/A converter clock jitter 
becomes increasingly significant as sample rates and IF frequencies are increased. 
The effects of A/D and D/A converter clock phase noise and jitter is described in 
Sections 6.10 and 6.13. The jitter on timing strobes used to perform transmit/receive 
(T/R) switching is typically less stringent than that of A/D clocks, as it does not have 
a direct impact on the signal phase. However, if components such as transmit/receive 
switches or power amplifiers have a transient phase response of significant duration, 
time jitter on the switching time can be translated into a phase modulation of the 
transmitter or receiver signal.
Total Radar Instability.  The primary sources of radar instability are usually the 
receiver-exciter common phase noise, receiver and exciter uncommon phase noise, 
and the transmitter phase noise. If the spectra of these components are available, either 
through measurements or through predictions based on similar devices, the convolu -
tion of receiver-exciter common phase noise, modified by the range-dependent effect 
with the other components, provides an estimate of the spectrum of returns from stable 
clutter, which is then modified by the receiver filters and integrated to obtain the resi -
due power caused by these contributors. These procedures are employed to diagnose 
the source of radar instability in an existing radar or to predict the performance of a 
radar in the design stage and to allow the allocation of stability requirements to critical 
components or subsystems within the radar.
Measurement of total radar instability can be conducted with the radar antenna 
search-lighting a stable point clutter reflector that produces a signal return close to 
(but below) the dynamic-range limit of the receiver. Suitable clutter sources are dif -
ficult to find at many radar sites, and interruption of rotation of the antenna to con -
duct such a test may be unacceptable at others; in this case, a microwave delay line 
can be employed to feed a delayed sample of the transmitter pulse into the receiver. 
All sources of instability are included in this single measurement except for any 
contributors outside the delay-line loop. It is important to recognize that timing jit -
ter does not produce equal impact on all parts of the return pulse and generally has 
minimal effect on the center of the pulse, so it is essential to collect data samples at 
a multiplicity of points across the return, including leading and trailing edges. The 
total radar instability is the ratio of the sum of the multiplicity of residue powers at 
the output of the doppler filter to the sum of the powers at its input, divided by the 
ratio of receiver noise at these locations. Stability is the inverse of this ratio; both are 
generally expressed in decibels.
ch06.indd   20 12/17/07   2:03:20 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Radar Receivers  RADAR RECEIVERS  6.216x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 6
In radars with phase-coded transmission and pulse compression receivers, residue 
may be significant in the range sidelobe region as well as in the compressed pulse, 
caused by phase modulation during the long transmitted pulse rather than solely from 
pulse to pulse. Measurement of stability of such radars must employ a very large num -
ber of data points to obtain an answer valid for clutter distributed in range.
In addition to the amplitude and phase noise of the receiver-exciter and the trans -
mitter, mechanically scanning antennas produce a modulation that is predominantly 
AM. The combined effect is the sum of the residue powers produced by each compo -
nent individually.
Low Noise Frequency Sources.  Many radar systems operate over a range of 
RF frequencies, requiring a number of LO frequencies that are typically generated 
using frequency synthesis. Frequency synthesis is the process of creating one or more 
frequencies from a single reference frequency using frequency multiplication, divi -
sion, addition, and subtraction to synthesize the required frequencies. The fundamental 
building block of any frequency synthesis approach is the oscillator. Crystal oscillators 
have historically been the most common source technology. VHF crystal oscillators 
employing doubly-rotated (SC, IT, etc.) crystal resonators are able to support higher 
power levels than single axis crystals. This enables them to achieve lower phase noise 
and improved vibration immunity due to properties unique to the particular axis of 
rotation. Frequency multiplication of these VHF sources is often used to generate the 
radar RF frequencies required; however, this multiplication process results in increase 
in phase noise performance by 20 log10(M) dB where M is the multiplication factor. A 
variety of other source technologies, such as Surface Acoustic Wave (SAW) oscilla -
tors, have been exploited to achieve improved phase noise performance. SAW oscil -
lators enable lower far-from-carrier phase noise, largely due to their higher frequency 
operation and the resulting lower frequency multiplication factor required to generate 
the equivalent radar RF output frequencies.
Very accurate frequency timing is often required in radars where coordination or 
hand-off from one radar to another, or communication to a missile in flight, is required. 
This is typically the case where a search radar acquires a target and queues a preci -
sion tracking radar. Accurate timing for these applications may be achieved by phase 
locking the low phase noise radar oscillators to a low frequency reference generated 
from either a rubidium oscillator or a GPS receiver. In this configuration, the long-term 
stability of the reference oscillator is superior to that of the radar oscillator, and the 
short-term stability of the radar oscillator is superior to that of the reference oscillator. 
The phase lock loop (PLL) architecture is established to exploit the strengths of both 
technologies by selecting a PLL bandwidth at the offset frequency where the source 
stabilities cross over. For typical radar and reference oscillator technologies, this usu -
ally occurs in the 100 Hz to 1 kHz offset region.
Frequency Synthesis Techniques.  The most common techniques are direct 
synthesis, direct digital synthesis, and frequency multiplication. Direct synthesis is 
the process of generating frequencies through the multiplication and mixing of a 
number of signals at different frequencies to produce the required output frequency. 
Frequency multiplication and direct digital synthesis are described in Section 6.13. 
Conventional phase locked loop synthesizers are occasionally used, but their fre -
quency switching times and phase settling responses are generally inadequate to meet 
the stringent radar receiver-exciter requirements. Phase locked loops are more likely 
used to lock fixed high-frequency oscillators to stable low-frequency references to 
ch06.indd   21 12/17/07   2:03:21 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Radar Receivers 6.22  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 6
ensure coherence of all oscillators within the receiver-exciter and obtain an optimum 
balance of long- and short-term stability.
Coherence After Frequency Switching.  Long range radars often transmit a series 
of pulses before receiving returns from the first in the sequence. Pulses may be transmitted 
at a number of different operating frequencies requiring switching of the LO frequency 
between pulses. If target returns are processed coherently, the phase of the LO signal 
must be controlled such that each time it switches to a particular frequency, the phase of 
the LO is the same phase that it would have been had no frequency switching occurred. 
This requirement drives the architecture used to generate LO frequencies. Generating 
all the frequencies from a single reference frequency does not guarantee phase coher -
ence when frequency switching occurs. Three sources of phase ambiguity are common: 
frequency dividers, direct digital synthesizers, and voltage controlled oscillators (VCO). 
Frequency dividers produce an output signal that can have any one of N phases, where N 
is the divide ratio; switching dividers can result in phase ambiguity of 2 p /N. If frequency 
dividers are used in the frequency synthesis process, they must be operated constantly 
without switching the input frequency or divide ratio to avoid this phase ambiguity. 
Direct digital synthesizers (DDSs) can be used either to generate LO frequencies directly 
or to generate modulated waveforms prior to upconversion. When pulse-to-pulse phase 
coherence is required, the starting phase is reset to zero at the start of each pulse. If all the 
LO frequencies used are multiples of the pulse repletion frequency, the resulting phase 
will be the same for each pulse. VCOs can be used to create a tunable LO but are usually 
phase locked to another stable source for improved stability. The tuning voltage design 
and filter capacitor technology used to achieve phase lock must be carefully designed 
to ensure rapid voltage and stored charge transitions. Otherwise, the VCO may properly 
acquire and achieve phase lock, but the residual voltage decay from the transition will 
manifest itself in an insidious phase ambiguity called post-tuning drift .
Stretch Processing.  In stretch processing, the LO signal frequency is modulated 
with a chirp waveform similar to that of the received signal to reduce the bandwidth 
of the IF signal as described in Section 6.3. The wideband chirp waveform is typically 
generated by passing a narrower bandwidth linear frequency modulation (LFM) wave -
form through a frequency multiplier that increases both the operating frequency and 
bandwidth of the chirp waveform. Frequency multipliers multiply the phase distortion 
of the input signal and often have significant phase distortion themselves. Distortion of 
the LO chirp signal phase can have a significant effect on the compressed pulse perfor -
mance, either distorting the compressed pulse shape or degrading sidelobe performance 
(Section 6.13). Phase errors can be measured using a test target injected into the receiver 
and measuring the phase ripple at the receiver output. By performing this measurement 
with targets injected at different simulated ranges, the errors associated with the receiver 
LO and test signal can be separated. Correction of receiver LO phase distortion can be 
readily corrected when using a direct digital synthesizer as described in Section 6.13.
6.6 GAIN CONTROL
Sensitivity Time Control (STC).  The search radar detects returns of widely dif -
fering amplitudes, often so great that the dynamic range of a fixed-gain receiver will 
be exceeded. Differences in return strength are caused by differences in radar cross 
ch06.indd   22 12/17/07   2:03:21 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Radar Receivers  RADAR RECEIVERS  6.236x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 6
sections, in meteorological conditions, and in range. The effect of range on radar return 
strength overshadows the other causes and can be mitigated by a technique known as 
sensitivity time control , which causes the radar receiver sensitivity to vary with time in 
such a way that the amplified radar return strength is independent of range.
Time sidelobes of compressed pulses in radars that transmit coded waveforms can 
be degraded by STC. Gradual changes can usually be tolerated, but at close range, the 
rate of change of attenuation can be very large. Most modern radars that include STC 
use digital STC control, which can lead to large step sizes at close range unless high 
digitization rates are used. The phase stability of the STC attenuator is also an impor -
tant consideration as excessive phase variation as a function of attenuation can have a 
dramatic impact on range sidelobes.
Clutter Map Automatic Gain Control.  In some radars, mountain or urban clut -
ter can create returns that would exceed the dynamic range of the receiver. The spatial 
area occupied by such clutter is typically a very small fraction of the radar coverage, 
so clutter map AGC has been used as an alternative to boosting the STC curve. This 
technique uses a digital map to record the mean amplitude of the clutter in each map 
cell over many scans and adds receiver attenuation where necessary to keep the clutter 
returns below the saturation level of the receiver.
Programmable Gain Control.  Reduced gain may be desirable in a variety of 
situations such as high clutter or high interference environments or in short range 
modes. Fixed attenuation is often preferable to STC or clutter map control. High PRF 
pulse doppler radars, for example, cannot tolerate STC due to the range ambiguity 
of targets. Additional attenuation may be programmed either manually via operator 
control or automatically to increase the receiver’s large signal handling capability or 
to reduce its sensitivity.
Gain Normalization.  Receiver gain can vary due to component tolerances, fre -
quency response, variation with temperature, and aging. Accurate receiver gain control 
is required for a variety of reasons that include target radar cross-section measure -
ment, monopulse angle accuracy, maximizing the receiver dynamic range, and noise 
level control. Digital gain control permits the calibration of receiver gain by inject -
ing test signals during radar dead time or during some scheduled calibration interval. 
Calibration coefficients can be stored as a function of commanded attenuation, operat -
ing frequency, and temperature as needed. Measurements over time can also be used 
to assess component aging and potentially predict receiver failure prior to degradation 
beyond acceptable limits. Accurate gain control is essential for receiver channels used 
to perform monopulse angle measurements, where amplitudes received in two or more 
beams simultaneously are compared to accurately determine the target’s position in 
azimuth or elevation. Receiver dynamic range is maximized with accurate gain control 
as too little gain can result in noise figure degradation and too much gain results in 
large signals exceeding the A/D converter full-scale or creating unwanted gain com -
pression, intermodulation, or cross modulation distortion.
Automatic Noise-Level Control.  Another widely employed use for AGC is to 
maintain a desired level of receiver noise at the A/D converter. As will be described 
in Section 6.10, too little noise relative to the quantization increment of the A/D con -
verter causes a loss in sensitivity. Samples of noise are taken at long range, often beyond 
the instrumented range of the radar or during some scheduled period. If the radar has  
ch06.indd   23 12/17/07   2:03:21 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Radar Receivers 6.24  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 6
RF STC prior to any amplification, it can be set to full attenuation to minimize exter -
nal interference with minimal (and predictable) effect on system noise temperature. Most 
radars employ amplifiers prior to STC, so they cannot attenuate external interference with -
out affecting the noise level. The noise level calibration algorithm must be designed to 
tolerate external interference and returns from rainstorms or mountains at extreme range.
Another concern with amplification prior to STC is that the noise level at the output 
of the STC attenuator varies with range. At close range, the noise level into the A/D 
converter may fall below the quantization interval. Also, a constant noise level as a 
function of range at the receiver output is desirable in order to maintain a constant false 
alarm rate. Noise injection after the STC attenuator is used to overcome this problem. 
A noise source and attenuator are often employed at IF to inject additional noise to 
compensate for the reduced noise after the STC attenuator. Digital control of the noise 
injection is synchronized with the STC attenuation to provide an effective constant 
noise level at the A/D converter input.
Gain Control Components.  Most modern radars perform gain control digitally. 
Digital control permits calibration of each attenuation value to determine the differ -
ence between the actual attenuation and that commanded by injecting test signals 
during dead time.
In the past, gain controlled amplifiers were used extensively to control and adjust 
receiver gain. Recently, this approach has largely been replaced using digital switched 
or analog (voltage or current) controlled attenuators distributed throughout the receiver 
chain. Variable attenuators have a number of advantages over variable gain amplifi -
ers; they typically provide broader bandwidths, greater gain control accuracy, greater 
phase stability, improved dynamic range, and faster switching speed.
The choice between voltage controlled and switched attenuation depends on trade-
offs between performance of a variety of parameters. Switched attenuators generally 
provide maximum attenuation accuracy, faster switching speed, improved amplitude 
and phase stability, greater bandwidth, higher dynamic range, and higher power han -
dling capability. V oltage or current controlled attenuators, controlled via a D/A con -
verter, typically provide improved resolution and lower insertion loss.
Gain control attenuators are often incorporated within the receiver at both RF and 
IF. RF attenuation is used to provide increased dynamic range in the presence of large 
target returns. By placing the attenuation as close to the front end as possible, large 
signals can be handled by minimizing gain compression, intermodulation, or cross-
modulation distortion in the majority of receiver components. The disadvantage of 
using front-end attenuation is that it will typically have a larger impact on receiver 
noise figure than attenuation placed later in the receiver. This is not usually an issue 
when the intent of adding attenuation is to desensitize the receiver as is the case for 
STC. Back-end or IF attenuation is often used to adjust the gain of the receiver to 
compensate for receiver gain variations due to component variations where receiver 
noise figure degradation cannot be tolerated.
6.7 FILTERING
Filtering of the Entire Radar System.  Filtering provides the principal means 
by which the radar discriminates between target returns and interference of many 
types. The filtering is performed by a variety of filters throughout the receiver and 
ch06.indd   24 12/17/07   2:03:22 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Radar Receivers  RADAR RECEIVERS  6.256x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 6
in the subsequent digital signal processing. Most radars transmit multiple pulses at 
a target before the antenna beam is moved to a different direction, and the multiple 
returns are combined in some fashion. The returns may be combined using coherent 
integration or various doppler processing techniques (including MTI) to separate 
desired targets from clutter. From the radar system standpoint, these are all filter -
ing functions, and in modern radar systems, these functions are performed using 
digital signal processing on the receiver output I and Q data. These functions are 
discussed in other chapters of this handbook. The purpose of the filtering within 
the receiver is to reject out-of-band interference and digitize the received signal 
with the minimum of error so that optimum filtering can be performed using digital 
signal processing.
Matched Filtering.  Although matched filtering is typically now performed 
within the digital signal-processing function, the concept is explained here for com -
pleteness. The overall filter response of the system is chosen to maximize the radar 
performance. If the signal spectrum X(w), in the presence of white noise with power 
spectral density N0/2, is processed with a filter with frequency response H(w), the 
resulting signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) at time T is given by7
 χπ
πω
=−∞∞
−∞∞∫
∫1
2
42
0 2X H e d
NH dj T( ) ( )
| ( ) |w w w
w w (6.14)
The ideal filter response from the standpoint of maximizing SNR is the matched filter 
that maximizes the SNR at time TM when
 H X eMj TM ( ) ( )*w ww=−  (6.15)
Deviations from the ideal matched filter response HM(w) produce a reduction in 
SNR termed mismatch loss . This loss can occur for a number of reasons such as target 
doppler or because a filter response is chosen that is different from the matched filter 
response in order to minimize another parameter such as range sidelobes.
Receiver filtering is often modified for different waveforms used. When radar sys -
tems use waveforms of widely varying bandwidths, different I/Q data rates may be 
used to minimize the digital signal-processing throughput requirements. With differ -
ent data rates comes the need to adjust the receiver filtering in order to avoid aliasing 
signals beyond the Nyquist rate. Although these radars adjust their filtering to the 
waveform bandwidth, they do not typically implement the matched filtering within the 
receiver. This function is usually implemented in digital signal processing.
Receiver Filtering.  Filtering is required at various points throughout the receiver 
chain including RF, IF, baseband if used, digital filtering prior to decimation (reduc -
tion of the sample rate), and as an integral part of I/Q generation.
Section 6.4 described how spurious responses are generated in the mixing process. 
Unwanted interference signals can be translated to the desired intermediate frequency 
even though they are well separated from the signal frequency at the input to the mixer. 
The ability of the radar to suppress such unwanted interference is dependent upon the 
filtering preceding the mixer as well as on the quality of the mixer itself.
ch06.indd   25 12/17/07   2:03:25 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Radar Receivers 6.26  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 6
The primary function of RF filtering is the rejection of the image response due to 
the first downconversion. Image rejection filtering can be alleviated using an image 
reject mixer; however, the maximum rejection achievable by image reject mixers is 
typically inadequate without the use of additional rejection through filtering. This 
image-suppression problem is the reason why some receivers do not translate from the 
received signal frequency directly to the final intermediate frequency in a single step.
The other spurious products of a mixer generally become more serious if the ratio 
of input to output frequencies of the downconverter is less than 10. The spurious-
effects chart (Figure 6.2) shows that there are certain choices of frequency ratio that 
provide spurious-free frequency bands, approximately 10% of the intermediate fre -
quency in width. By the use of a high first IF, one can eliminate the image problem 
and provide a wide tuning band free of spurious effects. Filtering prior to the mixer 
remains important, however, because the neighboring spurious responses are of rela -
tively low order and may produce strong outputs from the mixer. RF filtering is also 
important as it reduces out-of-band interference before it can cause intermodulation or 
cross-modulation distortion within the receiver.
If the receiver operating bandwidth is a large percentage of the RF frequency, some 
form of switched or tunable RF filtering may be required so that the image response is 
rejected as it moves through the operating bandwidth. The choice between using switched 
or tunable filtering depends on the switching speed, linearity, and stability requirements of 
the receiver. Switched filters provide the fastest response time, with excellent linearity and 
stability but can be bulky and suffer from the additional loss of the switch components.
An alternate approach that is sometimes used with large operating bandwidths is 
to first upconvert the input RF signal to an IF frequency higher than the RF operating 
band. This process virtually eliminates the image response problem, allowing the use 
of a single RF filter spanning the entire operating bandwidth. Narrow bandwidth filter -
ing can be used on the high IF as defined by the signal bandwidth before downconver -
sion to a lower IF for digitization or baseband conversion.
IF filtering is the primary filtering used to define the receiver bandwidth prior to A/D 
conversion in receivers using either IF sampling or baseband conversion. In IF sampling 
receivers, the IF filter acts as the anti-aliasing filter and limits the bandwidth of signals 
entering the A/D converter. In receivers using baseband conversion, the IF filter sets the 
receiver bandwidth. Subsequent video filtering should be of greater bandwidth to prevent 
the introduction of I/Q imbalance due to filter differences between I and Q channels.
In IF sampling receivers, digital filtering is usually the primary means of setting the 
final receiver bandwidth and provides anti-alias rejection required to prevent aliasing 
in the decimation of the I/Q data rate. Digital filtering can be precisely controlled, 
tailored to almost any desired passband and stop band rejection requirements. The 
digital filters used are typically linear phase FIR filters, but they can also be tailored to 
compensate for variations in the passband phase and amplitude responses of RF and 
IF analog filters.
Filter Characteristics.  Filter responses are characterized fully by either their 
frequency response H(w) or their impulse response h(t); however, they are usually 
specified by a variety of parameters as described below. Digital filters may be speci -
fied using the same measures, or because they can be specified exactly, they are fre -
quently specified by their transfer function H(z) or impulse response h(n).
Key passband characteristics are: insertion loss, bandwidth, passband amplitude 
and phase ripple, and group delay. Bandwidths are frequently specified in terms of 
a 3 dB bandwidth; however, if a low passband variation is required, the specified 
ch06.indd   26 12/17/07   2:03:25 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Radar Receivers  RADAR RECEIVERS  6.276x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 6
bandwidth may be, for example, specified as a 0.5 dB or 0.1 dB bandwidth. Passband 
amplitude variation relative to the insertion loss is a key parameter that has potential 
impact on range sidelobes and channel-to-channel tracking. Phase ripple, if specified, 
is relative to a best-fit linear phase and has similar effects as amplitude ripple. Group 
delay, the rate of change of phase vs. frequency, is ideally constant for linear phase 
filters. The absolute value of group delay does not impact the range sidelobe perfor -
mance; however, the relative group delay between channels must be tightly controlled 
or compensated in monopulse, sidelobe canceler, and digital beamforming systems.
Although stopband rejection is clearly a key parameter, filters with fast roll-off 
may not provide the required phase and impulse response characteristics. Figure 6.9 
shows the magnitude response of six different fifth order low-pass filters with equal 
3 dB bandwidth.8 The Chebshev filters (0.1 and 0.01 dB ripple) have flat passband 
response and improved stopband rejection relative to the remaining filters; however, 
as shown in Figure 6.10 and Figure 6.11, they have inferior phase (group delay) and 
impulse response characteristics.
Digital filters can be either Finite Impulse Response (FIR) or Infinite Impulse 
Response (IIR). FIR filters are typically preferred as their finite response is desirable 
along with their linear phase characteristic. Phase linearity is achieved with the sym -
metric impulse response condition9 defined by Eq. 6.16 or the anti-symmetric impulse 
response conditions defined by Eq. 6.17:
 h(n) = h(M − 1 − n)    n = 0, 1, … , M − 1 (6.16)
where M is the length of the FIR filter impulse response
 h(n) = −h(M − 1 − n)    n = 0, 1, … , M − 1 (6.17)
FIGURE 6.9  Magnitude response of lowpass filters
ch06.indd   27 12/17/07   2:03:26 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Radar Receivers 6.28  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 6
FIGURE 6.10  Group delay response of lowpass filters
FIGURE 6.11  Normalized impulse response of lowpass filters
ch06.indd   28 12/17/07   2:03:27 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Radar Receivers  RADAR RECEIVERS  6.296x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 6
Range Sidelobes.  Errors in filter responses can produce degradation in pulse 
compression range sidelobes. The effect of a filter response on range or time sidelobes 
can be seen by taking the filter impulse response h(t) and adding to this a delayed 
impulse response 20log10(a) dB below the main response to produce the modified 
response h'(t), which is given by
 h'(t) = h(t) + a h(t−T0) (6.18)
Using the property of time shifting of the Fourier transform, the resultant frequency 
response is given by
 ′ = +−H H e Hj T( ) ( ) ( ) w w a ww0  (6.19)
Thus, for small values of a, the resulting magnitude and phase response is that of the 
original filter modified by a sinusoidal phase and amplitude modulation as given here:
 | ( ) || ( ) |( c os( ) ) ′ = + H H T w w w 10 α  (6.20)
 ∠′ = ∠ − H H T ( ) ( ) sin( ) w w a w0 (6.21)
Therefore, if there are n ripples across the filter bandwidth B, the range sidelobe 
occurs at time T0 given by
 T0 = n/B (6.22)
Assuming a compressed pulse width of 1/B, values of n < 1 will put the range 
sidelobe within the main lobe of the target return, resulting in a distortion of the 
mainlobe response.
Channel Matching Requirements.  Radar receivers with more than one 
receiver channel typically require some degree of phase and amplitude matching 
or tracking between channels. In order to operate effectively, sidelobe canceler 
channels must track very closely. Constant offsets in gain or phase do not degrade 
sidelobe canceler performance, but small variations in phase and amplitude across 
the bandwidth cause significant degradation. For example, achieving a cancellation 
ratio of 40 dB requires a gain tracking of less than 0.1 dB across the receiver band -
width. Filters are the main source of amplitude and phase ripple across the signal 
bandwidth as other components such as amplifiers and mixers are typically rela -
tively broadband. The degree of tracking required for sidelobe canceler operation 
was previously achieved by providing matched sets of filters with tightly tracking 
amplitude and phase responses. Modern digital signal processing allows the correc -
tion of these channel-to-channel variations using FIR equalization (Section 6.11) or 
correction in the frequency domain in the digital signal processor, allowing the use 
of less tightly controlled filters.
6.8 LIMITERS
Applications.  Limiters are used to protect the receiver from damage and to con -
trol saturation that may occur within the receiver. When received signals saturate 
some stage of the radar receiver that is not expressly designed to cope with such a 
ch06.indd   29 12/17/07   2:03:32 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Radar Receivers 6.30  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 6
situation, the distortions can result in severely degraded radar performance, and the 
distortion of operating conditions can persist for some time after the signal disap -
pears. Video stages are most vulnerable and take longer to recover than IF stages; 
so it is customary to include a limiter in the last IF stage, designed to quickly regain 
normal operating conditions immediately following the disappearance of a limiting 
signal. Limiting prior to the A/D converter also prevents the distortion that occurs 
when signals exceed full-scale. Although A/D converters can often handle modest 
overload with fast recovery, the distortion that occurs degrades signal processing such 
as digital pulse compression and clutter rejection. With IF limiting, these harmonics 
are filtered out using bandpass filtering after limiting prior to A/D conversion, mini -
mizing the degradation due to limiting.
All radar systems contain some form of Transmit/Receive (T/R) device to protect 
the receive electronics from the high-power transmit signal. In many systems, an RF 
front-end limiter is also required in order to prevent the receiver from being damaged 
by high input power levels from the antenna that may occur as a result of leakage from 
the T/R device during transmit mode or from interference due to jammers or other 
radar systems. These limiters are typically designed to limit well above the maximum 
signals to be processed by the receiver.
In the past, limiters were used to perform a variety of analog signal-processing 
functions. Hard limiters with as much as 80 dB of limiting range were used with some 
designed to limit on-receiver noise. Applications that utilize hard limiting, including 
phase-detectors and phase-monopulse receivers, are described in Section 3.10 of the 
second edition1 of this handbook. Modern radar systems are mostly designed to maxi -
mize the linear operating region, with limiters used only to handle excessively large 
signals that inevitably exist under worst case conditions.
Characteristics.  The ideal limiter is perfectly linear up to the power level at 
which limiting begins followed by a transition region beyond which the output power 
remains constant. In addition, the insertion phase is constant for all input power lev -
els, and recovery from limiting is instantaneous. The output waveform from a band -
pass limiter is sinusoidal, whereas the output waveform from a broadband limiter 
approaches a square wave. Deviations from the ideal characteristics can degrade radar 
performance in a variety of ways.
Linearity Below Limiting.  One major drawback of adding a limiter stage to a 
receiver channel is that it is inherently nonlinear. Since any practical limiter has a 
gradual transition into limiting, the limiter is often the largest contributor to receiver 
channel nonlinearity in the linear operating region and can cause significant inter -
modulation distortion of in-band signals. For this reason, the primary limiting stage is 
usually located at the final IF stage where maximum filtering of out-of-band interfer -
ence has been achieved. The lower operating frequency also allows implementation of 
a limiter that more closely matches the ideal characteristics.
Limiting Amplitude Uniformity.  No single-stage limiter will exhibit a constant 
output over a wide range of input signal amplitudes. One cause is apparent if one 
considers the effect of a single-stage limiter having a perfectly symmetrical clipping at 
voltages ±E. For a sinusoidal input, the output signal at the threshold of limiting is
 v0 = Esin(w t) (6.23)
ch06.indd   30 12/17/07   2:03:33 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Radar Receivers  RADAR RECEIVERS  6.316x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 6
and when the limiter is fully saturated and the output waveform is rectangular, it is 
given by the Fourier series:
 ′=
=∞
∑ vE
nn to
n4 1
1 35πsin( )
, , ,...w (6.24)
which is an increase of 20 log (4/ p ) = 2.1 dB in the power of the fundamental.
In practice, the amplitude performance is also degraded by capacitive coupling 
between input and output of each limiting stage, charge storage in transistors and 
diodes, and RC time constants that permit changes in bias with signal level. For these 
reasons, two or more limiter stages may be cascaded when good amplitude uniformity 
is required over a wide dynamic range.
Phase Uniformity.  The change of insertion phase of the limiter with amplitude is 
less of a concern for modern radar systems that operate primarily in the linear operat -
ing region. However, maintaining constant insertion phase during limiting preserves 
the phase of target returns in the presence of limiting clutter or interference. The 
change of insertion phase with signal amplitude is generally directly proportional to 
the frequency at which it is operated.
Recovery Time . The recovery time of a limiter is a measure of how quickly the 
limiter returns to linear operation after the limiting signal is removed. Fast recovery is 
particularly important when the radar is exposed to impulsive interference.
6.9 I/Q DEMODULATORS
Applications.  The I/Q demodulator, also referred to as a quadrature channel 
receiver, quadrature detector, synchronous detector, or coherent detector, performs fre -
quency conversion of signals at the IF frequency to a complex representation, I + jQ 
centered at zero frequency. The baseband in-phase ( I) and quadrature-phase ( Q) signals 
are digitized using a pair of A/D converters providing a representation of the IF signal, 
including phase and amplitude without loss of information. The resulting digital data can 
then be processed using a wide variety of digital signal-processing algorithms, depend -
ing on the type of radar and mode of operation. Processing such as pulse compression, 
doppler processing, and monopulse comparison, all require amplitude and phase infor -
mation. The predominance of digital signal processing in modern radar systems has led 
to almost universal need for Nyquist rate sampled data. In many modern radar systems, 
digital I and Q data is now generated using IF sampling followed by digital signal pro -
cessing used to perform the baseband conversion as described in Sections 6.10 and 6.11. 
I/Q demodulators are still used, though their use is increasingly limited to wider band -
width systems where A/D converters are not yet available with the required combination 
of bandwidth and dynamic range to perform IF sampling.
Implementation.  Figure 6.12 shows the basic block diagram of a I/Q demodual -
tor. The IF signal described by Eq. 6.25 is split and fed to a pair of mixers or analog 
multipliers. The mixer LO ports are fed with a pair of signals in quadrature, generated 
from the reference frequency signal, or coherent oscillator (COHO), and represented 
ch06.indd   31 12/17/07   2:03:34 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Radar Receivers 6.32  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 6
in complex form in Eq. 6.26. Ignoring any mixer insertion loss or loss associated with 
the IF split, the complex representation of the mixer output is given by Eq. 6.27. Ideal 
low-pass filtering rejects the second (sum frequency) term of Eq. 6.27, producing the 
I/Q demodulator output as represented by Eq. 6.28.
 V A tA
je eSS j t j t
IF= + = −+ − +sin( ) ( )( ) ( )w qw q w q
2 (6.25)
 V A t j t j A eR Rj t
COHO= + =−sin( ) c os( ) w ww
0 00 (6.26)
 V VAe e A eAS j t j t
Rj t S
IFCOHO= − =+ − + −
20 ( )( ) ( ) w q w q w A AeA AeR j t S R j t
2 20 0 [( ) ] [( ) ] w w q ww q − + − + +−
  
  (6.27)
 V j VA At jA A
I QS R S R+ = − + + −2 20 0 cos[( ) ] s in[( ) w w q wwt tA AeS R j t+ =− + qw w q]( )
20
  
  (6.28)
In implementing an I/Q demodulator, it is important to provide well-balanced  
I and Q channels in order to maximize image rejection, as explained below. The mixers 
must have DC coupled IF output ports and be presented with a good match at both the 
wanted low frequency output and the unwanted sum frequency. A match at the sum 
frequency can be provided using a diplexer filter. Video filtering is required to reject 
the sum frequency mixer outputs and also provides rejection of wideband noise from 
the video amplifiers, which would otherwise alias to baseband through the A/D con -
verter sampling process, producing an unwanted degradation of receiver noise figure. 
Video amplification is often required to increase the signal level to the full-scale signal 
level of the A/D converter and also allows for impedance matching of the mixer and 
A/D converter.
The convention for the I and Q relationship is that the I signal phase leads the Q sig-
nal phase for radar signals with positive doppler (approaching targets). Frequency con -
versions within the receiver using LO frequencies greater than the RF frequency will 
cause a doppler frequency inversion, so each conversion must be considered in order 
to achieve the correct sense of I and Q at the receiver output. Fortunately, an incorrect 
I and Q relationship can easily be fixed either in the receiver or the signal processor, 
by switching the I and Q digital data or by changing the sign of either I or Q.
Gain or Phase Imbalance.  If the gains of the I and Q channels are not exactly 
equal or if their COHO phase references are not exactly 90 degrees apart, an input 
signal at frequency w will create an output at both the desired frequency w−w 0 and FIGURE 6.12  I/Q demodulatorIn-phase 
power 
dividerIF Signal
VIF = AS sin(wt + q)I/Q Demodulator 
Reference 
(COHO)Lowpass 
Filter
90º 
hybridAR sin(w0t)
AR cos(w0t)cos[(w − w0)t + q]
sin[(w − w0)t + q]2ASAR
ASARVI =
2VQ =Lowpass 
Filter
ch06.indd   32 12/17/07   2:03:42 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Radar Receivers  RADAR RECEIVERS  6.336x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 6
at the image frequency −(w −w 0). The image signals generated by gain and phase 
imbalance are given by Eq. 6.29 and Eq. 6.30. For small errors, if the ratio of voltage 
gains is (1 ± ∆) or if the phase references differ by ( p /2 ± ∆) radians, the ratio of the 
spurious image at −wd to the desired output of wd is ∆/2 in voltage, ∆2/4 in power, or 
20 (log ∆) −6 in decibels.
  V j V E t j E tI Q d d + = + + = +

 cos( ) ( ) sin( ) w w 1 12∆∆E Ee Eej t j td d w w−− ∆
2 (6.29)
V j V E t j E t EeI Q d d + = + + =

 cos( ) s in( ) cos w w ∆∆
2j j t j td dEew w +

 − ++ 

−

∆ ∆∆2 2
2sinπ
 
  
  (6.30)
Historically, I and Q phase and gain corrections have been performed using 
adjustments in the analog signal paths, as shown in Figure 6.13. Gain errors may 
be corrected by a change in gain in the IF or video stages of either or both I and Q 
channels. Video gain control must be implemented with care as it can exaggerate 
the nonlinearity of those stages. These corrections can now be implemented more 
precisely in the digital domain.
A measurement of the signal spectrum at the center of the IF bandwidth indicates 
the degree of gain and phase imbalance compensation. However, as the following 
discussion will explain, the suppression of image energy across the IF bandwidth may 
be substantially less than indicated by this measurement at IF center .
Time Delay and Frequency Response Imbalance.  If the responses of the  
I and Q channels are not identical across the entire signal bandwidth, unwanted image 
responses will occur that are frequency dependent. Optimum bandpass filtering should 
FIGURE 6.13  I/Q demodulator with gain, phase, DC offset, and time-delay adjustmentsIn-phase 
power 
dividerIF 
SignalI/Q Demodulator 
Reference 
(COHO)
+90ºA/D
90º 
hybrid
φ0ºDigital 
I Data
Digital 
Q DataI Gain
Q GainQ Phaseφ I Phase∆tA/D Sample 
Clock 
+
A/D∆tA/D Sample 
Clock I Offset
D/A
+Q Offset
D/ALowpass 
Filter 
Lowpass 
Filter
ch06.indd   33 12/17/07   2:03:46 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Radar Receivers 6.34  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 6
be at IF, where it affects I and Q channels identically, not at baseband. Video filter 
bandwidth should be more than half the IF bandwidth and controlled by precision 
components in order to minimize the creation of image signals. Substituting ∆(w) for ∆ 
in Eq. 6.29 and Eq. 6.30 gives the image components for frequency dependent gain and 
phase errors. Similarly, substituting w ∆T for ∆ in Eq. 6.30 gives the image component 
due to time-delay imbalance in the I and Q paths. Small time-delay imbalances can 
be corrected by adding time delay to the A/D sample clock, as shown in Figure 6.13. 
Large time-delay corrections should be avoided as they can cause problems aligning 
the I and Q digital data. When adding time delay to the sample clock, care must be 
taken to avoid adding jitter, which could degrade the A/D converter SNR performance. 
Time-delay correction can also be implemented effectively in the digital domain, and 
if frequency dependent phase and amplitude imbalance correction is required, this is 
most easily and effectively performed in the digital domain using FIR filtering of the 
I and Q data or by performing corrections in the frequency domain data as part of the 
radar signal processing.
Nonlinearity in I and Q Channels.  Component tolerances often lead to some -
what different nonlinearities in I and Q, which can generate the variety of spurious 
doppler components.
The ideal input signal is
 V A e I jQj td = = +w  (6.31)
Each video channel response can be expressed as a power series. For simplicity, 
only symmetrical distortion will be considered. The A/D output, including a residual 
gain imbalance of ∆, is
 V'IQ = V'I + jV'Q (6.32)
 V'I = VI − aV3
I − cV5
I (6.33)
 V'Q = (1 + ∆)VQ − bV3
Q − dV5
Q (6.34)
Substitution of Eqs. 6.33 and 6.34 into Eq. 6.31 yields the amplitudes of the spectral 
components listed in Table 6.2. Note that if the nonlinearities in I and Q were identi -
cal (a = b; c = d), spurious components at −5w and +3w  would not be present and the 
image ( −w) would be proportional to input signal amplitude. Spurious at zero doppler 
is not due to dc offset; it is the result of even-order nonlinearities that were omitted 
from the above equations. The negative third harmonic is the dominant component 
produced by nonlinearity.
Signal Frequency Amplitude of Spectral Component
−5w A5(c − d)/32
−3w A3(a + b)/8 + 5A5 (c + d)/32
−w A(∆/2) + 3A2 (a − b)/8 + 5A5 (c − d)/16
(Input)w A(1 + ∆/2) − 3A2(a + b)/8 − 5A5(c + d)/16
+3w A3(a − b)/8 + 5A5 (c − d)/32
+5w A5(c + d)/32TABLE 6. 2 Spurious Signal Components Generated by I/Q Nonlinearity
ch06.indd   34 12/17/07   2:03:47 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Radar Receivers  RADAR RECEIVERS  6.356x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 6
DC Offset.  Small signals and receiver noise can be distorted by an offset in 
the mean value of the A/D converter output unless the doppler filter suppresses this 
component.
False-alarm control in receivers without doppler filters is sometimes degraded by 
errors of a small fraction of the least significant bit (LSB), so correction is preferably 
applied at the analog input to the A/D. DC offsets can be measured using digital pro -
cessing of the A/D converter outputs and a correction applied using D/A converters, 
as shown in Figure 6.13. DC offset correction can also be performed effectively in the 
digital domain, provided that the DC offset at the input of the A/D converter is not so 
large that it results in a significant loss of available dynamic range.
Many of the I/Q demodulator errors described above are either reduced dramati -
cally or eliminated using IF sampling. This, along with the reduction of hardware 
required, are the reasons that IF sampling (described in Sections 6.10 and 6.11) is 
becoming the dominant approach.
6.10 ANALOG-TO-DIGITAL CONVERTERS
The high-speed A/D converter is a key component in receivers of modern radar sys -
tems. The extensive use of digital signal processing of radar data has resulted in a 
demand for converters with both state-of-the-art sampling rates and dynamic range.
Analog to digital converters transform continuous time analog signals into discrete 
time digital signals. The process includes both sampling in the time domain, convert -
ing from continuous time to discrete time signals and quantization, converting from 
continuous analog voltages to discrete fixed-length digital words. Both the sampling 
and quantization process produce errors that must be minimized in order to limit the 
radar performance degradation. In addition, a variety of other errors such as additive 
noise, sampling jitter, and deviation from the ideal quantization, result in non-ideal 
A/D conversion.
Applications.  The conventional approach of using a pair of converters to digi -
tize the I and Q outputs of an I/Q demodulator is, in many cases, being replaced by 
digital receiver architectures where a single A/D converter is followed by digital 
signal processing to generate I and Q data. Digital receiver techniques are described 
in Section 6.11.
Although the dividing line is arbitrary and advancing with the state-of-the-art, radar 
receivers are often classified as either wideband or high dynamic range. Different 
radar functions put a greater emphasis on one or the other of these parameters. For 
example, imaging radars put a premium on wide bandwidth, whereas pulse doppler 
radars require high dynamic range. Because radars are often required to operate in a 
variety of modes with differing bandwidth and dynamic range requirements, it is not 
uncommon to use different types of A/D converter, sampling at different rates for these 
different modes.
Data Formats.  The most frequently used digital formats for A/D converters are 
2’s complement and offset binary.10
The 2’s complement is the most popular method of digital representation of signed 
integers and is calculated by complementing every bit of a given number and adding one. 
ch06.indd   35 12/17/07   2:03:48 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Radar Receivers 6.36  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 6
The most significant bit is referred to as the sign bit. If the sign bit is 0, the value is posi -
tive; if it is 1, the value is negative. The representation of voltage in 2’s complement form 
is given by
 E = k(−bN2N−1 + bN−12N−2 + bN−22N−3 + ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ + b120) (3.36)
where E = analog voltage
 N = number of binary digits
 bi = state of ith binary digit
 k = quantization voltage
Offset binary is an alternate coding scheme in which the most negative value is 
represented by all zeros and the most positive value is represented by all ones. Zero is 
represented by a most significant bit (MSB) of one followed by all zeros. The repre -
sentation of voltage in offset binary is given by
 E = k[(bN−1)2N−1 + bN−12N−2 + bN−22N−3 + ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ + b120] (3.35)
The Gray code10 is also used in certain high-speed A/D converters in order to 
reduce the impact of digital output transitions on the performance of the A/D con -
verter. The Gray code allows all adjacent transitions to be accomplished by the change 
of a single digit only.
Delta-Sigma Converters.  Delta-sigma converters differ from conventional 
Nyquist rate converters by combining oversampling with noise-shaping techniques to 
achieve improved SNR in the bandwidth of interest. Noise shaping may be either low-
pass or bandpass depending on the application. Delta-sigma architectures provide poten -
tial improvements in spurious-free dynamic range (SFDR) and SNR over conventional 
Nyquist converters where tight tolerances are required to achieve very low spurious 
performance. Digital filtering and decimation is required to produce data rates that can 
be handled by conventional processors. This function is either performed as an integral 
part of the A/D converter function or can be integrated into the digital downconversion 
function used to generate digital I and Q data, as described in Section 6.11.
Performance Characteristics.  The primary performance characteristics of A/D 
converters are the sample rate or usable bandwidth and resolution, the range over 
which the signals can be accurately digitized. The resolution is limited by both noise 
and distortion and can be described by a variety of parameters.
Sample Rate.  Sampling of band-limited 
signals is performed without aliasing distortion, 
provided that the sample rate ( fs) is greater than 
twice the signal bandwidth and provided the sig -
nal bandwidth does not straddle the Nyquist fre -
quency ( fs/2) or any integer multiple ( Nfs/2).
In conventional baseband approaches, sam -
pling is usually performed at the minimum rate to 
meet the Nyquist criteria. Since the baseband I and 
Q signals have bandwidths ( B/2) equal to half the 
IF signal bandwidth, a sample rate just greater than 
the IF bandwidth is required (see Figure 6.14). FIGURE 6.14  Baseband sampling
Frequency
0Amplitude
2-B
2B
2-fS
2fS
ch06.indd   36 12/17/07   2:03:49 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Radar Receivers  RADAR RECEIVERS  6.376x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 6
For IF sampling, a frequency at least twice the IF bandwidth is required; however, 
oversampling is typically employed to ease alias rejection filtering and to reduce the 
effect of A/D converter quantization noise. IF sampling is often performed with the 
signal located in the second Nyquist region, as shown in Figure 6.15 or in higher 
Nyquist regions.
Stated Resolution.  The stated resolution of an A/D converter is the number of 
output data bits per sample. The full-scale voltage range of a Nyquist rate converter 
is given by VFS = 2NQ, where N is the stated resolution and Q is the least significant 
bit (LSB) size.
Signal-to-Noise-Ratio (SNR).  SNR is the ratio of rms signal amplitude to rms 
A/D converter noise power. For an ideal A/D converter, the only error is due to quan -
tization. Provided that the input signal is sufficiently large relative to the quantization 
size and uncorrelated to the sampling signal, the quantization error is essentially ran -
dom and is assumed to be white. The rms quantization noise is Q/ 12, and signal-  
to-quantization-noise ratio (SQNR) of an ideal A/D converter is given by
 SQNR (dB) = 6.02 N + 1.76 (6.37)
Practical A/D converters have additional sampling errors other than quantization, 
including thermal noise and aperture jitter. Provided that these additional errors can 
be characterized as white, they can be combined with the quantization noise with a 
resulting SNR less than the theoretical SNR of the ideal converter. Because various 
A/D converter error mechanisms are dependent on input signal level and frequency, 
it is important to characterize devices over the full range of input conditions to be 
expected. The available signal-to-noise ratio of state-of-the-art high-speed A/D con -
verters has been shown11 to fall off by one-bit (6 dB) for every doubling of the sample 
rate. Over-sampling of the signal followed by filtering and decimation provides an 
improvement of one half-bit (3 dB) in the achievable signal-to-noise-ratio for each 
doubling of the sample rate. Thus, for high dynamic-range applications, the best per -
formance is achieved using a state-of-the-art A/D converter that has a maximum 
sample rate just sufficient for the application.
Spurious Free Dynamic Range (SFDR).  SFDR is the ratio of the single-tone sig -
nal amplitude to the largest spurious signal amplitude and is usually stated in dB. 
Similar to SNR, the spurious performance of an A/D converter is dependent on the FIGURE 6.15  IF sampling in second Nyquist region
Frequency
0Aliased 
SignalBand-limited 
IF SignalAmplitude
B
2fS fS fIF fIF -  fS
ch06.indd   37 12/17/07   2:03:51 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Radar Receivers 6.38  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 6
input signal frequency and amplitude. The frequency of spurious signals is also depen -
dent on the input signal frequency with the highest values typically due to low order 
harmonics or their aliases. When using IF sampling with a significant over-sampling 
ratio ( fs  B/2), the worst spurious signals may be avoided by choosing the sample 
frequency relative to signal frequency such that the unwanted spurious signals fall 
outside the signal bandwidth of interest. If the worst case spurious can be avoided, the 
specified SFDR is less important than the levels of the specific spurious components 
that fall within the bandwidth of interest. Again, it is important to characterize devices 
over the range of expected operating conditions.
The impact of A/D converter spurious signals on radar performance depends on the 
type of waveforms being processed and the digital signal processing being performed. 
In applications using chirp waveforms with large time-bandwidth products, spurious 
signals are less critical as they are effectively rejected in the pulse compression pro -
cess because their coding does not match that of the wanted signal. In pulse doppler 
applications, spurious signals are of much greater concern because they can create 
components with doppler at a variety of frequencies that may not be rejected by the 
clutter filtering.
Signal-to-Noise-and-Distortion Ratio (SINAD).  SINAD is the rms signal ampli -
tude to the rms value of the A/D converter noise plus distortion. The noise plus dis -
tortion includes all spectral components, excluding DC and the fundamental up to 
the Nyquist frequency. SINAD is a useful figure of merit for A/D converters, but in 
digital receiver applications, where the worst spurious components may fall outside of 
the bandwidth of interest, it is not necessarily a key discriminator between competing 
converters for a specific application.
Effective Number of Bits (ENOB).  The term effective number of bits  is often used 
to state the true performance of an A/D converter and has been stated in the literature11 
in terms of SINAD and SNR, as given below. Consequently, it is important to differ -
entiate between definitions when using this term.
 Neff = [SINAD (dB) − 1.76 ] / 6.02 (6.38)
 Neff = [SNR(dB) − 1.76 ] / 6.02 (6.39)
Two Tone Intermodulation Distortion (IMD).  Two tone intermodulation distortion 
is also important in receiver applications. Testing is performed with two sinusoidal input 
signals of unequal frequency and levels set such that the sum of the two inputs does 
not exceed the A/D converter full-scale level. Similar to IMD for amplifiers, the most 
significant distortion is usually second order or third order IMD products. However, 
due to the complex nature of the distortion mechanism in A/D converters, the amplitude 
of IMD products is not easily characterized and predicted by the measurement of an 
input intercept point.
Input Noise Level and Dynamic Range.  Accurate setting of the A/D con -
verter input noise level relative to the A/D converter noise is critical to achieving the 
optimum trade-off between dynamic range and system noise floor. Too high a level 
of noise into the A/D converter will degrade the available dynamic range; too low 
a level will degrade the overall system noise floor. Sufficient total noise should be 
applied to the A/D converter input to randomize or “whiten” the quantization noise. 
ch06.indd   38 12/17/07   2:03:52 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Radar Receivers  RADAR RECEIVERS  6.396x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 6
This can be achieved with rms input noise ( s ) equal to the LSB step size ( Q). In 
addition, the input noise power spectral density should be sufficient to minimize the 
impact on system noise due to the A/D converter noise. The impact on overall noise 
due to quantization noise is given by7
 s
s s2
22
2112= +Q   s≥Q (6.40)
Typical operating points are in the range of s /Q  = 2 to s /Q = 1, with corresponding 
noise power degradation due to quantization of 0.09 dB and 0.35 dB, respectively.
In practice, the SNR of high-speed converters is often such that the noise of the 
A/D converter is significantly greater than the theoretical quantization noise. In addi -
tion, the A/D converter input signal noise bandwidth may be significantly less than the 
Nyquist bandwidth. This is a significant factor in IF sampling applications where the 
IF noise bandwidth is often less than ¼ of the Nyquist bandwidth. In this case, the total 
input and A/D converter noise must be sufficient to whiten the quantization noise, and 
the power spectral density of the input noise should be sufficiently greater than that of 
the A/D converter, as illustrated in Figure 6.16. In some cases, out-of-band noise may 
be added to whiten the A/D converter quantization noise and spurious signals. The out-
of-band noise is then rejected through subsequent digital signal processing.
The resulting SNR of the system after digital filtering with receiver bandwidth BR 
and sample rate fs is given by
 SNR dB SNR dBf
BS
RSYS ADC ( ) ( ) log = +

− 1021010 l log101+( )S SIF ADC (6.41)
where SIF/SADC is the ratio of noise power spectral density of the A/D converter input 
signal to the power spectral density of the A/D converter. The degradation of overall 
sensitivity due to the A/D converter noise is given by
 L(dB) = 10log10(1 + SADC/SIF) (6.42)FIGURE 6.16  IF sampling noise spectrumsBIF
0 fS fS/2 fIFAliased Input 
NoiseAmplitude
FrequencyBRA/D Con verter 
Quantization Noise 
+ Additional Inter nal 
NoiseA/D Con verter 
Input Noise
10 log(SIF | SADC)(dB)
ch06.indd   39 12/17/07   2:03:57 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Radar Receivers 6.40  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 6
A/D Converter Sample Clock Stability.  The stability of the sample clock is 
critical to achieving the full capability of an A/D converter. Sample-to-sample varia -
tion in the sampling interval, called aperture uncertainty  or aperture jitter , produces 
a sampling error, proportional to the rate of change of input voltage. For a sinusoidal 
input signal, the SNR due to aperture uncertainty alone is given by12
 SNR(dB) = −20log10(2p fs j) (6.43)
where f = input signal frequency
 sj = rms aperture jitter
Similarly, close-to-carrier noise sidebands present on the sample clock signal are 
transferred to sidebands on the sampled input signal, reduced by 20log10 (f / fS) dB. 
For example, in an IF sampling application with the input signal ¾ of the sample 
frequency, the close-to-carrier phase noise of the sample clock will be transferred to 
the output of the A/D converter output data signal, reduced by 2.5 dB.
6.11 DIGITAL RECEIVERS
The availability of high-speed analog-to-digital converters capable of direct sam -
pling of radar receiver IF signals has resulted in the almost universal adoption of 
digital receiver architectures over conventional analog I/Q demodulation. In a digital 
receiver, a single A/D converter is used to digitize the received signal, and digital 
signal processing is used to perform the downconversion to I and Q baseband sig -
nals. Continuing advances in sampling speeds are leading to sampling at increasing 
frequencies, sometimes eliminating the need for a second downconversion, with the 
possibility approaching of sampling directly at the radar RF frequency. The benefits 
of IF sampling over conventional analog I/Q demodulation are
● Virtual elimination of I and Q imbalance
● Virtual elimination of DC offset errors
● Reduced channel-to-channel variation
● Improved linearity
● Flexibility of bandwidth and sample rate
● Tight filter tolerance, phase linearity, and improved anti-alias filtering
● Reduced component cost, size, weight, and power dissipation
The use of a high IF frequency is desirable as it eases the downconversion and 
filtering process; however, the use of higher frequencies places greater demands on 
the performance of the A/D converter. Direct RF sampling is considered the ulti -
mate goal of digital receivers, with all the tuning and filtering performed through 
digital signal processing. The advantage being the almost complete elimination of 
analog hardware. However, not only does the A/D converter have to sample the 
RF directly, but unless it is preceded by tunable RF preselector filters, the A/D 
converter input must have the dynamic range to handle all of the signals pres -
ent in the radar band simultaneously. Generally, the interference power entering  
the A/D converter is proportional to the bandwidth of components in front of the 
ch06.indd   40 12/17/07   2:03:57 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Radar Receivers  RADAR RECEIVERS  6.416x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 6
A/D converter. The required A/D converter SNR to avoid saturation on the interfer -
ing signals is given by
 SNR d BP C
NI
ADC
ADC( ) log =

10102
 (6.44)
where
 PI = interference power at A/D converter input
 C = crest factor
 NADC = A/D converter noise
The crest factor is the peak level that can be handled within the full-scale range 
of the A/D converter relative to the rms interference level. It is set to achieve a  
sufficiently high probability that full-scale will not be exceeded. For example, with 
gaussian noise, a crest factor of 4 sets the peak level at the 4 s level (12 dB above 
the rms level) with a probability of 0.999937 that the full-scale is not exceeded on 
each A/D converter sample.
Setting the system noise level power spectral density into the A/D converter R(dB) 
above the A/D converter noise gives
 R dBf N
B Ns( ) log =

 10210SYS
IF ADC (6.45)
where
 NSYS = system noise at A/D converter input in bandwidth BIF
Combining Eq. 6.43 and 6.44 gives the required SNR as
 SNR d BP C B
f NR dBI
SADCIF
SYS( ) log ( =

+ 102
102
) ) (6.46)
The generation of baseband I and Q signals from the IF sampled A/D converter data 
is performed using digital signal processing and can be implemented through a variety 
of approaches.7 Two approaches are described next.
Digital Downconversion.  The digital downconversion approach is shown in 
Figure 6.17. The signal is sampled by the A/D converter, frequency shifted to base -
band, low-pass filtered, and decimated to produce I/Q digital data. The signal spectrum 
at each stage of the process is shown in Figure 6.18. In continuous-time (Fig. 6.18 a), 
frequency is in hertz and is represented by F. In discrete-time (Fig. 6.18 b–e), fre -
quency is in radians per sample and is represented by w. The spectrum of the ana -
log input signal x(t) is shown in Figure 6.18 a, with the signal spectrum centered at  
F0 hertz. The signal is sampled by the A/D converter at frequency Fs, producing the 
time sequence x n( ) and frequency spectrum X( )ω centered at frequency w0 with the 
image centered at −w0. The A/D converter output signal is then frequency shifted by 
complex multiplication with the reference signal ej n−w0, corresponding to a reference 
signal rotating at w0 radians per sample, centering the signal spectrum X( )w about 
zero. The unwanted image is re-centered at −2w0 if w0 > p /2 or −2w0 + 2p  if w0 ≤ p /2. 
The unwanted image is then rejected using the FIR filter with impulse response h(n) 
producing output ˆ( )x n with spectrum ˆ( )Xw. Finally, the sample rate is reduced by 
ch06.indd   41 12/17/07   2:04:09 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Radar Receivers 6.42  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 6
selecting every Dth sample. Provided the filter response H(w) has sufficient rejection 
for frequencies | | /w≥πD, there will be negligible aliasing and loss of information in 
the decimation process.FIGURE 6.17  Digital downconversion architectureI(m)
A/D x(t)~x(n)
xI(n)h(n) D
cos(w0n)sin(w0n)
h(n) DFIR Filter with 
Impulse Response h(n)
y(m) = I(m) + jQ(m)
Q(m)Decimation by  Factor D 
y(m) = x(mD)^
x(n)^
FIGURE 6.18  Digital downconversion spectra
B
F0−F0F
w0w~X(w)X(F)
−w0 p −p
2p − 2w0w
p
wX(w)
Y(w)p
w
p−p
−p
−p(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)X(w)
^
ch06.indd   42 12/17/07   2:04:13 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Radar Receivers  RADAR RECEIVERS  6.436x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 6
Hilbert Transformer.  An alternative digital receiver architecture is shown in 
Figure 6.19 with the relevant signal spectra shown in Figure 6.20. The A/D converter 
output signal x n( ) is processed using a Hilbert transformer comprising FIR filters 
h1(n) and h2(n), where the frequency responses are given by
  | ( )|| ( )| H H1 2 1 w w≈ ≈    | |w w− ≤0B (6.47)
and
 H j B
j B1( )
( ), | |
, | |w
H ww -w
w w20
0+≈− ≤
≤ (6.48)
The filter outputs form the desired complex valued signal x n( ) centered at frequency 
w0, while rejecting the image centered at −w0. The final stage is to perform a frequency 
shift and sample rate reduction by decimating the signal by selecting every Dth sample. FIGURE 6.19  Hilbert transformer architectureD
Q(m)A/D y(m) = I(m) + jQ(m)
DI(m)
x(t) x(n)
h2(n)h1(n)
~x(n)
FIGURE 6.20  Spectra of Hilbert transformer receiver
B
F0 −F0F
w0w~X(w)X(F)
−w0 p −p
w0 = 2pk|DwX(w)
p
wY(w)
p−p
−p(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)k = 1, 2, …
ch06.indd   43 12/17/07   2:04:21 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Radar Receivers 6.44  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 6
If the spectrum of X( )w is centered at frequency w0 = 2p k / D, k = 1,2,.., the decimation 
will center the spectrum Y(w) about zero. Provided the filter responses have sufficient 
rejection for frequencies |w  ± w0 | ≥ p / D, there will be negligible aliasing and loss of 
information in the decimation process.
I/Q Errors.  Digital I and Q generation does not produce signals without error, 
as is often stated, but instead allows the generation of these signals with errors 
that are sufficiently small to be considered negligible. The primary cause of the 
imbalance is the non-ideal filter responses. An infinite number of taps would be 
required to set the passband gain to unity and the stopband gain to zero; however, 
for most applications, sufficient processing resources are available to reduce the 
errors to insignificant levels. Finite length words for filter coefficients produce non-
ideal filter responses. The effect on passband response is typically negligible, but 
significant distortion of the filter stopband rejection can occur, potentially effecting 
I/Q balance.
Digital Downconversion Using Multirate Processing and Polyphase 
filters.  There are many variations to these basic approaches, and specific imple -
mentations often utilize efficient approaches that minimize the number of calcula -
tions required with emphasis on reducing the number of multiplications, as these 
require significantly more resources than additions. Two techniques used to reduce 
the FIR filter processing burden are multirate processing and polyphase filtering.13 
The digital downconversion approach is shown in Figure 6.21 using multirate pro -
cessing. The first FIR filter h1(n) provides sufficient reduction to prevent aliasing 
in the first decimation by factor D1, the second filter h2(n) provides alias reduction 
for the second decimation and can also be used to correct passband ripple or droop 
due to filter h1(n). For large decimation factors, more than two decimation stages 
may be used.
A popular filter for the first stage is the Cascaded Integrator Comb14 (CIC) decima -
tor filter that can be implemented without multipliers. These filters provide rejection in 
the stopband at frequencies that alias to the passband as a result of decimation. Since 
they provide relatively large passband droop and slow stopband rejection, they are 
generally followed by a FIR filter that can both correct for CIC passband droop and 
FIGURE 6.21  Digital downconversion architectureA/DD1
x(t)
Q(k)I(k) h1(n)
cos(w0n)D1sin(w0n)
)(~nx
h1(n)h2(m)
h2(m)D2D2
ch06.indd   44 12/17/07   2:04:24 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Radar Receivers  RADAR RECEIVERS  6.456x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 6
provide the desired stopband rejection response. The kth order CIC filter for decima -
tion factor D has transfer function:
 H z zz
zKm
mDKDK
( )=

=−
−

−
=− −
− ∑
01
11
1 (6.49)
A polyphase filter is a filter bank that splits an input signal into D sub-band filters 
operating at a sample rate reduced by a factor D, providing a computationally efficient 
approach to performing the FIR filtering followed by decimation in a digital receiver. 
Rather than computing all the filter output samples and only using every Dth sample, 
the polyphase approach calculates only those that are actually used. Figure 6.22 and 
Eq. 6.50 define how the filter with impulse response h(n), followed with decimation 
by factor D, is implemented in a polyphase structure. The input signal x(n) is divided 
into D parallel paths by the “commutator,” which outputs samples in turn, rotating in a 
counterclockwise direction, to each of the FIR filters operating at the reduced sample 
rate. The outputs of the FIR filters are summed to produce the output signal y(m). This 
architecture is beneficial as it provides an approach that can be easily parallelized at 
rate FX / D.
 pk(n) = h(k + nD)   k = 0, 1, …, D - 1 (6.50)
           n = 0, 1, …, K - 1 
Multi-Channel Receiver Considerations.  Modern radar systems rarely con -
tain only one receiver channel. Monopulse processing, for example, requires two 
or more channels to process sum and delta signals. Additionally, the channels 
must be coherent, synchronized in time, and well matched in phase and amplitude. 
Digital beamforming systems require a large number of channels with similar 
coherence and synchronization requirements and tight phase and amplitude track -
ing. The coherence requirement dictates the relative phase stability of LO and 
A/D converter clock signals used for each receive channel. The time synchroniza -
tion requirement means that A/D converter clock signals for each channel must 
be aligned in time and decimation must be performed in phase for each channel. 
Phase and amplitude imbalance between channels is a result of variation in the 
FIGURE 6.22  Decimation using polyphase filters+
+
+ p2(n)p1(n)p0(n)
x(n)y(m)
Rate = FXRate = FX/D x(nD)
x(nD−1)
x(nD−2)
x(nD−D+1)pD−1(n)
ch06.indd   45 12/17/07   2:04:26 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Radar Receivers 6.46  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 6
analog circuitry prior to and within the A/D converter. If the IF filter bandwidth is 
wide relative to the digital receiver bandwidth, the majority of the error between 
channels will be a constant gain and phase offset across the receiver bandwidth. 
A single correction, applied as a complex multiplication of I/Q data, will cor -
rect for gain and phase offsets and is usually adequate to provide the required 
channel tracking for monopulse applications. When tighter channel tracking is 
required, such as for sidelobe canceler or digital beamforming applications, FIR 
filter equalization can be used to correct for frequency dependent variations across 
the receiver bandwidth. FIR filter equalization can be performed either subse -
quent to the FIR filtering used to generate I/Q data or combined with these filters. 
It should be noted that to correct for frequency and phase variation across the 
receiver bandwidth requires FIR filters with complex coefficients, applied equally 
to I and Q data. Real value coefficients typically used in I/Q generation provide fil -
ter responses symmetrical about zero frequency. Correction of IF filter frequency 
response errors will, in general, require asymmetric frequency correction that can 
only be provided at baseband using complex coefficients.
The degree to which these multiple receiver channels must track depends on the 
specific system requirements. Although modern systems typically include some 
degree of channel equalization function, a reasonable degree of tracking between gain, 
phase, and timing must be maintained in order to allow the channel equalization to 
be performed using digital signal processing without consuming excessive processing 
resources. Also, the relative stability of the radar channels as a function of time and 
temperature must be such that the corrections can maintain adequate tracking during 
the time between calibration intervals.
Digital beamforming systems require a large number of receiver channels. In these 
applications, size, weight, power dissipation, and cost are critical considerations.
6.12  DIPLEX OPERATION
Diplex Benefits.  Diplex operation consists of two receivers that simultaneously 
process returns from transmissions on different frequencies. Transmissions are usu -
ally non-overlapping in time to avoid a 6 dB increase in peak power and because most 
radar transmitters are operated in saturation and simultaneous transmission at multiple 
frequencies would produce significant transmitted intermodulation distortion.
The sensitivity benefit of diplex operation for detecting Swerling 1 targets is shown 
in Figure 6.23, increasing with probability of detection ( PD). For example, diplex oper -
ation achieves 90% PD with 2.6 dB less total signal power than simplex. Assumptions 
made in deriving Figure 6.23 are
1. Returns on the two frequencies are added in voltage or power prior to the detection 
decision rather than being subjected to individual detection decisions.
2. Separation of the two frequencies is sufficient to make their Swerling 1 fluctua -
tions independent. This depends on the physical length of the target in the range 
dimension lR. The minimum frequency separation is 150 MHz/ lR (m); 25 MHz 
will maintain the diplex benefit for aircraft longer than 6 m (20 ft).
3. Equal energy is transmitted in both pulses. A 2:1 imbalance sacrifices only 0.2 dB 
of the benefit at 90% PD.
ch06.indd   46 12/17/07   2:04:27 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Radar Receivers  RADAR RECEIVERS  6.476x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 6
Both linear and asymmetrical nonlinear FM produce a range error as a function 
of doppler due to range-doppler coupling. These range displacements must match in 
the two receivers to within a small fraction of the compressed pulse width; otherwise, 
the sensitivity benefits of diplex operation are not fully achieved and range accuracy 
may be degraded.
Implementation . Diplex operation can be implemented with a variety of 
approaches. Complete replication of the receiver channels is typically the most expen -
sive approach and may be required if the frequency separation is very large. A more 
common approach is separation of the frequencies at the first IF, as this does not 
require complete duplication of the RF front end or the first LO signal. Separate sec -
ond local oscillator or I/Q demodulator reference frequencies can be used to process 
the different frequencies. With the use of high-speed IF sampling, it is also possible 
to digitize both signals simultaneously using a single A/D converter and perform the 
frequency separation using digital signal processing. Whichever approach is used, care 
must be taken to provide adequate dynamic range and linearity to prevent intermodula -
tion distortion from degrading radar performance.
6.13 WAVEFORM GENERATION  
AND UPCONVERSION
The exciter function of waveform generation and upconversion is often tightly coupled 
with the receiver function. The requirement for coherence between the receiver and 
exciter is a major factor for this tight coupling and the use of the same LO frequen -
cies within the receiver and exciter usually results in hardware savings. Similar to 
the migration to digital receiver architectures, the exciter functionality is increasingly 
being implemented using digital approaches.FIGURE 6.23  Diplex operation improves the sensitivity of the receiver
ch06.indd   47 12/17/07   2:04:27 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Radar Receivers 6.48  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 6
Direct Digital Synthesizer.  The Direct Digital Synthesizer15 (DDS) produces 
waveforms using digital techniques and provides significant improvements in stabil -
ity, precision, agility, and versatility over analog techniques. The main limitations are 
the noise and spurious signals as described below. The general DDS architecture is 
shown in Figure 6.24. The double accumulator architecture, comprising the frequency 
and phase accumulators, enables the generation of CW, linear FM (chirp), nonlinear 
(piece-wise linear) FM, frequency modulated, and phase modulated waveforms. CW 
waveforms are generated by applying a constant frequency word (digitized frequency 
representation) input to the phase accumulator, creating a linear phase sequence that is 
first truncated then input to a cosine (or sine) lookup table that outputs the correspond -
ing sinusoidal signal value to the digital-to-analog (D/A) converter. The frequency 
resolution is dependent on the number of bits and the clock frequency of the phase 
accumulator. The output frequency is given by
 fM ff
N outclk=2φ (6.51)
where
 Mf = frequency word, input to the phase accumulator
 fclk = phase accumulator clock frequency
 Nf = number of bits of phase accumulator
Linear FM or chirp waveforms are generated by applying a constant chirp slope 
word (digitized chirp slope representation) to the input of the frequency accumulator, 
creating a quadratic phase sequence at the output of the phase register. Piecewise-linear 
or nonlinear FM waveforms can be generated by applying a time-varying slope input 
to the frequency register. The frequency accumulator may be clocked either at the same 
rate as the phase accumulator or at a sub-multiple to provide finer chirp slope resolu -
tion. If both accumulators are clocked at the same rate, the chirp slope is given by
 ∆
∆f
tM fS
Nfout clk=2
2 (6.52)
where
 MS = chirp slope word, input to the frequency accumulator
 Nf = number of bits of frequency accumulator
Frequency modulated and phase modulated waveforms can be created applying time-
varying inputs to the frequency modulation (FM) and phase modulation (PM) ports.
FIGURE 6.24  Direct Digital Synthesizer block diagramCosine 
LookupDACPhase 
Truncation+ +
fclkfclkPhase 
Accumulator
+
fclkFrequency 
Accumulator
+MfNf
MSNf
FM 
InputPM 
InputfoutPhase 
RegisterFrequency 
Register
ch06.indd   48 12/17/07   2:04:31 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Radar Receivers  RADAR RECEIVERS  6.496x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 6
Errors such as phase truncation and D/A converter quantization and nonlinearity 
produce spurious signals due to their deterministic nature. The spurious signal fre -
quencies generated by a DDS can be readily predicted16 as they are a function of the 
digital architecture and programmed frequency. The spurious signal magnitudes are 
less predictable as the magnitudes of the dominant spurious signals are a function of 
the D/A converter nonlinearity.
When generating CW waveforms, the D/A converter sequence repeats after 2K 
samples where 2K equals the greatest common divisor of 2Nf and Mf . Thus, spurious 
signals occur only at frequencies:
  fnf
K spurclk=2, n = 0,1,2,... (6.53)
In the extreme case where Mf does not contain the factor 2, this creates a spurious fre -
quency spacing of fclk / 2Nf. For example, with a 1 GHz clock and 32-bit frequency accu -
mulator, the spurious frequency spacing can be as close as 0.23 Hz. In most cases, such 
closely spaced spurious signals cannot be differentiated from noise. Conversely, choos -
ing values of Mf that contain large factors of 2N creates relatively large spurious spacing. 
For example, using a 640 MHz clock allows the generation of frequencies at multiples of 
10 MHz with all the spurious components occurring at multiples of 10 MHz.
The impact of DDS spurious signals on radar performance depends on the nature 
of the spurious signals and the type of radar processing involved. Applications using 
chirp waveforms with large time-bandwidth products are typically less sensitive to 
DDS spurious signals since the DDS spurious signals chirp at a different rate to that 
of the wanted signal. The spurious signals are thus rejected during pulse compression. 
In pulse doppler applications, spurious signals are of much greater concern; however, 
their effects can be mitigated by ensuring that the DDS generates each waveform from 
the same initial conditions. Restarting the DDS for every pulse guarantees that the 
same digital sequence will be input to the D/A converter for each pulse. The result is a 
DDS output that only contains spectral components at multiples of the PRF .
Techniques have been proposed or incorporated into DDS devices that reduce spu -
rious levels by adding dithering to reduce the effects of limited word lengths. The 
effect of these techniques and the spurious signals that they are designed to mitigate 
should be considered carefully as they may be detrimental to radar performance. The 
use of dithering will randomize the spurious signal, resulting in pulse-to-pulse varia -
tions in the digital sequence output to the D/A converter, a result that is undesirable in 
pulse doppler applications.
Truly random errors are not generated by the digital portion of the DDS. The only 
nondeterministic errors are a result of the D/A converter performance in the form of 
internal clock jitter or additive thermal noise and the effect of the phase noise on the 
input clock signal.
Internal D/A converter clock jitter produces phase modulation of the output signal 
proportional to the output frequency. Similarly, phase noise present on the clock input 
signal is transferred to the output signal, reduced by 20log10 (fout / fclk) dB. D/A con -
verter additive thermal noise is independent of output signal frequency and produces 
both phase and amplitude noise components.
Frequency Multipliers.  Frequency multiplication allows signals to be increased 
in both frequency and bandwidth. Frequency multiplication is frequently used in gen -
erating local oscillator CW frequencies where all frequencies are typically based on a 
ch06.indd   49 12/17/07   2:04:32 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Radar Receivers 6.50  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 6
low frequency reference. They also provide the capability for wide-bandwidth chirp 
waveforms that cannot be generated directly using available DDS devices. Frequency 
multipliers operate as shown in Figure 6.25, by multiplying the phase of the input 
signal by the integer multiplication factor M. Since in practice the process typically 
includes some form of limiting, the output amplitude A t( ) generally has a lower ampli -
tude variation than the input signal amplitude A(t).
Because the multiplication process multiplies up the variations in the signal phase 
by factor M, input phase noise and spurious phase modulations are increased by 
20 log10(M) dB. Similarly, variations in the phase of the signal as a function of fre -
quency are multiplied up. These variations are produced during signal filtering and 
may be present on the input signal. For chirp waveforms, this can result in a significant 
degradation in the range sidelobe performance. Also, practical multipliers may have a 
significant phase variation as a function of frequency. If the input signal phase distor -
tion is given by
 f b( ) sin fnf
B=

2π (6.54)
where
 b = peak phase ripple
 B = waveform input bandwidth
 n = number of cycles of phase ripple
the resulting output distortion produces range sidelobes at times ±n / MB and magnitude 
20 log10(Mb / 2) relative to the main beam of the target return. As an example, generat -
ing a chirp waveform that has range sidelobes better than 35 dB using an ×8 multiplier 
requires that the input signal has less than 0.5 degrees peak-peak phase ripple.
Frequency multipliers can be implemented using a variety of techniques, such as 
using step recovery diode multipliers or using phase locked loops. Where wide percent -
age bandwidth and fast settling is required, the most common technique is to cascade a 
series of frequency doublers or low order multipliers. This type of multiplier can also 
provide near ideal phase noise performance, but has significant phase modulation as a 
function of frequency as it contains filters between each stage of multiplication.
Predistortion of the multiplier input waveform is often used in order to produce 
wideband chirp waveforms with low range sidelobe performance. If the multiplier 
is characterized by an output phase distortion as a function of input frequency given 
by f (w), then a predistortion of the input signal by phase −f (w)/M will equalize the 
multiplier response. Predistortion can be performed very precisely by adding the phase 
modulation via the DDS that is used to generate the chirp waveform.
Waveform Upconversion.  Upconversion of exciter waveforms is similar to 
downconversion within the receiver. Also, similar practical considerations of mixer 
spurious and image rejection apply. The one significant additional challenge is the 
rejection of the LO leakage. LO rejection typically imposes tight filter rejection 
requirements on the RF filters, and for wide-tunable ranges, switched filters are 
often required.FIGURE 6.25  Frequency multiplier operationxM A(t)ej[wt+f(t)]A(t)ejM[wt+f(t)]
ch06.indd   50 12/17/07   2:04:36 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Radar Receivers  RADAR RECEIVERS  6.516x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 6
REFERENCES
 1. M. I. Skolnik, Radar Handbook , 2nd Ed., New York: McGraw Hill, 1990.
 2. M. I. Skolnik, Radar Handbook , 1st Ed., New York: McGraw Hill, 1971.
 3. R. E. Watson, “Receiver dynamic range: Part 1,” Watkins Johnson Company, Technical Note, 
vol. 14, no 1, January/February 1987.
 4. B. C. Henderson, “Mixers in microwave systems (Part 1),” Watkins Johnson Company, Technical 
Note, vol.17, no.1, January/February 1990.
 5. D.W. Allan, H. Hellwig, P. Kartaschoff, J. Vanier, J. Vig, G. M. R. Winkler, and N. F. Yannoni, 
“Standard terminology for fundamental frequency and time metrology,”  in Proceedings of the 
42nd Annual Frequency Control Symposium , Baltimore, MD, June 1–4, 1988, pp. 419–425.
 6. P. Renoult, E. Girardet, and L. Bidart, “Mechanical and acoustic effects in low phase noise piezo -
electric oscillators,” presented at IEEE, 43rd Annual Symposium on Frequency Control, 1989.
 7. M. A. Richards, Fundamental of Radar Signal Processing , New York: McGraw-Hill, 2005.
 8. A. I. Zverev, Handbook of Filter Synthesis , New York: John Wiley and Sons, Inc., 1967.
 9. A. V . Oppenheim and R. W. Schafer, Discrete-Time Signal Processing , New York: Prentice Hall 
Inc., 1989.
10. W. Kester, The Data Conversion Handbook , London: Elsevier/Newnes, 2005.
11. R. H. Walden, “Analog-to-digital converter survey and analysis,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas 
in Communications , vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 539–550, April 1999.
12. B. Brannon, “Sampled systems and the effects of clock phase noise and jitter,” Analog Devices 
Inc., Application Note, AN-756, 2004.
13. J. G. Proakis and D. G. Manolakis, Digital Signal Processing , 2nd Ed., New York: Macmillan, 
1992.
14. E. B. Hogenauer, “An economical class of digital Filters for decimation and interpolation,” IEEE 
Transactions on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing , vol. ASSP-29, no. 2, April 1981.
15. J. Tierney, C. M. Radar, and B. Gold, “A digital frequency synthesizer,” IEEE Trans . AU-19, 
pp.43–48, March 1971.
16. H. T. Nicholas III and H. Samueli, “An analysis of the output spectrum of direct digital frequency 
synthesizers in the presence of phase-accumulator truncation,” Proceedings. 41 st annual Frequency 
Control Symposium , USERACOM, Ft. Monmouth, NJ, May 1987, pp. 495–502.
ch06.indd   51 12/17/07   2:04:37 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Radar Receivers 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 6  
blind folio 6.52
ch06.indd   52 12/17/07   2:04:37 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Radar Receivers 