2.16x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 2 MTI Radar William W. 
Shrader Shrader Associates, Inc. Vilhelm Gregers-Hansen Naval Research Laboratory 2.1 PREFACE This chapter addresses surface-based radars; e.g., radars sited on land or installed  onboard ships. For airborne radar, rapid platform motion has a significant effect on  design and performance as discussed in Chapters 3, 4, and 5 of this Handbook. 
The fundamental theory of moving target indication (MTI) radar, as presented in the  previous editions of the Radar Handbook , has not materially changed. The performance  of MTI radar, however, has been greatly improved, due primarily to four advances:   (1) increased stability of radar subsystems such as transmitters, oscillators, and receivers;   (2) increased dynamic range of receivers and analog-to-digital converters (A/D);   (3) faster and more powerful digital processing; and (4) better awareness of the limita - tions, and therefore requisite solutions, of adapting MTI systems to the environment. These  four advances have made it practical to use sophisticated techniques that were considered,  and sometimes tried, many years ago but were impractical to implement. 
Examples of  early concepts that were well ahead of the available technology were the velocity indicat - ing coherent integrator (VICI)1 and the coherent memory filter (CMF).2,54 Although these improvements have enabled much improved MTI capabilities,  there are still no perfect solutions to all MTI radar problems, and the design of an MTI  system is still as much of an art as it is a science. Examples of current problems include  the fact that when receivers are built with increased dynamic range, system instability  limitations will cause increased clutter residue (relative to system noise) that can cause  false detections. Clutter maps, which are used to prevent false detections from clutter  residue, work quite well on fixed radar systems, but are difficult to implement on, for  example, shipboard radars, because as the ship moves, the aspect and range to each  clutter patch changes, creating increased residues after the clutter map. 
A decrease in  the resolution of the clutter map to counter the rapidly changing clutter residue will  preclude much of the interclutter visibility (see later in this chapter), which is one of  the least appreciated secrets of successful MTI operation. MTI radar must work in the environment that contains strong fixed clutter, birds, bats  and insects, weather, automobiles, and ducting. The ducting, also referred to as anoma - lous propagation , causes radar returns from clutter on the surface of the Earth to appear Chapter 2 ch02.indd   1 12/20/07   1:42:40 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Source: RADAR HANDBOOK. 2.2 RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 2 at greatly extended ranges, which exacerbates the problems with birds and automobiles,  and can also cause the detection of fixed clutter hundreds of kilometers away. 
The clutter models contained in this chapter are approximations of the types of  clutter that must be addressed. The exact quantitative data, such as precise spectrum  and amplitude of each type of clutter, or the exact number of birds or point reflectors  (e.g., water towers or oil-well derricks) per unit area, is not important, because the MTI  radar designer must create a robust system that will function well no matter the actual  deviation from the clutter models of real clutter encountered. MTI radars may use rotating antennas or fixed apertures with electronic beam scan - ning (phased arrays). 
The rotating antenna may use a continuous waveform processed  through either a finite-impulse-response (FIR) filter or an infinite-impulse-response  (IIR) filter, or may use a batch waveform consisting of coherent processing intervals  (CPIs) that are processed in FIR filters in groups of N pulses. (The term MTI filter ,  used often in this chapter, is a generic nomenclature that includes both FIR and IIR  filters.) The finite time-on-target dictates the need for a batch processing approach. There are many different combinations of successful MTI techniques, but any spe - cific MTI radar system must be a total concept based on the parameters of the antenna,  transmitter, waveform, signal processing, and the operational environment. 
A number of plan-position-indicator (PPI) photographs, taken years ago, are  included in this chapter to provide a better understanding of the environment that is  difficult to appreciate with many modern radars. These photographs show MTI opera - tion, birds, insects, and ducting better than can be described in words. Attention is especially directed to the final section in this chapter, “Considerations  Applicable to MTI Radar Systems,” which provides insight into both hardware and  environmental lessons learned during many decades of MTI system development. 
2.2 INTRODUCTION TO MTI RADAR The purpose of MTI radar is to reject returns from fixed or slow-moving unwanted  targets, such as buildings, hills, trees, sea, and rain, and retain for detection or display  signals from moving targets such as aircraft. Figure 2.1 shows a pair of photographs  of a PPI, which illustrates the effectiveness of such an MTI system. The distance from  the center to the edge of the PPI is 40 nmi. 
The range marks are at 10-nmi intervals.  The picture on the left is the normal video display, showing mainly the fixed-target  returns. The picture on the right shows the effectiveness of the MTI clutter rejection. 
 The camera shutter was left open for three scans of the antenna; thus, aircraft show up  as a succession of three returns. MTI radar utilizes the doppler shift imparted on the  reflected signal by a moving target to distinguish moving targets from fixed targets. In  a pulse radar system, this doppler shift appears as a change of phase of received sig - nals between consecutive radar pulses. 
Consider a radar that transmits a pulse of radio  frequency (RF) energy that is reflected by both a building (fixed target) and an airplane  (moving target) approaching the radar. The reflected pulses return to the radar a certain  time later. The radar then transmits a second pulse. 
The reflection from the building  occurs in exactly the same amount of time, but the reflection from the moving aircraft  occurs in less time because the aircraft has moved closer to the radar in the interval  between transmitted pulses. The precise time that it takes the reflected signal to reach  the radar is not of fundamental importance. What is significant is whether the time  changes between pulses. 
The time change, which is of the order of a few nanoseconds  for an aircraft target, is determined by comparing the phase of the received signal with  ch02.indd   2 12/20/07   1:42:41 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	MTI Radar. 
 MTI RADAR  2.36x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 2 the phase of a reference oscillator in the radar. If the target moves between pulses, the  phase of the received pulse changes. Figure 2.2 shows a simplified block diagram of a coherent MTI system. 
The RF  oscillator feeds the pulsed amplifier, which transmits the pulses. The RF oscillator FIGURE 2.1 (a) Normal video and ( b) MTI video: These PPI photographs show how effective an MTI  system can be. Aircraft appear as three consecutive blips in the right-hand picture because the camera shutter  was open for three revolutions of the antenna. 
The PPI range is 40 nmi. FIGURE 2.2  Simplified block diagram of a coherent MTI system TRANSMITTERRF OSCILLA TOR DUPLEXER PHASE DETECT ORANTENNA + MTI FIL TERT Σ −Bipolar Video ch02.indd   3 12/20/07   1:42:44 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. 
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	MTI Radar. 2.4 RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 2 is also used as a phase reference for determining the phase of reflected signals. The  phase information is stored in a pulse repetition interval (PRI)) memory for the period,  T, between transmitted pulses, and is subtracted from the phase information from the  current received pulse. 
There is an output from the subtractor only when a reflection  has occurred from a moving target. Moving-Target Indicator (MTI) Block Diagram . A more complete block dia - gram of an MTI radar is shown in Figure 2.3. 
This block diagram is representative of a  modern air traffic control radar operating at L or S band with a typical interpulse period  of 1–3 ms and a CW pulse length of a few µs when the transmitter employs a vacuum  tube amplifier such as, for example, a klystron, or tens of µs for a pulse compression  waveform when a solid-state transmitter is used. The received signals are amplified in  a low-noise amplifier (LNA) and subsequently downconverted through one or more  intermediate frequencies (IF) by mixing with stable local oscillators. A bandpass IF  limiter at the receiver output protects the A/D converter from damage but also prevents  limiting from taking place in the A/D converter. 
In early MTI systems, the IF lim - iter served the purpose of deliberately restricting the dynamic range to reduce clutter  residues at the MTI output. The received signals are then converted into in-phase and  quadrature components (I & Q) through the A/D converter, either using a pair of phase  detectors or through direct sampling as discussed in Section 2.13. The in-phase (I) and  quadrature (Q) outputs are a function of the amplitude and phase of the IF signal and  FIGURE 2.3  MTI system block diagram I QTRANSMITTERWAVEFORM GENERA TOREXCITER RECEIVERIF LIMITER VIDEO OUTPUTTIMING & CONTR OLLNADUPLEXER MIXERANTENNA A/D CONVER- SIONMAGNI- TUDEVIDEO INTE- GRATORTΣ+− TΣ+ − MTI FIL TER ch02.indd   4 12/20/07   1:42:45 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	MTI Radar.  MTI RADAR  2.56x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 2 have in the past been referred to as bipolar videos, but a more correct terminology is  that of the complex envelope of the received signals. 
An example of such a bipolar  video (either I or Q), received from a single transmitted pulse and including both clut - ter and point targets is sketched in Figure 2.4. If the point targets are moving, the super - imposed bipolar video from several transmitted pulses would appear as in Figure 2.5. The remainder of the block diagram in Figure 2.3 shows the remaining process - ing required so that the moving targets can be displayed on a PPI or sent to an auto - matic target extractor. 
The in-phase and quadrature outputs from the A/D converter are  stored in a PRI memory and also subtracted from the output from the previous trans - mitted pulse. This implementation represents the most basic two-pulse MTI canceler  implemented as a finite impulse response (FIR) filter. As discussed in Section 2.8, MTI  cancelers used in practical radars use higher-order filters, and these are sometimes  implemented as infinite impulse response (IIR) filters. 
The output of the subtractors is again a bipolar signal that contains moving tar - gets, system noise, and a small amount of clutter residue if the clutter cancellation  is not perfect. The magnitudes of the in-phase and quadrature signals are then com - puted ( )I Q2 2+  and converted to analog video in a digital-to-analog (D/A) con - verter for display on a PPI. The digital signal may also be sent to automatic target  detection circuitry. 
The dynamic range (peak signal to rms noise) is limited to about  20 dB for a PPI display. A key distinction, sometimes lost in the complexities of the systems that follow, is  that an MTI radar system eliminates fixed clutter because the phase of signals returned  from consecutive transmitted pulses do not (appreciably) change. The fixed clutter is  removed after as few as two transmitted pulses by the subtraction process described FIGURE 2. 
4  Bipolar video: return from single transmitter pulse POINT TARGETS FIGURE 2.5  Bipolar video: from consecutive transmitted pulses ch02.indd   5 12/20/07   1:42:48 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	MTI Radar. 
2.6 RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 2 above, even if each transmitted pulse has frequency modulation or other artifacts, as  long as the artifacts are identical pulse-to-pulse. The point being made here is that MTI  system operation does not depend on the frequency resolution of targets from clutter.  To provide frequency resolution would require much longer dwell times on target than  two pulses separated by a single PRI. 
Such extended dwell times is one of the funda - mental characteristics of the moving target detector. Moving-Target Detector (MTD) Block Diagram.  Progress in digital signal  processing technology by the mid-1970s made it practical for the first time to improve  the performance of the classical MTI by (1) implementing a parallel bank of FIR filters  to increase the output signal-to-clutter ratio and (2) replacing the IF limiter used in  the past with a high-resolution clutter map for effective false alarm control. 
Although  these concepts had been explored many years earlier using the Velocity Indicating  Coherent Integrator (VICI)1 or the Coherent Memory Filter (CMF)2,54 to implement a  doppler filter bank, and storage tubes or magnetic drum memory to implement clut - ter maps, it was the work at the MIT Lincoln Laboratory to improve the performance  of airport surveillance radars that resulted in one of the first working examples of  what has become known as the Moving Target Detection (MTD) radar.3,4 The theory  and expected benefits of this approach were described in two reports in 1972,5 which  provided the mathematical foundation for the understanding and the practical imple - mentation of the MTD concept. The predicted subclutter visibility improvement for the ASR-7 airport surveillance  radar, when the three-pulse MTI processor was replaced by the second-generation  MTD II processor, is shown in Figure 2.6. FIGURE  2.6 Subclutter visibility comparison between three-pulse MTI and MTD II PERCENT  OF DETECTION = 50 Pfa = 1 x 10−5 ASR–7/MTD II ASR–7/MT ISCV IN dB 010203040 0 0.2 0.4 0 .6 0.8 1.0 RADIAL  VELOCITY/BLIND SPEED ch02.indd   6 12/20/07   1:42:50 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	MTI Radar.  MTI RADAR  2.76x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 2 Part of this improvement was due to the use of doppler filter designs utilizing  eight pulses, instead of just three for the MTI, and part was the result of allowing a  larger dynamic range into the MTD processor and relying on a clutter map to suppress  residues in regions where the clutter level exceeds the maximum clutter suppression  of the radar. 
The block diagram of the MTD II signal processor is shown in Figure 2.7. Parallel  processing channels are provided for moving targets through the two-pulse MTI can - celer and the seven-pulse doppler filter bank, and for nonmoving (“zero-doppler”)  targets through the 0-Velocity Filter. A high resolution clutter map is built from the  “0-Velocity Filter” output, and the clutter map content is used for thresholding in the  two processing channels. 
In the moving target channel, the threshold obtained from  the clutter map content is scaled down by the expected clutter attenuation. In addition  to the clutter map thresholding, conventional constant false alarm rate thresholding  is utilized against moving clutter (rain) and interference. Detection outputs, named  Primitive Target Outputs , are obtained through this processing for each individual pro - cessed CPI. 
Figure 2.8 shows the additional processing required to generate centroided  Target Reports and the processing of these Target Reports to obtain track outputs for  display to the air traffic control system. The MTD radar transmits a group of N pulses at a constant pulse repetition fre - quency (PRF) and at a fixed radar frequency. This set of pulses is usually referred  to as the coherent processing interval (CPI)  or pulse batch. 
 Sometimes one or two  additional fill pulses are added to the CPI in order to suppress range-ambiguous clutter  returns, as might occur during periods of anomalous propagation. The returns received  during one CPI are processed in the bank of N-pulse finite-impulse-response (FIR)   filters. Then the radar may change its PRF and/or RF frequency and transmit another  CPI of N pulses. 
Since most search radars are ambiguous in doppler, the use of different   FIGURE  2.7 Block diagram of MTD II signal processor ch02.indd   7 12/20/07   1:42:51 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	MTI Radar. 
2.8 RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 2 PRFs on successive coherent dwells will cause the target response to fall at different  frequencies of the filter passband on the successive opportunities during the time on  target, thus eliminating blind speeds. Each doppler filter is designed to respond to targets in nonoverlapping portions  of the doppler frequency band and to suppress sources of clutter at all other doppler  frequencies. This approach maximizes the coherent signal integration in each doppler  filter and provides clutter attenuation over a larger range of doppler frequencies than  achievable with a single MTI filter. 
Thus, one or more clutter filters may suppress  multiple clutter sources located at different doppler frequencies. An example of the  use of an MTD doppler filter bank against simultaneous land and weather clutter (Wx)  is illustrated in Figure 2.9. It can be seen that filters 3 and 4 will provide significant  suppression of both clutter sources. 
The output of each doppler filter is envelope-detected and processed through a cell- averaging constant false alarm rate (CA-CFAR) processor to suppress residues due to  range-extended clutter that may not have been fully suppressed by the filter . As will be discussed later in this chapter, the conventional MTI detection system  often relies on a carefully controlled dynamic range in the IF section of the radar  receiver to ensure that clutter residues at the MTI output are suppressed to the level of  the receiver noise or below. This limited dynamic range, however, has the undesirable  effect of causing additional clutter spectral broadening, and the achievable clutter sup - pression is consequently reduced.FIGURE  2.8 Processing of Primitive Target detections and Radar Target Reports in MTD IIPRIMITIVE TARGETS INPUT BUFFER ADAPTIVE AMPLITUDE CENSORING PRIMITIVESTHRESHOLDING CENSORING MAP UNIT CORRELA TION OUTPUTS DISPLA YABLE TARGET REPOR TS AND WEA THER CONT OURSINTERPOLA TION ADAPTIVE AMPLITUDE CENSORING RADAR TARGET REPOR TS TO SURVEILLANCE PROCESSORTARGET LO AD/ FALSE-ALARM CONTR OLLERRADAR TARGET REPOR TS ASSOCIA TE TRACKS WITH TARGET REPOR TS UPDATE TRACKS WITH NEW DA TA OR COAST OR DR OP TRACKCORRELA TE TARGET REPOR TS WITH TRACK DISPLA Y TARGET REPOR T IF ASSOCIA TED WITH TRACK IN ST ATE 3 INITIA TE TRACK FILES WITH UNUSED TARGET REPOR TS DISPLA YASSOCIA TION CORRELA TION TRACK UPD ATE TARGET OUTPUT/DISPLA Y 2-LEVEL WEA THER CONT OURS OUTPUT TRACK INITIA TION ch02.indd   8 12/20/07   1:42:52 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	MTI Radar.  MTI RADAR  2.96x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 2 In the MTD, one or more high-resolution clutter maps are used to suppress the  clutter residues, after doppler filtering, to the receiver noise level (or, alternatively, to  raise the detection threshold above the level of the residues). 
This in turn eliminates  the need to restrict the IF dynamic range, which can then be set to the maximum value  supported by the A/D converters. Thus, a system concept is obtained that provides  a clutter suppression capability that is limited only by the radar system stability, the  dynamic range of the receiver-processor, and the spectrum width of the returns from  clutter. The concept of a high-resolution digital clutter map to suppress clutter residues  is related to earlier efforts to construct analog area MTI systems using, for example,  storage tubes. 
Also included in the MTD implementation are “…area thresholds maintained  to control excessive false alarms, particularly from bird flocks. Each area of about  16 square nautical miles is divided into several velocity regions. The threshold in each  region is adjusted on each scan to achieve the desired limit on false alarms without  raising the threshold so high that small aircraft are prevented from being placed in  track status.”4 In subsequent sections, specific aspects of the design of an MTD system will be  discussed. 
Thus, Section 2.10 will discuss the design and performance of doppler  filter banks, and a detailed discussion of clutter maps will follow in Section 2.15.  Since the original work at Lincoln Laboratory to develop the MTD concept, a number  of MTD systems have been developed that vary in detail from the original concept.  Also, the use of clutter maps to inhibit excessive clutter residue, instead of control - ling clutter residue with intentionally restricted dynamic range, has been adopted in  newer MTI systems. 
2.3 CLUTTER FILTER RESPONSE   TO MOVING TARGETS The response of an MTI system to a moving target varies as a function of the target’s  radial velocity. For the MTI system described above, the response, normalized for  unity noise power gain, is shown in Figure 2.10. Note that there is zero response  to stationary targets and also to targets at ±89, ±178, ±267,. 
knots. These speeds,  known as blind speeds,  are where the targets move 0, ½, 1, 1½, . wavelengths  between consecutive transmitted pulses. 
This results in the received signal being FIGURE  2.9 Suppression of multiple clutter sources by using a doppler filter bank ch02.indd   9 12/20/07   1:42:52 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	MTI Radar. 
2.10  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 2 shifted precisely 360° or multiples thereof between pulses, which results in no change  in the phase-detector output. The blind speeds can be calculated  V kfkBr= ⋅⋅= ±λ 20 1 2, , ,... (2.1) where VB is the blind speed, in meters per second; l is the transmitted wavelength, in  meters; and fr is the PRF, in hertz. 
A convenient set of units for this equation is  V kf fkBr(knots GHz)., , ,... = ⋅⋅= ±0 290 1 2 (2.2) where fr is the PRF (pulse repetition frequency) in hertz; and fGHz is the transmitted  frequency, in gigahertz. Note from the velocity response curve that the response to  targets at velocities midway between the blind speeds is greater than the response for  a normal receiver. 
The abscissa of the velocity response curve can also be labeled in terms of doppler  frequency. The doppler frequency of the target can be calculated from  fV dR=⋅2 λ (2.3) where fd is the doppler frequency, in hertz; VR is the target radial velocity, in meters  per second; and l is the transmitted wavelength, in meters. It can be seen from  Figure 2.10 that the doppler frequencies for which the system is blind occur at mul - tiples of the pulse repetition frequency. 
2.4 CLUTTER CHARACTERISTICS The clutter suppression needed from an MTI or MTD radar depends on the character - istics of the clutter environment, the specific radar target detection requirements, and  the major radar design characteristics such as range and angle resolution as well as  operating frequency. The ability of a radar to suppress clutter is determined by radar FIGURE 2.10  MTI system response for 1300-MHz radar operating at 400 pps ch02.indd   10 12/20/07   1:43:00 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. 
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	MTI Radar.  MTI RADAR  2.116x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 2 waveform and processing, available dynamic range, and the overall radar system sta - bility. In this section, some of the key characteristics of radar clutter and its influence  on MTI radar design will be summarized. 
Spectral Characteristics.  The spectral characteristics of clutter, as discussed in  most references, implicitly assumes that the radar transmits a continuous, constant PRF  waveform. The spectrum of the output of a pulsed transmitter using a simple rectangular  pulse of length t  is shown in Figure 2.11. 
The spectral width of the (sin U)/U envelope  is determined by the transmitted pulse width, the first nulls occurring at a frequency of   f0 ± 1/t. The individual spectral lines are separated by a frequency equal to the PRF.  These spectral lines fall at precisely the same frequencies as the nulls of the MTI filter  response shown in Figure 2.10. 
Thus, a canceler will, in theory, fully reject clutter with  this ideal line spectrum. In practice, however, the spectral lines of the clutter returns are  broadened by motion of the clutter (such as windblown trees or waves on the sea surface)  as well as by the motion of the antenna in a scanning radar or due to platform motion.  This spectral spread prevents perfect cancellation of clutter in an MTI system. 
Often, in the past, the assumption has been made that the returns from clutter have a  gaussian power spectral density, which may be characterized by its standard deviation  sv and mean velocity mv, both in units of m/s.6 Using this gaussian model, each of the  spectral lines in Figure 2.11 will be convolved with the spectrum:  S ff m G ff f( ) exp( )= ⋅ −−   1 2 22 2πσ σ (2.4) This spectrum is normalized to have unit power, and the velocity parameters have  been converted to Hz using the doppler equation:  mm fv fv=⋅ =⋅2 2λ σσ λ (2.5) FIGURE 2.11  Pulse transmitter spectrum ch02.indd   11 12/20/07   1:43:07 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	MTI Radar. 
2.12  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 2 where l is the radar wavelength. Instead of the standard deviation σf, the power spec - trum can be defined by its 3-dB width B3, as follows:  S f Bf BG( )ln( )expln( )=⋅ ⋅⋅ −⋅ ⋅  4 2 4 2 32 32π (2.6) where  Bf f 3 8 2 23548 = ⋅ ⋅ = ⋅ ln( ) . σ σ  (2.7) The early experimental results that led to the general adoption of the gaussian model6  were obtained with radar equipment of limited stability, and the spectral shape was  sometimes derived from video spectra computed using square-law detected returns. 
By the mid-1970s, new experimental results were obtained,7,8 which showed that  the spectrum fall-off was slower than predicted by the gaussian model. This led to  new models based on polynomial representations of the spectrum using an equation  of the form:  S fnn Bf Bn POLY( )sin | |=⋅   ⋅⋅ +  π π3 31 12 (2.8) The spectrum shape is determined by the integer n, which must be 4 or larger in  order for the two first spectral moments to exist. A typical value used for this spectrum  is n = 4 which results in  S fBf BPOLY( ) | |=⋅⋅ +  8 1 12 3 34 π  (2.9) The relationship between the standard deviation of this spectrum and its 3-dB width  is given by  Bf 32= ⋅σ (2.10) A potential issue with this model is that the skirts of the spectrum correspond to  very large radial velocity components of the clutter internal motion. 
During the 1990s, an extensive measurement program conducted at the MIT Lincoln  Laboratory obtained more accurate data on land clutter spectra using a very stable  radar equipment and data was collected under well-controlled conditions.9 These new  results led to the following exponential model for land clutter spectra:  S fB BfEXP( )ln( )expln( )| | = ⋅ −⋅⋅  2 2 2 3 3 (2.11) Here the 3-dB spectrum width can be expressed in terms of the standard deviation by  Bf f 3 2 2 09803 = ⋅ ⋅ = ⋅ ln( ) . σ σ  (2.12) ch02.indd   12 12/20/07   1:43:26 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. 
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	MTI Radar.  MTI RADAR  2.136x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 2 Billingsley9 used the parameters g, vc, and b , respectively, for the gaussian, the  polynomial, and the exponential spectrum models. In addition, the exponent n is needed  for the polynomial model. 
These parameters were chosen to simplify the functional  description of the spectrum shape. In terms of the standard deviation of the spectral  width in m/s, these parameters can be defined as follows:  g v=⋅1 22σ- gaussi anspect r rum -polynomia l spectru vc v = ⋅ ⋅ 2 2ln( ) σ m m with 4 2- en v= =βσx xpone ntial spectrum (2.13) Assuming a value of σv=0 25. m/s, corresponding to windy condition, the three- clutter spectrum models are compared in Figure 2.12. 
As noted in Billingsley9 all three  models are in reasonable agreement for the upper 30–40 dB of their range but differ  appreciably at the lower values of clutter spectral density. Estimated values of the spectral spread of land clutter from forested regions and  for different wind speeds are shown in Table 2.1. The values in the table are based  on Billingsley’s parameter b , but columns have been added with the corresponding  rms spectral spread in m/s. 
An example of a measured land clutter spectrum is shown  in Figure 2.13. The spectral shape parameter b can be estimated as the slope of the  (upper) skirt of the spectrum in dB per m/s divided by 10/ln(10). These values of   b  were added in this figure. 
FIGURE 2.12 Comparison of gaussian, exponential, and polynomial spectra for an rms  spectral spread of sv = 0.25 m/s ch02.indd   13 12/20/07   1:43:30 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	MTI Radar. 
2.14  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 2 The values of rms spectral spread of land clutter as derived from the data in  Billingsley9 agree quite well with previous studies. It can probably safely be stated  that the polynomial model of land clutter spectra is far too pessimistic at spectral  values below –40 dB and should be avoided for radar analysis requiring a large clutter  attenuation value. The case for the exponential model, as presented by Billingsley, is quite convinc - ing, and this model has been widely accepted as being the most accurate for radar  performance predictions. 
β = 4.8 β = 6.5 β = 9.7 70 dB(a) 1–2 (b) 6–7 (c) 18–20Wind (mph)LCE (7.0 km, 166 °) Forest (c) Windy Noise (b) Breezy (a) Light Air20 0 −20 −40 −60Ptot (dB) −3 −2 −1 0 1 2 3 Doppler Velocity v (m/s) FIGURE 2.13 Measured spectra of clutter from forest. Several wind  speeds and an estimated value of b  have been added. ( after J.B. 
Billingsley9  © William Andrew Publishing Inc. 2002 )TABLE 2.1 Measured Spectral Spread for Different Wind Conditions ( after J.B.Billingsley9   © William Andrew Publishing Inc. 2002 )  Wind   ConditionsWind Speed  (mph)Exponential ac Shape   Parameter b  (m/s)-1RMS Spectral   Width s v (m/s) Typical Worst Case Typical Worst Case Light air 1–7 12 — 0.12 — Breezy  7–15  8 — 0.18 — Windy 15–30     5.7 5.2 0.25 0.27 Gale force (est.) 30–60     4.3 3.8 0.33 0.37 ch02.indd   14 12/20/07   1:43:32 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	MTI Radar.  MTI RADAR  2.156x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 2 A comparison between the gaussian and the exponential models on a linear scale,  as shown in Figure 2.14, indicates that the difference in spectral width at even very  low levels (–80 dB) is no more than about a factor of 2. 
For many analyses, this would  most likely be insignificant compared to the added clutter spectral spreading caused by  scanning modulation. Thus, in many cases, the simple gaussian model can continue to  be used in MTI and MTD performance analysis. In case of doubt, the spectral spread  of the gaussian model could be doubled to assess the available mar gin. 
Nathanson and Reilly10 have shown that the clutter spectral width of rain is pri - marily due to a turbulence and wind shear (change in wind velocity with altitude).  Measurements show a typical average value of s vt = 1.0 m/s for turbulence and  s vs = 1.68 m/(s/km) for wind shear. A convenient equation is σ θvs el = ⋅ ⋅ 0 04.R  m/s   for the effect of wind shear, provided the rain fills the vertical beam. 
Here R is the  range to the weather, in nautical miles, and θel is the one-way half-power verti - cal beamwidth, in degrees. Thus, for example, s vs of rain viewed at 25 nmi with a  vertical beamwidth of 4° would be s vs = 4.0 m/s.  The total spectral spread is then  σ σ σv= + = + =vt2 vs2m/s 1 0 4 0 4 12 2. 
Rain and chaff also have an average veloc - ity, in addition to the spectral spread noted above, which must be taken into account  when designing an MTI system. The clutter spectral width in meters per second is independent of the radar frequency.  The standard deviation of the clutter power spectrum s f, in hertz, is  σσ λfv=⋅2Hz (2.14) where l is the transmitted wavelength, in meters; and s v is the clutter standard  deviation, in meters per second. 
FIGURE  2.14 Comparison of gaussian and exponential spectra on linear velocity scale ch02.indd   15 12/20/07   1:43:38 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	MTI Radar. 
2.16  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 2 Antenna scanning also causes a spread of the clutter power spectrum due to the  amplitude modulation of the echo signals by the two-way antenna pattern.11 The result - ing clutter standard deviation is  σπfr r f nf n= ⋅ = ⋅ln.20265 Hz (2.15) where fr is the PRF and n is the number of hits between the one-way 3-dB points of the  antenna pattern. This equation was derived from a gaussian beam shape but is essen - tially independent of the actual beam shape or aperture illumination function used. The clutter spectral spread due to scanning, normalized to the PRF , is  σfTn=0265. 
(2.16) where T = 1/PRF is the interpulse period. The combined spectral effects of internal clutter motion and antenna scanning modu - lation must be obtained as the convolution of the individual spectra. When both spectra  are gaussian in shape, the resulting spectrum remains gaussian with a standard deviation  that is the square-root of the sum of the squares of the individual standard deviations. 
By integrating the two-sided tails of the gaussian and exponential spectra, outside  a multiple, k, of the standard deviation of the spectra, a rough, but conservative,  estimate can be found of how wide the MTI notch must be to achieve a required  improvement factor I. Such a curve is shown in Figure 2.15 based on the clutter  spectra shown in Figure 2.14. Although this approach would only be strictly correct  for an ideal MTI filter with a step-function passband, it can serve as a preliminary  guideline for the MTI filter design. 
FIGURE  2.15 Clutter power in two-sided tails of spectrum vs. multiple of standard deviation ch02.indd   16 12/20/07   1:43:42 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. 
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	MTI Radar.  MTI RADAR  2.176x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 2 Amplitude Characteristics.  To predict the performance of an MTI system, the  power of the clutter returns with which a target must compete should be known. 
The  amplitude of the clutter returns depends on the size of the resolution cell of the radar,  the frequency of the radar, and the reflectivity of the clutter. The expected radar cross  section of clutter can be expressed as the product of a reflectivity factor and the volume  or area of the resolution cell. For surface clutter, as viewed by a surface-based radar,  σ στσ = ⋅ = ⋅ ⋅⋅⋅ A Rc c0 0 2qaz  (2.17) where σ is the average radar cross section, in square meters; Ac is the area of clutter  illuminated, in square meters; R is the range to clutter, in meters; qaz is the one-way  half-power azimuthal beamwidth, in radians; c is the speed of propagation, 300 million  m/s; t  is the half-power radar pulse length (after the matched filter), in seconds; and s 0  is the average clutter reflectivity factor, in square meters per square meter. 
For volumetric clutter, such as chaff or rain, the average cross section is  σ ητη = ⋅ = ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅⋅⋅ V R Hc cq qaz el2 (2.18) where Vc is the volume of clutter illuminated (m3) and h is the clutter reflectivity factor  (m2/m3). The volume Vc is computed from the height extent of clutter H (meters), the  azimuth extent of the clutter R⋅qaz, and the radar range resolution cell t. If the clutter  completely fills the vertical beam, then H R= ⋅qel, where qel is the elevation beam - width. 
R is the range to the clutter (meters) and c is the speed of propagation. It should be noted that for land clutter s 0 can vary considerably from one resolu - tion cell to the next. A typical distribution of s 0, taken from Barton,12 is shown in  Figure 2.16. 
Typical values for s 0 and h  from the same reference are given in Table 2.2.  Additional results for clutter reflectivity are found in Billingsley.9 TABLE 2. 2 Typical Values of Clutter Reflectivity* ClutterReflectivity, l, m h, (m)–1ConditionsBand  l, mClutter Parameters for   Typical Conditions L  0.23S  0.1C  0.056X  0.032 Land (excluding    point clutter) σλ0000032=. 
(worst 10 percent ). s 0 dB –29 –25 –22 –20 Point clutter s = 104 m2. s  m2 104104104104 Sea (Beaufort scale    KB, angle E)s 0 dB = −64 + 6KB +  (sin E)dB − l dBSea state 4   (6-ft waves,  rough); E = 1°s 0 dB –51.5 –47.5 –44.5 –42.5 Chaff (for fixed    weight per unit    volume)h = 3 × 10−8 l . 
h  m–1 7 × 10–93 × 10–91.7 × 10–910–9 Rain    (for rate r mm/h)h = 6 × 10−14 r1.6 l−4 (matched  polarization)r = 4 mm/h h  m–1 2 × 10–105 × 10–95 × 10–85 × 10–7 *From Barton12 ch02.indd   17 12/20/07   1:43:53 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	MTI Radar. 
2.18  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 2 Because of the imprecision in predicting s 0 and h, these equations do not include  an antenna beam-shape factor. For the measurement of the reflectivity of rain, refer - ences on radar meteorology present more precise equations.13 In addition to distributed clutter targets, there are many targets that appear as  points,  such as radio towers, water tanks, and buildings. These point targets typically  have a radar cross section of 103 to 104 m2 with typical densities as shown later in  Figure 2.18. 
This graph is from Billingsley9 and the additional points indicated by an  asterisk are from Ward.14 Figure 2.17 a shows a PPI display of all clutter observed with a surveillance radar with  a 1.3° by 2- µs resolution cell in the mountainous region of Lakehead, Ontario, Canada.  (The PPI range is set for 30 nmi.) Clutter that exceeds the minimum-discernible signal  (MDS) level of the radar by 60 dB is shown in Figure 2.17 b.FIGURE 2.16  Distribution of reflectivity for ground clutter typical of heavy clutter at S band  (after D. K. 
Barton12 © IEEE 1967 ) FIGURE 2.17  PPI display, 30-nmi range of ( a) all clutter at a mountainous site and ( b) clutter that exceeds  the system noise level by 60 dB ch02.indd   18 12/20/07   1:43:55 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	MTI Radar. 
 MTI RADAR  2.196x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 2 Note that the clutter in Figure 2.17 b is very spotty in character, including the  strong fixed-point targets and returns from extended targets. It is significant that the  extended targets are no longer very extended. The face of a mountain at 10 mi from  5 to 7 o’clock is only a line. 
If the MTI system were incapable of displaying an air - craft while it was over the mountain face, it would display the aircraft on the next scan  of the antenna because the aircraft would have moved either farther or nearer. The  PPI does not have a resolution that approaches the resolution of the signal processing  circuits of this radar. Thus, the apparent extended clutter has many weak areas not  visible in these photographs, where targets could be detected by virtue of an MTI  radar’s interclutter visibility (defined in Section 2.5). 
2.5 DEFINITIONS The IEEE Standard Radar Definitions15 provide useful definitions for many of the  quantities needed to quantify MTI and MTD performance, but in some cases, the  vagueness of the original definition and the lack of distinction between performance  against distributed clutter versus point clutter returns have led to ambiguous interpre - tations of several terms. In this section, the major definitions will be reviewed and  annotated to attempt to clarify some of these potential ambiguities. For each term, the  IEEE definition, when available, will be quoted along with a subsequent discussion. 
Improvement Factor  The IEEE definition of Improvement Factor reads: moving-target-indication (MTI) improvement factor:  The signal-to-clutter power ratio at  the output of the clutter filter divided by the signal-to-clutter power ratio at the input to the  clutter filter, averaged uniformly over all target radial velocities of interest. Synonym: clutter  improvement factor.FIGURE  2.18 Typical densities of point clutter scatterers ( after J.B. Billingsley9  © William Andrew Publishing Inc. 
2002 ) Ward Model Urban (1 Site;  179 km2) Mountains (1 Site;  58 km2) Rural (Aggregate of 5 Sites; Various Terrain Types; 2,087 km2) Receiv er Saturation RCS (m2)10010−410−310−210−1100101102103104 101102103104105Number of cells per km2 with RCS > Abscissa ch02.indd   19 12/20/07   1:43:56 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	MTI Radar. 
2.20  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 2 This definition assumes that clutter is distributed homogeneously across many  range cells. In this case, the above definition is equally valid before and after pulse  compression. Against point clutter this definition only applies after pulse compression  and may result in a different value of the improvement factor. 
The real difficulty with  this definition is, however, the lack of a precise definition of the doppler velocity inter - val, which is to be used for the required “uniform” averaging. Originally, this averag - ing was assumed to involve multiple PRF intervals based on classical low PRF radars  using a single MTI filter. It was for this reason that the MTI Improvement Factor defi - nition (I) provided in the 2nd edition of this Radar Handbook  used the noise gain of  the doppler (MTI) filter as the normalizing factor. 
The increased use of pulse doppler  filter banks in modern radar has, however, led to a use of the IEEE definition where  the averaging of the signal-to-clutter ratio improvement is performed only across a  narrow region around the peak of the doppler filter response. In this case, the coherent  integration gain of the doppler filter is automatically added to the conventional MTI  improvement factor value and much better radar performance is indicated. Since a definition of clutter suppression is often needed, which quantifies the inher - ent radar stability limitations, apart from any additional coherent gain, it is sometimes  preferable to use the IEEE definition of clutter attenuation. 
In this chapter, improvement  factor  and clutter attenuation  will be used synonymously. When the coherent gain of the  doppler filter is included, the term signal-to-clutter ratio  improvement will be used. Clutter Attenuation  The IEEE definition reads clutter attenuation (CA):  In moving-target indication (MTI) or doppler radar, the ratio of  the clutter-to-noise ratio at the input to the processor, to the clutter-to-noise ratio at the out - put. 
Note:  In MTI, a single value of CA will be obtained, while in doppler radar the value  will generally vary over the different target doppler filters. In MTI, CA will be equal to MTI  improvement factor if the targets are assumed uniformly distributed in velocity. See also:  MTI  improvement factor. 
Here, it will be assumed that “processor” refers to the MTI filter or a single doppler  filter in a pulse doppler filter bank. Based on this definition, the clutter attenuation is  given by  CAP PP P= ⋅CIN COUTNOUT NIN (2.19) where PCIN and PCOUT are the clutter power at the input and output of the MTI filter,  respectively, and PNIN and PNOUT are the corresponding noise powers. As noted in the  IEEE definition, the value of CA will most likely differ from filter to filter in a doppler  filter bank due to specific clutter and filter response characteristics. 
In the discussion above, the assumption was implicitly made that clutter returns are  stationary and distributed in range. The above definitions will be equally valid before  and after pulse compression. For a single piece of point clutter, as often used in actual  radar stability measurements, the definition of clutter attenuation would have to be  changed as follows to provide identical results: clutter attenuation (CA), point clutter:  In moving-target indication (MTI) or Doppler radar,  the ratio of the total energy in the received point clutter return at the input to the processor,  to the total energy in the point clutter residue at the output of the processor, multiplied by the  noise gain of processor. 
ch02.indd   20 12/20/07   1:43:58 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	MTI Radar. 
 MTI RADAR  2.216x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 2 The clutter attenuation against point clutter based on this definition will be the same  before or after pulse compression and will also be identical to the value of CA obtained  against distributed clutter with identical spectral characteristics. For the practical measurement of CA against a single piece of point clutter (i.e.,  corner reflector), the total energy must be integrated, per the above definition, at the  input and output of each doppler filter. The calculation of the energy is best performed  prior to pulse compression since the precise duration of the uncompressed pulse, and  therefore the integration window, is accurately known. 
If done after pulse compres - sion, uncertainties in the integration of energy may arise due to the transient response  of the pulse compression filter. Signal-to-Clutter Ratio Improvement ( ISCR) For a system employing mul - tiple doppler filters, such as the MTD, each doppler filter will also have a coher - ent gain, GC(  f ), which at the filter peak has a value GC,max. The coherent gain of  a doppler filter is equal to the increase in signal-to-thermal-noise ratio between  the input and the output of the filter due to the coherent summation of individual  target returns. 
Again these coherent gain values would usually differ from filter to  filter due to potentially different doppler filter characteristics. These coherent gain  values will include the filter mismatch loss but not the straddling losses between  adjacent filters. The product of the clutter attenuation, CAi, and the coherent gain,  GCmax, i, for the i’th doppler filter becomes the definition of the signal-to-clutter ratio  (SCR) improvement:  I C A Gi i C i SCR, max, = ⋅  (2.20) This quantity was not included in the IEEE Dictionary,15 but the following defini - tion is commonly used: signal-to-clutter ratio improvement: ( ISCR): The ratio of the signal-to-clutter ratio obtained  at the output of the doppler filter bank to the signal-to-clutter ratio at the input to the filter bank  computed as a function of target doppler frequency. 
This definition does not include any doppler averaging across the individual  filters, and the definition does not provide a single figure of merit for a radar dop - pler processor because each filter may have different values of clutter attenuation  and coherent gain. Since each doppler filter has a coherent gain that is a function of target doppler, an  average value of signal-to-clutter improvement can be defined by averaging all filters  over its respective range of target dopplers:  If fCA G f df CA G f NC ff C f SCR=−⋅ ⋅ + ⋅ ∫ 1 00 0 1 1 01 , , ( ) ( ) 1 12 11 1f N C N fdf CA G f N∫⋅ + + ⋅− − −.............. ( ),f fN df ∫⋅             (2.21) The specific frequencies could logically be chosen as the crossover between indi - vidual doppler filters. 
This calculation will now include the effect of a target doppler  ch02.indd   21 12/20/07   1:44:02 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	MTI Radar. 
2.22  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 2 straddling loss and would represent a single figure-of-merit for a doppler processor.  To simplify this calculation the average signal-to-clutter improvement  may be defined  as the finite sum  INCA Gi C i iN SCR= ⋅ =− ∑1 01 max, (2.22) to which the doppler straddling loss would have to be added. Subclutter Visibility (SCV)  The IEEE definition of subclutter visibility is Subclutter visibility: The ratio by which the target echo power may be weaker than coincident  clutter echo power and still be detected with specified detection and false-alarm probabilities. 
 Note:  Target and clutter powers are measured on a single pulse return and all target velocities  are assumed equally likely. The subclutter visibility (SCV) of a radar system is a measure of its ability to detect  moving-target signals superimposed on clutter signals. A radar with 20 dB SCV can  detect an aircraft flying over clutter whose signal return is 100 times stronger. 
Note that  it is implicitly assumed in the above definition that signal and clutter are both observed  after pulse compression. The SCV of two radars cannot necessarily be used to compare  their performance while operating in the same environment, because the target-to-clutter  ratio seen by each radar is proportional to the size of the radar resolution cell and may  be a function of frequency. Thus, a radar with a 10- µs pulse length and a 10° beamwidth  would need 20 dB more subclutter visibility than a radar with a 1- µs pulse and a 1°  beamwidth for equal performance in a distributed clutter environment. 
The subclutter visibility of a radar, when expressed in decibels, is less than the  improvement factor by the clutter visibility factor Voc (see definition below). Interclutter Visibility (ICV)  The IEEE definition is interclutter visibility:  The ability of a radar to detect moving targets that occur in resolution  cells among patches of strong clutter; usually applied to moving target indication (MTI) or  pulsed-Doppler radars. Note:  The higher the radar range and/or angle resolution, the better the  interclutter visibility. 
The interclutter visibility (ICV) of a radar is a measure of its capability to detect  targets between points of strong clutter by virtue of the ability of the radar to resolve  the areas of strong and weak clutter. A radar with high resolution makes available  regions between points of strong clutter where the target-to-clutter ratio will be suf - ficient for target detection even though the SCV of the radar (based on average clutter)  may be relatively low. To achieve ICV , a mechanism must be furnished to provide  CFAR operation against the residue from strong clutter. 
This CFAR is provided in  older MTI system by IF limiting and, in the MTD implementation, through the use of  high-resolution clutter maps. A quantitative definition of interclutter visibility has not  yet been formulated. Filter Mismatch Loss  The IEEE definition is filter mismatch loss:  The loss in output signal-to-noise ratio of a filter relative to the signal- to-noise ratio from a matched filter. 
ch02.indd   22 12/20/07   1:44:04 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	MTI Radar. 
 MTI RADAR  2.236x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 2 The maximum signal-to-noise ratio available from an N-pulse filter is N times  the signal-to-noise ratio of a single pulse, assuming all pulses have equal ampli - tude. When weighting is applied to reject clutter and control the filter sidelobes, the  peak output signal-to-noise ratio is reduced. The filter mismatch loss is the amount  by which the peak-output signal-to-noise ratio is reduced by the use of weighting. 
  A three-pulse MTI filter using binomial weights has a filter mismatch loss of 0.51 dB.  The mismatch loss for the binomial-weighted four-pulse canceler is 0.97 dB. Clutter Visibility Factor ( Voc) The IEEE definition is clutter detectability factor:  The predetection signal-to-clutter ratio that provides stated   probability of detection for a given false alarm probability in an automatic detection circuit. 
 Note:  In MTI systems, it is the ratio after cancellation or doppler filtering. The clutter visibility factor is the ratio by which the target signal must exceed the  clutter residue so that target detection can occur without having the clutter residue  result in false-target detections. The system must provide a threshold that the targets  will cross and the clutter residue will not cross. 
2.6 IMPROVEMENT FACTOR CALCULATIONS Using Barton’s approach,17 the maximum improvement factor I against zero-mean  clutter with a gaussian-shaped spectrum for different implementations of the finite- impulse-response binomial-weight MTI canceler (see Section 2.8) is  Ifr f12 22≈  πσ (2.23)  Ifr f24 22≈  πσ (2.24)  Ifr f364 3 2≈  πσ (2.25) where I1 is the MTI improvement factor for the single-delay coherent canceler; I2 is the  MTI improvement factor for the dual-delay coherent canceler; I3 is the MTI improve - ment factor for the triple-delay coherent canceler; sf is the rms frequency spread of  the gaussian clutter power spectrum, in hertz; and fr is the radar repetition frequency,  in hertz. When the values of sf for scanning modulation in Eq. 2.15 are substituted in  the above equations for I, the limitation on I due to scanning is  In 12 1 39≈. 
(2.26)  In 24 3 84≈. (2.27)  In 36 160≈. (2.28) ch02.indd   23 12/20/07   1:44:15 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	MTI Radar. 2.24  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 2 These relationships are shown graphically in Figure 2.19. 
This derivation assumes a  linear system. That is, it is assumed that the voltage envelope of the echo signals, as the  antenna scans past a point target, is identical to the two-way antenna voltage pattern.  This assumption of a linear system may be unrealistic for some practical MTI systems  with relatively few hits per beamwidth, however, as discussed in Section 2.11. 
The scanning limitation does not apply to a system that can step-scan, such as  a phased array. Note, however, that sufficient pulses must be transmitted to initial - ize the filter before useful outputs may be obtained. For example, with a three-pulse  binomial-weight canceler, the first two transmitted pulses initialize the canceler, and a  useful output is not available until after the third pulse has been transmitted. 
Feedback  or infinite impulse response (IIR) filters would not be used with a step-scan system  because of the long transient settling time of the filters. The limitation on I due to internal-clutter fluctuations can be determined by sub - stituting the appropriate value of sf into Eqs. 2.23 to 2.25. 
By letting sf = 2sv/l,  where sv is the rms velocity spread of the clutter, the limitation on I can be plotted  for different types of clutter as a function of the wavelength l and the pulse repetition  frequency fr. This is done for one-, two-, and three-delay binomial-weight cancelers  in Figure 2.20, Figure 2.21, and Figure 2.22. The values of VB given are the first blind  speed of the radar (or where the first blind speed VB would be for a staggered PRF  system if staggering were not used). 
The improvement factor shown in these figures  for rain and chaff is based on the assumption that the average velocity of the rain  and chaff has been compensated for so that the returns are centered in the canceler  rejection notch. Unless such compensation is provided, the MTI offers little or no  improvement for rain and chaff. Two further limitations on I are the effect of pulse-to-pulse repetition-period stag - gering combined with clutter spectral spread from scanning and internal-clutter motion. 
FIGURE 2.19  Theoretical MTI improvement factor due to scan modulation: gaussian antenna pattern: n =  number of pulses within the one-way half-power beamwidth ch02.indd   24 12/20/07   1:44:16 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	MTI Radar. 
 MTI RADAR  2.256x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 2 These limitations, plotted in Figure 2.23 and Figure 2.24, apply to all cancelers, whether  single or multiple. (The derivation of these limitations and a means of avoiding them  by the use of time-varying weights are given in “Stagger Design Procedures” in  Section 2.8.) 2.7 OPTIMUM DESIGN OF CLUTTER FILTERS The statistical theory of detection of signals in gaussian noise provides the required  framework for the optimum design of radar clutter filters. Such theoretical results  are important to the designer of a practical MTI or MTD system, in that they estab - lish upper bounds on the achievable performance in a precisely specified clutter  environment. 
It should be noted, however, that owing to the extreme variability of  the characteristics of real clutter returns (power level, doppler shift, spectrum shape,  spectral width, etc.) any attempt to actually approximate the performance of such  optimum filters for the detection of targets in clutter requires the use of adaptive  methods. The adaptive methods must estimate the unknown clutter statistics and FIGURE 2.20  MTI improvement factor as a function of the rms velocity spread of clutter for   a two-pulse binomial-weight canceler ch02.indd   25 12/20/07   1:44:16 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. 
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	MTI Radar. 2.26  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 2 subsequently implement the corresponding optimum filter. An example of such an  adaptive MTI system is discussed in Section 2.14. 
For a single radar pulse with a duration of a few microseconds, the doppler shift  due to aircraft target motion is a small fraction of the signal bandwidth, and conven - tional MTI and pulse doppler processing are not applicable. It is well known that the  classical single-pulse “matched” filter provides optimum radar detection performance  when used in a white-noise background. Against clutter returns that have the same  spectrum as the transmitted radar pulse, the matched filter is no longer optimum, but  the potential improvement in the output signal-to-clutter ratio by designing a modified  optimized filter is usually insignificant. 
When the duration of the transmitted radar signal, whether CW or a repetitive train  of N identical pulses, is comparable with or greater than the reciprocal of anticipated  target doppler shifts, the difference between a conventional white-noise matched fil - ter (or coherent integrator) and a filter optimized to reject the accompanying clutter  becomes significant. The characteristics of the clutter are characterized by the covari - ance matrix ΦC of the N clutter returns. If the power spectrum of the clutter is denoted FIGURE 2.21  MTI improvement factor as a function of the rms velocity spread of clutter for   a three-pulse binomial-weight canceler ch02.indd   26 12/20/07   1:44:17 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	MTI Radar.  MTI RADAR  2.276x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 2 SC ( f ) and the corresponding autocorrelation function is RC (ti – tj), then the elements  of ΦC are given by  Φij= −R t tC i j ( )  (2.29) where ti is the transmission time of the ith pulse. 
For example, for a gaussian-shaped  clutter spectrum we have  S f Pf f C C fd f( ) exp( )= ⋅ ⋅⋅ −− ⋅  1 2 22 2π σ σ (2.30) where PC is the total clutter power, sf is the standard deviation of the clutter spectral  width, and fd is the average doppler shift of the clutter. The corresponding autocor - relation function is  R P j fC C f d ( ) exp ( ) exp( ) τ πσ τ π τ = − − 4 22 2  (2.31) where t  is the separation in time of two consecutive clutter returns.FIGURE 2.22  MTI improvement factor as a function of the rms velocity spread of clutter for   a four-pulse binomial-weight canceler  ch02.indd   27 12/20/07   1:44:22 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. 
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	MTI Radar. 2.28  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 2 For two pulses separated in time by the interpulse period T, the complex correlation  coefficient between two clutter returns is  ρ π σ πT f d T j f T = − ( ) ⋅ − exp exp( ) 4 22 2  (2.32) The second factor in this expression represents the phase shift caused by the doppler  shift of the clutter returns. For a known target doppler shift, the received target return can be represented by  an N-dimensional vector:  s f= ⋅AS (2.33) where AS is the signal amplitude and the elements of the vector f are fi = exp [ j2pfsti]. 
 On the basis of this description of signal and clutter, it has been shown18 that the opti - mum doppler filter will have weights given by  w sC1 OPT= ⋅−Φ (2.34)FIGURE 2.23  Approximate MTI improvement factor limitation due to pulse-to-pulse repetition-period  staggering and scanning (all canceler figurations): I(dB) = 20 log [2.5 n/ (g  − 1)]; g  = maximum period/ minimum period ch02.indd   28 12/20/07   1:44:28 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	MTI Radar. 
 MTI RADAR  2.296x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 2 and the corresponding signal-to-clutter improvement is  IT T T CSCRopt opt opt opt*=⋅ w s s w w w* * Φ (2.35) where the asterisk denotes complex conjugation and superscript T is the transposition  operator. An example where the optimum performance is determined for the case of  clutter at zero doppler having a gaussian-shaped spectrum with a normalized width  of sfT = 0.1 is shown in Figure 2.25. In this case, a coherent processing interval of   CPI = nine pulses was assumed, and the limitation due to thermal noise was ignored  by setting the clutter level at 100 dB above noise. 
It should be kept in mind that Eq. 2.34 for the optimum weights will yield a dif - ferent result for each different target doppler shift, so that a large number of parallel  filters would be needed to approximate the optimum performance even when the clutter  characteristics are known exactly. As an example, the response of the optimum filter  designed for one particular target doppler frequency labeled as point A in Figure 2.25  is shown in a broken line. 
At approximately ±5% from the design doppler, the perfor - mance starts to fall significantly below the optimum.FIGURE 2.24  Approximate MTI improvement factor limitation due to pulse-to-pulse staggering  and internal-clutter motion (all canceler configurations): I(dB) = 20 log [0.33/( l − 1) (g   fr /sv)];   g  = maximum period/minimum period ch02.indd   29 12/20/07   1:44:31 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	MTI Radar. 
2.30  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 2 Also shown in Figure 2.25 is a horizontal line labeled “average SCR improve - ment.” This indicates the level corresponding to the average of the optimum SCR  curve across one doppler interval and may be considered as a figure of merit for a  multiple-filter doppler processor, somewhat analogous to the MTI improvement fac - tor defined for a single doppler filter. In Figure 2.26, the optimum average ISCR has  been computed for several different values of the CPI as a function of the normalized  spectrum width. These results may be used as a point of reference for practical doppler FIGURE 2.25  Optimum signal-to-clutter ratio improvement ISCR) for gaussian-shaped clutter  spectrum and a CPI of nine pulses; clutter-to-noise ratio, 100 dB FIGURE 2.26  Reference curve of optimum average SCR improvement for   a gaussian-shaped clutter spectrum ch02.indd   30 12/20/07   1:44:31 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	MTI Radar.  MTI RADAR  2.316x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 2 processor designs as discussed in Section 2.9. 
Note that for sfT ≈ 1 the average SCR  improvement is due only to the coherent integration of all the pulses in the CPI. An MTI filter can also be designed based on the criterion of maximizing the signal- to-clutter improvement at a specific target doppler. However, such a design will usually  provide suboptimum performance at all other target dopplers. 
The single exception is the  two-pulse MTI canceler,19 which provides optimum performance for all target dopplers. A more attractive approach for designing an optimum MTI filter is to maximize  its improvement factor (or clutter attenuation). To design an optimum MTI filter using  improvement factor as the criterion, the covariance matrix of the clutter returns, as given  by Eq. 
2.29, is again the starting point. As shown by Capon,20 the weights of the opti - mum MTI filter are found as the eigenvector corresponding to the smallest eigenvalue  of the clutter covariance matrix and the MTI improvement factor is equal to the inverse  of the smallest eigenvalue. The optimum improvement factor for the three models for  the spectrum of land clutter introduced in Section 2.4 have been computed based on this  above approach. 
For the gaussian clutter spectrum, the optimum improvement factor is shown in  Figure 2.27 as a function of the rms relative spectrum width, assuming zero mean for  the spectrum. Calculations are shown for MTI cancelers of order N = 2 through 32. For the polynomial clutter spectrum, the optimum improvement factor is shown in  Figure 2.28, again as a function of the RMS relative spectrum width assuming zero  mean for the spectrum. 
Finally, for the exponential clutter spectrum model, the optimum improvement fac - tor is shown in Figure 2.29, again as a function of the RMS relative spectrum width,  assuming zero mean for the spectrum. FIGURE  2.27 Optimum improvement factor for gaussian spectrum model ch02.indd   31 12/20/07   1:44:32 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. 
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	MTI Radar. 2.32  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 2 FIGURE 2.28  Optimum improvement factor for polynomial clutter spectrum model FIGURE  2.29 Optimum improvement factor for Billingsley’s exponential spectrum model ch02.indd   32 12/20/07   1:44:34 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. 
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	MTI Radar.  MTI RADAR  2.336x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 2 In Figure 2.30, the improvement factor of an MTI using the optimum weights  is compared with the binomial coefficient MTI for different values of the relative  clutter spectral spread and shown as a function of the number of pulses in the CPI.  These results again assume a gaussian-shaped clutter spectrum. 
For typical numbers  of pulses in the MTI (three to five), the binomial coefficients are remarkably robust  and provide a performance which is within a few decibels of the optimum. Again, it  should be noted that any attempt to implement an MTI canceler, which performs close  to the optimum, would require the use of adaptive techniques that estimate the clutter  characteristics in real time. If the estimate is in error, the actual performance may fall  below that of the binomial-weight MTI canceler. 
2.8 MTI CLUTTER FILTER DESIGN The MTI block diagrams introduced by Figures 2.2 and 2.3 and whose response was  discussed in detail in Section 2.3, considered a single-delay* canceler. It is possible  to utilize more than one delay and to introduce feedback and/or feedforward paths  around the delays to change the MTI system response to targets of different velocities.  Filters with only feedforward paths are called finite impulse response (FIR) filters,  and filters that incorporate feedback are called infinite impulse response (IIR) filters,  or recursive filters. 
Multiple-delay cancelers have wider clutter rejection notches than  single-delay cancelers. The wider rejection notch encompasses more of the clutter  spectrum and thus increases the MTI improvement factor attainable with a given  clutter spectral distribution. *  Delay is used here to represent an interpulse memory for an MTI filter. 
An FIR filter with one delay is a two-pulse  filter. For feedback (IIR) filters, it is inappropriate to call them two-pulse (or three-pulse, etc.) filters because they   require a number of pulses to reach steady-state.FIGURE  2.30  Comparison of MTI improvement factor of binomial-weight  MTI and optimum MTI against a gaussian-shaped clutter spectrum ch02.indd   33 12/20/07   1:44:34 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. 
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	MTI Radar. 2.34  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 2 A general block diagram model applicable to any MTI filter is shown in Figure 2.31.  This model has been denoted the “Direct Form 2,” or the canonical form, in the terminol - ogy survey presented in Rabiner et al.21 It can be shown that an MTI filter as shown in Figure 2.31 can be divided into a  cascade of second order sections as shown in Figure 2.32. 
When a number of single-delay feedforward cancelers are cascaded in series,  the overall filter voltage response is k2n sinn (p fdT), where k is the target amplitude,   n is the number of delays, fd is the doppler frequency, and T is the interpulse period.22  The cascaded single-delay cancelers can be rearranged as a transversal filter, and the  weights for each pulse are the binomial coefficients with alternating sign: 1, −1 for  two pulses; 1, −2, 1 for three pulses; 1, −3, 3, −1 for four pulses, and so on. Changes  of the binomial feedforward coefficients and/or the addition of feedback modify the FIGURE  2.31  Direct Form 2 or canonical form of any MTI filter design−a1 −a2−aNx(n)b1 b2 bN Z−1Z−1y(n) Z−1b0 bN−1 FIGURE  2.32 MTI shown as cascaded form of second order section: ( a) is for even order and ( b) is for  odd order with first order section at end.−a1i −a2ix(n)b2i Z−1Z−1b0 −a1K −a2Kb1K b2K Z−1Z−1y(n) Hi(z) i = 1, 2, …, K−1 HK(z)b1i (a) −a1i −a2ix(n)b1i b2i Z−1Z−1b0 −a1Kb1K Z−1y(n) Hi(z) i = 1, 2, …, K−1 HK(z) (b) ch02.indd   34 12/20/07   1:44:36 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. 
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	MTI Radar.  MTI RADAR  2.356x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 2 filter characteristics. Within this chapter, reference to binomial-weight cancelers  refers  to cancelers with the 2n sinn (p fdT) transfer function. 
The block diagram of this type of  MTI canceler is shown in Figure 2.33. Figure 2.34 to Figure 2.36 represent typical velocity response curves obtainable from  one-, two-, and three-delay cancelers. Shown also are the canceler configurations assumed,  with corresponding Z-plane pole-zero diagrams. 
The Z plane is the comb-filter equivalent  of the S plane23 with the left-hand side of the S plane transformed to the inside of the unit  circle centered at Z = 0. Zero frequency is at Z = 1 + j0. The stability requirement is that  the poles of the Z transfer function lie within the unit circle. 
Zeros may be anywhere .FIGURE  2.33  Nth order FIR MTI canceler block diagramb1 b2 bN Z−1Z−1y(n) Z−1bN−1 x(n)G FIGURE 2.34  One-delay canceler ch02.indd   35 12/20/07   1:44:38 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	MTI Radar. 
2.36  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 2 These velocity response curves are calculated for a scanning radar system with  14.4 hits per one-way 3-dB beamwidth. An antenna beam shape of (sin U)/U, termi - nated at the first nulls, was assumed. The shape of these curves, except very near the  blind speeds, is essentially independent of the number of hits per beamwidth or the  assumed beam shape. 
The ordinate labeled “response” represents the single-pulse signal-to-noise output  of the MTI receiver relative to the signal-to-noise response of a normal linear receiver  for the same target. Thus, all the response curves are normalized with respect to the  noise power gain for the given canceler configuration. The intersection at the ordinate  represents the negative decibel value of I, the MTI improvement factor for a point  clutter target processed in a linear system.FIGURE 2.35  Two-delay canceler ch02.indd   36 12/20/07   1:44:38 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	MTI Radar.  MTI RADAR  2.376x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 2 Because these curves show the signal-to-noise response for each output pulse from  the MTI canceler, the inherent loss incurred in a scanning radar with MTI processing  due to the reduction of the effective number of independent pulses integrated24 is not  apparent. 
This loss is 1.4 dB for a 3-pulse canceler and 2.1 dB for a 5-pulse canceler,  assuming a large number of pulses. If quadrature MTI channels (see Section 2.13) are  not employed, there is an additional loss of 1½ to 3 dB. The abscissa of these curves, V/VB, represents the ratio of target velocity V to the  blind speed VB = l fr /2, where l  is the radar wavelength and fr is the average PRF of  the radar. 
The abscissa can also be interpreted as the ratio of the target doppler fre - quency to the average PRF of the radar. The canceler configurations shown are not the most general feedforward, feedback  networks possible. Pairs of delays are required to locate zeros and poles elsewhere FIGURE 2.36  Three-delay canceler ch02.indd   37 12/21/07   10:16:14 AMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	MTI Radar. 2.38  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 2 than on the real axis of the Z-plane. 
In the configurations shown, the zeros are con - strained to the unit circle. To move the zeros off of the unit circle, which may be done  to control the flatness of the filter passband response, requires a configuration similar  to the elliptic filter configuration shown in Figure 2.46 later in this chapter. The triple- canceler configuration shown is such that two of the zeros can be moved around the  unit circle in the Z plane. 
Moving the zeros can provide a 4 or 5 dB increase in the MTI  improvement factor for specific clutter spectral spreads, as compared with keeping all  three zeros at the origin.25 Note the width of the rejection notches for the different binomial-weight canceler  configurations. If the −6 dB response relative to average response is used as the mea - suring point, the rejection is 24% of all target dopplers for the single canceler, 36%  for the dual canceler, and 45% for the triple canceler. Consider the dual canceler:  Eliminating 36% of the dopplers means limiting the system to a long-term average of  64% single-scan probability of detection. 
Feedback can be used to narrow the rejection  notch without much degradation of I. If feedback is used to increase the improvement  factor, the single-scan probability of detection becomes worse. Figure 2.37 shows the improvement factor limitation due to scanning for cancelers  with feedback. 
These curves were calculated assuming a (sin U)/U antenna pattern  terminated at the first nulls.  The no-feedback curves shown in Figure 2.37 are almost indistinguishable from  the theoretical curves derived for a gaussian pattern shown in Figure 2.19. (One of the  curves showing the effect of feedback on the triple canceler is not straight because two  of the three zeros are not at the origin but have been moved along the unit circle the  optimum amount for 14 hits per beamwidth. 
Thus, at 40 hits per beamwidth, these two  zeros are too far removed from the origin to be very effective.) FIGURE 2.37  Improvement factor limitation due to scanning for cancelers with feedback ch02.indd   38 12/20/07   1:44:39 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	MTI Radar. 
 MTI RADAR  2.396x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 2 In theory, it is possible to synthesize almost any velocity response curve with digi - tal filters.26 As mentioned earlier, for each pair of poles and pair of zeros on the Z  plane, two delay sections are required. The zeros are controlled by the feedforward  paths and the poles by the feedback paths. Velocity response shaping can be accomplished by the use of feedforward only  without the use of feedback. 
The principal advantage of not using feedback is the  excellent transient response of the canceler, an important consideration in a phased  array or when pulse interference noise is present. If a phased array radar should use a  feedback canceler, many pulses would have to be gated out after the beam has been  repositioned before the canceler transient response has settled to a tolerable level.  An initialization technique has been proposed27 to alleviate this problem, but it pro - vides only partial reduction in the transient settling time. 
If feedforward only is used,  only three or four pulses have to be gated out after moving the beam. The disadvan - tage of using feedforward for velocity response shaping is that an additional delay,  and therefore an additional transmit pulse, must be provided for each zero used to  shape the response. Figure 2.38 shows the velocity response and Z-plane diagram of a  feedforward-only, shaped-response, four-pulse canceler. 
Also shown are the velocity  responses of a five-pulse feedforward canceler and a three-pulse feedback canceler.  For the cancelers shown, the improvement factor capability of the three-pulse canceler  is about 4 dB better than the shaped-response four-pulse feedforward canceler, inde - pendent of clutter spectral spread. The five-pulse canceler response shown is a linear-phase28 MTI filter described by  Zverev.29 The four zeros are located on the Z-plane real axis at +1.0, +1.0, −0.3575,  and −2.7972. 
Much of the literature on filter synthesis describes linear-phase filters,  but for MTI applications linear phase is of no importance. Almost identical filter  responses can be obtained with nonlinear-phase filters that require fewer pulses, as  shown in Figure 2.38. Because only a fixed number of pulses is available during the  time on target, none should be wasted. 
Thus, one should choose the nonlinear-phase  filter that uses fewer pulses. Stagger Design Procedures.  The interval between radar pulses may be changed  to modify the target velocities to which the MTI system is blind. 
The interval may  be changed on a pulse-to-pulse, dwell-to-dwell (each dwell being a fraction of the  beamwidth), or scan-to-scan basis. Each approach has advantages. The advantages  of the scan-to-scan method are that it is easier to build a stable transmitter, and mul - tiple-time-around clutter is canceled in a power amplifier MTI system. 
The transmit - ter stabilization necessary for good operation of an unstaggered MTI is a significant  challenge. To stabilize the transmitter sufficiently for pulse-to-pulse or dwell-to-dwell  stagger operation is considerably more difficult. Typically, pulse-to-pulse staggering  is used with MTI processing, whereas dwell-to-dwell staggering is used with MTD  (filter bank) processing. 
For many MTI applications pulse-to-pulse or dwell-to-dwell staggering is pref - erable to scan-to-scan staggering.† For example, if a binomial-weighted three-pulse  canceler that has 36%-wide rejection notches is employed and if scan-to-scan pulse  staggering is used, 36% of the desired targets would be missing on each scan owing  to doppler consideration alone. This might be intolerable for some applications.  †  The choice between pulse-to-pulse staggering and dwell-to-dwell (MTD) operation is a system concept decision— both approaches have their advantages. 
For example, pulse-to-pulse staggering will not provide canceling of clutter in  the ambiguous range intervals. With dwell-to-dwell staggering, an extra transmitter pulse (also known as a fill pulse)  will enable canceling of second range interval clutter. ch02.indd   39 12/20/07   1:44:40 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	MTI Radar. 2.40  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 2 With pulse-to-pulse staggering, good response can be obtained on all dopplers of  interest on each scan. 
In addition, better velocity response can be obtained at some  dopplers than either pulse interval will give on a scan-to-scan basis. This is so  because pulse-to-pulse staggering produces doppler components in the passband  of the MTI filter. Pulse-to-pulse staggering may degrade the improvement factor  attainable, as shown in Figure 2.23 and Figure 2.24, but this degradation may not be  significant, or it can be eliminated by the use of time-varying weights as described  below. 
One further advantage of pulse-to-pulse staggering is that it may permit  eliminating the use of feedback in the cancelers (used to narrow the blind-speed  notches), which eliminates the transient settling problem of the feedback filters. The optimum choice of the stagger ratio depends on the velocity range over  which there must be no blind speeds and on the permissible depth of the first null FIGURE 2.38  Shaped-velocity-response feedforward cancelers compared with three-pulse  feedback canceler. See text for five-pulse canceler parameters. 
ch02.indd   40 12/20/07   1:44:41 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	MTI Radar. 
 MTI RADAR  2.416x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 2 in the velocity response curve. For many applications, a four-period stagger ratio is  best, and a good set of stagger ratios can be obtained by adding the first blind speed  (in V/VB) to the numbers −3, 2, −1, 3 (or 3, −2, 1, −3). Thus, in Figure 2.41‡, where  the first blind speed occurs at about V/VB = 14, the stagger ratio is 11:16:13:17§  (alternating the long and short periods keeps the transmitter duty cycle as nearly  constant as possible, as well as ensuring good response at the first null where   V = VB). 
Figures 2.39 and 2.42 show two other 4-period velocity response curves. If  using four interpulse periods makes the first null to be too deep, then five interpulse  periods may be used, with the stagger ratio obtained by adding the first blind speed  to the number −6, +5, −4, +4, +1. Figure 2.40 shows a velocity response curve for  five pulse intervals. 
The depth of the first null can be predicted from Figure 2.45,  which is discussed later. For a radar system with relatively few hits per beamwidth, it is not advantageous to  use more than four or five different intervals because then the response to an individual  target will depend on which part of the pulse sequence occurs as the peak of the beam  passes the target. Random variation of the pulse intervals is not desirable (unless used  as an electronic counter-countermeasure feature) because it permits the nulls to be  deeper than the optimum choice of four- or five-pulse intervals. 
When the ratio of pulse intervals is expressed as a set of relatively prime integers  (i.e., a set of integers with no common divisor other than 1), the first true blind speed  occurs at  V VR R R R NBN=+ + + +1 2 3 (2.36) ‡  All velocity response curves plotted herein present the average power response of the output pulses of the canceler  for the duration of the time on target for a scanning radar. If staggering were used with batch processing, such as in a  phased array, these curves would not apply for a single output. For example, if the stagger ratio was 11:16:13:17 and a  three-pulse FIR filter is used, it would be necessary to transmit six pulses, with interpulse spacings of 11:16:13:17:11  and sum the power output from the filter after the last four pulses were transmitted to get the equivalent response  shown in these curves. 
§  Note that the first differences between all combinations of the integers 11, 16, 13, and 17 are 1,2,3,4,5,6. This “perfect  difference set” for the stagger sequence is the key to the relative flatness of the response curves.FIGURE 2.39  Velocity response curve: dual canceler, no feedback, 25:30:27:31  pulse-interval ratio ch02.indd   41 12/20/07   1:44:43 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. 
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	MTI Radar. 2.42  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 2 FIGURE 2.40  Velocity response curve: three-pulse binomial canceler, 51:62:53:61:58 pulse- interval ratio FIGURE 2.41   Velocity response curve: three-pulse binomial canceler, 11:16:13:17 pulse- interval ratio FIGURE  2.42 Velocity response curve: three-pulse binomial canceler, 53:58:55:59 pulse- interval ratio. This response curve continues to V/VB = 53 with no dips below 5 dB. 
The first  blind speed is at V/VB = 56.25. ch02.indd   42 12/20/07   1:44:44 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. 
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	MTI Radar.  MTI RADAR  2.436x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 2 where ( R1, R2, R3, . ., RN) are the set of integers and VB is the blind speed correspond - ing to the average interpulse period. 
The velocity response curve is symmetrical about  one-half of the value from Eq. 2.36. Feedback and Pulse-to-Pulse Staggering. 
 When pulse-to-pulse staggering  is employed, the effect of feedback is reduced. Staggering causes a modulation of  the signal doppler at or near the maximum response frequency of the canceler. The  amount of this modulation is proportional to the absolute target doppler so that, for an  aircraft flying at VB, the canceler response is essentially independent of the feedback  employed. 
Figure 2.43 shows a plot of the effects of feedback on a dual-canceler sys - tem with 14.4 hits per beamwidth and a ratio of stagger intervals of 6:7:8. The feed - back values employed are several of those used for the unstaggered velocity response  plot in Figure 2.35. If scan-to-scan pulse-interval staggering had been used instead of  pulse-to-pulse, the no-feedback rms response for three scans at a target velocity of VB  would be −12.5 dB. 
The composite response for pulse-to-pulse staggering, however, is  only −6 dB at VB, thus illustrating the advantage of pulse-to-pulse staggering. Improvement Factor Limitations Caused by Staggering.  When pulse-to-pulse  staggering is used, it limits the attainable improvement factor owing to the unequal  time spacing of the received clutter samples. 
The curves in Figure 2.23 and Figure 2.24,  which have been referred to several times, give the approximate limitation on I caused  by pulse-to-pulse staggering and either antenna scanning or internal clutter motion.  They have been derived as explained below. A two-delay canceler will perfectly cancel a linear waveform, V(t) = c + at, if  it is sampled at equal time intervals independent of the constant c or the slope a. 
 (Additional delay cancelers perfectly cancel additional waveform derivatives; e.g., a  three-delay canceler will perfectly cancel V(t) = c + at + bt2.) A stagger system with  two pulse intervals samples the linear waveform at unequal intervals, and therefore  FIGURE 2.43  Effect of feedback on the velocity response curve: dual canceler, 6:7:8 pulse- interval ratio ch02.indd   43 12/20/07   1:44:44 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	MTI Radar. 
2.44  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 2 there will be a voltage residue from the cancelers that is proportional to the slope   a and inversely proportional to g  − 1, where g  is the ratio of the intervals. The appar - ent doppler frequency of the residue will be at one-half the average repetition rate  of the system and thus will be at the frequency of maximum response of a binomial- weight canceler. The rate of change of phase or amplitude of clutter signals in a scanning radar is  inversely proportional to the hits per beamwidth, n. 
Thus, with the use of a computer  simulation to determine the proportionality constant, the limitation on I due to stag - gering is approximately  In≈−   202 5 1log. γdB (2.37) which is plotted in Figure 2.23. These curves, which apply to all multiple-delay cancelers, give answers that are  fairly close to the actual limitation that will be experienced for most practical stagger  ratios. 
An example of the accuracy is as follows: A system with 14.4 hits per beam - width, a four-pulse binomial weight canceler, and a 6:9:7:8 pulse-interval ratio has an  improvement factor limitation of 36.5 dB due to staggering. The curve gives a limita - tion of 37.2 dB for this case. But if the sequence of pulse intervals were to be changed  from 6:9:7:8 to 6:8:9:7, the actual limitation would be 41.1 dB, which is 3.9 dB less  than that indicated by the curve. 
This occurs because the primary modulation with a  6:9:7:8 pulse-interval ratio looks like a target at maximum-response speed, whereas  the primary modulation with a 6:8:9:7 pulse-interval ratio looks like a target at one- half the speed of maximum response. Because it is desirable to average the transmitter  duty cycle over as short a period as possible, the 6:9:7:8 pulse-interval ratio would  probably be chosen for a practical system. Once Eq. 
2.37 for the limitation on I due to scanning and staggering is obtained,  it is possible to determine the limitation on I due to internal-clutter motion and stag - gering. If  nn f fr vr v= × =1 2 201325( ).πλ σλ σ (2.38) (from Eqs. 2.14 and 2.15) is substituted into Eq. 
2.37,  If fr v=−×  = 202 5 101325200 33log. .log. γλ σλr r v ( )γ σ−  1 (2.39) where l is the wavelength, fr is the average pulse repetition frequency, and sv is the  rms velocity spread of scattering elements. 
This is plotted in Figure 2.24 for rain and  for wooded hills with a 40 knot wind. This limitation on the MTI improvement factor  is independent of the type of canceler employed. Time-Varying Weights. 
 The improvement factor limitation caused by pulse-to- pulse staggering can be avoided by the use of time-varying weights in the canceler  forward paths instead of binomial weights. The use of time-varying weights has no  appreciable effect on the MTI velocity response curve. Whether the added complex - ity of utilizing time-varying weights is desirable depends on whether the stagger  ch02.indd   44 12/20/07   1:44:50 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	MTI Radar.  MTI RADAR  2.456x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 2 limitation is predominant. 
For two-delay cancelers, the stagger limitation is often  comparable with the basic canceler capability without staggering. For three-delay  cancelers, the stagger limitation usually predominates. Consider the transmitter pulse train and the canceler configurations shown in  Figure 2.44. 
During the interval TN when the returns from transmitted pulse PN are  being received, the two-delay canceler weights should be  A CT T B CN N= = = − −− −1 12 1 (2.40) and the three-delay canceler weights should be  A CT T T B C DN N N= = ++ = − = −− − −1 1 13 1 2  (2.41) These weights have been derived by assuming that the cancelers should perfectly  cancel a linear waveform V(t) = c + at, sampled at the stagger rate, independent of the  values of the constant c or the slope a. (As mentioned at the beginning of this section, a  multiple-delay canceler with binomial weights in an unstaggered system will perfectly  cancel V(t) = c + at.) The choice of A = 1 in both cases is arbitrary. In the three-delay canceler, setting   D = −1 eliminates the opportunity for a second-order correction to cancel the quadratic  term bt2, which could be obtained if D were also time-varying. 
Computer calculations  have shown that it is unnecessary to vary D in most practical systems. FIGURE 2.44  Use of time-varying weights: ( a) pulse train, ( b) two-delay canceler,  and ( c) three-delay canceler ch02.indd   45 12/20/07   1:44:54 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. 
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	MTI Radar. 2.46  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 2 Depth of First Null in Velocity Response.  When selecting system parameters,  it is useful to know the depth of the first few nulls to be expected in the velocity  response curve. 
As discussed earlier, the null depths are essentially unaffected by  feedback. They are also essentially independent of the type of canceler employed,  whether single, dual, or triple, or of the number of hits per beamwidth. Figure 2.45  shows approximately what null depths can be expected versus the ratio of maximum  to minimum interpulse period. 
2.9 MTI FILTER DESIGN FOR WEATHER RADARS MTI filters are used at the lower elevation angles in weather radars to prevent weather  estimates from being contaminated with ground clutter returns. It is, however, also  very important to preserve an accurate measurement of weather intensity and precipi - tation rate. To meet this dual objective, MTI filters with narrow fixed clutter rejection  notches and flat passbands are needed. 
Use of a very narrow clutter notch even permits  measuring weather precipitation rates with a mean radial velocity of zero, albeit with  some bias.* Such measurement is possible because weather usually has a wide spec - tral spread—typically 1 to 4 m/s—whereas fixed clutter has a much narrower spectral  spread—typically less than 0.5 m/s.FIGURE 2.45  Approximate depth of nulls in the velocity response curve for pulse-to-pulse  staggered MTI *  Bias as used herein refers to the error in measuring radar reflectivity due to the clutter notch and lack of flatness  of the MTI filters. When weather has a wide spectral spread and the clutter notch of the filters is narrow, there is  minimal measurement error induced by the MTI filters. Conversely, when the weather spectral width is narrow and  the radial  velocity of the weather is near zero, significant error in the weather reflectivity measurement will exist. 
 There are other causes of error between radar estimates of precipitation rates and rain gauge measurements that are  not addressed herein, such as the spatial and temporal distribution of rain. ch02.indd   46 12/20/07   1:44:55 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. 
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	MTI Radar.  MTI RADAR  2.476x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 2 Examples of weather radar applications for which MTI filters are used: 1. Weather Doppler Radars (NEXRAD/WSR-88)  Radars with rotating antennas that  measure precipitation rate, doppler velocity, and turbulence. 
Measures total rainfall  and provides tornado warnings. 2. Terminal Doppler Weather Radars (TDWR)  Radars with rotating antennas  designed to detect severe wind shear in aircraft approach and departure paths close  to airports. 
3. Airport Surveillance Radars  Radars with rotating antennas designed for air  traffic control functions in the terminal area but with a secondary function of  detecting and monitoring severe weather and wind shear in aircraft approach and  departure paths. 4. 
Phased Array Radars  Radars with fixed electronically scanned antennas designed  for many functions such as missile detection and air traffic control, and used con - currently for measuring precipitation rates. As an example, the design of elliptic MTI filters as used in the TDWR will be  described. TDWR is a C-band radar used at airports for detection of downbursts,  microbursts, and prediction of wind direction. 
Elliptic filters are infinite impulse  response (IIR) filters that have the sharpest possible transition from rejection notch to  passband for a specified level of the clutter rejection notch (width and depth), ripple in  the passband, and number of delay sections (see Oppenheim and Schafer28). The ellip - tic filters can be followed with pulse-pair processing13 for estimation of weather mean  velocity and spectral width (turbulence). There are two drawbacks of elliptic filters:  First, the long transient settling time. 
For a scanning weather radar, it takes about four  beamwidths of scanning after the transmitter starts pulsing before clutter attenuation  reaches 50 to 60 dB. Second, if the input clutter signal reaches the limit level in the  IF receiver, there will be a significant transient increase of clutter residue. One of the  elliptic filters employed in the original TDWR radar is used as an example. 
TDWR operates at C band (5.60-5.65 GHz). The antenna rotates at 4.33 rpm and  has a 0.55° one-way beamwidth. The PRF is 1066 Hz. 
The elliptic filter designed for  these parameters has an improvement factor of 57.2 dB. HBW (hits per one-way 3-dB  beamwidth) are 22.6. The specifications for the elliptic filter for the above parameters  are normalized stopband edge sfT = 0.03492; passband edge sfT = 0.07350; stop-   band attenuation 58 dB below peak filter response; and passband ripple = 2.0 dB. 
 To meet these requirements, the filter requires 4-delay sections, which can be imple - mented as two cascaded 2-delay sections, as shown in Figure 2.46. FIGURE 2.46  Four-delay elliptic filter used in TDWR−a11 −a21x(n)b11 b21 Z−1Z−1G −a12 −a22b12 b22 Z−1Z−1y(n) H1(z) H2(z) ch02.indd   47 12/20/07   1:44:56 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. 
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	MTI Radar. 2.48  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 2 The filter coefficients are  a11 = −0.901933 a12 = −1.701983  a21 = 0.420985 a22 = 0.914913  b11 = 1.000000 b21 = 1.000000  b21 = −1.992132 b22 = −1.958290 The calculated improvement factor for this filter against land clutter with 22.6 HBW is  58 dB, and the bias for weather returns with spectral spreads of 1 and 4 m/sec is –10 dB  and –2 dB, respectively, when the radial velocity of the weather returns is v = 0 m/s. Figure 2.47 shows the elliptic filter CW response and its response for weather with  1 m/s and 4 m/s rms spectral spread. 
The unambiguous doppler interval corresponding  to fdT = 1 is 28.4 m/s for the parameters used to calculate this response. Figure 2.48 shows the time-domain responses for this filter as the antenna scans  past a point of clutter, such as a water tower. This figure shows the input to the elliptic  filter and the residue output. 
A gaussian antenna pattern is assumed in this figure. The  calculated improvement factor for the sequence shown (total clutter power into the  filter divided by total residue power out of the filter, normalized by the noise gain of  the filter) is 58 dB. A sin( x)/x antenna pattern is assumed for the following three figures, but the lessons  to be gained from these figures is essentially independent of the assumed beam shape. 
 Figure 2.49 shows the filter response if the transmitter starts radiating just as a null of  the antenna pattern passes the point of clutter. The individual samples of residue are  60 or more dB below the peak clutter return. The improvement factor for this sequence  is 57 dB. 
FIGURE  2.47 Elliptic filter CW response and response to weather with s  = 1 and 4 m/s rms  spectral spreadWx1 m/sspectral spread Wx4 m/sspectral spread CW Response −70−60−50−40−30−20−10010 0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1 Relativ e Doppler - σfTRelative Response - dBWx 1 m/s spectral spread Wx 4 m/s spectral spread CW Response ch02.indd   48 12/20/07   1:44:57 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	MTI Radar. 
 MTI RADAR  2.496x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 2 Figure 2.50 shows the residue if the transmitter starts radiating as the peak of the  beam passes the point clutter. Forty-nine pulses after the transmitter starts radiating,  the residue has decayed only 27 dB. It would take at least another 50 pulses for the  residue to decay to −60 dB. 
For this reason, when the transmitter starts pulsing, a set - tling time of at least 90 pulses must be allowed before useful data is collected.FIGURE  2.48 Time-domain clutter input and output residue as antenna scans past   a point target−100−90−80−70−60−50−40−30−20−100 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 9 0 100 Pulse Number - iElliptic Filter Response - dBGaussian Beam Residue FIGURE  2.49 Clutter input and residue from elliptic filter. Radar starts radiating at pulse  number 1.−100−90−80−70−60−50−40−30−20−100 0 10 20 30 4 0 50 6 0 7 0 8 0 9 0100 Pulse NumberdBSin X/X Beam Residue ch02.indd   49 12/20/07   1:44:59 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. 
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	MTI Radar. 2.50  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 2 Figure 2.51 shows the effect of the returned signal if the point clutter exceeds the  IF limit level by 6 dB. When the signal reaches the limit level, there is a step increase  of residue of about 30 dB. 
TDWR uses clutter maps to normalize the residue from the  strong points of clutter that exceed the limit level.  The weather mode of Airport Surveillance Radars is demonstrated by five-pulse  finite impulse response (FIR) filters used in the ASR-11, an S-band radar used for  air traffic control at airports. The design of the filters is primarily for Moving Target  Detector (MTD) detection of aircraft, but special attention is given to providing flat  passband response for accurate weather reflectivity estimation. 
The filter bank (for  HBW = 17) is pictured in Figure 2.52 and the coefficients are shown in Table 2.3. FIGURE  2.50 Clutter input and residue from elliptic filter. Radar starts radiating at pulse  number 51.−100−90−80−70−60−50−40−30−20−100 0 20 40 60 8 0 100 Pulse NumberdBPoint Clutter Residue FIGURE  2.51 Effect of limiting on elliptic filter response−100−90−80−70−60−50−40−30−20−100 0 20 4 0 60 8 0 100 Pulse NumberdB Point clutter after i.f . 
limiter Residue ch02.indd   50 12/20/07   1:45:00 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	MTI Radar. 
 MTI RADAR  2.516x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 2 Selection of filters is based on clutter amplitude information stored in a clutter map.  The filters are selected on a range-cell by CPI basis. These FIR clutter filters have the narrowest rejection notches that can be obtained  with five pulses and the indicated level of fixed clutter rejection. 
However, the  notches are significantly wider than those of the elliptic filters; thus, they will  have greater bias for measurement of weather intensity when the weather radial  velocity is zero. For phased array radars, FIR filters similar to those described for the ASR-11 are  applicable. The filters can be designed, if the time budget of the phased array radar  allows, to utilize more than the five pulses per coherent processing interval (CPI) used  by the ASR-11 radar. 
Using more pulses makes possible narrower rejection notches  and thus less bias for estimates of precipitation with zero radial velocity . FIGURE  2.52 Response of ASR-11 FIR filters low-PRF ( fr = 855 pps) filters operating against fixed clutter  with HBW = 17. The unambiguous doppler interval (  f T = 1) is 45.8 m/s for the parameters used to calculate  this response. 
TABLE  2.3 ASR: Coefficients of ASR-11 5-Pulse Low-PRF Fir Filters FILTER Coefficient 1 Coefficient 2 Coefficient 3 Coefficient 4 Coefficient 5 20 dB 0.79812 –0.50687 –0.29297 –0.08340  0.11528 30 dB 0.67844 –0.62907 –0.28700  0.00815  0.24810 40 dB 0.50178 –0.80291  0.06899  0.30685 –0.06807 50 dB 0.39235 –0.78485  0.21613  0.37851 –0.20021 60 dB 0.28502 –0.75401  0.58529 –0.03661 –0.07956 70 dB 0.17766 –0.58440  0.70278 –0.35920  0.06322 ch02.indd   51 12/20/07   1:45:01 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	MTI Radar. 
2.52  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 2 2.10 CLUTTER FILTER BANK DESIGN As discussed in Section 2.2, the MTD uses a waveform consisting of coherent pro - cessing intervals (CPIs) of N pulses, all at the same PRF and RF frequency. The PRF  and possibly the RF are changed from one CPI to the next. With this constraint, only  finite-impulse-response (FIR) filter designs are realistic candidates for the filter bank  design. 
(Feedback filters require a number of pulses to settle after either the PRF or  the RF is changed and thus would not be practical.) The number of pulses available during the time when a surveillance radar beam  illuminates a potential target position is determined by system parameters and require - ments such as beamwidth, PRF, volume to be scanned, and the required data update  rate. Given the constraint on the number of pulses on target, one must decide how  many CPIs should occur during the time on target and how many pulses per CPI. The  compromise is usually difficult. 
One wishes to use more pulses per CPI to enable the  use of better filters, but one also wishes to have as many CPIs as possible. Multiple  CPIs (at different PRFs and perhaps at different RF frequencies) improve detection  and can provide information for true radial velocity determination.30 The design of the individual filters in the doppler filter bank is a compromise between  the frequency sidelobe requirement and the degradation in the coherent integration gain  of the filter. The number of doppler filters required for a given length of the CPI must be  balanced between hardware complexity and the straddling loss at the crossover between  filters. 
Finally, the requirement of providing a high degree of clutter suppression at zero  doppler (land clutter) sometimes introduces special design constraints. When the number of pulses in a CPI is large ( ≥ 16), the systematic design pro - cedure and efficient implementation of the fast Fourier transform (FFT) algorithm  is particularly attractive. Through the use of appropriate weighting functions of the  time-domain returns in a single CPI, the resulting frequency sidelobes can be readily  controlled. 
Further, the number of filters (equal to the order of the transform) needed  to cover the total doppler space (equal to the radar PRF) can be chosen independently  of the CPI, as discussed below. As the CPI becomes smaller ( ≤ 10), it becomes important to consider special  designs of the individual filters to match the specific clutter suppression requirements  at different doppler frequencies in order to achieve better overall performance. While  some systematic procedures are available for designing FIR filters subject to specific  passband and stopband constraints, the straightforward approach for small CPIs is  to use an empirical approach in which the zeros of each filter are adjusted until the  desired response is obtained. 
An example of such filter designs is presented next. Empirical Filter Design.  An example of an empirical filter design for a six-pulse  CPI follows. 
(The six pulses per CPI may be driven by system considerations, such as  time-on-target.) Because the filter will use six pulses, only five zeros are available for  the filter design; the number of zeros available is the number of pulses minus one. The  filter design process consists of placing the zeros to obtain a filter bank response that  conforms to the specified constraints. The example that follows was produced with an  interactive computer program with which the zeros could be moved until the desired  response was obtained. 
The assumed filter requirements are as follows: ● Provide a response of −66 dB in the clutter rejection notch (relative to the peak target  response) of the moving-target filters. ch02.indd   52 12/20/07   1:45:01 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. 
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	MTI Radar.  MTI RADAR  2.536x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 2 ● Provide a response of −46 dB for chaff rejection at velocities between ±20% of the  ambiguous doppler frequency range. ● In this design, only five filters will be implemented. 
● Three of the five filters will reject fixed clutter and respond to moving targets. Two  filters will respond to targets at zero doppler and its ambiguities. (With good fixed  clutter rejection filters, it takes two or more coherent filters to cover the gap in  response at zero velocity.) With the above considerations, a filter bank can be constructed. 
Figure 2.53 a shows the filter designed to respond to targets in the middle of the  doppler passband. The sidelobes near zero velocity are 66 dB down from the peak,  thus providing good clutter rejection for clutter within 5% of zero doppler. The −46 dB  sidelobe provides chaff rejection to ±16%. 
Because of the constraint of having only five  zeros available, this filter could not provide −46 dB rejection to ±20%. Figure 2.53 b shows the filter that responds to targets as near as possible to zero  doppler, while having a zero-doppler response of −66 dB. Two zeros are placed near  0, providing −66 dB response to clutter at 0. 
The filter sidelobes between 0.8 and 1.0  doppler provide the specified chaff rejection of 46 dB. A mirror image of this filter is  used for the third moving doppler filter. (The mirror-image filter has coefficients that  are complex conjugates of the original filter coefficients.) Figure 2.53 c shows the first filter designed for response at zero doppler. 
 Considerations here are that the doppler straddling loss of the filter bank be minimized   FIGURE 2.53  Six-pulse filters for targets at ( a) f T = 0.5, ( b) Ft = 0.3, f T = 0.8, and ( c) combined response  of complete bank of five six-pulse filters (a) (b) (c) (d) ch02.indd   53 12/20/07   1:45:03 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	MTI Radar. 
2.54  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 2 (this dictates the location of the peak), that the response to chaff at 0.8 doppler be  down 46 dB, and that the mismatch loss be minimized. Minimizing the mismatch loss  is accomplished by permitting the filter sidelobes between 0.3 and 0.8 to rise as high  as needed (lower sidelobes in this range increase the mismatch loss). The second zero- doppler filter is the mirror image of this one. 
Figure 2.53 d shows the composite response of the filter bank. Note that the filter  peaks are fairly evenly distributed. The dip between the first zero-doppler filter and  the first moving doppler filter is larger than the others, primarily because, under the  constraints, it is impossible to move the first doppler filter nearer to zero velocity . 
Chebyshev Filter Bank.  For a larger number of pulses in the CPI, a more system - atic approach to filter design is desirable. If a doppler filter design criterion is chosen  that requires the filter sidelobes outside the main response to be below a specified level  (i.e., providing a constant level of clutter suppression), while simultaneously minimiz - ing the width of the filter response, a filter design based on the Dolph-Chebyshev dis - tribution provides the optimum solution. 
Properties and design procedures based on  the Dolph-Chebyshev distribution can be found in the antenna literature. An example  of a filter design for a CPI of 9 pulses and a sidelobe requirement of 68 dB is shown in  Figure 2.54. The peak filter response can be located arbitrarily in frequency by adding  a linear-phase term to the filter coefficients. 
The total number of filters implemented to cover all doppler frequencies is a design  option trading straddling loss at the filter crossover frequencies against implementa - tion complexity. An example of a complete doppler filter bank implemented with nine  uniformly spaced filters is shown in Figure 2.55. The performance of this doppler filter  bank against the clutter model considered in Figure 2.25 is shown in Figure 2.56. 
This  graph shows the signal-to-clutter ratio improvement against clutter at zero doppler as  a function of target doppler frequency. Only the response of the filter providing the  greatest improvement is plotted at each target doppler. For comparison the optimum curve from Figure 2.25 is shown by a broken line and  thus provides a direct assessment of how well the Chebyshev filter design performs  against a given clutter model. 
Also shown is the average SCR improvement for both  the optimum and the Chebyshev filter bank. FIGURE 2.54  Chebyshev FIR filter design with 68 dB doppler sidelobes ch02.indd   54 12/20/07   1:45:03 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. 
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	MTI Radar.  MTI RADAR  2.556x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 2 Finally, Figure 2.57 shows the average SCR improvement of the 68 dB Chebyshev  doppler filter bank as well as the optimum curve (from Figure 2.26) as a function  of the relative spectrum spread of the clutter. Owing to the finite number of filters  implemented in the filter bank, the average SCR improvement will change by a small  amount if a doppler shift is introduced into the clutter returns. 
This effect is illustrated  by the cross-hatched region, which shows upper and lower limits on the average SCR  improvement for all possible clutter doppler shifts. For a smaller number of filters in  the doppler filter bank, this variation would be greater. Fast Fourier Transform Filter Bank. 
 For a large number of parallel doppler  filters, hardware implementation can be simplified significantly through the use of  the FFT algorithm. The use of this algorithm constrains all filters in the filter bank to FIGURE 2.55  Doppler filter bank of 68 dB Chebyshev filters, CPI = 9 pulses FIGURE 2.56  SCR improvement of 68 dB Chebyshev doppler filter bank compared with   the optimum ch02.indd   55 12/20/07   1:45:04 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. 
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	MTI Radar. 2.56  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 2 have identical responses, and the filters will be uniformly spaced along the doppler  axis. The number of filters implemented for a given size of the CPI can, however,  be varied. 
For example, a greater number of filters can be realized by extending the  received data with extra zero values (also known as zero padding) after the received  returns have been appropriately weighted in accordance with the desired filter  response (e.g., Chebyshev). Filter Bank Designs Using Constrained Optimization Techniques.  For a  greater numbers of pulses in the CPI, and when the economy of the FFT implementa - tion of a doppler filter bank can be replaced by a FIR implementation, more desirable  FIR filter responses can be realized through the use of appropriate numerical digital  filter design techniques. 
The goal is similar to that pursued with the empirical filter  designs discussed earlier but filters with a large number of taps can be designed to  exacting specifications. As an example, consider the design of a doppler filter bank for an S band (3.0 GHz)  radar using a CPI of N = 25 pulses using a PRF of 6 kHz. Assume that the radar require - ments call for a suppression of stationary land clutter by 80 dB and a suppression of  moving clutter (rain) by 50 dB. 
For the filter design, a clutter attenuation 10 dB below  these requirements will be needed to keep the sensitivity loss due to the clutter residue  below 1 dB and also because each doppler filter will have a coherent gain of around  10 25 1410⋅ =log ( ) d B, this must be added to the filter design specification as well. The  total S-band doppler space for the above radar parameters is 300 m/s, and assuming that  the land clutter suppression region has to be ± 4 m/s and that the moving clutter suppres - sion region has to be ± 30 m/s, the constraint for all doppler filter designs normalized to  their peak is as shown in Figure 2.58. Using a signal processing toolbox developed by Dr. 
Dan P. Scholnik of the Naval  Research Laboratory, a doppler filter bank meeting the above constraints was designed.  The first filter, which has its peak located as close as possible to the left edge of the  constraint box is shown in Figure 2.59, with the abscissa normalized to the total avail - able doppler space.FIGURE 2.57  Average SCR improvement for the 68 dB Chebyshev filter bank shown  in Figure 2.55. 
CPI = 9 pulses. Optimum is from Figure 2.26. ch02.indd   56 12/20/07   1:45:05 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	MTI Radar.  MTI RADAR  2.576x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 2 The mismatch loss of this filter is Lm = 1.29 dB, which is well below that of a 105 dB  Dolph-Chebyshev filter bank ( Lm = 3.0 dB). 
For the remaining filters, a relative spac - ing of D = 1/25 = 0.04 was used, but this could be reduced in order to minimize  doppler straddling losses. The third filter in the filter bank is shown in Figure 2.60.  FIGURE  2.58 Doppler filter design constraints120 90 30 0 60 150 180 210 240 270 300−100−80−60−40−200 4 296Radial Velocity – vr (m/s)Maximum Response – R (dB) FIGURE  2.59 Leftmost FIR filter in doppler filter bank design0.4 0.3 0.1 0 0.2 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1−100−80−60−40−200 Relative Doppler – fdTMaximum Response – A (dB) Mismatch loss = 1.2869 dB ch02.indd   57 12/20/07   1:45:06 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	MTI Radar. 2.58  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 2 The mismatch loss has now been reduced to 0.71 dB. 
Finally, the complete doppler  filter bank is shown in Figure 2.61. This filter bank could be augmented with addi - tional filters around zero doppler, but these would not meet the design constraints  discussed above. The main benefit of a customized doppler filter bank design, as FIGURE  2.60 Third FIR filter in doppler filter bank design0.4 0.3 0.1 0 0.2 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1−100−80−60−40−200 Relative Doppler – fdTMaximum Response – A (dB) Mismatch loss = 0.70612 dB FIGURE  2.61 Complete doppler filter bank design0.4 0.3 0.1 0 0.2 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1−100−80−60−40−200 Relative Doppler – fdTMaximum Response – A (dB) ch02.indd   58 12/20/07   1:45:08 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	MTI Radar.  MTI RADAR  2.596x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 2 described here, is its reduced mismatch loss. 
For the 16 filters in the above design,  the average mismatch loss is Lm=0 66. d B, a savings of 2.3 dB as compared to the  alternative of a 105 dB weighted Dolph-Chebyshev filter bank. 2.11 PERFORMANCE DEGRADATION   CAUSED BY RECEIVER LIMITING Elsewhere in this chapter (Sections 2.2 and 2.12, particularly) IF bandpass limiters  have been discussed as (1) a means of preventing received clutter signals from exceed - ing the range of the A/D converters, (2) normalizing MTI clutter residue caused by  system instabilities, and (3) normalizing residue due to the spectral spread of “fixed  clutter” caused by either scanning or wind-blown motion. 
There are occasional clutter  residue spikes when clutter exceeds the limit level, and in the past, the energy from  these spikes of residue has been suppressed by further reduction of the limit level.  When limiters have been used to normalize the energy of clutter residue spikes, the  average improvement factor of the MTI systems drastically deteriorates. The equa - tions for I (improvement factor) of a scanning radar in Section 2.6 are based on linear  theory. 
Field measurements, however, have shown that many scanning multiple-delay  MTI radar systems fall considerably short of the predicted performance. This occurs  because the IF bandpass limiters have been used to suppress the energy of the residue  spikes that are caused by the limiting action. Later in this section, it is shown that the  use of a binary detection scheme, instead of a drastic reduction of the limit level, can  be used to maintain a clutter rejection performance close to linear theory prediction in  the resolution cells where clutter limiting occur. 
An example of how limiting the dynamic range adjusts the residue is shown in the  MTI PPI photographs shown in Figure 2.62. The range rings are at 5-mi intervals.   FIGURE 2.62  Effect of limiters: ( a) 18 dB improvement factor, 20 dB input dynamic range, and   (b) 18 dB improvement factor, 14 dB input dynamic range ch02.indd   59 12/20/07   1:45:15 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	MTI Radar. 2.60  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 2 A number of birds are shown on the display. 
The residue from clutter in the left photo - graph is solid out to 3 nmi and then decreases until it is almost entirely gone at 10 nmi.  The MTI improvement factor in both pictures is 18 dB, but the input dynamic range  (peak signal-to-rms noise) to the canceler was changed from 20 to 14 dB between the  two pictures. An aircraft flying over the clutter in the first 5 mi in the left-hand picture  could not be detected, no matter how large its radar cross section. 
In the right-hand pic - ture, the aircraft could be detected if the target-to-clutter cross-section ratio were suf - ficient. Although this example is from many years ago,31 the principle is still the same,  even though current MTI improvement factors are better by tens of dBs. Restriction  of the IF dynamic range is still a very efficient way of normalizing clutter residue due  to system instabilities or clutter spectral spread to system noise. 
This is true whether  or not the radar uses pulse compression. Prior to the development of modern clutter maps for controlling false alarms  caused by clutter residue, or the more recent suggestion that binary integration can  mitigate impulse-like residue,32 the use of IF limiting was essential for false-alarm  control in an MTI radar. Such limiting, however, seriously affects the mean improve - ment factor obtainable with a scanning-limited, multiple-delay canceler because of  the increased spectral spread of the clutter that exceeds the limit level. 
Part of the  additional clutter spectral components comes from the sharp discontinuity in the  envelope of returns as the clutter reaches the limit level.33 A time-domain example  of this phenomenon is shown in Figure 2.63 for a radar with N = 16.4 hits per beam - width. On the left is a point target that does not exceed the limit level; on the right  is a point target that exceeds the limit level by 20 dB. Note that, for this example,  I degrades by 12.8 dB for the dual canceler and by 26.5 dB for the triple canceler. 
 The exact result of this calculation depends on the assumed shape of the antenna  pattern; for this example, a sin()u u pattern terminated at the first nulls was assumed.  There is a comparable improvement factor degradation due to spectral spreading of  limited distributed clutter.34,35 Figures 2.64, 2.65, and 2.66  show the expected mean  improvement factor for two- three-, and four-pulse cancelers as a function of s/L,  the ratio of the rms clutter amplitude to the limit level. Hits per one-way half-power  beamwidth are indicated by N. 
An example of clutter residue from simulated hard-limited distributed clutter is  taken from Hall and Shrader.32 Figure 2.67 shows a polar plot of part of a linear clut - ter sequence for a scanning radar with N = 20 hits per beamwidth. This linear clutter  sequence is 65 consecutive complex voltage returns from one range cell of distributed  clutter. Figure 2.68 shows the phase and amplitude of this sequence. 
If this clutter sequence were 40 dB stronger and passed through a 10 V IF limiter,  only the phase information would remain. Each pulse would have a 10 V amplitude.  When the resulting limited clutter sequence is passed through a three-pulse canceler  (coefficients 1, –2, 1), the output residue appears as in Figure 2.69 a. 
The correspond - ing pulse-to-pulse improvement factor is shown Figure 2.69 b. The expected three-pulse canceler improvement factor (from equation 2.27) for  a linear system with N = 20 is I3 = n4/3.84 = 46.2 dB. In Figure 2.69 b, it is seen that  this level of  I3 is achieved for most of the pulses, with only two pulses having very  low values of I3. 
The statistics for the distribution of I3 for the three-pulse canceler for  hard-limited distributed clutter are shown in Figure 2.70.32 Note that for N = 20, less that 5% of the hard-limited samples have an improvement  factor less than 24 dB, whereas almost 60% of the samples exceed the  I3 expected for  a linear system. ch02.indd   60 12/20/07   1:45:17 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. 
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	MTI Radar.  MTI RADAR  2.616x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 2 The time-domain illustration shown previously in Figure 2.69 leads to the conclu - sion of Hall and Shrader32 that using an M out of N binary detector at the output of an  MTI filter will preclude false alarms from the clutter residues caused by limiting. Figure 2.71 shows, in addition to clutter residue, the returns from a target that was  superimposed on the distributed clutter prior to the clutter-plus-target sequence pass - ing through the IF limiting process. 
One can see that many of the individual pulse  returns from the target exceed the detection threshold, whereas only four of the clutter  residue pulses exceed the threshold. To summarize: (1) The MTI improvement factor in a majority of limiting clutter  cells exceeds the average improvement factor obtained with linear processing; (2) cells  with poor MTI improvement factor can be rejected with binary detection processing;  and, therefore, (3) excellent MTI performance can be obtained even in regions of clutter  that exceed the IF dynamic range.FIGURE 2.63  Improvement factor restriction caused by a limiter ch02.indd   61 12/20/07   1:45:17 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. 
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	MTI Radar. 2.62  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 2 FIGURE 2.64  Mean improvement factor restriction versus amount of limiting and clutter  spectral spread for a two-pulse canceler ( after T. M. 
Hall and W. W. Shrader32 © IEEE 2007 and  H. 
R. Ward and W. W. 
Shrader34 © IEEE 1968 ) FIGURE  2.65 Mean improvement factor restriction versus amount of limiting and clutter  spectral spread for a three-pulse canceler  (after T. M. Hall and W. 
W. Shrader32 © IEEE 2007  and H. R. 
Ward and W. W. Shrader34 © IEEE 1968 ) ch02.indd   62 12/20/07   1:45:18 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	MTI Radar.  MTI RADAR  2.636x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 2 Note that this discussion of binary detection is addressed to the spectral distribution  of real clutter, that, when viewed in the time domain before limiting, has a smoothly  varying change of the amplitude and phase of the clutter vector. 
This is distinct from  clutter variations due to system instabilities that are noise-like, wherein the system  dynamic range should be limited to prevent the instability residue from exceeding the  system noise level. FIGURE  2.67 Polar representation of a linear clutter sequence  for 20 hits per beamwidth ( after T. M. 
Hall and W. W. Shrader32  © IEEE 2007 )30° 210°60° 240°90° 270°120° 300°150° 330°180°0° Volts1.02.03.0 4.05.0 START1020 30 40 50 60 FINISHFIGURE  2.66 Mean improvement factor restriction versus amount of limiting and  clutter spectral spread for a four-pulse canceler ( after T. 
M. Hall and W. W. 
Shrader32  © IEEE 2007 and H. R. Ward and W. 
W. Shrader34 © IEEE 1968 )0.0030102030405010LOG(I)60708090100 Relative Cl utter Spectral Width - σfTσ/L = 0 dB σ/L = 10 dB σ/L = 20 dBNo Limit Hard Limitσ/L = 30 dB 0.05 0.04 0.03 0.02 0.01 0.007 0.005N = 20 N = 10 N = 5 N = 40 N = 80 ch02.indd   63 12/20/07   1:45:20 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. 
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	MTI Radar. 2.64  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 2 FIGURE  2.68 Linear clutter sequence amplitude and phase for 20 hits   per beamwidth ( after T. M. 
Hall and W. W. Shrader32 © IEEE 2007 )30 20 10 0 40 5 0 6 0012345Amplitude (Volts) (a) 10 0 20 3 0 4 0 5 0 6 0–100–50050100150200Phase (Degrees) Pulse Nu mber (b) FIGURE  2.69 (a) Three-pulse canceler residue and ( b) improvement factor for hard-   limited clutter sequence for N = 20 hits per beamwidth ( after T. 
M. Hall and W. W. 
Shrader32  © IEEE 2007 )0 20 3 0 4 0 5 0 6 00510152025|Residue| (Volts) (a) 10 0 20 3 0 4 0 5 0 6 002040608010I3 Per Pulse (dB) Pulse Number (b) ch02.indd   64 12/20/07   1:45:21 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	MTI Radar. 
 MTI RADAR  2.656x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 2 2.12 RADAR SYSTEM STABILITY  REQUIREMENTS System Instabilities.  Not only do the antenna motion and clutter spectrum affect  the improvement factor that is attainable, but system instabilities also place a limit on  MTI performance. These instabilities come from the stalo and coho, from the trans - mitter pulse-to-pulse frequency change if a pulsed oscillator and from pulse-to-pulse FIGURE  2.70 Distribution of I3 and mean of I3 for hard-limited clutter for different numers of scan - ning hits per beamwidth. 
For reference, the mean of I3 is also shown for linear processing. ( I3 refers to the  improvement factor of a three-pulse MTI canceler.) ( after T. M. 
Hall and W. W. Shrader32 © IEEE 2007 )40 20 0 60 8 0 100 120 1400.0050.010.020.050.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.90.950.980.990.995Probability That Residue Samples Are Less Than A Given Value of I3 I3 (dB)I3 Mean for Hard Li mitI3 Mean for Linear CaseN = 5 σfT = 0.05 3 N = 10 σfT = 0.02 7 N = 20 σfT = 0.01 3N = 40 σfT = 0.007N = 80 σfT = 0.003 FIGURE  2.71 After MTI processing of the hard-limited distributed clutter  sequence ( N = 20) and a target superimposed on the clutter sequence, the residue  spikes are distinctly different from the target returns. 
A binary M-of-N detector  will reject the residue and keep the target. ( after T. M. 
Hall and W. W. Shrader32  © IEEE 2007 )Returns From Target Detection  Threshold  Pulse Number 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 0 10 20 |Residue| (Volts) Clutter Residue  ch02.indd   65 12/20/07   1:45:24 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	MTI Radar. 2.66  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 2 phase change if a power amplifier, from the inability to lock the coho perfectly to the  phase of the reference pulse, from time jitter and amplitude jitter on the pulses, and  from quantization noise of the A/D converter.36,37 Phase instabilities will be considered first. 
If the phases of consecutive received  pulses relative to the phase of the coho differ by, say, 0.01 rad, a limitation of 40 dB  is imposed on I. The 0.01-rad clutter vector change would be equivalent to a target  vector, 40 dB weaker than the clutter, being superimposed on the clutter, as shown  in Figure 2.72. In the power amplifier MTI system shown in Figure 2.73, pulse-to-pulse phase  changes in the transmitted pulse can be introduced by the pulsed amplifier. 
The  most common cause of a power amplifier introducing phase changes is ripple on the  high-voltage power supply. Other causes of phase instability include ac voltage on a  transmitter tube filament and uneven power supply loading, such as that caused by  pulse-to-pulse stagger. In the pulsed oscillator system, shown in Figure 2.74, pulse-to-pulse frequency  changes result in phase run-out during the transmitted pulse. 
Phase run-out is the  change of the transmitted pulse phase during the pulse duration with respect to the  phase of the reference oscillator. If the coho locked perfectly to the end of the trans - mitted pulse, a total phase run-out of 0.02 rad during the transmitted pulse would then  place an average limitation of 40 dB on the improvement factor attainable. Pulse-to- pulse frequency change in microwave oscillators is primarily caused by high-voltage  power supply ripple. 
In the pulsed oscillator system, a pulse-to-pulse phase difference  of 0.01 rad in locking the coho results in I limitation of 40 dB. (As noted elsewhere,  frequency change during a pulse from a pulsed oscillator does not limit I if it repeats  precisely pulse to pulse.) The limitations on the improvement factor that are due to equipment instabilities in  the form of frequency changes of the stalo and coho between consecutive transmitted  pulses are a function of the range of the clutter. These changes are characterized in  two ways. 
All oscillators have a noise spectrum. In addition, cavity oscillators, used  because they are readily tunable, are microphonic, and thus their frequency may vary  at an audio rate. The limitation on the improvement factor due to frequency changes  is the difference in the number of radians that the oscillator runs through between  the time of transmission and the time of reception of consecutive pulses. 
Thus, the  improvement factor will be limited to 40 dB if 2 p∆f T = 0.01 rad, where ∆ f is the  oscillator frequency change between transmitted pulses and T is the transit time of   the pulse to and from the target. FIGURE 2.72  Phase instability ch02.indd   66 12/20/07   1:45:33 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. 
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	MTI Radar.  MTI RADAR  2.676x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 2 To evaluate the effects of oscillator phase noise on MTI performance, there are four  steps. First, determine the single-sideband power spectral density of the phase noise as  a function of frequency from the carrier.38,39 Second, increase this spectral density by  6 dB. 
This accounts for a 3-dB increase because both sidebands of noise affect clut - ter residue, and a 3-dB increase because the oscillator contributes noise during both  transmitting and receiving. Third, adjust the oscillator phase noise spectral density  determined above due to the following three effects: ( a) the self-cancellation of phase  noise based on correlation resulting from the two-way range delay of the clutter of  interest, ( b) noise rejection due to the frequency response of the clutter filters, and   (c) noise rejection due to the frequency response of the receiver passband. Finally, as  the fourth step, integrate the adjusted spectral density of the phase noise across the  entire passband. 
The result is the limitation on I due to the oscillator noise. Rather than performing this integration of the residual noise numerically, a much  simpler analysis can be carried out if both the oscillator phase noise characteristic and  all of the adjustments to phase noise are approximated by straight lines on a decibel- versus-log frequency plot. This procedure becomes particularly simple when a MTI  FIR filter using binomial coefficients is assumed. 
The locations along the frequency  axis where the straight lines intersect are called break frequencies.  This simplified  procedure, which is similar to that presented in Vigneri et al.,40 is described in the  following paragraphs. The first of the three adjustments—oscillator noise self-cancellation due to the  range of the clutter of interest—reduces noise at the low frequencies by 20 dB per  decade below the break frequency of f TR = ⋅ ⋅ 1 2/( )π. 
Here T R cR= ⋅2 /  is the time FIGURE 2.73  Power amplifier simplified block diagram FIGURE 2.74  Pulsed oscillator simplified block diagram ch02.indd   67 12/20/07   1:45:37 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	MTI Radar. 
2.68  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 2 delay of the clutter return, R is the clutter range , and c is the speed of light. For the  second adjustment due to the frequency response of the clutter filters, which as stated  previously are assumed to be FIR cancelers with binomial weights, it is noted that  the response at very low frequencies fall off at 20 dB per decade for one delay, 40 dB  per decade for two delays, 60 dB per decade for three delays, etc. As an example,  the approximation used for a two-delay MTI filter is shown in Figure 2.75. 
The MTI  response has a peak value of 4 6 4 26 / .≈ dB, resulting in an average noise gain of  unity, and the straight line approximation follows the low frequency asymptote up to  the 0 dB level, which occurs at f T = 0.249, and stays constant at the 0 dB level at all  higher frequencies. The justification for the 0 dB approximation at the higher frequen - cies is that the oscillator spectral density is more nearly constant and the average over  one period of the MTI response is unity. For other binomial coefficient MTI cancelers,  the break frequencies for the start of the response falloff are f T = 0.225 for one delay,  0.249 for two delays, 0.262 for three delays, and 0.271 for four delays. 
For example, consider an oscillator with single-sideband phase-noise spectral  density as shown in Figure 2.76. All oscillator noise contributions are assumed to be  combined into this one curve. The single-sideband noise is increased by 3 dB because  both sidebands affect system stability, and the power integration is only carried out  for positive frequencies and by an additional 3 dB because the oscillator introduces  noise in both the upconversion to the transmitted signal and in the receiver downcon - version process. 
Figure 2.77 shows the spectral modifications due to the system responses: ( a) The  first modification accounts for correlation due to the range to the clutter of interest  [assumed clutter range is ≈ 50 nmi (92.6 km); thus, the break frequency is 365 Hz].  (b) Second, a three-pulse binomial-weighted canceler is assumed with the radar operat - ing at a PRF of 360 Hz. Thus, the break frequency is 0.249 × 360 = 90 Hz. 
( c) Third,  the receiver passband is assumed to extend from −500 kHz to +500 kHz with respect  to the IF center frequency (1 MHZ total passband) at the −3 dB points and determined  by a two-pole filter. Thus, the receiver passband response falls off at 40 dB per decade  from the break frequency at 500 kHz as shown.FIGURE  2.75 Straight-line approximation to two-delay binomial MTI ch02.indd   68 12/20/07   1:45:39 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. 
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	MTI Radar.  MTI RADAR  2.696x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 2 The adjusted phase-noise spectral density is shown in Figure 2.78. The total noise  power with respect to the carrier is determined by integration of the noise power under  the curve. 
The equation for the power spectral density of any one segment as a func - tion of frequency is  S f Sf ff f f ( )= ⋅   ≤ ≤1 11 2α  (2.42) Here f1 and f2 are the start and end frequencies of the segment, respectively;   S1 (Hz–1) is the phase noise spectral density relative to the carrier at the beginning of  the segment and a  is the slope of the segment in log10-units per decade. Note that the FIGURE 2.76  Single-sideband phase-noise spectral density of a microwave oscillator and the effective  noise density FIGURE 2.77  Adjustments, based on system parameters (see text), to the phase noise of a microwave  oscillator ch02.indd   69 12/20/07   1:45:42 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. 
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	MTI Radar. 2.70  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 2 dBc/Hz values in Figure 2.78 correspond to 10⋅log( )S. Further denoting the phase  noise spectral density relative to the carrier at the end of the segment as S2 (Hz–1), the  slope is defined by  α=log ( / ) log ( / )10 2 1 10 2 1S S f f (2.43) The slope in dB/decade is equal to 10⋅α. 
The noise power contribution correspond - ing to this segment is found as  PS ff f all S f=⋅+⋅ −≠ − ⋅+ + 1 121 11 1 11 11αα α ααα [ln n() ln()] f f2 1 1 − =−   α (2.44) Table 2.4 gives the integration for the example. When the integrated powers for all  segments have been calculated, they are summed and then converted back to dBc. The  final answer, −66.37 dBc, is the limit on I that results from oscillator noise. 
The limit  on ISCR (dB) is I (dB) plus target integration gain (dB).FIGURE 2.78  Composite adjustments and adjusted phase-noise spectral density TABLE 2.4  Integration of the Phase-Noise Spectral Density of Figure 2.76 with Adjustments of  Figure 2.77 as Shown in Figure 2.78 Segment f1, Hz f2, HzSlope,  dB/dekSlope   a S1 dBc/Hz S2 dBc/HzIntegrated  powerIntegrated  power, dBc 1 1 90  30.0  3 –149.4  –90.8 0.188e-7 –77.25 2 90 365 –10.0 –1  –90.8  –96.9 0.105e-6 –69.80 3 365 1,000 –30.0 –3  –96.9 –110.0 0.323e-7 –74.91 4 1.0e3 1.0e4 –20.0 –2 –110.0 –130.0 0.900e-8 –80.46 5 1.0e4 5.0e5   0.0  0 –130.0 –130.0 0.490e-7 –73.10 6 5.0e5 1.0e7 –40.0 –4 –130.0 –182.0 0.167e-7 –77.78 Total integrated noise power 0.231e-6 –66.37 ch02.indd   70 12/20/07   1:45:49 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	MTI Radar. 
 MTI RADAR  2.716x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 2 Time jitter of the transmitted pulses results in degradation of MTI systems. Time  jitter results in failure of the leading and trailing edges of the pulses to cancel, the  amplitude of each uncancelled part being ∆t/t, where ∆t is the time jitter and t  is the  transmitted pulse length. The total residue power is 2( ∆t/t )2, and therefore the limita - tion on the improvement factor due to time jitter is I t = ⋅20 2 log[ /( )] τ ∆ (dB). 
This  limit on the improvement factor is based on a CW transmitter pulse and on the assump - tion that the receiver bandwidth is matched to the duration of the transmitted pulse. In  a pulse compression system, the receiver bandwidth is wider by the time-bandwidth  (Bt ) product; thus the clutter residue power at each end of the pulse increases in  proportion to the Bt product. The limit on I for a chirp pulse compression system is  then I tB = ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ 20 2 log[ /( )] τ τ ∆ . 
For pulse compression systems employing phase- coded waveforms, the factor 2 in the preceding equation should be multiplied by the  number of subpulses in the waveform. Thus, for example, the limit on I for a 13-pulse  Barker code is  I t = × 20 2 13 1 3 log [ /( )] τ ∆ dB (2.45) Pulse-width jitter results in one-half the residue of time jitter , and  I B=20logτ τ ∆PWdB (2.46) where ∆PW is pulse-width jitter. Amplitude jitter in the transmitted pulse also causes a limitation of  IA A=20log∆dB (2.47) where A is the pulse amplitude and ∆A is the pulse-to-pulse change in amplitude. 
This  limitation applies even though the system uses limiting before the canceler because  there is always much clutter present that does not reach the limit level. With most  transmitters, however, the amplitude jitter is insignificant after the frequency-stability  or phase-stability requirements have been met. Jitter in the sampling time in the A/D converter also limits MTI performance. 
 If pulse compression is done prior to the A/D or if there is no pulse compression,  this limit is  I J B=20logτ τdB (2.48) where J is the timing jitter, t is transmitted pulse length, and Bt is the time-   bandwidth product. If pulse compression is done subsequent to the A/D converter,  then the limitation is  IJB=20logτ τdB (2.49) The limitations on the attainable MTI improvement factor are summarized in  Table 2.5. This discussion has assumed that the peak-to-peak values of these insta - bilities occur on a pulse-to-pulse basis, which is often the case in pulse-to-pulse  staggered MTI operation. 
If it is known that the instabilities are random, the peak  ch02.indd   71 12/20/07   1:46:01 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	MTI Radar. 
2.72  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 2 values shown in these equations can be replaced by the rms pulse-to-pulse values,  which gives results essentially identical to Steinberg’s results.41 If the instabilities occur at some known frequency, e.g., high-voltage power sup - ply ripple, the relative effect of the instability can be determined by locating the  response on the velocity response curve for the MTI system for a target at an equiva - lent doppler frequency. If, for instance, the response is 6 dB down from the maximum  response, the limitation on I is about 6 dB less severe than indicated in the equations  in Table 2.5. If all sources of instability are independent, as would usually be the  case, their individual power residues can be added to determine the total limitation  on MTI performance. 
Intrapulse frequency or phase variations do not interfere with good MTI operation  provided they repeat precisely from pulse to pulse. The only concern is a loss of sen - sitivity if phase run-out during the transmitted pulse or mistuning of the coho or stalo  permits the received pulses to be significantly detuned from the intended IF frequency.  If a 1-rad phase run-out during the pulse is permitted, the system detuning may be as  large as 1/(2 pt ) Hz with no degradation of MTI performance. 
To give an example of interpulse stability requirements, consider a 3000-MHz  radar transmitting a CW pulse of duration t = 2 µs and the requirement that no  single system instability will limit the MTI improvement factor attainable at a range  of 100 nmi to less than 50 dB, a voltage ratio of 316:1. The rms pulse-to-pulse  transmitter frequency change (if a pulsed oscillator) must be less than  ∆f= =1 316504πτHz (2.50) which is a stability of about 2 parts in 107.Pulse-to-Pulse Instability Limit on Improvement Factor Oscillator phase noise See discussion in text . Transmitter frequency I = 20 log [1/( p ∆f t  )] Stalo or coho frequency I = 20 log [1/(2 p ∆f T)] Transmitter phase shift I = 20 log (1/ ∆f) Coho locking I = 20 log (1/ ∆f) Pulse timing I = 20 log [ /( ) ] τ τ 2∆t B Pulse width I = 20log [ /( ) ] τ τ∆PW B Pulse amplitude I = 20 log ( A/∆A) A/D jitter I = 20 log [ ( )] τ τJ B A/D jitter with pulse compression following A/D I = 20 log [ /( ) ] τ τJB where ∆f interpulse frequency change       t transmitted pulse length       T transmission time to and from target       ∆f interpulse phase change       ∆t time jitter       J A/D sampling time jitter       Bt time-bandwidth product of pulse compression        system ( Bt = unity for CW pulses)       ∆PW pulse-width jitter       A pulse amplitude, V       ∆A interpulse amplitude changeTABLE 2.5  Instability Limitations ch02.indd   72 12/20/07   1:46:10 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	MTI Radar.  MTI RADAR  2.736x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 2 The rms pulse-to-pulse transmitter phase-shift change (if a power amplifier) must  be less than  ∆φ= = =1 316000316 0 180. 
rad  (2.51) The stalo or coho frequency change in the interpulse period must be less than  ∆f=× ×=−1 316 2 100 1236100 46( ) ( . ).πHz (2.52) which is a stability of 1 part in 1010 for the stalo (at about 3 GHz) and 1 part in 108 for  the coho (assuming a 30-MHz IF frequency). The coho locking (if a pulsed oscillator system) must be within  ∆φ= = =1 316000316 0 180. 
rad (2.53) The pulse timing jitter must be less than  ∆t= =×= ×− − τ 316 2 12 10 316 24 5 106 9. s  (2.54) The pulse-width jitter must be less than  ∆PW s = =×= ×− − τ 316 12 10 3166 106 9 (2.55) The pulse amplitude change must be less than  ∆A A= = =1 316000316 0 3 . percent (2.56) The A/D sampling time jitter must be less than  J= =×= ×− − τ 316 12 10 3166 106 9s (2.57) Of the above requirements, oscillator phase noise may dominate. 
However, in  systems with large bandwidths (short compressed pulses), the timing jitter require - ments become significant and may require special clock regeneration circuitry at key  system locations. Effect of Quantization Noise on Improvement Factor.  Quantization noise,  introduced in the A/D converter, limits the attainable MTI improvement factor. 
 Consider a conventional video MTI system, as shown in Figure 2.79. Because the  peak signal level is controlled by the linear-limiting amplifier, the peak excursion of  the phase-detector output is known, and the A/D converter is designed to cover this  excursion. If the A/D converter uses N bits and the phase-detector output is from −1 to  +1, the quantization interval is 2/(2N − 1). 
The rms value of the signal-level deviation  ch02.indd   73 12/20/07   1:46:21 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	MTI Radar. 
2.74  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 2 introduced by the A/D converter is 2 2 1 1 2 /[( ) ].N−  The limit on the MTI improve - ment factor that this imposes on a signal reaching the full excursion of the phase detec - tor is found by substituting in the following equation from Table 2.5:  IA A N= = −    =−20 201 2 1 3 0201log l og [( ) . ]log [∆( ( ) . ] 2 1 3 0N−  (2.58) Because two quadrature channels contribute independent A/D noise, the average  limit on the improvement factor of a full-range signal is  IN N= −  = − 20 2 13 0 220 2 1 1 5 log ( ).log [( ) . 
] (2.59) If the signal does not reach the full excursion of the A/D converter, which is normally  the case, then the quantization limit on I is proportionately more severe. For example,  if the system is designed so that the mean level of the strongest clutter of interest is   3 dB below the A/D converter peak, the limit on I would be 20 2 1 0 7510⋅ − ⋅ log [ ( ) . ]N. 
  (This is tabulated in Table 2.6.) This discussion of A/D quantization noise has assumed perfect A/D converters.  Many A/D converters, particularly under high-slew-rate conditions, are less than per - fect. This, in turn, leads to system limitations more severe than predicted here (see  Section 2.13).FIGURE 2.79  Digital MTI consideration TABLE 2.6 Typical Limitation on I Due to A/D Quantization Number of Bits, N Limit on MTI Improvement Factor I, dB 10 59.0 11 65.0 12 71.0 13 77.0 14 83.0 15 89.1 16 95.1 ch02.indd   74 12/20/07   1:46:28 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	MTI Radar.  MTI RADAR  2.756x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 2 Pulse Compression Considerations.† When an MTI system is used with pulse  compression, the system target detection capability in clutter may be as good as a  system transmitting the equivalent short pulse, or the performance may be no better  than a system transmitting the same length CW pulse. 
The kind of clutter environment,  the system instabilities, and the signal processing utilized determine where the system  performance will fall between the above two extremes. Unless provision is incorpo - rated for coping with system instabilities and clutter spectral spread, the MTI pulse  compression system may fail to work at all in a clutter environment. Ideally, a pulse compression receiver coupled with an MTI would appear as in  Figure 2.80 a.‡ If the pulse compression system was perfect, the compressed pulse  would look as if the radar had transmitted and received a short pulse, and MTI pro - cessing could proceed as if the pulse compression had not existed. 
In practice, the  compressed pulse will have time sidelobes from three basic causes. The first is wave - form and system design, which includes components that may be nonlinear with  frequency, etc. These sidelobes will be stable. 
That is, they should repeat precisely on  a pulse-to-pulse basis and thus will cancel in the MTI canceler. It is assumed that the  radar system is fully coherent as required by rule 3 in Section 2.17. The second cause  of pulse compression sidelobes is system instabilities, such as noise on local oscil - lators, transmitter time jitter, transmitter tube noise, and A/D converter jitter. 
These  sidelobes are noise-like and are proportional to the clutter amplitude. They will not  cancel in the MTI canceler. The third source of sidelobes is high-frequency ripple in  the transmitter power supply. 
If the transmitter power supply incorporates high-frequency ac-dc and/or dc-dc  converters, and if the converter frequency components are not sufficiently filtered,  there will be discrete time sidelobes, offset from the clutter in range, as predicted by  paired-echo theory.42 The paired-echo sidelobes will also have a doppler frequency  equal to the converter frequency. This frequency (  fconv) will alias into the PRF (  fr)  doppler interval at the frequency (  fdop) [ fdop = modulo (  fconv,  fr)]). These sidelobes will  not cancel unless the high-frequency converters are synchronized to a multiple of the  PRF, in which case fdop = 0. 
Assume that the noise-like component of the sidelobes is down 50 dB from the  peak transmitted signals. This noise-like component will not cancel in the MTI sys - tem, and therefore, for each clutter area that exceeds the system threshold by 50 dB  or more, the residue will exceed the detection threshold. If the clutter exceeds the  threshold by 70 dB, the residue from the MTI system will exceed the detection  threshold by 20 dB, eliminating the effectiveness of the MTI. 
Figure 2.80 b shows a  sketch of this effect. To ensure that the noise-like pulse-compression sidelobes will not exceed the system  noise after the MTI canceler, the system stability budget must ensure that the instability  sidelobe level is lower than the dynamic range of the receiving system. The receiving  system dynamic range is ultimately determined (in a well-designed system) by the IF  †  All signal processing following the A/D detector is done digitally. 
It is more meaningful, however, to describe and  depict the processing in an analog manner. ‡  The IF bandpass limiter [ Radar Handbook, 2 nd Ed., pp. 3.30–3.32] shown in this and subsequent diagrams has an  amplitude output characteristic that is linear for input signal voltages from noise level to within 6 dB of the limiter  output maximum voltage and  then transitions smoothly to the maximum output voltage.32 The phase of the input  signal is precisely preserved. 
These limiter characteristics exist whether the filter is implemented in analog circuitry  or a digital algorithm. ch02.indd   75 12/20/07   1:46:28 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. 
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	MTI Radar. 2.76  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 2 bandpass limiter that precedes the A/D converter. If system instabilities cannot be con - trolled to be less than the system dynamic range, then the system dynamic range should  be decreased. 
(An alternative to decreasing the dynamic range is to depend on a cell- averaging constant false alarm rate (CA-CFAR) processor after the signal processing  to provide a threshold that rides over the residue noise, but the efficacy of this method  depends on the residue noise being completely noise-like, which is unlikely.) After addressing the unstable pulse-compression sidelobes, it is still necessary to  control detections from residue caused by the spectral spread of the clutter or by low  frequency transmitter power supply ripple. This can be accomplished by limiting the  maximum signal amplitude at the input to the canceler. The process described above  is depicted in Figure 2.81. 
One approach that has been successful in achieving the maximum MTI system  performance attainable within the limits imposed by system and clutter instabilities FIGURE 2.80  Pulse compression with MTI: ( a) ideal but difficult-to-achieve combination  and ( b) effect of oscillator on transmitter instabilities FIGURE 2.81  Practical MTI pulse-compression combination ch02.indd   76 12/20/07   1:46:29 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	MTI Radar. 
 MTI RADAR  2.776x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 2 is shown in Figure 2.81. (Transmitter noise will be used in the following discussion  to represent all possible system instabilities that create noise-like pulse-compression  time sidelobes.) Limiter 1 is set to limit the system dynamic range to the range between peak clutter  and clutter instability noise. Limiter 2 is set so that the dynamic range at its output is  equal to the expected MTI improvement factor as limited by clutter spectral spread  or low-frequency transmitter power supply ripple. 
These limiter settings cause the  residue due to transmitter noise and the residue due to other instabilities, such as quan - tization noise and internal-clutter motion, each to be equal to front-end thermal noise  at the canceler output. This allows maximum sensitivity without an excessive false- alarm rate. Limiter 1 is a very efficient constant-false-alarm-rate device against system  instabilities because it suppresses the instability noise in direct proportion to the clutter  signal strength but does not suppress at any time when the clutter signal is not strong. 
 Although the limiters cause partial or complete suppression of some desired targets in  the clutter areas, no targets are suppressed that could otherwise have been detected in  the presence of clutter residue at the system output if the limiters had not been used. As a specific example, consider a system with a pulse-compression ratio of about  30 dB and system instability noise approximately 28 dB below the carrier power.  Assume that the MTI canceler improvement factor is 30 dB, limited by clutter spec - tral spread. 
With the above system parameters, a receiver system that will provide  the maximum obtainable performance is shown in Figure 2.82. At the output of the  pulse-compression network, the system instability noise will be equal to or less than  thermal noise for either distributed clutter or point clutter, and the peak clutter signals  will vary from about 28 dB above thermal noise for evenly distributed clutter to 58 dB  above thermal noise for strong point clutter. Because the MTI canceler is expected to attenuate clutter by 30 dB, the second lim - iter is provided to prevent the residue from strong clutter from exceeding the threshold. 
 Without the second limiter, a strong-point reflector that was 58 dB above noise at the  canceler input would have a residue 28 dB above noise at the canceler output. This  would be indistinguishable from an aircraft target. It the transmitter noise were 15 dB less than assumed above, the first limiter would  be set 43 dB above thermal noise and much less target suppression would occur. 
Thus  target detectability would improve in and near the strong clutter areas even though the  MTI improvement factor was still limited to 30 dB by internal-clutter motion. In summary, the noise-like pulse compression sidelobes and the duration of the  uncompressed pulse dictate how effective a pulse-compression MTI system can be.  Systems have been built in which transmitter noise and long uncompressed pulses  combined to make the systems incapable of detecting aircraft targets in or near land  clutter. 
Some existing pulse-compression systems have not deliberately provided the  FIGURE 2.82  MTI with pulse compression ch02.indd   77 12/20/07   1:46:30 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	MTI Radar. 
2.78  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 2 two separate limiters described above, but the systems work because dynamic range is  sufficiently restricted by circuit components. Other systems, such as those that delib - erately hard-limit before pulse compression for CFAR reasons, do not have clutter  residue problems but suffer from significant target suppression in the clutter areas. An alternative to the use of limiters is the use of clutter maps in conjunction  with the CA-CFAR. 
Clutter maps work well for stationary radars operating at fixed  frequencies, but are less effective for other radars. The CA-CFAR is useful, even  for a system with IF limiters, because there will be small variations (on the order of  a few dB) in the combination of clutter residue and system noise. To reemphasize,  however, without the limiters, there may be tens of dB’s difference between clutter  residue and system noise. 
2.13 DYNAMIC RANGE AND A/D CONVERSION  CONSIDERATIONS The accurate conversion of the radar IF signal into a digital representation of the  complex envelope is an important step in the implementation of a modern digital sig - nal processor. This analog-to-digital (A/D) conversion must preserve the linearity of  amplitude and phase over the required dynamic range, have a small effect on overall  radar system noise temperature, and be free from undesired spurious responses. Advances in A/D converter technology is now making it possible to directly con - vert an analog IF signal into a corresponding digital complex representation, rather  than going through the intermediate step of first downconverting the IF signal into  baseband in-phase (I) and quadrature (Q) components and subsequently using a sepa - rate A/D converter in each of these two channels. 
A flow chart of a direct IF A/D converter is illustrated in Figure 2.83 along with  spectral representations of the signal throughout the conversion process. The IF input  centered at the frequency fIF is first passed through a bandpass filter to ensure that  negligible aliasing will occur during the subsequent A/D conversion process. On the  right in Figure 2.83, the top graph shows the positive and negative parts of the signal  spectrum at the IF filter output. 
The positive part of this spectrum corresponds to the  complex envelope, which needs to be translated into the digital I and Q representation.  This filter output becomes the input to the A/D converter operating at a sampling rate  of fAD. The spectrum of the A/D converter output is again shown, and it is obtained  simply by replicating the original IF spectrum from minus infinity to plus infinity with  a period of fAD. 
In this example, an A/D conversion rate of f fAD IF = ⋅4 3 is assumed. The  optimum choice of the A/D converter sampling rate ensures that the negative part of  the spectrum has the smallest possible overlap with the positive part of the spectrum. The smallest possible overlap occurs when the A/D sampling rate is related to the  radar IF frequency as follows43:  ff MADIF=⋅ ⋅ −4 2 1 (2.60) where M is an integer greater than 1. 
Thus, optimum sampling rates are 4  fIF , 1.3333  fIF,  0.8 fIF , 0.57  fIF ,… etc. The corresponding maximum unaliased (or Nyquist) bandwidth  is B fNQ AD= /2. This value is, therefore, the maximum allowable cutoff bandwidth of  the IF bandpass filter at the input to the A/D converter. 
It is not strictly necessary to use   ch02.indd   78 12/20/07   1:46:35 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	MTI Radar. 
 MTI RADAR  2.796x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 2 an A/D converter sampling rate as given by Eq. 2.60, but other values will result in an   available Nyquist bandwidth less than fAD/2. This is shown in Figure 2.84 where  the normalized Nyquist bandwidth is shown as a function of the relative A/D converter  sampling rate. 
From this figure, it is seen that the direct conversion approach will fail  whenever a value of M, which is located halfway between the optimum values, is used. At the A/D converter output, the signal samples are still real valued. To be able  to extract the complex envelope corresponding to the positive part of the spectrum,  2⋅ −+A f f ( )IF, it is necessary to shift the spectrum at the A/D converter output   down in frequency by the amount fIF. 
This corresponds to a multiplication by the  time series u i ej i( )=− ⋅⋅⋅3 2π. Equivalently, the complex envelope spectrum below zero  frequency can be shifted up to zero frequency by multiplication with the time series  u i ej i( )=⋅ ⋅π 2.This results in the spectrum shown where the desired spectrum corre - sponding to the complex envelope is centered at zero frequency, but the signal still  contains the unwanted negative spectral components (light shading). As a result of  this frequency translation, the signal has now become complex. 
A digital FIR band - pass filter with a nearly rectangular response is then applied to reject the negative- frequency components as shown in the final graph on the right. The desired sampled  complex envelope representation has now been realized, but at the original sampling  rate of fAD. If desired, the oversampling can finally be removed through decimation  by a factor of 2 as shown in the last step in the figure.FIGURE  2.83 Implementation of A/D conversion using direct sampling of the IF signalA+(f)  A+(f) A+*(–f)  A+(f) A+*(–f)  A+(f) A+*(–f) A–(f) = A+*(–f)S(f)  S(f)  S’(f)  S”(f) –fIF fIF 0  –fIF fIF 0  –fIF fIF 0  –fIF fIF 0 Complex Envelope  Sampled @ fAD/2 Negative  Spectrum  Suppressed Spectrum  Shifted Up  to Zero Direct  Sampling  @ fAD IF  Filter ~ ~ ~  A/D  FIR  FILTER  DEC  By 2 Decimate by 2IF INPUT ej.i2pfAD fAD =.fIF4 3 ch02.indd   79 12/20/07   1:46:50 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	MTI Radar. 2.80  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 2 A/D converters are typically characterized by their signal-to-noise ratio (SNR)  performance referred to a bandwidth equal to the A/D sampling rate. 
Often this SNR  is not as high as one would expect based on the number of bits used by the A/D   converter. Sometimes the actual performance of an A/D converter is characterized by  an effective number of bits, smaller than the actual number of bits and correspond - ing to the achievable SNR. The SNR of an A/D converter sets an upper limit on the  achievable improvement factor. 
2.14 ADAPTIVE MTI When the doppler frequency of the returns from clutter is unknown at the radar input,  special techniques are required to guarantee satisfactory clutter suppression. As dis - cussed in Section 2.10, the doppler filter bank will usually be effective against moving  clutter. This requires that the individual filters be designed with a low sidelobe level  in the regions where clutter may appear and that each filter be followed by appropri - ate CFAR processing circuits to reject unwanted clutter residue. 
When clutter sup - pression is to be implemented with a single MTI filter, it is necessary to use adaptive  techniques to ensure that the clutter falls in the MTI rejection notch. An example of  such an adaptive MTI is TACCAR,31 originally developed for airborne radars. In many  applications, the adaptive MTI will further have to take into account the situation  where multiple clutter sources with different radial velocities are present at the same  range and bearing. 
Usually the doppler shift of clutter returns is caused by the wind field, and early  attempts of compensating in the MTI have varied the coho frequency sinusoidally as a  function of azimuth based on the average wind speed and direction. This approach is FIGURE  2.84 Available Nyquist bandwidth vs. A/D converter sampling rate0 1.5 1 0.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5 500.050.10.150.20.250.30.350.40.450.5 M = 1 M = 2 Relativ e A/D sampling rate –fAD/fIFRelative Nyquist Bandwidth – BNQ/fAD ch02.indd   80 12/20/07   1:46:51 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	MTI Radar.  MTI RADAR  2.816x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 2 unsatisfactory because the wind field rarely is homogeneous over a large geographical  area and because the wind velocity usually is a function of altitude due to wind shear  (important for rain clutter and chaff). 
Against a single clutter source, an implementa - tion is required that permits the MTI clutter notch to be shifted as a function of range.  An example of such an adaptive MTI implementation is shown in Figure 2.85. The  phase-error circuit compares the clutter return from one sweep to the next. 
Through  a closed loop, which includes a smoothing time constant, the error signal controls  a phase shifter at the coho output such that the doppler shift from pulse to pulse is  removed. It should be noted that since the first sweep entering the MTI is taken as a  reference, any phase shift run-out as a function of range will increase proportionally  to the number of sweeps. Ultimately this run-out will exceed the speed of response  of the closed loop, and the MTI must be reset. 
This type of closed-loop adaptive MTI  must, therefore, be operated for a finite set (batch) of pulses to ensure that this will not  happen. Such batch-mode operation is also required if a combination of MTI operation  and frequency agility is desired. If a bimodal clutter situation is caused by the simultaneous presence of returns from  land clutter and weather or chaff, an adaptive MTI can be implemented following a  fixed-clutter-notch MTI section, as illustrated in Figure 2.86. 
The number of zeros  used in the fixed- (zero doppler) clutter-notch section of the MTI is determined by the  required improvement factor and the spectral spread of the land clutter. Typically, the  fixed-notch MTI would use two or three zeros. For the adaptive portion of the MTI,  a fully digital implementation is shown in which the pulse-to-pulse phase shift of the  clutter output from the first canceler is measured and averaged over a given number of  range cells. 
This estimated phase shift is added to the phase shift, which is applied to the  data on the previous sweep, and this new phase shift is applied to the current data. The range averaging must be performed separately on the I and Q components of  the measured phase in each range cell due to the 2 p ambiguity of the phase representa - tion itself. The accumulation of the applied phase shift from sweep to sweep, however,  must be performed directly on the phase and is computed modulo 2 p. 
The number of  zeros of the adaptive MTI section is again determined by the required improvement  factor and the expected spectral spread of the clutter. The phase shift is applied to the  input data in the form of a complex multiply, which again requires the transformation  of the phase angle into rectangular coordinates. This transformation can easily be  performed by a table lookup operation in a read-only memory. 
FIGURE 2.85  Block diagram of closed-loop adaptive digital MTI ch02.indd   81 12/20/07   1:46:52 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	MTI Radar. 
2.82  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 2 When doppler shifts are introduced by digital means as described above, the accu - racy of the I and Q representation of the original input data becomes an important  consideration. Any dc offset, amplitude imbalance, quadrature phase error, or nonlin - earity will result in the generation of undesired sidebands that will appear as residue  at the canceler output. A discussion of A/D conversion considerations was presented  in Section 2.13. 
In the adaptive MTI implementation described above, the number of zeros allo - cated to each of the two cancelers was fixed, based on an a priori assessment of the  clutter suppression requirement. The only variation possible would be to completely  bypass one (or both) of the MTI cancelers if no land clutter or weather or chaff returns  are received on a given radial. A more capable system can be implemented if the num - ber of zeros can be allocated dynamically to either clutter source as a function of range. 
 This leads to a fully adaptive MTI implementation using a more complex adaptation  algorithm, as discussed below. Such an adaptive MTI may provide a performance  close to the optimum discussed in Section 2.7. In order to illustrate the difference in performance between such candidate MTI  implementations, a specific example is considered next. 
For this example, land clutter  returns are present at zero doppler with a normalized spectral spread of sfT = 0.01, and  chaff returns are present at a normalized doppler offset of fdT = 0.25 with a normalized  spectral spread of sfT = 0.05. The power ratio of the land clutter to that of the chaff is  denoted Q (dB). Thermal noise is not considered in this example. 
In both cases, the  total number of filter zeros is assumed to be equal to 3. For the adaptive MTI with a  fixed allocation of zeros, two zeros are located at zero doppler and the remaining zero  is centered on the chaff returns. In the optimum MTI, the zero locations are chosen  so that that overall improvement factor is maximized. 
The results of this comparison  are presented in Figure 2.87, which shows the improvement factor for the optimum  and the adaptive MTI as a function of the power ratio Q (dB). When Q is small so that  chaff returns dominate, a significant performance improvement can be realized by  using all MTI filter zeros to cancel the chaff returns. The performance difference for  large values of Q is a result of an assumption made that the location of the third zero  remains fixed at the chaff doppler frequency. 
In reality, the adaptive MTI would move FIGURE 2.86  Open-loop adaptive MTI for cancellation of simultaneous fixed and moving clutter ch02.indd   82 12/20/07   1:46:52 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	MTI Radar. 
 MTI RADAR  2.836x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 2 its third zero to the land clutter as the land clutter residue starts to dominate the output  of the first canceler. The zero locations of the optimum MTI are shown in Figure 2.88  and can be seen to move between the land clutter at zero doppler toward the doppler  of the chaff returns as the relative level of the land clutter becomes small. 2.15 RADAR CLUTTER MAPS In many MTI radar applications, the clutter-to-noise ratio in the receiver will exceed the  improvement factor limit of the system even when techniques such as sensitivity time  control (STC), improved radar resolution, and reduced antenna gain close to the horizon  are used to reduce the level of clutter returns. 
The resulting clutter residues after the MTI  canceler must, therefore, be further suppressed to prevent saturation of the PPI display  and/or an excessive false-alarm rate in an automatic target detection (A TD) system. Against spatially homogeneous sources of clutter such as rain, sea clutter, or corri - dor chaff, a cell-averaging constant-false-alarm-rate (CA-CFAR) processor following  the MTI filter will usually provide good suppression of the clutter residues. Special  features are sometimes added to the CA-CFAR, such as greatest-of-selection or two- parameter (scale and shape) normalization logic, in order to improve its effectiveness  at clutter boundaries if the probability distribution of the clutter amplitude is non- gaussian. 
However, when the clutter returns are significantly nonhomogeneous, as is  the case for typical land clutter returns, the performance of the cell-averaging CFAR  will not be satisfactory and other means must be implemented to suppress the output  residues to the noise level. The traditional solution to this problem has been to deliberately reduce the receiver  dynamic range prior to the MTI filter to the same value as the maximum system  improvement factor. Theoretically, then, the output residue should be at or below the  normal receiver noise level, and no false alarms would be generated. 
In practice, the  introduction of IF limiting against the ground clutter returns will result in an additional FIGURE 2.87  Improvement factor comparison of  optimum and adaptive MTI against fixed and moving  clutter of ratio Q FIGURE 2.8 8 Location of the three filter zeros  for an optimum MTI used against  fixed and mov - ing clutter ch02.indd   83 12/20/07   1:46:53 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	MTI Radar. 
2.84  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 2 improvement factor restriction, as discussed in Section 2.11. Consequently, for the  limited IF dynamic range to have the desired effect on the output residues, the limit  level must be set 5 to 15 dB below the improvement factor limit of the linear system.  The net result is that some of the clutter suppression capability of the MTI radar must  be sacrificed in exchange for control of the output false-alarm rate. 
Since returns from land clutter scatterers usually are spatially fixed and, therefore,  appear at the same range and bearing from scan to scan, it has long been recognized  that a suitable memory circuit could be used to store the clutter residues and remove  them from the output residue on subsequent scans by either subtraction or gain nor - malization. This was the basic principle of the so-called area MTI, and many attempts  have been made to implement an effective version of this circuit over an extended span  of time. The main hindrance to its success has been the lack of appropriate memory  technology, since the storage tube (long the only viable candidate) lacks in resolution,  registration accuracy, simultaneous read-and-write capability, and stability. 
The devel - opment of high-capacity semiconductor memories is the technological breakthrough  that has made the design of a working area MTI a reality. The area MTI  is better known  today as a clutter map , but both terms are used. The clutter map may be considered as a type of CFAR where the reference samples,  which are needed to estimate the level of the clutter (or clutter residue), are collected  in the cell under test on a number of previous scans. 
Since aircraft targets usually  move several resolution cells from one scan to the next, it is unlikely that the reference  samples will be contaminated by a target return. Alternatively, by making the averag - ing time (in terms of past scans) long, the effect of an occasional target return can be  minimized. Although the primary purpose of the clutter map is to prevent false alarms  due to discrete clutter or clutter residues that are at a fixed location, it may also be  necessary to consider slowly moving point clutter in the clutter map design, either to  suppress bird returns or because the radar is on a moving platform (e.g., a ship). 
The memory of a clutter map is usually organized in a uniform grid of range and  azimuth cells, as illustrated in Figure 2.89. Each map cell will typically have 8 to  16 bits of memory so that it will handle the full dynamic range of signals at its input,  which makes it possible to detect a strong target flying over a point of clutter (some - times referred to as superclutter visibility ). The dimensions of each cell are a compro - mise between the required memory and several performance characteristics. 
These are  the minimum target velocity that will not be suppressed by the map (so-called cutoff  velocity), its transient response, and the loss in sensitivity caused by the clutter map  (similar to a CFAR loss). The minimum cell size will be constrained by the size of the  radar resolution cell. FIGURE 2.89  Clutter map cell definition ch02.indd   84 12/20/07   1:46:53 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	MTI Radar.  MTI RADAR  2.856x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 2 Each map cell is updated by the radar returns (or residues) falling within its borders  (or in its vicinity) on several previous scans. 
To save memory, the cells are usually  updated by using a simple recursive (single-pole) filter of the form  y i y i x i ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) = − ⋅ − + ⋅ 1 1α α (2.61) where y(i − 1) is the clutter map amplitude from the previous scan, y(i) is the updated  clutter map amplitude, x(i) is the radar output on the present scan, and the constant   a  determines the memory of the recursive filter. The test for detecting a target based  on the output x(i) is  x i k y iT ( ) ( ) ≥ ⋅ −1 (2.62) where the threshold constant kT is selected to give the required false-alarm rate.  Alternatively, the radar output can be normalized on the basis of the clutter map  content to obtain an output z ix i y i( )( ) ( )=−1, which can be processed further if required. 
 Analogously to the implementation of the cell-averaging CFAR processor, the ampli - tude x(i) can be obtained using a linear, square-law, or logarithmic detector. The loss in detectability due to the clutter map is analogous to the CFAR loss ana - lyzed in the literature for many different conditions. An analysis of the clutter map loss  for single-hit detection using a square-law detector has been presented by Nitzberg.44  These and other results can be summarized into a single universal curve of clutter map  loss, LCM, as a function of the clutter map ratio x/Leff, as shown in Figure 2.90, where   x defines the required false-alarm probability according to Pf = 10−x and Leff is the  effective number of past observations averaged in the clutter map defined as  Leff=−2α α (2.63) For example, for Pf = 10−5 and a  = 0.125, the clutter map loss is LCM = 1.8 dB since   x = 5 and Leff = 15 for this case. 
Also shown in Figure 2.90 is the curve for the conven - tional CA-CFAR,45 where all reference samples are equally weighted. If more than one  noise and/or clutter amplitude is used to update the clutter map content on each scan,  the value of Leff should be increased proportionally. It should also be noted that most  radars base their target detection on multiple hits using some form of video integra - tion, and that a clutter map loss based on the single-hit results of Figure 2.90 could be  much too large. 
An analysis of the performance of typical implementations of clutter maps has been  discussed in Khoury and Hoyle.46 From this reference, a typical transient-response  curve is shown in Figure 2.91 for a single point clutter source 20 dB above thermal  noise that fluctuates from scan-to-scan according to a Rayleigh probability density  function, a filtering constant of a  = 0.125 and assuming four returns noncoherently  integrated in each clutter map cell. The abscissa is in radar scans, and the ordinate is  probability of detection of the point clutter source. Since the clutter point has the same  amplitude statistics as thermal noise, the output false-alarm rate approaches Pf = 10−6  asymptotically. 
Against a slowly moving source of clutter (e.g., birds), the probability of detection  may increase as the clutter source crosses the boundary between two clutter map cells.  To prevent this, a spreading technique can be used, through which each clutter map  cell will be updated—not only with radar returns falling within its boundaries, but also  ch02.indd   85 12/20/07   1:47:00 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. 
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	MTI Radar. 2.86  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 2 by using radar returns in adjacent cells in range and azimuth. Through the use of such  spreading, an additional degree of control over the clutter map velocity response can  be achieved. 
An example of the velocity response of a clutter map including such spreading is  shown in Figure 2.92. The range extent of the clutter map cell is 5 µs, the radar reso - lution cell is 1 µs, n = 4 pulses are noncoherently integrated, the filtering constant is  a  = 0.125, the update interval is 5 s, and the SNR = 20 dB. On each scan, the clutter  map cell is updated with the radar amplitudes in the five range cells falling within  the clutter map cell and with the amplitude from one additional radar resolution cell  before and after the clutter map cell.FIGURE 2.90  Universal curve for determining detectability loss caused by the  clutter map FIGURE 2.91  Transient response of clutter map due to  Swerling Case 2 point clutter model ch02.indd   86 12/20/07   1:47:01 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	MTI Radar.  MTI RADAR  2.876x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 2 It is seen from Figure 2.92 that the velocity response characteristic of the clutter  map from stopband to passband is somewhat gradual in this particular implementation. 
 This is partly due to the large size of the clutter map cell relative to the radar resolu - tion. A finer-grain map with additional spreading would have a much better velocity  response characteristic. A potential problem with the type of amplitude clutter map described in this sec - tion is the fact that a large target flying in front of a smaller target may cause enough  buildup in the map to suppress the small target. 
One way to overcome this problem in  a system that includes automatic tracking would be to use the track prediction gate to  inhibit updating of the clutter map with new (target) amplitudes. 2.16 SENSITIVITY-VELOCITY CONTROL (SVC) In the mid-1980s, several radar researchers had realized that signal processing algo - rithms to estimate the unambiguous radial velocity of a target using multiple PRF  dwells during the time of target were becoming practical. These radial velocity esti - mates could be used for improved false-alarm control against slow-moving targets  such as birds.30,47 When such radial velocity measurements are paired with corre - sponding cross section estimates a powerful discriminant for distinguishing between  slow-moving birds and low cross-section missiles becomes possible using the so- called sensitivity velocity control (SVC) algorithm.48 The SVC Concept. 
 Sensitivity velocity control (SVC) is used when a radar must  detect aircraft and missile targets in the presence of returns from unwanted targets  such as large birds or bird flocks. The criteria to accept or reject targets is based on a  combination of the radial velocity and apparent RCS (radar cross section) of the target  returns. The desired targets may have an RCS smaller than a single bird, or possibly  FIGURE 2.92  Velocity response of clutter map ch02.indd   87 12/20/07   1:47:01 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	MTI Radar. 2.88  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 2 a bird flock (in a single radar resolution cell). 
Thus, discrimination requires a parame - ter in addition to the target RCS. The available parameter is target radial velocity. Birds  typically fly at 40 knots or less, whereas targets of concern usually have airspeeds of  100 knots or more. 
If the radar can make unambiguous radar doppler measurements  of, e.g., ±160 knots with a single CPI (coherent processing interval), the radar can  determine the true radial velocity of each radar echo from returns of three or more  consecutive CPIs at different PRFs. The acceptance criteria of the SVC algorithm48 relates to the type of target (aircraft,  missile, bird, etc.) being accepted or rejected. In general, the criteria accepts large tar - gets having low to high radial velocities. 
The smaller the apparent radar cross section  of the target, the higher the true radial velocity must be for acceptance. The true radial  velocity versus apparent radar cross section profile is intended to accept aircraft and  missiles but reject birds. Therefore, threatening targets that have high radial veloci - ties, but very small RCS, can be instantly identified, whereas returns from birds, with  their slow radial velocities, can be censored. 
A typical SCV accept/reject algorithm is  depicted in Figure 2.93. To obtain the doppler space of ±160 knots, ambiguous range PRFs must be used.  This requires approximate PRFs of 1400 Hz at L band, 3,300 Hz at S band, and  11,000 Hz at X band (unambiguous ranges, respectively, 58 nmi, 27 nmi, and 5 nmi). 
 The tradeoff for selecting PRFs is that in a dense target environment, when try - ing to resolve true radial velocity using different PRFs, “ghosts”§ may be created.  FIGURE  2.93 Illustrative acceptance/rejection criteria of SVCFighter  Aircraft  Waves Helicopter  Missile  Radial Velocity (knots) General  Aviation  T Cross Section - dBsm ACCEPT ACCEPT  Birds Commercial  Airliner  0 Positive Negative REJECTWaves  Birds TWA  §  “Ghosts” occur when targets (or noise peaks) at different unambiguous ranges fold into the same, but incorrect,  true range cell. The velocity resolution algorithm then gives an incorrect result, and the ghosts may be declared as  threatening targets. 
ch02.indd   88 12/20/07   1:47:03 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	MTI Radar. 
 MTI RADAR  2.896x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 2 In addition to the “ghost” problem, multiple range ambiguities lead to targets having  to compete with clutter at all ranges. In particular, targets at long distances have to  compete with strong clutter returns in the first, or several, range intervals. Because of the ghosting problem, in order to minimize range ambiguities while  retaining adequate doppler space, RF frequencies of 1400 MHz or lower are best  suited for the SVC unwanted target discrimination technique. 
Range- and Range Rate Ambiguity Resolution.  To apply the SVC algorithm,  true range and radial velocity (range-rate) must be determined from the range-ambig - uous and doppler-ambiguous waveform. This requires multiple detections from the  same target. 
Assume a doppler filter bank of n-pulse FIR filters and assume a process - ing dwell that consists of three CPIs. The CPIs must use different PRFs and may also  employ different RF frequencies. (The different RF frequencies change target RCS  statistics from Swerling 1 to Swerling 2, and thus less radar energy is required for high  probability of detection.) The CPIs must have (1) sufficient transmitted pulses so that  n returns (enough to fill an n-pulse filter) will be received from the most distant target  of interest and the most distant clutter and (2) one additional pulse to enable velocity  determination (more on this later). 
True Range Determination.  The most straightforward way to detect a target and  simultaneously determine its true range is to determine, on each CPI, all “primitive”  detections at the output of the doppler filter bank. For this, it is assumed that each  doppler filter output is processed through an appropriate clutter map threshold and  cell-averaging CFAR to control the false-alarm rate. 
For each peak detection, adjacent  amplitudes will be used to obtain an accurate ambiguous range estimate denoted ˆri,   where the subscript refers to the CPI number. Also, from the specific doppler filter  corresponding to the peak detection described above, the phase ( q1i) of the return is  saved. In addition, a corresponding phase ( q2i) obtained from an identical second dop - pler filter bank trailing (or leading) the detection filter bank by one pulse repetition  interval (PRI) is saved. 
This explains why a CPI of n + 1 pulses is needed to implement  the SVC concept. For each primitive detection in a CPI, calculate the set of all possible  target ranges out to the maximum instrumented range Rmax:  ˆˆ , ,,...,, max R r m R m mi i i = + ⋅ =PRI wher e0 1 2 PRI m R R ii max m ax , int( / ) , , = + = 1 1 2 3 (2.64) where RPRI,i is the ambiguous range interval corresponding to the ith CPI. After the  primitive detections from all CPIs in the processing dwell have been processed, the  values of ˆRi from all CPIs are sorted into a single list. 
A final range detection and  its true range is then found as a cluster of three primitive detections having possible  ranges within an error window of two to three times the standard deviation of the  ambiguous range estimate. True Radial Velocity Determination.  For each true target detection, an unam - biguous radial velocity estimate must next be determined using a similar proce - dure to that described above for range. 
For this, an accurate estimate, ˆ ,fd i, of the  ambiguous target radial velocity must be obtained at the range corresponding to  the ambiguous primitive target detection on each CPI. This frequency estimation  problem has been studied by many authors with the best approach being defined  ch02.indd   89 12/20/07   1:47:18 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. 
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	MTI Radar. 2.90  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 2 by the maximum likelihood estimate.49 For a single-pulse signal-to-noise ratio S1  and n pulses in a CPI, the Cramer-Rao lower bound for the accuracy of the doppler  frequency estimate is  σ πf S n n S n n PRF= ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ −= ⋅ ⋅ −6 2 103898 112 12( ). ( ) (2.65) Since the maximum likelihood estimation procedure tends to require a tedious  computational burden, a simplified approach for estimating the doppler frequency is  highly desirable. 
One such approach using phase measurements of the doppler filter  output at times separated by one interpulse period* was presented in McMahon and  Barrett.50 The normalized doppler frequency estimate is  fd i i i , , , PRF=− ⋅θ θ π1 2 2 (2.66) and the corresponding radial velocity is  ˆ,vf id i=⋅λ 2 (2.67) In most cases of interest, the accuracy of this estimate of doppler frequency is as  good as the maximum likelihood procedure. Expressed in terms of the numerator of  Eq. 2.65, which will be denoted by k, a simulation of the phase-difference estima - tor using different weighting functions for the doppler filter bank are summarized  in Figure 2.94. 
It is noted that the performance of the phase-difference estimation  procedure is best when moderate Taylor weighting functions are used. For uniform  weighting, the procedure would be substantially inferior to the maximum likelihood  approach. The increase in the constant k for the more severe weighting cases is the  result of the SNR loss resulting from the use of weighting. 
Using an approach similar to that used to resolve the range ambiguity, all possible  radial velocities are then enumerated to the maximum negative and positive radial  velocity of interest on each of the CPIs:  ˆˆ , ( ),...,, max max V v m V m m mi i B i = + ⋅ = − − −1 0 , ,, ,..., int( / )max max m ax ,1 2 1m m V VB i wher e = + i=1 23, , (2.68) In this equation, VB i i , / = ⋅PRFλ2 is the blind velocity for the ith CPI. The pos - sible target radial velocities for all CPIs are then sorted into a single list, and the most  likely true radial velocity is found where at least two possible velocities fall within an  interval less than two or three times the standard deviation of the doppler frequency  estimate. The tightness of the cluster of nearly identical velocities in conjunction with  the number of CPIs contributing to the cluster can be utilized as a measure of reliability  of the unambiguous radial velocity estimate. 
*  This approach was first brought to the attention of the authors by Dr. Ben Cantrell of the U.S. Naval Research  Laboratory. 
ch02.indd   90 12/20/07   1:47:29 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	MTI Radar. 
 MTI RADAR  2.916x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 2 Comments.  The above procedure for determining true range and true radial veloc - ity has been described for a dwell of three CPIs and the assumption that each target  will have a return for each of the three CPIs. In practice, this assumption is not always  valid, and the actual implementation may choose, for example, to have the dwell con - sist of four or five CPIs, with the range and velocity determinations being based on  the best grouping of three returns. 
The actual implementation must be based on the  parameters of the system and permissible time allocated for each dwell. The PRFs of the CPIs should be selected to minimize the chance of false radial  velocity determinations. One method of selecting PRFs is similar to selecting pulse  interval ratios for staggered PRF operation, as described in Section 2.8. 
For exam - ple, if operating at an average RF frequency of 1300 MHz, at an average PRF of  1400 Hz (ambiguous velocity of 312 knots), and covering a velocity range of interest  of ±2500 knots, there are approximately 16 doppler ambiguities to cover. Using the  factors of –3, 2, –1, 3, as used in PRF stagger selection, the interpulse periods of the  four different PRFs would be in the ratio of 13, 18, 15, 19. The average of these ratios  is 16.25. 
The PRFs are calculated as 16.25·1400/13, 16.25·1400/18, 16.25·1400/15,  and 16.25·1400/19. The PRFs would be about 1750, 1264, 1517, and 1197 Hz. 2.17 CONSIDERATIONS APPLICABLE   TO MTI RADAR SYSTEMS MTI radar system design encompasses much more than signal processor design. 
 The entire radar system—transmitter, antenna, and operational parameters—must be  keyed to function as part of an MTI radar. For example, excellent MTI concepts will  not perform satisfactorily unless the radar local oscillator is extremely stable and the FIGURE  2.94 Performance of phase-difference doppler frequency estimator for different  weighting functions of the doppler filter bank10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 Sidelobe  Level - SLL (dB)Cramer-Ra o boundUniform weightin gChebyshev weightin g Taylor weightin g( )2 1 1fk S nnσ= ⋅ ⋅− 10–1100101102Doppler Error Constant - k Cramer-Ra o boundUniform weightingCheb yshev weighting Taylor weightingk S1.n.(n2 – 1)σf= ch02.indd   91 12/20/07   1:48:36 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. 
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	MTI Radar. 2.92  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 2 transmitter has very little pulse-to-pulse frequency or phase jitter. In addition, the  system must successfully operate in an environment that comprises many unwanted  targets, such as birds, insects, and automobiles. 
Hardware Considerations.  In this section, rules and facts relating to MTI radar  design, as developed during many years of work in the field, will be summarized: The rules are as follows: 1. Operate at constant duty cycle. 
2. Synchronize ac-dc and dc-dc power conditioners† to harmonics of the PRF. 3. 
Design the system to be fully coherent.‡ 4. Provide IF Limiters prior to A/D converters. 5. 
Be wary of vibration and acoustic noise. The facts are as follows: 1. The basic MTI concept does not require a long time on target to resolve targets from  fixed clutter. 
Instead, MTI systems reject fixed clutter through a subtraction process  while retaining moving targets. 2. Transmitter intrapulse anomalies have no affect on MTI performance if they repeat  precisely pulse-to-pulse. 
Rule 1.  Operate at constant duty cycle. The transmitter (whether the transmitter  is a single large tube or a distributed function as in an active phased array with many  transmit-receive elements) should be operated at constant duty cycle. 
This permits  the transmitter power supply transient effects to be identical pulse to pulse and also,  particularly applicable to solid-state transmit devices, permits the device heating and  cooling to be identical from pulse to pulse. Sometimes constant duty cycle operation is  not possible, but there are various techniques that can be used to approach this desired  condition. Consider an MTD waveform where a CPI consisting of n pulses is transmit - ted with a constant PRI. 
The next CPI uses a different PRI. Constant duty cycle can be  maintained by changing the transmitted pulse length in proportion to the change in the  PRI. If pulse compression is used, the range resolution of the compressed pulse can be  maintained by changing the pulse compression waveform. 
If it is necessary to utilize  precisely the same waveform and RF pulse length from CPI to CPI, with, for example,  a klystron transmitter, the beam pulse of the klystron can be varied to maintain con - stant beam duty cycle while the RF pulse length is maintained constant. This wastes  part of the beam pulse energy for the longer PRIs, but the average power loading on  the power supply remains constant. The same technique can be utilized with solid- state devices by changing the drain voltage pulse duration, while holding the RF pulse  constant. 
A second-order correction that has been utilized when changing between  CPIs with different PRIs is to have a transition PRI that is the average of the two PRIs.  With phased array radars, if the beam transition time between CPIs takes longer than a  PRI, it is important to keep the transmitter pulsing at a constant duty cycle during the  transition time. If constant duty cycle cannot be maintained, or when starting to radiate  †  Power conditioners accept either ac or dc input and provide a regulated dc output. 
‡  “Fully coherent” is described under rule 3. ch02.indd   92 12/20/07   1:52:13 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. 
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	MTI Radar.  MTI RADAR  2.936x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 2 after dead time, the transmitter, power supply, and heating effects must be allowed to  settle before good MTI performance can be expected. The duration of the settling time  depends on the system parameters and the requirements. 
Rule 2.  Synchronize ac-dc and dc-dc power conditioners to harmonics of the  PRF. When ac-dc and/or dc-dc power conditioners are used for voltages applied to  transmitting devices, the frequency (and its harmonics) of the converter must be atten - uated sufficiently so that they do not modulate the phase of the transmitted pulses. 
If  the power conditioner frequencies cannot be sufficiently attenuated, their frequency  should be synchronized to a multiple of the PRF of the CPI so that modulations repeat  precisely pulse-to-pulse and thus will cancel like stationary clutter . Rule 3.  Design the system to be fully coherent. 
All frequencies and timing signals  should be generated from a single master oscillator. Doing this makes the entire sys - tem coherent, and mixer products will be identical pulse-to-pulse and will, therefore,  cancel in the MTI filters. When this coherence of all frequencies is not maintained,  clutter residue will occur and must be quantified to determine if it is at an acceptable  level. 
One of the prominent places in which residue caused by unsynchronized local  oscillators has shown up is in pulse-compression sidelobes. If the pulse-compression  sidelobes from fixed clutter returns vary from pulse to pulse, they do not cancel. This  coherency issue has been further discussed by Taylor.51 Rule 4. 
 Provide IF Limiters prior to A/D converters. MTI radars require that IF  bandpass limiters exist prior to an A/D (analog/digital converter). The limiter prevents  any clutter return from exceeding the dynamic range of the A/D. 
This requirement  exists for either quadrature I, Q (in-phase, quadrature) sampling or direct sampling  with the I and Q data constructed after the A/D. The limiter must be designed to  minimize the conversion of amplitude to phase no matter how much the signal level  exceeds the limit level. If clutter saturates the A/D, the I, Q data is significantly cor - rupted. 
When limiters prevent A/D saturation, the signals are limited in a controlled  manner that still enables good clutter rejection about 90% of the time. Rule 5.  Be wary of vibration and acoustic noise. 
Many RF devices are susceptible  to both vibration and acoustic noise. An air conditioner fan blowing on waveguide  has caused degradation of improvement factor due to phase modulation of signals.  Vibrations can cause phase modulation of an oscillator. 
Acoustic noise can originate  from cooling fans, and vibrations can come from shipboard or airborne radar plat - forms. Components such as klystrons and solid-state modules can have unexpected  susceptibility to vibration. RF connectors must be secure. 
Shock mounts can be used  to isolate components from the cabinet structure. It is recommended that all RF com - ponents, in their operational configuration, be tested for phase stability in the vibration  environment in which they will be used. Fact 1. 
 The basic MTI concept does not require sufficient time-on-target to resolve  targets from fixed clutter using a linear time-invariant filter. Instead, MTI systems reject  fixed clutter through a subtraction process while retaining moving targets. An MTI   system using a two-pulse canceler requires the transmitter to transmit only two suc - cessive, identical pulses for the system to be able to reject stable fixed clutter. 
The  radar returns from the second pulse are subtracted from the returns from the first pulse.   ch02.indd   93 12/20/07   1:52:14 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. 
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	MTI Radar. 2.94  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 2 The result from this subtraction process is that the fixed clutter is removed, and moving  targets are retained. The output from the first pulse is not used, making this type of MTI  filter time-variant. 
Of course, the clutter filters may be more complex than a two-pulse  canceler,§ but the principle still remains that fixed clutter is rejected by the zeros in   the canceler transfer characteristic. This enables phased array radars to have good clut - ter rejection with short dwells.* Fact 2.  Transmitter intrapulse anomalies have no affect on MTI performance if  they repeat precisely pulse to pulse. 
Transmitted pulses should be identical. It does  not matter if there is intrapulse amplitude or frequency modulation of the transmitted  pulse, as long as it repeats precisely from pulse to pulse. If the voltage of the trans - mitter power supply varies pulse to pulse, the transmitted pulses will not be identi - cal, and the resulting variations must be quantified to determine if the limitations on  improvement factor fall within the stability budget for the system. 
However, if the only  difference between pulses is absolute phase (not intrapulse variations pulse to pulse),  some mitigation is possible. One method of compensating for small variations in the  phase of transmitter pulses follows. Lincoln Laboratory changed the original TDWR  waveform to an MTD type waveform. 
(The original TDWR waveform was constant  PRF during each antenna rotation, and processing was done with elliptic filters.) They  then modified the system “…to achieve 65-dB clutter suppression using a nearby  water tower for a target.”52 The TDWR uses a klystron transmitter tube. Typical phase  pushing for a klystron due to modulator voltage change is 10° for 1% delta-E/E. The  stability budget allocated a 75-dB limit on improvement factor to the transmitter, and  this required that the rms pulse-to-pulse power supply voltage variation be less than  1 part in 100,000. 
The transmitter power supply could not meet this requirement when  the radar changed PRF from CPI to CPI, as required by an MTD waveform. Therefore,  the actual phase of each transmitted pulse was measured, and this measured value was  used to correct the phase of the received signals for that PRI. This technique causes  small perturbations in phase from weather signals received from ambiguous ranges,  but does not interfere with velocity estimates. 
(It does degrade the improvement factor  of clutter signals received from ambiguous ranges, but for the TDWR operation, that  degradation was deemed acceptable.) Environmental Considerations.   This discussion contains essential informa - tion for those designing a modern surveillance radar to detect man-made airborne  targets. The laws of physics combined with the environment make it impossible to  design an MTI surveillance radar that does not have compromises. 
The problems  are related to the unwanted returns from birds, insects, automobiles, long-range  fixed clutter, and short- and long-range weather.53 The current state-of-the-art of  radar can ameliorate these problems, but not without some undesirable side effects.  (Many unwanted point target returns have characteristics similar to the returns from  wanted targets, and the unwanted returns may outnumber returns from desired tar - gets by the thousands.)  §  The clutter filters must be designed based on system parameters to reject the radial speed of the “fixed” clutter.  See Sections 2.4 and 2.6. 
*  It has been observed that some phased array radars have poor clutter rejection, which is often caused by failure   to follow rule 1. ch02.indd   94 12/20/07   1:52:14 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. 
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	MTI Radar.  MTI RADAR  2.956x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 2 The problems are exacerbated when anomalous or ducted propagation occurs  (anomalous propagation,  as used herein, is when the radar energy follows the curvature  of the Earth, thus causing detection of both fixed and moving clutter at long ranges).  Figure 2.95 from Shrader53 shows PPI photographs taken with an ARSR-2 radar  mounted on a 50-ft tower in flat country near Atlantic City, New Jersey. 
With normal  propagation, the expected line-of-sight is about 10 nmi, but the clutter actually goes  out to 100 nmi. The bridges across the intracoastal waterway can be seen. On occasion,  the unwanted long-range clutter and weather returns come from ambiguous ranges. 
  FIGURE  2.95 Anomalous propagation (ducting): ( a) 100-nmi maximum  range and ( b) 50-nmi maximum range ch02.indd   95 12/20/07   1:52:15 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	MTI Radar. 
2.96  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 2 The radar system must have features to cope with these situations. For example, if pulse- to-pulse staggering is used, the ambiguous-range clutter will not cancel and either the  PRI must be increased or the PRI must be made constant over the azimuth angles from  which the ambiguous range clutter is received. And be forewarned of a pitfall into which  many radar designers have fallen. 
For example, when presented with the requirement  to track 20 targets, the designer may not realize that radar returns from the 20 targets of  interest may be embedded in similar returns from thousands of unwanted targets. A typical long-range air-traffic-control radar has sufficient sensitivity to detect a  single large bird, such as a crow, seagull, or vulture (approximate RCS of 0.01 square  meter) at a range of 50 miles. If there are many such birds in the resolution cell of the  radar, then the composite RCS increases. 
Ten large birds in a resolution cell will have  an RCS of 0.1 square meter. When multipath reflections occur, such as over the ocean  when the radar beam is centered at the horizon, there can be up to a 12 dB enhancement  of the RCS of the birds, giving an apparent RCS greater than one square meter to the  flock of 10 birds. If there is 1 bird (or bird flock) per square mile, there will be about  3000 bird returns within 30 miles of the radar. 
Techniques used to counter unwanted targets are as follows: 1. Sensitivity time control (STC) used for eliminating low RCS targets in low PRF  radars—that is, radars that have no range ambiguities under normal operation 2. Enhanced high-angle gain antennas 3. 
Two-beam antennas—beam lifted above the horizon for short-range reception, and  then lowered to horizon for long range 4. MTD techniques using clutter maps. Also counting detections in small range- azimuth sectors and increasing detection thresholds in each sector if too many  detections occur. 
5. PRFs high enough so that all targets with radial velocities below 40 knots can be  censored 6. Sensitivity velocity control (SVC), which censors radially slow, small targets,  while accepting radially fast targets and large targets Combinations of techniques 1 through 4 are used in most air-traffic-control radars  where the smallest targets of interest have an RCS of one-square meter or greater. 
 Techniques 5 and 6 are used when the desired targets may have radar cross sections  similar to, or smaller than, a bird. Technique 1.  STC is the traditional method of suppressing birds and insects in a  radar with an unambiguous range PRF (a PRF low enough so that the range to targets  and clutter is unambiguous). 
STC decreases the sensitivity of the radar at short range  and then increases sensitivity, usually using a fourth-power law, as range increases.  This has the effect of not permitting detection of targets with apparent radar cross sec - tions of, say, less than 0.1 square meter. Figure 2.96 shows how effective STC can be  against birds. 
These PPI photos were taken with an L band ARSR (air-route surveil - lance radar) in Oklahoma. Note that the majority of returns from birds were elimi - nated, but not 100%. Figure 2.97 shows the effect of STC against bats and insects.†  †  Daytime bird returns and nighttime bat and insect returns can often be seen in real time—the extent depends on the  weather and time of year—on the NEXRAD (WSR-88D) weather radar images on the NOAA Internet sites. 
ch02.indd   96 12/20/07   1:52:16 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	MTI Radar. 
 MTI RADAR  2.976x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 2 FIGURE  2.96 STC can greatly reduce the number of birds displayed. Range 25 nmi. ( a) Birds seen with  MTI and ( b) birds seen with MTI and STC. 
FIGURE  2. 97  Insects with and without STC and range 25 miles: ( a) bats and insects seen with MTI and  (b) bats and insects seen with MTI and STC ch02.indd   97 12/20/07   1:52:18 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. 
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	MTI Radar. 2.98  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 2 The typical doppler radar images presented by TV weather forecasters often have the  birds and bats and insects removed by human intervention. Technique 2. 
 STC works quite well for unwanted biological returns near the peak  of the radar beam, but when used with a cosecant-squared antenna beam it solves one  problem but creates another: it also decreases sensitivity to desired targets at high  elevation angles where the antenna gain is low. The solution to this problem is to boost  the antenna gain at high elevation angles to be considerably higher than the require - ment for the cosecant-squared pattern. Not only does this compensate for the use of  STC, but also enhances the target-to-clutter signal ratio for targets at high elevation  angles, thus improving MTI performance. 
The penalty for this solution is a loss in the  peak antenna gain that can be achieved. An illustration of this approach is provided  in Figure 2.98, which shows both the ARSR-2 antenna pattern and the corresponding  free-space coverage. FIGURE 2.98  Antenna elevation pattern for the ARSR-2 antenna:  (a) compared with the cosecant-squared pattern and ( b) free-space  coverage diagram ch02.indd   98 12/20/07   1:52:18 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	MTI Radar.  MTI RADAR  2.996x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 2 The loss in peak gain for this example, due to the boost of coverage at high angles,  was about 2 dB. 
The combination of STC with enhanced high-angle coverage does  quite well for insects and birds, but does not eliminate automobile and truck returns.  Vehicles have RCSs that equal or exceed the RCS of many desired aircraft targets. Technique 3. 
 The two-beam technique reduces the returns from very low eleva - tion angles where vehicle traffic (and many birds, bats, and insects) is encountered.  The radar transmits energy using the basic pattern, but uses a higher angle beam  for reception at shorter ranges, and the basic antenna pattern for receiving at longer  ranges. Figure 2.99 shows, underneath the transmitting feed horn, a second receive- only antenna feed horn for the high beam. 
The effective two-way antenna patterns are  shown in Figure 2.100. As previously mentioned, the above techniques (STC, two-beam antennas, and  some variation of MTD) are currently used on many air-traffic-control radars. The  two-beam antennas also utilize some high-angle gain enhancement to counter the  high-angle effects of STC. 
Technique 4.  The MTD approach is described in Section 2.2. Technique 5. 
 A brute-force technique used to eliminate targets with radial  velocities of less than approximately ±40 knots resulting in a total rejection interval  of 80 knots. To keep this rejection of velocities to no more than 25% of the doppler  space available, the ambiguous velocity must be about 320 knots. This requires  PRFs of 1,400 Hz at L band, 3,300 Hz at S band, and 11,000 at X band (unambiguous   ranges, respectively, 58 nmi, 27 nmi, and 5 nmi). 
The main challenge with this tech - nique is that fixed clutter returns from many range ambiguities, as well as all targets  of interest, fold into the first range interval. Thus, excellent clutter rejection must be  provided to prevent folded clutter from suppressing targets of interest, which may  be at any true range. Technique 6. 
 SVC, as described in Section 2.16, is used when it is necessary to  distinguish very low RCS targets from low velocity clutter, such as birds, insects, and  sea. Somewhat lower PRFs can be used than those used for technique 5 because the  FIGURE  2.99 Two-beam antenna ch02.indd   99 12/20/07   1:52:19 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. 
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	MTI Radar. 2.100  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 2 logic permits retaining many of the targets with smaller radial velocities if their RCS  is large enough. SVC still rejects bird clutter, but retains, for example, the fast incom - ing, threatening low-RCS missile, while also retaining the larger cross-section aircraft  with lower radial velocities. 
REFERENCES  1. S. Applebaum, “Mathematical description of VICI,” General Electric Co., Syracuse, NY , Report  No. 
AWCS-EEM-1, April 1961.  2. S. 
M. Chow, “Range and doppler resolution of a frequency-scanned filter,” Proc. IEE , vol. 
114,  no. 3, pp. 321–326, March 1967. 
 3. C. E. 
Muehe, “New techniques applied to air-traffic control radars,” Proc. IEEE , vol. 62,   pp. 
716–723, June 1974.  4. R. 
J. Purdy et al., “Radar signal processing,” Lincoln Laboratory Journal , vol. 12, No. 
2, 2000.  5. R. 
J. McAulay, “A theory for optimum MTI digital signal processing,” MIT Lincoln Laboratory,  Lexington, MA, Report no.1972-14 Part I, Part II, Supplement I, February 22, 1972.  6. 
E. J. Barlow, “Doppler radar,” Proc. 
IRE, vol. 37, pp. 340–355, April 1949. 
 7. W. L. 
Simkins, V . C. Vannicola, and J. 
P. Royan, “Seek Igloo radar clutter study,” Rome Air  Development Center, Report No. Rept. 
TR-77-338 (DDC AD-A047 897), October 1977.  8. W. 
Fishbein, S. W. Graveline, and O. 
E. Rittenbach, “Clutter attenuation analysis,” US Army  Electronics Command, Fort Monmouth, NJ, Report No.ECOM-2808, March 1967.  9. 
J. B. Billingsley, Low-Angle Radar Land Clutter — Measurements and Empirical Models ,  Norwich, NY: William Andrew Publishing, 2002.FIGURE  2.100  Example of coverage obtained with a two-beam antenna 0 5 1 0 1 545 40 35 30 25Height (Thousands of Feet)20 15 10 5 06°7° 8° 9° 10° 15° 20° 25° 30° 40° 60° 90° 5° 4° 3° 2° 1° 0° 20 25 30 Radar Range (Nautical Miles)Low Beam  Transmit High Beam Receiv eLow Beam Transmit & Receiv e 35 40 45 50 55 60 ch02.indd   100 12/20/07   1:52:21 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	MTI Radar.  MTI RADAR  2.1016x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 2 10. 
F. E. Nathanson and J. 
P. Reilly, “Radar precipitation echoes—Experiments on temporal, spatial,  and frequency correlation,” The Johns Hopkins University, Applied Technology Laboratory,  Report No. Tech. 
Memo TG-899, April 1967. 11. D. 
K. Barton , Radar System Analysis , Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1964. 12. 
D. K. Barton, “Radar equations for jamming and clutter,” in Supplement to IEEE Trans. 
 AES-3,  EASCON’67 Tech. Conv. Rev, November, 1967, pp. 
340–355. 13. R. 
J. Doviak and D. S. 
Zrnic, Doppler Radar and Weather Observations , Orlando, FL:  Academic Press, 1984. 14. H. 
R. Ward, “A model environment for search radar evaluation,” in EASCON ’71 Convention  Record , New York, 1971, pp. 81–88. 
15. IEEE, “IEEE Standard Radar Definitions,” Radar Systems Panel, IEEE Aerospace and Electronics  Systems Society, Report No. IEEE Std 686-1997, 1999. 
16. D. K. 
Barton and W. W. Shrader, “Interclutter visibility in MTI systems,” in IEEE EASCON ’69  Tech. 
Conv. Rec ., New York, NY , October 1969, pp. 294–297. 
17. D. K. 
Barton, Modern Radar System Analysis , Norwood, MA: Artech House, 2005, pp. 228–230. 18. 
L. Spafford, “Optimum radar signal processing in clutter,” IEEE Trans. , vol. 
IT-14, pp. 734–743,  September 1968. 19. 
L. A. Wainstein and Y . 
D. Zubakov, Extraction of Signals From Noise , New York: Dover, 1970. 20. 
J. Capon, “Optimum weighting functions for the detection of sampled signals in noise,” IRE  Trans. Information Theory,  vol. 
IT-10, pp. 152–159, April 1964. 21. 
L. R. Rabiner et al., “Terminology in digital signal processing,” IEEE Trans. 
on Audio and  Electroacoustics , vol. AU-20, no. 5, pp. 
322–337, December 1972. 22. M. 
I. Skolnik, Introduction to Radar Systems , 3rd Ed., New York: McGraw-Hill, 2001, p. 117. 
23. H. Urkowitz, “Analysis and synthesis of delay line periodic filters,” IRE Trans. 
Circuit Theory ,  vol. CT-4, no. 2, pp. 
41–53, June 1957. 24. W. 
M. Hall and H. R. 
Ward, “Signal-to-noise ratio loss in moving target indicator,” Proc. IEEE ,  vol. 56, pp. 
233–234, February 1968. 25. W. 
W. Shrader and V . Gregers-Hansen, “Comments on ‘Coefficients for feed-forward MTI radar  filters’,”  Proc IEEE , vol. 
59, pp. 101–102, January 1971. 26. 
W. D. White and A. 
E. Ruvin, “Recent advances in the synthesis of comb filters,” in IRE Nat.  Conv. 
Rec. vol. 5, pt. 
2, New York, NY , 1957, pp. 186–200. 27. 
R. H. Fletcher and D. 
W. Burlage, “Improved MTI performance for phased array in severe clutter  environments,” in IEEE Conf. Publ. 
105 , 1973, pp. 280–285. 28 A. 
V . Oppenheim and R. W. 
Schafer, Digital Signal Processing , Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall,  Inc., 1975, p. 223. 29. 
L. Zverev, “Digital MTI radar filters,” IEEE Trans.,  vol. AU-16, pp. 
422–432, September 1968. 30. Ludloff and M. 
Minker, “Reliability of velocity measurement by MTD radar,” IEEE Trans. ,   vol. AES-21, pp. 
522–528, July 1985. 31. W. 
W. Shrader, “MTI Radar,” Chap. 17 in Radar Handbook , M. 
I. Skolnik (ed.), New York:  McGraw-Hill, 1970, pp. 17–19. 
32. T. M. 
Hall and W. W. Shrader, “Statistics of clutter residue in MTI radars with IF limiting,” in  IEEE Radar Conference , Boston, MA, April 2007, pp. 
01–06. 33. G. 
Grasso, “Improvement factor of a nonlinear MTI in point clutter,” IEEE Trans. , vol. AES-4,  November 1968. 
34. H. R. 
Ward and W. W. Shrader, “MTI performance degradation caused by limiting,” in EASCON  ’68 Tech. 
Conv. Rec.,  (supplement to IEEE Trans.  vol. 
AES-4), November 1968, pp. 168–174. 35. 
G. Grasso and P. F. 
Guarguaglini, “Clutter residues of a coherent MTI radar receiver,” IEEE  Trans. , vol. AES-5, pp. 
195–204, March 1969. 36. T. 
A. Weil, “Applying the Amplitron and Stabilotron to MTI radar systems,” in IRE Nat. Conv. 
 Rec., vol. 6, pt. 5, New York, NY , 1958, pp. 
120–130. ch02.indd   101 12/21/07   10:19:31 AMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. 
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	MTI Radar. 2.102  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 2 37. T. 
A. Weil, “An introduction to MTI system design,” Electronic Progress , vol. 4, pp. 
10–16,   May 1960. 38. D. 
B. Leeson and G. F. 
Johnson, “Short-term stability for a doppler radar: Requirements, measure - ments, and techniques,” Proc. IEEE , vol. 54, pp. 
329–330, February 1966. 39. Hewlett Packard Product Note 11729B-1, March 1984. 
40. R. Vigneri et al., “A graphical method for the determination of equivalent noise bandwidth,”  Microwave Journal , vol. 
11, pp. 49–52, June 1968. 41. 
D. Steinberg, “Chapters,” Chaps.1–4 in Modern Radar: Analysis, Evaluation, and System  Design , R. S. 
Berkowitz (ed.), New York, NY: John Wiley and Sons, 1966. 42. J. 
R. Klauder, “The theory and design of chirp radars,” Bell System Technical Journal ,   vol. XXXIX, no. 
4, pp. 745–809, July 1960. 43. 
W. Rice and K. H. 
Wu, “Quadrature sampling with high dynamic range,” IEEE Trans. Aerospace  and Electronic Systems , vol. AES-18, no. 
4, pp. 736–739, November 1982. 44. 
R. Nitzberg, “Clutter map CFAR analysis,” IEEE Trans. , vol. 
AES-22, pp. 419–422, July 1986. 45. 
V . Gregers Hansen, “Constant false alarm rate processing in search radars,” in Radar — Present  and Future , IEE Conf. Publ. 
no. 105, London, UK, October 1973. 46. 
N. Khoury and J. S. 
Hoyle, “Clutter maps: Design and performance,” in IEEE Nat. Radar Conf. ,  Atlanta, GA, 1984. 
47. G. V . 
Trunk et al., “False alarm control using doppler estimation,” IEEE Trans. Aerospace and  Electronic Systems , vol. AES-26, pp. 
146–153, January 1990. 48. W. 
W. Shrader, inventor, “Sensitivity Velocity Control,” U.S. Patent 5,134,410, July 1992. 
49. C. Rife and R. 
R. Boorstyn, “Single-tone parameter estimation from discrete-time observations,”  IEEE Trans. Information Theory , vol. 
IT-20, no. 5, pp. 591–598, September 1974. 
50. D. R. 
A. McMahon and R. F. 
Barrett, “An efficient method for the estimation of the frequency of  a single tone in noise from the phases of discrete Fourier transforms,” Signal Processing , vol. 11,  pp. 169–177, 1986. 
51. J. W. 
Taylor, “Receivers,” Chap. 3 in Radar Handbook , 2nd Ed., M. I. 
Skolnik (ed.), New York:  McGraw-Hill, 1990, pp. 323–325. 52. 
J. Y . N. 
Cho et al., “Range-velocity ambiguity mitigation schemes for the enhanced terminal doppler  weather radar,” in 31st Conference on Radar Meteorology , Seattle, W A, 2003, pp. 463–466. 53. 
W. W.  Shrader, “Radar technology applied to air traffic control,” IEEE Trans. 
Communications ,  vol. 21, no. 5, pp. 
591–605, May 1973. 54. W. 
W. Shrader, “MTI radar,” Chap. 17 in Radar Handbook , M. 
I. Skolnik (ed.), New York:  McGraw-Hill, 1970, pp. 17–56. 
ch02.indd   102 12/20/07   1:52:22 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	MTI Radar. 
