13.16x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 13
Phased Array  
Radar Antennas
Joe Frank
Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory
John D. Richards
Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory
13.1 INTRODUCTION*
Phased Array Radars.  Early radar systems used antenna arrays formed by the 
combination of individual radiators. Such antennas date back to the turn of the twen -
tieth century.1,2,3 Antenna characteristics are determined by the geometric position of 
the radiators and the amplitude and phase of their excitation. As radars progressed 
to shorter wavelengths, arrays were displaced by simpler antennas such as parabolic 
reflectors. For modern radar applications, the advent of electronically controlled phase 
shifters, switches, and transmit/receive modules has once more directed attention to 
array antennas. The aperture excitation may now be modulated by controlling the 
phase of the individual elements to give beams that are scanned electronically. The 
dramatic advantage of electronically steered phased arrays as compared to reflectors 
is provided by the time required to steer beams and the flexibility in steering. While 
prior radars took seconds to steer to a new location, phased arrays take microseconds. 
In addition, the new location can be anywhere in a hemisphere. This chapter will be 
devoted to arrays of this type.
Multifunction Radar.  The capability of rapidly and accurately switching beams 
permits multiple radar functions to be performed, interlaced in time. An electronically 
steered array radar may track a great multiplicity of targets, illuminate a number of 
targets with RF energy and guide missiles toward them, and perform complete hemi -
spherical search with automatic target selection and handover to tracking. It may even 
act as a communication system, directing high-gain beams toward distant receivers and 
transmitters. Complete flexibility is possible; search and track rates may be adjusted 
to best meet particular situations, all within the limitations set by the total use of time. Chapter 13
*  Portions of this chapter that appeared in earlier editions of the Radar Handbook  were written by the late 
Theodore C. Cheston, a pioneer in phased array antennas.
ch13.indd   1 12/19/07   2:31:44 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Source: RADAR HANDBOOK 13.2  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 13
The antenna beamwidth may be changed to search some areas more rapidly with less 
gain. Frequency agility is possible with the frequency of transmission changing at will 
from pulse to pulse or, with coding, within a pulse. Very high powers may be gener -
ated from a multiplicity of amplifiers distributed across the aperture. Electronically 
controlled array antennas can give radars the flexibility needed to perform all the vari -
ous functions in a way best suited for the specific task at hand. The functions may be 
programmed adaptively to the limit of one’s capability to exercise effective automatic 
management and control.
Phased array theory was studied intensively in the 1960s. Technology advanced 
and led to a series of operational systems in the 1980s; many publications became 
available.4–15 In terms of performance improvement, ultralow sidelobes (less than 
−40 dB) were demonstrated first in the 1970s by Westinghouse Electric Corporation’s 
AWACS (Airborne Warning and Control System) and brought about tight tolerances in 
construction and phase settings. The advent of more and better computer modeling and 
sophisticated test equipment such as network analyzers has led to improved methods 
of designing well-matched apertures. Better components such as radiating elements, 
phase shifters, and power dividers are now available. More economical solid-state 
devices and memory chips have led to precision aperture phase control with correc -
tions for frequency and temperature variations. Solid-state microwave devices hold 
great promise for future systems where a solid-state module is associated with each 
radiating element; improvements in terms of aperture control, reliability, and effi -
ciency continue. Phased arrays can be controlled adaptively, particularly for sidelobe 
cancellation. This is an area where theory and understanding have advanced much. 
Also great progress has been made with indoor near-field antenna ranges,16 where 
computer-controlled precision two-dimensional radiation patterns are derived at mul -
tiple frequencies and with scanning.
Phased arrays are very expensive. As technology advances, costs are expected to be 
reduced. At the same time, the quest for better performance with lower sidelobes and 
wider bandwidth keeps the costs high.
Phased Array Antennas.  The phased array antenna has an aperture that is assem -
bled from a great many similar radiating elements, such as slots, dipoles, or patches, 
each element being individually controlled in phase and amplitude. Accurately pre -
dictable radiation patterns and beam-pointing directions can be achieved.
The general planar array characteristics are readily obtained from a few simple 
equations that are given here but discussed later in greater detail. With the elements 
spaced by l /2 (l = wavelength) to avoid the generation of multiple beams (grating 
lobes), the number of radiating elements N for a pencil beam is approximately related 
to the beamwidth by
 N
B≈10000
2,
( )q 
 qBN≈100 
where qB is the 3-dB beamwidth in degrees. The corresponding antenna gain, when the 
beam points broadside to the aperture, is
 G0 ≈ p Nh ≈ p NhLha 
ch13.indd   2 12/17/07   2:38:52 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Phased Array Radar Antennas  PHASED ARRAY RADAR ANTENNAS  13.36x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 13
where h  accounts for antenna losses ( hL) and reduction in gain due to unequal weight -
ing of the elements with a nonuniform amplitude ( ha). When scanning to an angle is 
q0, the gain of a planar array is reduced to that of the projected aperture:
 G(q0) ≈ p Nh   cos q0 
Similarly, the scanned beamwidth is increased from the broadside beamwidth 
(except in the vicinity of endfire, q0 = 90°):
 qq
qBB((
cosscanned)broadside)≈
0 
The total number of beams M (with broadside beamwidth and square stacking) 
that fit into a sphere is approximately equal to the gain and with h  ≈ 1 is thus simply 
related to N by
 M ≈ p N 
An array where the elements are fed in parallel (see Section 13.8) and scanned by 
phase shift, modulo 2 p, has limited bandwidth; for wideband operation, constant path 
lengths rather than constant phases are required. The limit is given by
 Bandwidth (%) ≈ beamwidth ( °) 
This is equivalent to limitations given by
 Pulse length = 2 × aperture size 
With these criteria, the scanned radiation pattern at 60 ° is steered by ± one-fourth 
of the beamwidth at the angle of scan as the frequency is changed over the band. If all 
the frequencies in the band are used with equal weighting, then twice the bandwidth 
(half the pulse length) becomes acceptable. At a scan angle q0, the beam steers with 
frequency through an angle dq so that
 δδq q≈f
ftan (0 rad) 
For wider bandwidths, time-delay networks have to be introduced to supplement 
the phase shifters.
Conformal Arrays.17,18 Phased arrays may conform to curved surfaces as 
required, for example, for flush-mounting on aircraft or missiles. If the surface has a 
large radius of curvature so that all the radiating elements point in substantially the 
same direction, then the characteristics are similar to those of a planar array even 
though the exact 3D position of the element has to be taken into account to calculate 
the required phase. A small radius of curvature is found with cylindrical (or spherical)  
arrays used for 360 ° coverage. Elements are switched to avoid sections of the antenna 
where they point away from the desired beam direction. Difficulties may be encoun -
tered in matching the radiating elements and in maintaining polarization purity. The 
discussion in this chapter will concentrate on planar phased arrays, rather than con -
formal arrays.
ch13.indd   3 12/17/07   2:38:55 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Phased Array Radar Antennas 13.4  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 13
3D Volumetric Search.  Three-dimensional (3D) volumetric radar search is pos -
sible with electronic scanning in both azimuth and elevation; important regions (e.g., 
the horizon) may be emphasized at will and searched more frequently. The radar may 
operate with a higher than normal false-alarm rate since targets can easily be con -
firmed by additional dwells. Phase control allows beams to be widened, for example, 
to reduce search time for the more elevated regions, where reduced ranges need less 
antenna gain. A separate rotating surveillance radar system may be added for extra 
coverage (at a second frequency) and to allow the 3D radar more time for tracking.
Monopulse Track . Phased array radars are well suited for monopulse tracking. 
The radiating elements of the array can be combined in three different ways to give the 
sum pattern and the azimuth and elevation difference patterns. Contradictory require -
ments in optimum amplitude distribution for sum and difference patterns exist,19 but, 
as with other antenna systems, they may be independently satisfied. The sum and dif -
ference patterns are scanned simultaneously.
The difference-pattern null in a phased array system gives good beam-pointing 
accuracy. Absolute beam-pointing accuracies to within less than one-fiftieth of a 
(scanned) beamwidth have been measured with scans up to 60 °.20 The accuracy is 
limited by phase and amplitude errors. Since phase shift rather than time delay is 
used, as the frequency is changed, the direction of the null of the scanned beam is also 
changed, and the beam moves toward broadside with an increase in frequency .
Shaped Beams . The radiation pattern of an array may be shaped by modifying 
the aperture distribution. Good pattern approximations can be obtained by using phase 
only. In particular, the beam may be broadened by applying a spherical phase distribu -
tion to the aperture or by approximating it with a gable (triangular) phase distribution. 
Beams of this type are of particular interest because they are easily generated. They 
may be used for transmission in a system where the receiving antenna has a cluster of 
simultaneous beams, or, as previously discussed, they may be used in a search system 
to reduce the number of angular cells in regions of shorter range.
Monitoring . Electronically scanned arrays are composed of very many parts and 
include electronic circuitry to drive the phase shifters or switches that steer the beam. 
The overall reliability of such arrays can be great; graceful degradation has been 
claimed because the failure of as much as 10% of the components leads to a loss in 
gain of only 1 dB. There is, however, a degradation of (low) sidelobes. Nevertheless, 
the functioning of the antenna is complex, and there is need for providing test or mon -
itoring circuitry. The decision to point a beam in a certain direction is made some -
where in the radar control system and is normally defined by two direction cosines.  
A test or monitoring circuit should establish the correct functioning of all compo -
nents, including all beam-pointing computations, electronic drivers and phase shifters  
or switches, and all their interconnections. Frequent indications that the antenna sys -
tem is functioning or is capable of functioning should be available. In one possible 
method, the phase shifters are programmed to focus on a nearby monitor probe and 
scan past it.21 This will yield a close approximation of the complete radiation pattern, 
where gain and sidelobes can be measured and compared with previous results. The 
combination of individual elements and their phase shifters (and drivers) can also be 
checked with this configuration. The phase at each element is sequentially rotated at 
some low frequency; the amplitude and phase of this modulation as received by the 
probe relate directly to both the relative amplitude excitation of the element and its 
ch13.indd   4 12/17/07   2:38:55 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Phased Array Radar Antennas  PHASED ARRAY RADAR ANTENNAS  13.56x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 13
relative phase setting.22 Other methods have been proposed23 where measurements 
are compared with previously recorded ones.
Deployment of Apertures.  With planar arrays, scanning is limited by the loss in 
gain and the increase in beamwidth corresponding to the reduction of the aperture to 
its projected area. Practical extreme values of scanning are therefore in the region of 60 
to 70 °. A minimum of three planar array apertures is then necessary for hemispherical 
coverage. The antennas may be positioned as shown in Figure 13.1, permitting a view 
that is unimpeded by the central superstructure. The apertures would normally be tilted 
back from the vertical to balance the scan angles.
Radiating Elements . The most commonly used radiators for phased arrays are 
dipoles, slots, open-ended waveguides (or small horns), and printed-circuit “patches” 
(originally called Collings radiator  after their inventor24). The element has to be small 
enough to fit in the array geometry, thereby limiting the element to an area of a little 
more than l2/4. In addition, many radiators are required, and the radiating element 
should be inexpensive and reliable and have identical characteristics from unit to unit.
Because the impedance and pattern of a radiator in an array are determined pre -
dominantly by the array geometry (Section 13.4), the radiating element may be chosen 
to suit the feed system and the physical requirements of the antenna. For example, if 
the radiator is fed from a stripline phase shifter, a stripline dipole would be a logical 
choice. If a waveguide phase shifter is used, an open-ended waveguide or a slot might 
be convenient. At the lower frequencies, where coaxial components are prevalent, 
dipoles have been favored. A ground plane is usually placed about l /4 behind an array 
of parallel dipoles so that the antenna forms a beam in only one hemisphere.
For limited scanning (say, less than 10 °), it is possible to use directive radiators 
having dimensions of height and width of several wavelengths. With such separation, 
the mutual coupling effects (see Section 13.4) can be small, and the pattern and imped -
ance of an element in the array approach those of the isolated element.
FIGURE 13.1  Guided missile cruiser showing two out of four phased array antennas 
(Courtesy of Ingalls Shipbuilding Division of Litton )
ch13.indd   5 12/17/07   2:38:56 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Phased Array Radar Antennas 13.6  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 13
The element must be chosen to give the desired polarization, usually vertical or 
horizontal. The special case of circular polarization is discussed below.
If polarization diversity is required or if an array is required to transmit one polar -
ization and receive the orthogonal or both polarizations, either crossed dipoles or 
circular or square radiators seem suitable. With appropriate feed systems, both are 
capable of providing vertical and horizontal polarization independently and may be 
combined to provide any desired polarization, including circular. Such polarization 
diversity adds considerable complexity, requiring two feed systems or switches at the 
radiating element level.
Circular Polarization . From the point of view of the antenna designer, circular 
polarization is possible, though difficulties may be encountered in matching for large 
scan angles. On scanning, a component of the undesired orthogonal polarization will 
be generated,25 and some provision should be made to absorb that energy.26 With a 
conventional circularly polarized antenna, such as a parabolic dish with a circularly 
polarized feed, good circularity may be obtained over part of the main beam, with 
rapid deterioration over the rest of the pattern. With a planar array, the relevant beam -
width is the beamwidth of the element in the array rather than the array beamwidth.
With circular polarization, the signal returned from a single-bounce target (i.e., a 
sphere or flat plate) will require an antenna matched to the opposite sense of circular 
polarization from that transmitted. If the same antenna is used, then single-bounce 
targets are rejected. Such a system can, therefore, give a measure of suppression of 
rain echoes,27 ideally amounting to
 20 log ( e2 + 1)/(e2 − 1) dB 
where e is the voltage-ellipticity ratio. An early model of a Raytheon reflectarray gave 
an ellipticity ratio of less than 1.5 dB with scans up to 30 °, corresponding to a theoretical 
rain rejection of at least 15 dB. At the same time, an aircraft target would typically lose 
approximately 3 dB, leaving a relative net improvement of 12 dB of rain rejection.
Phased Arrays with Very Wide Bandwidth.  A radar system that has the capabil -
ity of changing frequency over a very wide bandwidth can, with advantage, adapt its 
transmission to take into account frequency-dependent multipath characteristics, tar -
get response, environmental conditions, interference, and jamming. Further, wideband 
processing can give fine range resolution.
Phased arrays have the potential of operating over very wide bandwidths. The 
high end of the frequency band is limited by the physical size of the elements, 
which must be spaced close enough in the array to avoid the generation of grating 
lobes (see Section 13.2). For wide instantaneous bandwidth (rather than tunable 
bandwidth), time delays have to be added to prevent the beam from being scanned 
as the frequency is changed.
The impedance of the radiating element at the aperture (with closely spaced 
elements) is approximately independent of frequency, but the element must be 
matched over the wide bandwidth. This is difficult to achieve without exciting 
harmful surface waves when scanning. Nevertheless, matching with octave band -
width for scanning to ±60° has been achieved.
Limited Scanning.28 If scanning is limited to a small angular volume, considerable 
simplifications become possible. The total number of active controls can be reduced to 
ch13.indd   6 12/17/07   2:38:56 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Phased Array Radar Antennas  PHASED ARRAY RADAR ANTENNAS  13.76x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 13
about equal the total number of beams. Subarrays (see Section 13.8) may be formed, 
each with only one phase control of a size such that the subarray beamwidth includes 
all the scan angles. Alternatively, a small phased array could be placed in the focal 
region of a large reflector to scan the narrow beamwidth of the reflector over a limited 
scan angle.
Scanning of Arrays
Phase Scanning.  The beam of an antenna points in a direction that is normal 
to the radiated phase front. In phased arrays, this phase front is adjusted to steer the 
beam by individual control of the phase of excitation of each radiating element. This 
is indicated in Figure 13.2 a. The phase shifters are electronically actuated to permit 
rapid scanning and are adjusted in phase to a value between 0 and 2 p rad. With an 
interelement spacing s, the incremental phase shift y  between adjacent elements for a 
scan angle q0 is y  = (2p /l)s sin q0. If the phase y  is constant with frequency, the scan 
angle q0 is frequency-dependent.
Time-Delay Scanning.  Phase scanning was seen to be frequency-sensitive; how -
ever, time-delay scanning is independent of frequency. Delay lines are used instead of 
phase shifters, as shown in Figure 13.2 b, providing an incremental delay from element 
to element of t  = (s/c) sin q0, where c = velocity of propagation. Individual time-delay 
circuits (Section 13.7) are normally too cumbersome to be added to each radiating ele -
ment. A reasonable compromise may be reached by adding one time-delay network to 
a group of elements (subarray) where each element has its own phase shifter .
Frequency Scanning.29 Frequency rather than phase may be used as the active 
parameter to exploit the frequency-sensitive characteristics of phase scanning. 
Figure 13.2 c shows the arrangement. At one particular frequency, all radiators are in 
phase. As the frequency is changed, the phase across the aperture tilts linearly, and the 
beam is scanned. Frequency-scanning arrays are relatively simple and inexpensive  
FIGURE 13.2  Generation of scanned beams: ( a) phased array, ( b) time-delay array, ( c) frequency-scanned 
array, and ( d ) Blass-type array
ch13.indd   7 12/17/07   2:38:57 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Phased Array Radar Antennas 13.8  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 13
to implement. They have been developed and deployed in the past to provide elevation-  
angle scanning in combination with mechanical horizontal rotation for 3D radars.  
A chapter in the first edition of this handbook was devoted to this approach, which 
since then has received much less attention; frequency is too important a parameter 
for achieving high-range resolution, electronic counter-countermeasures, and multiple 
radar occupancy to give it up for antenna scanning. Frequency scanning is seldom 
used anymore.
IF Scanning . For receiving, the output from each radiating element may be het -
erodyned (mixed) to an intermediate frequency (IF). All the various methods of scan -
ning are then possible, including the beam-switching system described below, and 
can be carried out at IF, where amplification is readily available and lumped constant 
circuits may be used.
Digital Beamforming.30–32 For receiving, the output from each radiating element 
may be amplified and digitized. The signal is then transferred to a computer for pro -
cessing, which can include the formation of multiple simultaneous beams (formed 
with appropriate aperture illumination weighting) and adaptively derived nulls in the 
beam patterns to avoid spatial interference or jamming. Limitations are due to the 
availability and cost of analog-to-digital (A/D) converters and to their frequency and 
dynamic-range characteristics. Partial implementation is possible by digitizing at sub -
array levels only.
Beam Switching . With properly designed lenses or reflectors, a number of inde -
pendent beams may be formed by feeds at the focal surface. Each beam has substan -
tially the gain and beamwidth of the whole antenna. Allen33 has shown that there are 
efficient equivalent transmission networks that use directional couplers and have the 
same collimating property. A typical form, after Blass,34 is shown in Figure 13.2 d. 
The geometry can be adjusted to provide equal path lengths, thus providing fre -
quency-independent time-delay scanning. Another possible configuration providing 
multiple broadband beams uses parallel plates containing a wide-angle microwave 
lens.35,36  Each port corresponds to a separate beam. The lens provides appropriate 
time delays to the aperture, giving frequency-invariant scanning. The beams may 
be selected through a switching matrix requiring M − 1 single-pole–double-throw 
(SPDT) switches to select one out of M beams. The beams are stationary in space 
and overlap at approximately the 4 dB points. This is in contrast to the previously 
discussed methods of scanning, where the beam can be steered accurately to any posi -
tion. The beams all lie in one plane. The system may be combined with mechanical 
rotation of the antenna, giving vertical-switched scanning for 3D coverage. Much 
greater complexity is required for a system switching beams in both planes.
Multiple Simultaneous Beams . Instead of switching the beams, as described in 
the preceding paragraph, all the beams may be connected to separate receivers, giving 
multiple simultaneous receive beams. The transmitter radiation pattern would need to 
be wide to cover all the receive beams. Such multibeam systems have found applica -
tion in combination with mechanical rotation for 3D coverage.
Multiple Independently Steered Beams.  Independent multiple beams may be 
generated with a single beamformer by modifying both amplitude and phase at the 
aperture. This can be seen from Figure 13.3, where, for example, two independent 
ch13.indd   8 12/17/07   2:38:57 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Phased Array Radar Antennas  PHASED ARRAY RADAR ANTENNAS  13.96x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 13
beams are generated. Both beams have the same amplitude (voltage) distribution 
F(x) but differently inclined linear phased fronts. The total aperture excitation with 
both beams is
 F x F x e F x e F xj x a j x a( , ) ( ) () () c( / ) (/ )ψψ ψ= + =2 21 2 2 o os( )( ) ( / )ψ ψψ ψ
1 21 2 −

+ x
aej x a 
That is, the aperture amplitude distribution required for two separate beams varies 
cosinusoidally, and the phase distribution is linear and has the average inclination.
In most phased array systems, only the phase can be controlled. Ignoring the 
required amplitude variations still leads to good approximations for forming multiple 
beams, by superimposing the various required phase-shifter settings (modulo 2 p ). In 
the case of two beams, the aperture phase slope has the average inclination and varies 
periodically from 0 to p.
Vertical Scan Only.  A greatly simplified phased array system becomes possible 
if there is no need for multifunction capabilities, including fire control, where a beam 
may have to be pointed in any given direction at any time. The array is scanned in the 
vertical plane only and mechanically rotated to give azimuth coverage. The number 
of phase control points is then reduced to the number of horizontal rows. In the case 
of a ship’s surveillance radar, the antenna should be positioned as high as possible to 
avoid shadowing by the superstructure, but the pedestal need not be stabilized since 
stabilization can be achieved by electronic beam steering. Scanning can be in the form 
of phase scanning or multiple simultaneous beams may be used on receive with a wide 
antenna pattern on transmit.
13.2 ARRAY THEORY
Array with Two Elements.  Figure 13.4 shows two isotropic radiators that are 
spaced by a distance s and excited with equal amplitude and phase. With unity input FIGURE 13.3  Aperture distribution giving two beams
ch13.indd   9 12/17/07   2:38:59 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Phased Array Radar Antennas 13.10  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 13
power, the vector sum of their contributions, added at a great distance as a function of 
q, is the radiation pattern
 E e eaj s j s( ) [( / )(/ )sin ( / (( /)siqq= +− 1
22 2 2 2 π λ π λ n n]q 
where q  is measured from the broadside direction. Normalizing, to get unity ampli -
tude when q  = 0, and simplifying give
 Es
a( ) cos s in q q =

πλ (13.1)
The absolute value of Ea (q  ) is plotted in Figure 13.4 as a function of p (s/l) sin q.  
If the plot had been in terms of the angle q, the lobes would have been found to  
increase in width as | q  | increased. The main beam occurs when sin q  = 0. The other 
lobes have the same amplitude as the main beam and are referred to as grating lobes . FIGURE 13.4  Radiation pattern of two isotropic radiators
ch13.indd   10 12/17/07   2:39:02 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Phased Array Radar Antennas  PHASED ARRAY RADAR ANTENNAS  13.116x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 13
They occur at angles given by sin q = ± [m/(s/l)], where m is an integer. For the half 
space given by −90° < q < +90°, there are 2 m′ grating lobes, where m′ is the largest 
integer smaller than s/l. If s < l, grating-lobe maxima do not occur, and the value at 
±90° is cos (p s/l). This value is for isotropic radiators and is reduced if the radiators 
have directivity.
Linear Array.37 With a linear array of N isotropic radiators, excited with equal 
amplitudes and phase and separated by distances s, as shown in Figure 13.5, the con -
dition for the occurrence of grating lobes is unchanged from the simpler case just 
considered. They occur for the same values of p (s/l) sin q, but the width of the lobes 
is reduced, and they are separated by minor lobes. Summing the vector contributions 
from all elements, with element 0 as phase reference, gives
 E
Neaj n s
nn N
( )( / ) s inqq=
== −
∑12
01
π λ  
The factor 1 /N shows that each element is energized with 1/ N of the (unity) input 
power. Normalizing the gain to unity at broadside, q  = 0, gives the pattern
 EN s
N sa( )sin[ ( ) sin ]
sin [( ) sin ]qq
q=π λ
π λ/
/ (13.2)
Ea(q ) gives the radiation pattern for isotropic radiators and is known as the array 
factor . It is shown in Figure 13.6 for N = 10. This pattern is repetitive, and the 
locations of the adjacent grating lobes at angles q 1 and q 2 are separated by p (s/l)  
(sin q 1 − sin q 2) = p .
FIGURE 13.5  Linear array with N radiators uniformly spaced by a distance s
ch13.indd   11 12/17/07   2:39:06 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Phased Array Radar Antennas 13.12  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 13
The radiating elements are not isotropic but have a radiation pattern Ee(q ), known 
as the element factor  or element pattern ; then the complete radiation pattern E(q ) is 
the product of the array factor and the element pattern:
 E E E EN s
Ne a e ( ) ( ) ( ) ( )sin [ ( /)sin]
sin[q qqq= = θπ λ
π( ( /)sin] sλq (13.3)
An approximation to the pattern of Eq. 13.2 is in the form
 Ea
a( )sin [( / ) sin]
( / ) sinqq
q=π λ
π λ (13.4)
where the effective aperture is a = Ns, which extends by s/2 beyond the centers of 
the end elements. In contrast to the array factor, this pattern has only one maximum 
and is nonrepetitive. It is the well-known Fourier transform of a continuous constant-
amplitude distribution. For uniform illumination, the beamwidth is
 qBa a= = °0886 508 .
/( ).
/( )λ λrad  (13.5)
The first sidelobe is 13.3 dB down from the peak of the main beam.
For larger values of q, the pattern of a continuous aperture is modified from  
Eq. 13.4 by the obliquity factor38,39 1/2 (1 + cos q ). This gives
 Ea
a( ) ( c os)sin[( / ) sin]
( / ) sinq qq
q= +121π λ
π λ (13.6)
For closely spaced elements, the obliquity factor is very similar to the amplitude 
pattern of a well-designed (matched) radiating element, cosq, for values up to 
some 60 or 70 °. At greater angles, the element pattern has values that are greater than 
those given by cosq and that are a function of the total number of elements.40
Scanned Linear Arrays . The pattern of the array may be steered to an angle q0 
by applying linearly progressive phase increments from element to element so that 
the phase between adjacent elements differs by 2 p (s/l) sin q0. Equation 13.2 is then 
modified, giving the normalized array factor of a uniformly illuminated arrays asFIGURE 13.6  Array factor with N = 10 elements
ch13.indd   12 12/17/07   2:39:14 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Phased Array Radar Antennas  PHASED ARRAY RADAR ANTENNAS  13.136x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 13
 EN s
N sa( )sin ( / )(sin sin )
sin ( / )(sinqq q
q=− π λ
π λ0
− −sin )q0 (13.7)
and the pattern is
 E EN s
N se ( ) ( )sin ( / )(sin sin )
/ )q qq q=− π λ
π λ0
sin[( ( (sin sin )] q q−0 (13.8)
Equation 13.8 describes the fundamental response of a scanned array system. The 
array will have only one single major lobe, and grating-lobe maxima will not occur 
for −90° < q < +90° as long as
 πλπs| sin sin |q q− <0 
or
 s
λ<+1
10 | sin |q (13.9)
which is always true if s/l < ½. When scanning is limited, the value of s/l may be 
increased, for example, to s/l < 0.53 for scanning to a maximum of 60 ° or s/l < 0.59 
for scanning to a maximum of ±45°.
For larger values of s/l, grating lobes occur at angles q1, given by
 sin s in/θ θλ1 0= ±n
s (13.10)
when n is an integer.
In the limit, the inequality (Eq. 13.9) does allow a grating-lobe peak to occur at 
90° when scanning to q0. Even though the grating lobe is reduced when multiplied 
by the element pattern, it may be prudent to space the elements such that the first null 
of the grating lobe, rather than the peak, occurs at 90 °. With N elements this more 
restrictive condition is given by
 s N
N λ<−×+1 1
10 | sin |q (13.11)
Equation 13.8 may again be approximated by the Fourier transform of the illumina -
tion across the continuous aperture:
 Ea
a( ) ( c os)sin ( /)(sin sin )
( / )(q qq q= +−1201π λ
π λ s sin s in ) q q−0 (13.12)
The Fourier-transform solutions for continuous apertures19,41 may be used to 
approximate patterns for practical amplitude and phase distributions as long as the 
element-to-element spacing is small enough to suppress grating lobes.42 Monopulse 
difference patterns may be approximated in the same way from the Fourier transforms 
of the corresponding continuous odd aperture distributions.
Element Factor and Gain of Planar Arrays.  The maximum gain of a uniformly 
illuminated and lossless aperture of area A, with a broadside beam, is G Amax / . =42π λ   
ch13.indd   13 12/17/07   2:39:24 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Phased Array Radar Antennas 13.14  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 13
With a nonuniform aperture distribution and with losses present, the gain is reduced 
by the efficiency term h  to
 GA
max=42πλη (13.13)
If the aperture is considered as a matched receiver, then the amount of energy arriv -
ing from a direction q0 is proportional to its projected area. The gain with scanning, 
therefore, is
 GA( )cosqq
00
24=πλη (13.14)
If the aperture is made up of N equal radiating elements and is matched to accept 
the incident power, then the contribution to the overall gain is the same from all 
elements, hence
 G(q ) = NGe(q )h (13.15)
where Ge is the gain per element. It follows from Eq. 13.14 that the matched element 
power pattern is
 GA
Ne( ) cos q q =42πλ (13.16)
and the normalized radiation amplitude pattern of the (matched) element or (matched) 
element pattern  is
 Ee( ) cosq q=  (13.17)
For a given element spacing s, the total number of radiators N in the area A is N = 
A/s2, and Eq. 13.16 gives
 Gs
e( ) cos q q =

42
πλ 
When the element spacing is s = l/2, then the power pattern of an element that is 
perfectly matched at all scan angles is
 Ge(q ) = p cos q (13.18)
And the peak antenna gain in the direction of scan, q0, is
 G(q0) = p Nh cos q0 (13.19)
where the efficiency term h  accounts for losses and for a nonuniform aperture distri -
bution. For a broadside beam q0 = 0 and
 G0 = p Nh (13.20)
and the element gain is Ge = p.
Figure 13.7 shows a theoretical example of the array and element factors and the 
resulting pattern for a 10-element array, with element spacing s = l /2, scanned to 60 °. 
ch13.indd   14 12/17/07   2:39:31 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Phased Array Radar Antennas  PHASED ARRAY RADAR ANTENNAS  13.156x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 13
The pattern maximum is noted to occur at less than 60 ° because the gain of the element 
pattern increases toward broadside. The element pattern value at 60 ° is cos 60 ° = 0.5 
in power or 0.707 in amplitude, relative to the maximum at broadside, as expected. 
The sidelobes in the general region of broadside are not reduced because in that region  
the element pattern is approximately unity. Relative to the beam maximum, therefore, the  
sidelobes near broadside are increased by approximately 3 dB.
13.3 PLANAR ARRAYS AND BEAM STEERING
Planar Arrays.  A planar array is capable of steering the beam in two dimen -
sions. In a spherical-coordinate system, the two coordinates q  and f define points 
on the surface of a unit hemisphere. As shown in Figure 13.8, q  is the angle of scan 
measured from broadside and f is the plane of scan measured from the x axis. V on 
Aulock43 has presented a simplified method for visualizing the patterns and the effect 
of scanning. He considers the projection of the points on a hemisphere onto a plane 
(Figure 13.9): the axes of the plane are the direction cosines cos ax, cos ay. For any 
direction on the hemisphere, the direction cosines are
 cos s incos
cos s insinα φ
α φx
y=
=q
q 
The direction of scan is indicated by the direction cosines cos axs, cos ays. Here 
the plane of scan is defined by the angle f measured counterclockwise from the cos 
ax axis and is given by
 φα
α=−tancos
cos1 ys
xs 
The angle of scan q  is determined by the distance of the point (cos axs, cos ays) from 
the origin. This distance is equal to sin q. For this reason, a representation of this sort is 
called sin q  space. A feature of sin q  space is that the antenna pattern shape is invariant FIGURE 13.7  Ten-element linear array scanned to 60 °; element spacing s = l /2
ch13.indd   15 12/17/07   2:39:34 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Phased Array Radar Antennas 13.16  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 13
to the direction of scan. As the beam is scanned, every point on the plot is translated in 
the same direction and by the same distance as is the beam maximum.
The region inside the unit circle where
 cos c os2 21 α αx y + ≤  FIGURE 13.8  Planar-array-element geometry and phasing
FIGURE 13.9  Projection of points on a hemisphere onto the plane 
of the array
ch13.indd   16 12/17/07   2:39:36 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Phased Array Radar Antennas  PHASED ARRAY RADAR ANTENNAS  13.176x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 13
is defined as real space , the hemisphere into which energy is radiated. The infinite 
region outside the unit circle is referred to as imaginary space . Although no power is 
radiated into imaginary space, the concept is useful for observing the motion of grat -
ing lobes as the array is scanned. In addition, the pattern in imaginary space represents 
stored energy and contributes to the element impedance in the array.
The most common element lattices have either a rectangular or a triangular grid. 
As shown in Figure 13.8, the mnth element is located at ( mdx, ndy). The triangular grid 
may be thought of as a rectangular grid where every other element has been omitted. 
The element locations can be defined by requiring that m + n be even.
Calculations for the element-steering phases are greatly simplified by the adop -
tion of the direction cosine coordinate system. In this system, the linear-phase tapers 
defined by the beam-steering direction (cos axs, cos ays) may be summed at each ele -
ment so that the phasing at the mnth element is given by
 ψmn xs ys = +mT nT  
where Txs = (2p/l)dx cos axs = element-to-element phase shift in the x direction
 Tys = (2p/l)dy cos ays = element-to-element phase shift in the y direction
The array factor of a two-dimensional array may be calculated by summing the 
vector contribution of each element in the array at each point in space. For an array 
scanned to a direction given by the direction cosines cos axs and cos ays, the array fac -
tor of an M × N rectangular array of radiators may be written
 E A ea
mM
nN
j mT(cos , cos ) | |[ (α αxs ys mn =
=−
=−
∑ ∑
01
01
x x y T n T T − + −xs ys ) ( )] 
where Tx = (2p/l) dx cos ax
 Ty = (2p/l) dy cos ay
 Amn = amplitude of mnth element
An array may be visualized as having an infinite number of grating lobes only one 
of which (namely, the main beam) is desired in real space. It is convenient to plot the 
position of the grating lobes when the beam is phased for broadside and observe the 
motion of these lobes as the beam is scanned. Figure 13.10 shows the grating-lobe 
locations for both rectangular and triangular spacing. For a rectangular array, the grat -
ing lobes are located at
 cos c os
cos c osα αλ
α αλxs
ys− = ±
− = ±x
x
y
ydp
dq 
 p, q = 0, 1, 2, . . . 
The lobe at p = q = 0 is the main beam. A triangular grid is more efficient for 
suppressing grating lobes than a rectangular grid,44 so that for a given aperture size, 
ch13.indd   17 12/17/07   2:39:39 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Phased Array Radar Antennas 13.18  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 13
fewer elements are required. If the triangular lattice contains elements at ( mdx, ndy), 
where m + n is even, the grating lobes are located at
 cos c os
cos c osα αλ
α αλxs
ys− = ±
− = ±x
x
y
ydp
dq2
2 
where p + q is even.FIGURE 13.10  Grating-lobe positions for ( a) rectangular and ( b) triangular 
grids, showing the motion of the lobes as the beam is scanned at angle q0
ch13.indd   18 12/17/07   2:39:41 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Phased Array Radar Antennas  PHASED ARRAY RADAR ANTENNAS  13.196x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 13
Because only one main beam is normally desired in real space, an appropriate 
design will place all but one maximum in imaginary space for all angles of scan. With 
scanning, lobes that were originally in imaginary space may move into real space if 
the element spacing is greater than l /2. As the array is scanned away from broadside, 
each grating lobe (in sin q  space) will move a distance equal to the sine of the angle of 
scan and in a direction determined by the plane of scan. To ensure that no grating lobes 
enter real space, the element spacing must be chosen so that for the maximum scan 
angle qm, the movement of a grating lobe by sin qm does not bring the grating lobe into 
real space. If a scan angle of 60 ° from broadside is required for every plane of scan, 
no grating lobes may exist within a circle of radius 1 + sin qm  = 1.866. The square grid 
that meets this requirement has
 λ λλd dd d
x yx y = = = = 1866 0536 . . or  
Here, the area per element is
 d dx y= =( . ) . 0536 02872 2λ λ  
For an equilateral-triangular array, the requirement is satisfied by
 λ λλ λd dd d
yxy x = = = =
31866 0536 0309 . . . or  
Because elements are located only at every other value of mn, the area per element is
 2 2 0536 0309 03322d dx y= = ( . )(. ) . λ λ λ 
For the same amount of grating-lobe suppression, the square geometry requires 
approximately 16% more elements.
Element-Phasing Calculations.  A computer is usually required to perform the 
steering computations for a phased array antenna. It can compensate for many of the 
known phase errors caused by the microwave components, the operating environ -
ment, and the physical placement of the elements. For example, if the insertion and 
differential phase variations (which may occur from phase shifter to phase shifter) 
are known, they may be taken into account in the computations. Known temperature 
variations across the array that would induce phase errors may be compensated for. 
Finally, many feeds (e.g., optical and series feeds) do not provide equal phase excita -
tion at the input to each phase shifter. The relative phase excitation caused by these 
feeds is a known function of frequency. In these cases, the computer must provide 
a correction based on the location of the element in the array and on the frequency 
of operation.
For a large array with thousands of elements, many calculations are required to 
determine the phasing of the elements. These calculations must be performed in a 
short period of time. The use of the orthogonal phase commands mTxs, nTys helps to 
minimize these calculations. Once the element-to-element phase increments Txs, Tys 
have been computed for a given beam-pointing direction, the integral multiples of Tys 
may be used to steer the columns (Figure 13.8).
ch13.indd   19 12/17/07   2:39:46 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Phased Array Radar Antennas 13.20  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 13
13.4 APERTURE MATCHING  
AND MUTUAL COUPLING 45
Significance of Aperture Matching.  An antenna is a device that acts as a trans -
former to provide a good match between a source of power and free space. If the 
antenna is not matched to free space, power will be reflected back toward the genera -
tor, resulting in a loss in radiated power. In addition, a mismatch produces standing 
waves on the feed line to the antenna. The voltage at the peaks of these standing waves 
is (1 + | Γ |) times greater than the voltage of a matched line, where Γ is the voltage 
reflection coefficient. This corresponds to an increased power level that is (1 + | Γ |)2 
times as great as the actual incident power. Therefore, while the antenna is radiating 
less power, individual components must be designed to handle more peak power. With 
antennas that do not scan, the mismatch may often be tuned out by conventional tech -
niques, preferably at a point as close to the source of the mismatch as possible.
In a scanning array, the impedance of a radiating element varies as the array is 
scanned, and the matching problem is considerably more complicated. Unlike a conven -
tional antenna, where mismatch affects only the level of the power radiated and not the 
shape of the pattern, spurious lobes in the scanning array may appear as a consequence 
of the mismatch. Further, there are conditions where an antenna that is well matched at 
broadside may have some angle of scan at which most of the power is reflected.
The variation in element impedance and element pattern is a manifestation of the 
mutual coupling between radiating elements that are in close proximity to one another. 
For a practical design, two empirical techniques are of great value:
1. Waveguide simulators provide a means for determining the element impedance 
in an infinite array with the use of only a few elements. The effectiveness of a 
matching structure based on these measurements may also be determined in the 
simulator.
2. A small array is the best technique for determining the active element pattern. The 
active element pattern, obtained by exciting one element and terminating its neigh -
bors, is the best overall measure of array performance other than the full array itself. 
If a large reflection occurs at some angle of scan, it can be recognized by a null in 
the element pattern. The small array can also provide data on the coupling between 
elements. This data can be used to calculate the variation in impedance as the array 
is scanned.
Both these techniques will be discussed later in this section.
Effects of Mutual Coupling.  When two antennas (or elements) are widely sepa -
rated, the energy coupled between them is small and the influence of one antenna on 
the current excitation and pattern of the other antenna is negligible. As the antennas 
are brought closer together, the coupling between them increases. In general, the mag -
nitude of the coupling is influenced by the distance between the elements, the pattern 
of the elements, and the structure in the vicinity of the elements. For example, the 
radiation pattern of a dipole has a null in the q  = ±90° direction and is omnidirectional 
in the q  = 0° plane. Therefore, it can be expected that dipoles in line will be loosely 
coupled and parallel dipoles will be tightly coupled. When an element is placed in an 
array of many elements, the effects of coupling are sufficiently strong that the pattern 
and impedance of the elements in the array are drastically altered.
ch13.indd   20 12/17/07   2:39:46 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Phased Array Radar Antennas  PHASED ARRAY RADAR ANTENNAS  13.216x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 13
The terms active element pattern  and element impedance  refer to an element in 
its operating environment (i.e., in an array with its neighboring elements excited). In 
the array, each excited element couples to every other element. The coupling from 
several elements to a typical central element, element 00, is shown in Figure 13.11. 
The Cmn,pq are mutual-coupling coefficients relating the voltage (amplitude and phase) 
induced in the mnth element to the voltage excitation at the pqth element. The coupled 
signals add vectorially to produce a wave traveling toward the generator of element 
00 that appears to be a reflection from the radiator of element 00. As the phases of 
the neighboring elements are varied to scan the beam, the vector sum of the coupled 
signals changes and causes an apparent change in the impedance of element 00. For 
some scan angles, the coupled voltages tend to add in phase, causing a large reflection 
and possibly the loss of the main beam. Large reflections often occur at scan angles 
just prior to the emergence of a grating lobe into real space, but in some instances such 
reflections may occur at smaller scan angles.
The description of the impedance variation given above made no reference to the 
feed network or the phase shifters and assumed that the only coupling between ele -
ments is via the radiating aperture. The coupling coefficients would be measured, and 
by superposition, the phased-voltage contributions from every element in the array 
(or at least those in the immediate vicinity) would be added vectorially to produce 
the voltage reflected back toward the generator. In a practical array, the impedance 
variation depends upon the feed system and the phase shifter. If these are taken into 
account, the impedance variation may be different from what the above model might 
predict. In most analyses, only the coupling at the aperture is considered. This descrip -
tion provides insight into the intrinsic impedance variation of the aperture when it is 
isolated from other effects, as in the case where each element has an independent feed 
(e.g., its own generator and isolator). In this case it, is a simple matter to measure the 
voltage-standing-wave ratio (VSWR) in any line and determine exactly the extent of 
the impedance and mismatch variation. For many feed systems, this is not possible, 
and a measurement of the reflected energy will provide erroneous information and a 
FIGURE 13.11  Coupled signals to a central element from neighboring elements
ch13.indd   21 12/17/07   2:39:47 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Phased Array Radar Antennas 13.22  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 13
false sense of security. Unless all the reflections are collimated back at some central 
point (or independent feeds are used), some of the reflected energy will generally be 
re-reflected and contribute to undesirable sidelobes.
For large arrays, the impedance of an element located near the center of the array 
is often taken as typical of the impedance of every element in the array. As might 
be expected, this element is most strongly influenced by elements in its immediate 
vicinity. When the array is scanned, the influence of elements several wavelengths 
distant is also significant. For dipoles above a ground plane, the magnitude of the 
coupling between elements decays rapidly with distance. For a reasonable indication 
of array performance, an element in the center of a 5-by-5 array may be taken as 
typical of an element in a large array. For dipoles with no ground plane the coupling 
between elements does not decay so rapidly, and a 9-by-9 array appears reasonable. 
For an array of open-ended waveguides, a 7-by-7 array should suffice. If accurate 
prediction of the array performance is required, many more elements are needed 
than are indicated above.47,48
It is often convenient to assume that the array is infinite in extent and has a uniform 
amplitude distribution and a linear-phase taper from element to element. In this man -
ner, every element in the array sees exactly the same environment, and the calculations 
for any element apply equally to all. These assumptions provide a significant simplifi -
cation in the calculation of the element impedance variations. In addition, impedance 
measurements made in simulators correspond to the element impedance in an infinite 
array. In spite of the assumptions, the infinite-array model has predicted with good 
accuracy the array impedance and the impedance variations. Even arrays of mod -
est proportions (less than 100 elements) have been in reasonable agreement with the 
results predicted for an infinite array.49
Element Pattern.  From energy considerations, the directional gain of a perfectly 
matched array with constant amplitude distribution ( h  = 1) will vary as the projected 
aperture area from Eq. 13.14:
 GA( ) cos q q0 2 04=π
λ 
If it is assumed that each of the N elements in the array shares the gain equally, the 
gain of a single element is from Eq. 13.16:
 GA
Ne( ) cos q q =4
2 0π
λ 
If the element is mismatched, having a reflection coefficient Γ(q, f ) that varies as 
a function of scan angle, the element gain pattern is reduced to
 GA
Ne( ) (cos)[| ( , )| ] q q = −4122 π
λθ φΓ  
The element pattern is seen to contain information pertaining to the element 
impedance.50–53 The difference between the total power radiated in the element pat -
tern and the power delivered to the antenna terminals must equal the reflected power. 
In terms of the radiation pattern of the scanning array, this means that since the 
scanned antenna patterns trace out the element pattern, it follows that the average 
power lost from the scanned pattern is equal to the power lost from the element 
ch13.indd   22 12/17/07   2:39:51 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Phased Array Radar Antennas  PHASED ARRAY RADAR ANTENNAS  13.236x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 13
pattern because of reflections. It is not enough to match one element in the pres -
ence of all its terminated neighbors. The element will deliver power to its neighbors, 
and this loss in power corresponds to the average power lost when scanning. An 
ideal, although not necessarily realizable element pattern, would place all the radiated 
power into the scan region, giving a pattern like a cosine on a pedestal and thereby 
providing maximum antenna gain for the number of elements used.
Thinned Arrays.  The number of radiating elements in an array may be reduced 
to a fraction of those needed completely to fill the aperture without suffering serious 
degradation in the shape of the main beam. However, average sidelobes are degraded 
in proportion to the number of elements removed. The element density may be thinned 
so as to taper the amplitude distribution effectively, and the spacing is such that no 
coherent addition can occur to form grating lobes. A thinned aperture, where elements 
have been removed randomly from a regular grid,54 is shown in Figure 13.12. The 
gain is that due to the actual number of elements NGe(q ), but the beamwidth is that 
FIGURE 13.12  (a) Thinned array with a 4000-element grid containing 900  
elements. ( b) Pattern for a thinned array. SA is the average sidelobe level. ( after  
R. E. Willey54 © IRE 1962.  Courtesy of  Bendix Radio .)
ch13.indd   23 12/17/07   2:39:52 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Phased Array Radar Antennas 13.24  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 13
of the full aperture. For example, if the array has been thinned so that only 10% of 
the elements are used, the gain of the array will drop by 10 dB. However, because the 
main beam is virtually unchanged, about 90% of the power is delivered to the sidelobe 
region. Thinned arrays are seldom used.
If the removed elements (in a regular thinned array) are replaced with elements 
with matched loads, the element pattern is identical to that of one in the regular array 
with all elements excited. The element pattern is independent of the array excitation, 
and the same fractional amount of power will be lost (because of mismatch) whether 
the array is thinned, tapered, or uniformly illuminated. It should be noted that the 
concept of an element pattern that applies equally to every element is valid only when 
isolating feeds are used and edge effects are ignored.
A thinned array may also be implemented with an irregular element spacing, 
although this is not common. In this case, the element gain (and impedance) will vary 
from element, depending upon the environment of a given element. To obtain the gain 
of the array, it is necessary to sum all the different element gains Gen(q ). Thus
 G G
n( ) ( ) q q=∑ en  
Impedance Variation of Free Space.  It is of interest to examine the case of a 
large continuous aperture that may be considered to be the limiting case of an array 
of many very small elements.55 The free-space impedance E/H varies as cos q for 
scanning in the E plane and as sec q  for scanning in the H plane. The impedance of 
a medium is thus dependent upon the direction of propagation, and the impedance 
variation of a scanning aperture is a natural consequence of this dependence. The 
continuous aperture appears to represent a lower limit to the impedance variation with 
scanning. This is indicated by Allen’s results56 where impedance variation with scan -
ning was calculated for dipoles above a ground plane. In spite of increased mutual cou -
pling, or perhaps because of it, the more closely the dipoles were spaced, the smaller 
the impedance variation with scanning. Although the impedance variation decreased, 
the absolute impedance of the dipoles also decreased, making them more difficult to 
match at broadside. It is expected that to obtain an impedance variation smaller than 
that of free space some impedance compensation must be employed.
Mutual Coupling and Surface Waves.  The mutual coupling between two small 
isolated dipoles57 should decrease as 1/ r in the H plane and 1/ r2 in the E plane ( E and 
H planes are interchanged for slots). Coupling measurements58 have shown that in the 
array environment the rate of decay is slightly greater than predicted above, indicating 
that some of the energy is delivered to other elements in the array and may be dis -
sipated and reradiated from these elements. The same measurements have shown that 
the phase difference of the energy coupled to elements is directly proportional to their 
distance from the excited elements, indicative of a surface wave traveling along the 
array, leaking energy to each of the elements. For best performance, the velocity of 
the surface wave should be very close to that of free space. If the array contains wave -
guides or horns loaded with dielectric, the velocity will decrease slightly. Further, if 
the dielectric protrudes from the radiators or if a dielectric sheet is used in front of the 
array, the velocity of the surface wave may decrease dramatically. This surface wave 
is important because it can cause a large reflection (and an accompanying loss of the 
beam) for some angles of scan. This can best be seen by examining the condition of 
ch13.indd   24 12/17/07   2:39:54 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Phased Array Radar Antennas  PHASED ARRAY RADAR ANTENNAS  13.256x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 13
phasing for which the couplings from many elements will add in-phase to cause a large 
reflection in a typical element.
Consider an array in which the velocity of the surface wave is that of free space. 
The difference in the phase of the voltages coupled from an adjacent pair of elements 
to element 00 ( e00 in Figure 13.13) is related to the scan angle by
 2 2 210 0π
λπ
λπ
λs s s+ = + sin ( sin ) q q 
The couplings will be in phase when ∆y = 2p  or when
 s
λ=+1
10 sinq 
This is seen to be exactly the same conditions as previously determined for the emer -
gence of a grating lobe into real space. Therefore, it may be expected that when a grat -
ing lobe is about to emerge into real space, the coupled voltages tend to add in phase 
and cause a large mismatch.
Array Simulators.  A good deal of effort has gone into matching a radiator in 
the presence of an array of radiators. The use of waveguide simulators as developed 
by Wheeler Laboratories has made it possible to determine the matching structure 
experimentally without needing to build an array. A waveguide, operating in a TE10 
mode, may be considered to contain two inclined–plane waves propagating down the 
guide. The angle that each of the plane waves makes with the longitudinal direction 
(Figure 13.14) is determined by the H dimension of the waveguide and simulates the 
angle of scan of an infinite array
 sinθλ
λ=
c (13.21)
where q = scan angle
 l = free-space wavelength
 lc = cutoff wavelength of guide
FIGURE 13.13  Two adjacent elements coupling to 
another element in the same row
ch13.indd   25 12/17/07   2:39:58 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Phased Array Radar Antennas 13.26  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 13
Additional scan angles may be simulated by exciting other modes. The waveguide 
dimensions are chosen so that a radiating element or element placed in the waveguide 
sees mirror images in the walls of the waveguide that appear to be at the same spacing 
as the array to be simulated. Both rectangular and triangular arrays may be simulated, 
as shown in Figure 13.15. The impedance measurements are made by looking into 
a waveguide simulator that is terminated with dummy elements. This is equivalent 
to looking at an infinite array from free space at a scan angle given by Eq. 13.21. A 
matching structure, designed from the simulator impedance data, may be placed into 
the simulator to measure its effectiveness. Several simulator designs, results, and a 
complete discussion of the topic have been presented by Hannan and Balfour.59 The 
technique is limited in that only discrete scan angles can be simulated. Several scan 
angles in both planes of scan give a general idea of the array impedance.FIGURE 13.14  Array simulator terminated with two dummy elements
FIGURE 13.15  Rectangular- and triangular-array geometries 
with simulator boundaries superimposed: ( a) square array with 
simulator superimposed and ( b) triangular array with simulator 
superimposed
ch13.indd   26 12/17/07   2:39:58 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Phased Array Radar Antennas  PHASED ARRAY RADAR ANTENNAS  13.276x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 13
Compensation for Scanned Impedance Variation.  The impedance of an ele -
ment in an array has been discussed and has been shown to vary as the array is scanned. 
An array that is matched at broadside can be expected to have at least a 2:1 VSWR at 
a 60° angle of scan. To compensate for the impedance variation, it is necessary to have 
a compensation network that is also dependent on scanning.
Small Arrays.  The element pattern is the best single indicator of impedance 
matching in a scanning array. One way of determining the element pattern is to build 
a small array. A central element is excited, and all other elements are terminated. The 
pattern of this central element is the active element pattern. Diamond60 has examined 
the number of elements required in a small array to provide a reasonable approxima -
tion to an element in an infinite array. He concludes that 25 to 37 elements are required 
to provide a good indication. Figure 13.16 shows the change in the measured active 
element pattern as the number of elements is increased. For a 41-element array, the 
null is very pronounced. Even for the 23-element array, it is clear that the gain varia -
tion with scanning is dramatically greater than cos q.
The small array can also be used to measure coupling coefficients as demonstrated 
by Figure 13.11 These coupling coefficients can be used to calculate the impedance 
variation as the array is scanned. Grove, Martin, and Pepe61 have noted that for the ele -
ment to be matched in its operating environment the self-coupling must exactly cancel 
the coupling from all other elements. They have used this technique to provide a good 
match on an ultralow-sidelobe wideband phased array.
The combination of waveguide simulators and small arrays provides powerful 
empirical tools to supplement the analytical techniques. Experience has demonstrated 
that a large antenna should not be built until the element pattern has been verified with 
a small array.
FIGURE 13.16  Experimental H-plane patterns of the center elements of waveguides arrays  
(after B. L. Diamond60 © Artech House 1972 )
ch13.indd   27 12/17/07   2:39:59 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Phased Array Radar Antennas 13.28  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 13
13.5 LOW-SIDELOBE PHASED ARRAYS
Low sidelobes have long been of interest to antenna designers. This interest has been 
heightened by the jamming that threatens most military radars. The requirement for 
low sidelobes for clutter rejection in the AWACS radar resulted in technology that now 
supports sidelobe levels of more than 50 dB below the main-beam peak.62,63 The price 
that must be paid to achieve these low sidelobes includes (1) a reduction in gain, (2) an 
increase in beamwidth, (3) increased tolerance control, (4) increased cost, and (5) the 
need to operate in an environment free from obstructions that can readily increase the 
sidelobes.64 In spite of these drawbacks, the trend to low-sidelobe antennas has accel -
erated since low sidelobes provide a counter to electronic countermeasures (ECM).
Antenna sidelobes can be controlled by the aperture amplitude distribution. For 
phased arrays, the amplitude of each element may be controlled individually, and 
therefore, good sidelobe control can be achieved. The process of designing a low-
sidelobe antenna can be considered in two parts:
1. Choose the correct illumination function to achieve the desired design (error-free) 
sidelobes.
2. Control the phase and amplitude errors that contribute to the random sidelobes.
Of the two, controlling errors fundamentally limits sidelobe performance. The 
effects of illumination function and errors are discussed below.
Illumination Functions.  The relation between aperture illumination and the 
far-field pattern has been studied extensively and is well documented in the litera -
ture.65–68 For a continuous aperture, the far-field pattern is the Fourier transform of 
the distribution across the aperture. For an array, samples are taken of the continuous 
distribution at each of the discrete locations. Some typical illumination functions are 
given in Table 13.1. It is seen that uniform illumination (constant amplitude) results 
in the highest gain and the narrowest beamwidth but at the cost of high sidelobes. As 
the amplitude is tapered, the gain drops, the beam broadens, and the sidelobes may 
be reduced. It is important for the antenna designer to choose an efficient and realiz -
able illumination function that provides low sidelobes at a minimum loss in gain. For 
low-sidelobe radars, the Taylor illumination69,70 for the sum patterns and the Bayliss 
illumination71 for the difference patterns have almost become an industry standard. 
The Taylor illumination is somewhat similar to a cosine squared on a pedestal and 
is readily implemented. The Bayliss illumination is a derivative form of the Taylor 
illumination and is also readily implemented. It should be noted that in many phased 
arrays the sidelobe performance for the difference pattern is comparable to that of the 
sum pattern. For both sum and difference patterns, the sidelobes are referenced to the 
peak of the sum pattern. The beamwidth factor provides the beamwidth, in degrees, of 
an aperture with length a.
Figure 13.17 gives the approximate loss in gain and the beamwidth factor for the 
Taylor illumination as the sidelobes change. For a more comprehensive treatment, 
see Barton and Ward.72 The sidelobes predicted by Table 13.1 are for antennas that 
have perfect phase and amplitude across the aperture. To allow for errors, aperture 
illuminations are often chosen to provide peak sidelobes below those required. For 
example, if the antenna specification calls for −40 dB sidelobes, a Taylor illumination 
that provides −45 dB design sidelobes might be chosen. The terminology n indicates 
that the first n sidelobes are held to the specified level.
ch13.indd   28 12/17/07   2:40:00 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Phased Array Radar Antennas  PHASED ARRAY RADAR ANTENNAS  13.296x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 13
It should be noted that for a rectangular array a different illumination may be 
chosen for each plane. This is appropriate if the sidelobe requirements in each of 
the planes are different. The resultant loss in gain is then the sum (in decibels) of the 
losses in each plane.TABLE 13.1  Illumination Functions
Illumination Function Efficiency, h Peak Sidelobe, dBBeamwidth  
Factor, k
Linear illumination functions: beamwidth = kl /a (degrees); a = length of antenna
Uniform 1 −13.3 50.8
Cosine 0.81 −23 68.2
Cosine square (Hanning) 0.67 −32 82.5
Cosine squared on 10 dB pedestal 0.88 −26 62
Cosine square on 20 dB pedestal 0.75 −40 73.5
Hamming 0.73 −43 74.2
Taylor n = 3 0.9 −26 60.1
Taylor n = 5 0.8 −36 67.5
Taylor n = 8 0.73 −46 74.5
Circular illumination functions: beamwidth = kl /D (degrees); D = diameter of antenna
Uniform 1 −17.6 58.2
Taylor n = 3 0.91 −26.2 64.2
Taylor n = 5 0.77 −36.6 70.7
Taylor n = 8 0.65 −45 76.4
FIGURE 13.17  Taylor illumination: loss and beamwidth factor
ch13.indd   29 12/17/07   2:40:05 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Phased Array Radar Antennas 13.30  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 13
Effect of Errors.  When errors occur in phase or amplitude, energy is removed 
from the main beam and distributed to the sidelobes. If the errors are purely random, 
they create random sidelobes that are considered to be radiated with the gain and 
pattern of the element. When the errors are correlated, the sidelobe energy will be 
lumped at discrete locations in the far field. The correlated errors will, therefore, pro -
vide higher sidelobes, but only at a limited number of locations. Both correlated and 
random sidelobes are of concern to antenna designers. Correlated errors are discussed 
in Section 13.6.
Analyses of the far-field effect of errors are based on the fact that antennas are 
linear devices. That is, the far-field pattern is the sum of the voltage (amplitude and 
phase) of each radiating element in the antenna. For this reason, the far-field voltage 
pattern can be considered to be the sum of the design pattern plus the pattern created 
solely by the errors:
 E E ET( ,) ( , ) ( ,) q q q φ φ φ = +design error 
In general, three regions will be recognized in the total resultant pattern: a low 
noise floor generated by random errors that follow the element pattern, a few peak 
sidelobes due to correlated errors, and the main beam with its sidelobes due to the 
design distribution.
Random Errors.  Allen73 and Ruze74 have made detailed analyses of the effects 
of random errors on antennas. This discussion will follow the analysis performed by 
Allen. As previously mentioned, amplitude and phase errors take a fraction of the 
energy from the main beam and distribute this energy to the sidelobes. This fraction 
is, for small independent random errors,
 σ σ σφ T A2 2 2= +  
where sf = rms phase error, rad
 sA = rms amplitude error, volts/volt (V/V)
This energy is radiated into the far field with the gain of the element pattern. 
To determine the mean-squared-sidelobe level (MSSL), it is necessary to compare 
this energy with the peak of the pattern of an array of N elements so that the mean-
squared-sidelobe level is
 MSSL =−σ
η σT
a TN2
21( ) (13.22)
Note that in the denominator of this expression the gain due to the array factor 
N is reduced by the aperture efficiency ha and by the error power lost from the main 
beam ( )12−σT. As an example, consider an array of 5000 elements with an aperture 
efficiency of 70%, sa = 0.1 v/v, and sf = 0.1 rad. Then σT2 2 20 1 0 1 0 02 = + = ( .) ( . ) . .
 MSSL =−= =σ
η σT
T N2
210 02
0 7 5000 0 985 8( ).
( .)( )(. ).× × = −−10 526dB 
The result is that this array has a mean floor of random sidelobes that on the average 
is 52 dB below the peak of the beam. It also illustrates that to achieve low sidelobes 
ch13.indd   30 12/17/07   2:40:12 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Phased Array Radar Antennas  PHASED ARRAY RADAR ANTENNAS  13.316x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 13
very tight tolerances are required. The amplitude of 0.1 v/v is equivalent to a total 
amplitude standard deviation of 0.83 dB rms. The total rms phase error is 5.7 °. It 
should be noted that there are numerous sources of phase and amplitude errors that 
are induced by the phase shifters, the feed network, the radiating elements, and the 
mechanical structure. The task of building a low-sidelobe antenna is one of reducing 
each of the amplitude errors to a few tenths of a decibel and the phase errors to a few 
degrees. The fewer the number of elements used, the tighter the tolerance becomes.
The individual effects of phase and amplitude errors and failed elements are sum -
marized in Figure 13.18.75 The resultant rms sidelobes are referenced to the gain of a 
single element so that the curve can be used for any number of elements with indepen -
dent errors. For example, a 5 ° rms phase error will produce an rms sidelobe level that 
is approximately 21 dB below the gain of an element. If 1000 elements (30 dB) are 
used, the rms sidelobe level is 51 dB below the gain of the array. This is the effect of 
only the random phase errors. The effects due to amplitude errors and failed elements 
must also be included.
The previous discussion applies to the rms sidelobe level. This analysis has been 
extended by Allen73 to apply the probability of keeping a single sidelobe below a given 
FIGURE 13.18  Random errors and rms sidelobes
ch13.indd   31 12/17/07   2:40:12 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Phased Array Radar Antennas 13.32  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 13
level and then the probability of keeping a number of sidelobes below a given level. By 
ignoring the element pattern, the MSSL including failed elements is given by
 MSSL =− + + ( )12 2P P
PNA
aσ σ
ηφ 
where 1 − P = probability of a failed element. Note that if P = 1 (no failed elements), 
this equation becomes
 MSSL2
=+=σ σ
ησ
ηφ A
aT
a N N2 2 
This is the same as Eq. 13.22 except for ( )12−σT in the denominator, which is not 
significant for low-sidelobe antennas. For the case in which the design sidelobes are 
well below the sidelobes caused by errors, Allen has developed the set of curves shown 
in Figure 13.19. An example will illustrate the use of these curves. If you desire to hold 
the sidelobe at a given point in space to less than 40 dB below the peak of the beam 
with a probability of 0.99, draw a vertical line from −40 dB on the abscissa until it 
intersects the 0.99 curve. From this intersection, draw a horizontal line and read the 
value of MSSL, in this case −47 dB. Then
 MSSL = −47 dB 
or
 MSSL 2 1 0 = × =− + +−52 21( )P P
PNA
aσ σ
ηφ 
FIGURE 13.19  Sidelobe level to be held with probability P (after J. L. Allen73)
ch13.indd   32 12/17/07   2:40:17 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Phased Array Radar Antennas  PHASED ARRAY RADAR ANTENNAS  13.336x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 13
For a 10,000-element array,
 0 212 2
.( )=− + + P P
PA
aσ σ
ηφ 
For ha = 1, this array can tolerate P = 0.83, or sA = 3.2 dB, or sf = 25.6 °. Naturally, 
each type of error must be anticipated, and one must allow a budget for failed ele -
ments, amplitude errors, and phase errors.
For a number of independent sidelobes, the probability that n sidelobes can be kept 
below a given level RT is equal to the product of the probabilities that each sidelobe 
can be held below this level:
 P n R P R RT i T
in
[ ] [ ( ) ] sidelobes< = <
=∏q
1 
 Ri i ( )q q =sidelobelevel at 
Assuming the same sidelobe requirement at each qi,
 P [n sidelobes < RT] = {1 − P [one sidelobe > RT]}n 
and for P [one sidelobe > RT]  1,
 P [n sidelobes < RT] ≅ 1 − n P [one sidelobe > RT] 
A simple example will illustrate the process. If it is necessary to keep all 100 sidelobes 
in a sector below −40 dB with a probability of 0.9, determine the required probability on 
any one given sidelobe:
 0.9 = P [100 sidelobes < 40 dB] 
Then
 0.9 = 1 − 100 P [one given sidelobe > 40 dB] 
 0.001 = P [one given sidelobe > 40 dB] 
 0.999 = P [one given sidelobe < 40 dB] 
That is, to keep all 100 sidelobes below −40 dB with a probability of 0.9, it is necessary 
to keep any given sidelobe below −40 dB with a probability of 0.999. The process of 
controlling each and every sidelobe is thus seen as formidable, since the total num -
ber of sidelobes is approximately equal to the number of elements in a phased array.  
For a 5000-element array and a probability of 0.999 that a single sidelobe will not 
exceed RT at any single location, it will still be expected that 5 sidelobes will exceed 
RT when all 5000 sidelobe locations are taken into account.
For very low sidelobe arrays, it is reasonable to allow a few sidelobes to exceed 
the MSSL value by as much as 10 to 12 dB to account for random variations. This 
can be seen from Figure 13.19 as the difference between P = 0.5 and P = 0.999 
or P = 0.9999. If this allowance is not granted, the antenna will be overdesigned. 
It is worthwhile to do some probability calculations before specifying the exact 
sidelobe requirements.
ch13.indd   33 12/17/07   2:40:22 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Phased Array Radar Antennas 13.34  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 13
13.6 QUANTIZATION EFFECTS
Of concern here are errors peculiar to phased arrays, which are due to the quantization 
of amplitude and phase and to the lobes that occur when these errors are repeated peri -
odically. The effect on the gain and radiation pattern of random errors in the antenna 
excitation function is discussed in Section 13.5.
Phase Quantization.  Phase shifters suitable for steering phased arrays are 
described in Section 13.9. Most of these phase shifters are digitally controlled and can 
be set with an accuracy that is a function of the number of bits. A small number of bits 
is desired for simplicity of phase-shift computation and operation, for minimal inser -
tion loss in the case of diode phase shifters, and for minimal cost. On the other hand, a 
large number of bits is required for best performance in terms of gain, sidelobes, and 
beam-pointing accuracy.
Phase Errors . The phase of a phase shifter having P bits can be set to the desired 
value with a residual error:
 Peakphaseerror= = ±απ
2P (13.23)
 RMSphaseerror= =σπ
φ2 3P (13.24)
Loss in Gain . As discussed in Section 13.5, the loss in gain is σφ2, which with 
Eq. 13.24 gives
 ∆GP≈ =σπ
φ22
21
32 (13.25)
With many array elements, this result is statistically independent of the amplitude 
distribution. An enumeration of Eq. 13.25 gives
 Number ofphase-shifterbits,
Loss ingP2 3 4
a ain d B 1.0 0.23 0.06 ∆G, 
From the point of view of gain, therefore, 3 or 4 bits would appear ample.
RMS Sidelobes . Phase quantization decreases the gain of the main beam, as 
shown above. The energy that has been lost is distributed to the sidelobes. The result -
ing rms sidelobes are, therefore, σφ2 relative to the gain of a single element, as shown 
in Figure 13.18.
Beam-Pointing Accuracy . The accurate determination of the direction of targets is 
made with the monopulse difference pattern. The accuracy of the null position of the 
difference pattern is, therefore, of interest. With quantized phase shifters, the position 
of this null can be moved with a granularity that is a function of the bit size.
Following the analysis of Frank and Ruze,76 Figure 13.20 shows an aperture with 
an even number of elements N, separated by distances s. All elements are excited with 
ch13.indd   34 12/17/07   2:40:28 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Phased Array Radar Antennas  PHASED ARRAY RADAR ANTENNAS  13.356x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 13
equal amplitude and antisymmetric phase to give a difference pattern. The steering 
increment is shown to be
 δ θq=9
2NPB(scanned) 
Periodic Errors
Periodic Amplitude and Phase Modulation . Both amplitude and phase quantiza -
tion lead to discontinuities that may be periodic and give rise to quantization lobes  that 
are similar to grating lobes.
Amplitude or phase errors that vary cosinusoidally may be analyzed simply after 
Brown.77 Figure 13.21 a shows an original amplitude distribution F(x) disturbed by a 
cosinusoidal ripple q cos (2p x/s), giving a new distribution F ′ (x) such that
 ′= +
= +F x F x qFxx
s
F xqF x ej x s( ) ( ) ( )cos
( ) ( )(2
22π
π/ )) ( )( )+ −F x ej x s 2π/ 
When the beam is scanned to q0, the quantization lobes occur at an angle q1, 
where
 sin s inq q1 01= ±s/λ 
The gain of the aperture varies as cos q, and the relative amplitude of the quanti -
zation lobe is modified by the factor (cos ) /(cos ). q q1 0 Figure 13.21 b–g shows the 
effects of various other periodic aperture modulations.FIGURE 13.20  Antisymmetrically phased array
ch13.indd   35 12/17/07   2:40:34 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Phased Array Radar Antennas 13.36  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 13
Phase-Shifter Quantization Lobes.  Peak quantization sidelobe values are derived 
by Miller78 considering the actual aperture phase distribution. Figure 13.22 shows this 
distribution for some scan angle q0 and the resulting errors due to phase quantization. 
Although a continuous curve has been drawn, only points corresponding to integral 
values of M are meaningful.
The greatest phase-quantization lobes seem to occur with a phase slope such 
that the elements are spaced by a distance exactly one-half of the period or an exact 
odd multiple thereof. The phase error under this condition has element-to-element 
phase ripples with a peak-to-peak value of α π=/2p. The value of the peak phase-
quantization lobes for the case shown in Figures 13.21 f and 13.22 are given in 
Figure 13.23. An examination of Figure 13.23 shows that peak phase-quantization 
lobes are significant and attempts should be made to reduce them.
Reduction of Peak Phase-Quantization Lobes.  Miller78 points out that peak quan -
tization lobes can be reduced by decorrelating the phase-quantization errors. This may 
be done by adding a constant phase shift in the path to each radiator, with a value 
that differs from radiator to radiator by amounts that are unrelated to the bit size. FIGURE 13.21  Effects of periodic amplitude and phase modulation (sin q1 = sin q0 ± l /s)
ch13.indd   36 12/17/07   2:40:35 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Phased Array Radar Antennas  PHASED ARRAY RADAR ANTENNAS  13.376x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 13
FIGURE 13.22  Aperture phase error due to phase quantization ( from Miller78)
FIGURE 13.23  Peak sidelobes due to phase quantization
ch13.indd   37 12/17/07   2:40:36 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Phased Array Radar Antennas 13.38  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 13
The variable phase shifter is then programmed to account for this additional inser -
tion phase. With a spherical or quadratic law of insertion phase variation, as obtained 
with optical-feed systems (Section 13.8), the reductions in peak quantization lobes 
are equivalent to adding 1 bit to the phase shifters in a 100-element array, 2 bits in a 
1000-element array, and 3 bits in a 5000-element array.
Amplitude Quantization . When the aperture of a phased array is divided into 
equal subarrays, then the amplitude distribution across each subarray is constant. 
Aperture taper for the antenna is approximated by changing the amplitude from subar -
ray to subarray, and quantization lobes arise from these discontinuities. The value of 
these lobes may be estimated from the various results shown in Figure 13.21 or actu -
ally computed by summing all contributions at the known quantization (grating) lobe 
angles. The distribution becomes smoother as the number of subarrays is increased or 
as they are interlaced.
13.7 BANDWIDTH OF PHASED ARRAYS
The phenomenon of focusing an array is the result of the energy from each element 
adding in-phase at some desired point within the antenna. When energy is incident 
normal to the array, each element receives the same phase independent of frequency. 
When energy is incident from some angle other than normal, the phase difference from 
the planar phase front to each element is a function of frequency and most phased 
arrays with phase shifters become frequency-dependent. This same phenomenon can 
be viewed in the time domain. As shown in Figure 13.24, when a pulse of energy is 
incident at an angle other than normal, the energy is received earlier at one edge of the 
array than at the other edge and a period of time must elapse before energy appears 
in all elements. The concept of aperture fill time, T = L/c sin q0, is just another way of 
explaining the bandwidth of a phased array.
The bandwidth of phased arrays is described by Frank79 as being composed of two 
effects: the aperture effect and the feed effect. In both effects, it is the path-length differ -
ences that contribute to the bandwidth sensitivity of a phased array. For a parallel-fed 
FIGURE 13.24  Aperture-fill-time parallel-fed array ( after J. Frank79 © Artech 
House 1972 )
ch13.indd   38 12/17/07   2:40:37 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Phased Array Radar Antennas  PHASED ARRAY RADAR ANTENNAS  13.396x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 13
array (equal line length), the feed network does not contribute to a change in phase with 
frequency, and so only the aperture effect remains. This will be discussed first, and the 
effect of the feed will follow.
Aperture Effects.  When energy is incident on an array at an angle other than 
broadside (Figure 13.24), the phase required on the edge element is y   = (2p L)/l sin q0.  
Note the l in the denominator. This indicates that the required phase is frequency-
dependent. If frequency is changed and the phase shifters are not changed, the beam 
will move. For an equal-line-length feed, the beam shape will be undistorted (in sine 
space) and the beam will move toward broadside as the frequency is increased. If the 
phase shifters are replaced by time-delay networks, then the phase through the time-
delay networks will change with frequency and the beam will remain stationary .
When phase shift (independent of frequency) is used to steer the beam, the beam is 
steered to a direction q0 with a phase of
 ψπ
λπ= =2 2
10 1 0x x
cf sin sin q q 
on the element located a distance x from the array center. At frequency f2 this same 
phase setting steers the beam to a new direction, q0 + ∆q0, which is shown in Frank79 
to be
 ∆∆q q0 0 =f
ftan ( rad) (13.26)
As the frequency is increased, the beam scans toward broadside by an angle 
that is independent of the aperture size or beamwidth. However, the permissible 
amount that the beam may scan with frequency is related to the beamwidth because 
pattern and gain deteriorations are a function of the fractional beamwidth scanned.  
The angle that the beam actually scans, on the other hand, is related to the per -
centage bandwidth. A bandwidth factor may, therefore, be defined in terms of the 
broadside beamwidth:
 Bandwidthfactorbandwidth(%)
beam width (= =°K) ) 
A reasonable criterion is to limit the bandwidth so that the beam never scans by 
more than ± one-fourth of a local beamwidth frequency, i.e.,
 Criterion:(scanned)∆q
q0 1
4B≤ 
With a scan of 60 °, this gives K = 1, and in terms of broadside beamwidth the limit is
 Bandwidth (%) = beamwidth ( °) (CW) 
For example, if the array has a beamwidth of 2 ° this criterion permits a 2% change 
in frequency prior to resetting the phase shifters. This allows the beam to move from 
one-fourth beamwidth on one side of the desired direction to one-fourth beamwidth 
on the other side as the frequency changes by 2%. At smaller scan angles, the effect is 
reduced as given by Eq. 13.26, and broader-band operation is possible.
ch13.indd   39 12/17/07   2:40:42 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Phased Array Radar Antennas 13.40  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 13
The explanation given above applies to an antenna operating at a single (CW) fre -
quency and describes how the beam moves as this frequency is changed.
However, most radars are pulsed and radiate over a band of frequencies. For a beam 
scanned from broadside, each spectral component is steered to a slightly different direc -
tion. To determine the composite effect of the components, it is necessary to add the 
far-field patterns of all spectral components. This analysis has been performed80,81 and 
it is apparent that the overall antenna gain of the pulse will be less than that of a single 
spectral component that has maximum gain in the desired direction. As with the CW 
situation, the greatest loss occurs at the maximum scan angle, which is assumed to be 
60°. For this situation, the criterion chosen is to allow a spectrum that loses 0.8 dB of 
energy on target due to frequency-scanned spectral components. For a beam scanned 
to 60 °, this becomes
 Bandwidth (%) = 2 beamwidth ( °) (pulse) 
Note that this is twice the bandwidth permitted for the CW situation. Another way of 
analyzing this phenomenon is in terms of aperture fill time. As shown in Figure 13.24, 
the time it takes to fill the aperture with energy is
 τ=L
csinq0 
If the bandwidth is chosen to be equal to the aperture fill time t = L /c sin q0, this 
is equivalent to bandwidth (%) = 2 beamwidth ( °). Hence, a loss of 0.8 dB can be 
expected if the pulse width is equal to the aperture fill time. Longer pulses will have 
less loss. The exact amount of the loss will depend on the specific spectrum transmit -
ted, but the variation will amount to less than 0.2 dB for most waveforms. Rothenberg 
and Schwartzman82 provide details and also treat the problem as a matched filter.
The preceding discussion assumes an equal-path-length feed. However, it is 
unlikely that a feed will provide exactly equal path lengths. It will suffice to have the 
path lengths kept within one wavelength of each another. The phase errors introduced 
can then be corrected by programming the phase shifters. This will have the beneficial 
effect of breaking up the quantization errors and thereby reducing quantization lobes.
Feed Effect.  When an equal-path-length feed is not in use, the feed network will 
produce a change in phase with frequency. In some cases, such as Rotman lens83 or 
equal-length Blass matrix84, the feed can actually compensate for the aperture effect 
and produce a beam direction that is independent of frequency. However, the more 
conventional feeds tend to reduce the bandwidth of the array.
End-Fed Series Feed . An end-fed series array is shown in Figure 13.31 a later  
in this chapter. The radiating elements are in series and progressively farther and far -
ther removed from the feed point. When the frequency is changed, the phase at the 
radiating elements changes proportionately to the length of feed line so that the phase 
at the aperture tilts in a linear manner and the beam is scanned. This effect is useful 
for frequency-scanning techniques, but in the case of phased arrays, it is undesirable 
and reduces the bandwidth. It has been shown previously that with phased arrays, the 
pointing direction of a scanned beam also changes with frequency (Eq. 13.26) because 
phase rather than time delay is adjusted. These two changes in beam-pointing direction 
may add or subtract, depending on the direction in which the beam has been scanned. 
The worst case will be considered here.
ch13.indd   40 12/17/07   2:40:44 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Phased Array Radar Antennas  PHASED ARRAY RADAR ANTENNAS  13.416x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 13
With a change in frequency, a nondispersive transmission line having free-space 
propagation characteristics and a length L equal to the size of the aperture that it feeds 
will produce a linear-phase variation across the aperture with a maximum value at the 
edges of
 ∆∆ψπ
λmax=f
fL2rad 
where ∆f / f is the fractional change in frequency. This linear-phase progression across 
the aperture will scan the beam by
 ∆∆qq0
01=f
fcosrad 
For one direction of scanning, this effect will add to the aperture effect; for the 
opposite direction, it will tend to cancel the aperture effect. In a waveguide, with the 
guide wavelength denoted l g, the effect is more pronounced and the resultant change 
in beam position is
 ∆∆qq0
01=λ
λgf
fcosrad 
When analyzing an end-fed series feed, it is necessary to consider both the feed 
effect and the aperture effect. The total frequency scan of this feed will be
 ∆∆ ∆q qq0 0
01= ±f
ff
fgtancosλ
λrad ( CW) 
Center-Fed Series Feed.85 A center-fed array (Figure 13.25) can be considered 
as two end feeds. Each feed controls an aperture that is half the total and, therefore, 
has twice the beamwidth. As the frequency is changed, each half of the aperture scans 
in the opposite direction. This initially creates a broader beam with reduced gain. As 
frequency continues to change, the two beams will eventually split apart. At broad -
side, the center-fed antenna has poorer performance than a parallel feed since each 
half scans. However, at 60 ° scan the compensation on one-half of the array assists 
in keeping the gain comparable to that of a parallel feed. From the viewpoint of gain 
reduction, the criterion for a center-fed array is
 Bandwidth(%) beam width () (CW) = °λ
λg 
where lg is the waveguide wavelength.
However, from the viewpoint of sidelobes, this criterion may be unacceptable. For 
a low-sidelobe design, either CW or pulsed, the sidelobes for this feed should be cal -
culated because a change in frequency no longer produces a translated beam but rather 
a broader beam composed of two translated beams.
Space Feed . The space (optical) feed can be considered to be somewhat between 
a parallel feed and a center-fed series feed. With a very long focal length, the space 
feed approximates a parallel feed. With a very short focal length it approximates a 
ch13.indd   41 12/17/07   2:40:50 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Phased Array Radar Antennas 13.42  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 13
center-fed series feed. Because the bandwidth performance of each is comparable, the 
optical-feed criterion is
 Bandwidth (%) = bandwidth ( °) (CW) 
Table 13.2 summarizes the bandwidth criteria for the various feed networks. Both 
the CW criterion and the comparable pulse criterion are given.
Broad Instantaneous Bandwidth.  For a stationary beam in space, independent 
of frequency, it is necessary to use time delay rather than phase steering. It is not 
practical to provide a time-delay network at each element in a phased array because FIGURE 13.25  Center-fed series array ( after J. Frank79 © Artech House 
1972 ): (a) center-fed series feed and ( b) gabled phase due to feed
Feed CW Bandwidth (%) Pulse Bandwidth (%)
Equal line length Beamwidth 2 × beamwidth
End-fed series 1
1+×

λ
λgbeam width2
1+×

λ
λgbeam width
Center-fed series λ
λg×beam width 2λ
λg×beam width
Space-fed (optical) Beamwidth 2 × beamwidth
* After Frank79
NOTE: All beamwidths are in degrees and refer to the broadside beamwidth:  lg = guide wavelength and l = free-
space wavelength.TABLE 13.2  Bandwidth Criteria for Several Feed Networks*
ch13.indd   42 12/17/07   2:40:55 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Phased Array Radar Antennas  PHASED ARRAY RADAR ANTENNAS  13.436x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 13
these networks are expensive and lossy and contain errors. An alternative is to use a 
broadband beam-switching technique such as the equal-line-length Blass matrix84 or a 
Rotman lens.83 For 2D scanning these techniques become quite complex.
Another technique for improving the bandwidth by a considerable factor is to use an 
array of subarrays. The radiating elements of a phased array may be grouped into subar -
rays where time-delay elements are added. This is shown in Figure 13.26. The antenna 
may be regarded as an array of subarrays. The subarray pattern forms the element fac -
tor; it is steered by phase shifters in the desired direction, but it scans with frequency 
as indicated by Eq. 13.26. The array factor is scanned by adjusting the frequency-  
independent time-delay elements. All subarrays are steered in the same manner. The 
total radiation pattern is the product of the array factor and the element factor. A change 
in frequency gives rise to grating lobes rather than shifts of the beam position. This can 
be seen from Figure 13.27. The subarray pattern is shown at the design frequency f0 and 
is seen to have a null at the position of the grating lobe. As frequency is changed by d  f, 
the pattern is scanned. It is shown dashed in a position where it has been scanned by a 
little more than half of its beamwidth. This is clearly too much, for the product of array 
and element factors gives two beams of equal amplitude.
The loss in gain and the magnitude of the grating lobe are functions of the fractional 
subarray beamwidth that has been scanned as a result of the change in frequency. The 
results may be expressed in terms of the bandwidth factor K (referred to as the subarray 
broadside beamwidth ).
Figure 13.28 shows these values as functions of K for a scan of 60 °.
The value previously used for scanning 60 ° was K = 1 and this value appears 
acceptable here, where the relevant beamwidth is the broadside beamwidth of the 
subarray. Thus, if the aperture is split into N subarrays in one plane, with time-delay 
networks at each subarray level, the bandwidth is increased by a factor of N. This same 
bandwidth criterion leads to a reduction in gain of about 0.7 dB and a grating lobe of 
about −11 dB at the edges of the band with 60 ° of scan. Interlacing of subarrays can 
reduce the grating lobes.
FIGURE 13.26  Phased array using subarrays with time delay
ch13.indd   43 12/17/07   2:40:56 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Phased Array Radar Antennas 13.44  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 13
The monopulse null position is unaffected by the behavior of the subarrays as long 
as they all respond in the same way. The null position is determined only by the time-
delay networks behind the subarray and corresponds to the array-factor null, which is 
unaffected when multiplied by the subarray pattern.
Time-Delay Networks.  Figure 13.29 a shows a time-delay network that is digi -
tally controlled by switches. The total delay path length that has to be provided non -
dispersively amounts to L sin qmax, where qmax is the maximum scan angle for the 
aperture L. The smallest bit size is about l /2 or l, with the precise setting adjusted by FIGURE 13.27  Generation of grating lobes by a change of frequency
FIGURE 13.28  Loss of gain and grating-lobe amplitude as functions of bandwidth (phased 
subarrays with time delay, scanned 60 °). The value of the grating lobe will be modified by the 
element pattern.
ch13.indd   44 12/17/07   2:40:57 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Phased Array Radar Antennas  PHASED ARRAY RADAR ANTENNAS  13.456x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 13
an additional variable phase shifter. A 1 ° beam scanned 60 °, for example, requires a 
time delay of 6 bits, the largest being 32 wavelengths, as well as an additional phase 
shifter. The tolerances are tight, amounting in this case to a few degrees out of about 
20,000 and are difficult to meet. Problems may be due to leakage past the switch, to 
a difference in insertion loss between the alternate paths, to small mismatches at the 
various junctions, to variations in temperature, or to the dispersive characteristics of 
some of the components. Painstaking design is necessary. The switches may be diodes 
or circulators. Leakage past the switches may be reduced by adding another switch 
in series in each line. The difference in insertion loss between the two paths may be 
equalized by padding the shorter arm. The various problems have been comprehen -
sively assessed and analyzed by Lincoln Laboratory.45
On transmitting, the tolerances are less severe because the requirements are usually 
for power on target rather than for accurate angle determination or low sidelobes.
Figure 13.29 b shows another configuration that has the advantage of simplicity. 
Each of the switchable circulators connects either directly across (counterclockwise) 
or via the short-circuited length. Isolation in excess of 30 dB is required. It is clear 
that the insertion loss of time-delay circuits is very high for most practical systems. 
They would, therefore, precede a final power amplifier for transmitting and follow a 
preamplifier for receiving.
A further method of providing delay is possible by translating the problem from the 
microwave domain and delaying at IF.
FIGURE 13.29  Time-delay configurations: ( a) time delay by choosing upper or lower paths and ( b) time 
delay by using switched circulators
ch13.indd   45 12/17/07   2:40:57 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Phased Array Radar Antennas 13.46  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 13
13.8 FEED NETWORKS (BEAMFORMERS)
Optical-Feed Systems.  Phased arrays may be in the form of lens arrays or reflec -
tarrays, as shown in Figure 13.30, where an optical-feed system provides the proper 
aperture illumination. The lens has input and output radiators coupled by phase shift -
ers. Both surfaces of the lens require matching. The primary feed should be designed 
with care and can be complex to give the desired aperture amplitude distribution with 
low spillover losses. The transmitter feed can be separated from the receiver feed by 
an angle a , as shown in Figure 13.30. The phase shifters are then reset between trans -
mitting and receiving so that in both cases the beam points in the same direction. This 
method allows flexibility in optimizing the transmitter aperture distribution, perhaps 
for maximum power on the target, and separately optimizing the receiver sum and 
difference patterns for low sidelobes. Since a change in feed position corresponds 
to scanning with time delay, additional feeds may be added to provide several time-
delay-compensated directions of scan for a corresponding increase in bandwidth.
The phasing of the antenna has to include a correction for the spherical phase front. 
This can be seen (Figure 13.30 a) to amount to
 211
42 222π
λπ
λf r fr
fr
f+ −( )= −

+



… 
With a sufficiently large focal length, the spherical phase front may be approxi -
mated by that of two crossed cylinders, permitting the correction to be applied simply 
with row-and-column steering commands.
Correction of a spherical phase front with the phase shifters reduces peak phase-
quantization lobes (Section 13.6). Space problems may be encountered in assembling 
an actual system, especially at higher frequencies, because all control circuits have to 
be brought out at the side of the aperture of the lens array.
Multiple beams may be generated by adding further primary feeds. All the beams 
will be scanned simultaneously by equal amounts in sin q.
The reflectarray shown in Figure 13.30 b has general characteristics similar to those 
of the lens. However, the same radiating element collects and radiates after reflection. 
Ample space for phase-shifter control circuits exists behind the reflector. To avoid 
aperture blocking, the primary feed may be offset as shown. As before, transmitting 
and receiving feeds may be separated. Multiple beams are again possible with addi -
tional feeds.
The phase shifter must be reciprocal so that there is a net controllable phase shift 
after passing through the device in both directions. This rules out frequently used 
nonreciprocal ferrite or garnet phase shifters.
Constrained Feeds.  The optical-feed system divides power very simply in one 
step from the feed to the many elements on the aperture. In contrast, the constrained-
feed system uses many steps. For a high-performance low-sidelobe system, each 
of these power-dividing steps has to be well matched over the band. If mismatches 
are present, they will be separated by many wavelengths and will add up to give 
frequency-sensitive phase and amplitude perturbations at the aperture. In general, 
these perturbations will be different for the monopulse sum and difference patterns, 
so that only a common average can be compensated by calibration.
ch13.indd   46 12/17/07   2:40:59 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Phased Array Radar Antennas  PHASED ARRAY RADAR ANTENNAS  13.476x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 13
Series Feeds.  Figure 13.31 shows several types of series feeds. In all cases except d,  
the electrical path length to each radiating element has to be computed as a function 
of frequency and taken into account when setting the phase shifters. Type a is an end-
fed array. It is frequency-sensitive and leads to more severe bandwidth restrictions 
than most other feeds. Type b is center-fed and has almost the same bandwidths as a FIGURE 13.30  Optical-feed systems: ( a) lens array and ( b) reflectarray
ch13.indd   47 12/17/07   2:41:00 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Phased Array Radar Antennas 13.48  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 13
parallel-feed network. Sum- and difference-pattern outputs are available, but they have 
contradictory requirements for optimum amplitude distributions that cannot both be 
satisfied. As a result, either good sum or good difference patterns can be obtained. At 
the cost of some additional complexity, the difficultly can be overcome by the method 
shown in Figure 13.31 c. Two separate center-fed feed lines are used and combined in a 
network to give sum- and difference-pattern outputs.86 Independent control of the two 
amplitude distributions is possible. For efficient operation, the two feed lines require 
distributions that are orthogonal , that is, that give rise to patterns where the peak value 
of one coincides with a null from the other and aperture distributions are respectively 
even and odd.
A very wideband series feed with equal path lengths is shown in Figure 13.31 d. 
If the bandwidth is already restricted by phase scanning, then very little advan -
tage is obtained at the cost of a considerable increase in size and weight. The 
network in Figure 13.31 e gives simplicity in programming because each phase 
shifter requires the same setting. The insertion loss increases for successive radia -
tors, and the tolerances required for setting the phases are high. This type is not 
commonly used.
Parallel Feeds.  Figure 13.32 shows a number of parallel-feed systems. They 
frequently combine a number of radiators into subarrays, and the subarrays are then 
combined in series or in parallel to form sum and difference patterns.
Figure 13.32 a shows a matched corporate feed , which is assembled from matched 
hybrids. The out-of-phase components of mismatch reflections from the aperture and 
of other unbalanced reflections are absorbed in the terminations. The in-phase and FIGURE 13.31  Series-feed networks
ch13.indd   48 12/17/07   2:41:00 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Phased Array Radar Antennas  PHASED ARRAY RADAR ANTENNAS  13.496x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 13
balanced components are returned to the input. To break up periodicity and reduce 
peak quantization lobes (Section 13.6), small additional fixed phase shifts may be 
introduced in the individual lines and compensated by corresponding readjustments 
of the phase shifters.
The reactive feed network shown in Figure 13.32 b is simpler than the matched 
configuration. It has the disadvantage of not terminating unbalanced reflections that 
are likely to be at least partly reradiated and thus contribute to the sidelobes. A stripline 
power divider is shown in Figure 13.32 c, and a constrained optical power divider using 
an electromagnetic lens is shown in Figure 13.32 d. The lens may be omitted and the 
correction applied at the phase shifters. With nonreciprocal phase shifters, a fraction 
of the power reflected from the aperture will then be reradiated (as sidelobes) rather 
than returned to the input. The amplitude distribution across the horn is given by the 
waveguide mode. It is constant with an E-plane horn as shown.
Subarrays.  The phased-array aperture may be divided into subarrays, all 
similar to simplify manufacturing and assembly. Beamforming now requires com -
bining the subarrays for suitable sum and difference patterns. Figure 13.33 a shows 
a method of combining opposite subarrays into their sums and differences. All 
sum channels are then added with proper weighting to obtain the desired ampli -
tude distribution. The difference channels are treated similarly with independent 
amplitude weighting. This method may be extended to include combinations in 
the other plane.
Amplification on receiving or on both receiving and transmitting may be con -
venient at the subarray level. On receiving, the noise figure is established by the FIGURE 13.32  Parallel-feed networks
ch13.indd   49 12/17/07   2:41:01 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Phased Array Radar Antennas 13.50  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 13
preamplifier so that further processing may include lossy circuits. The receiving 
channel may be split three ways, as indicated in Figure 13.33 b, into the sum and the 
elevation and azimuth difference channels. These are then weighted and summed 
with corresponding outputs from the other subarrays. On transmitting, all separate 
power amplifiers may be energized equally to give maximum power on the target. 
The addition of phase shifters shown at the subarray level simplifies the beam-  
steering computation, permitting all subarrays to receive identical steering com -
mands. They may be replaced by time-delay circuits giving a wide instantaneous 
bandwidth (Section 13.7).
The simple method of providing TR (transmit-receive) switching can be obtained 
by combining two halves of a subarray with a four-port hybrid junction. The transmit -
ter input into one port energizes both halves of the aperture, for example, in phase. 
The receiver, connected to the remaining port, then requires that the phase shifters of 
half the aperture give an additional phase shift of p  during the receiving period. This 
is easily programmed.
Multiple receive beams may be formed by combining the subarrays after amplifica -
tion in as many different ways as separate beams are required. The limitation is that 
the beams have to lie within the beamwidth of the subarray in order to avoid excessive 
grating lobes. A cluster of such simultaneous receiver beams requires a wider trans -
mitter beam. This may be obtained efficiently from the same antenna with a gabled or 
spherical phase distribution.
With identical subarrays, a desired aperture amplitude taper (for low sidelobes) is 
applied with a granularity that depends on their size and shape. The resulting ampli -
tude steps will cause quantization lobes (Section 13.6).FIGURE 13.33  Combination of subarrays to form sum and difference channels: ( a) combining opposite 
subarrays and ( b) combining subarrays after amplification
ch13.indd   50 12/17/07   2:41:01 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Phased Array Radar Antennas  PHASED ARRAY RADAR ANTENNAS  13.516x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 13
13.9 PHASE SHIFTERS
The three basic techniques for electronic beam steering are (1) frequency scanning, 
(2) beam switching, and (3) phase scanning with phase shifters. Of the three tech -
niques, the use of phase shifters is by far the most popular, and considerable effort has 
gone into the development of a variety of phase shifters. Phase shifters can be sepa -
rated into two categories: reciprocal and nonreciprocal. The reciprocal phase shifter 
is not directionally sensitive. That is, the phase shift in one direction (e.g., transmit) 
is the same as the phase shift in the opposite direction (e.g., receive). Therefore, if 
reciprocal phase shifters are used, it is not necessary to switch phase states between 
transmit and receive. With a nonreciprocal phase shifter, it is necessary to switch the 
phase shifter (i.e., change phase state) between transmit and receive. Typically, it takes 
a few microseconds to switch nonreciprocal ferrite phase shifters. During this time, the 
radar is unable to detect targets. For low pulse repetition frequency (PRF) radars [e.g., 
200 to 500 pulses per second (pps)], this may not cause a problem. For example, if the 
PRF is 200 pps (or Hz), the time between pulses is 500 µs. If the switching time for 
the phase shifter is 10 µs, only 2% of the time is wasted and less than 1.0 nmi of mini -
mum range is lost. On the other hand, if the PRF = 50 kHz, the time between pulses 
is 20 µs, and it would not be possible to tolerate 10 µs of dead time for the switching 
of phase shifters.
All diode phase shifters are reciprocal along with certain types of ferrite phase 
shifters. It is worth noting that, owing to losses associated with their magnetic proper -
ties, ferrite phase shifters are almost never used at frequencies below 3 GHz. Diode 
phase shifters, in contrast, improve as the frequency gets lower .
There are three basic types of phase shifters that typically compete for use in a 
phased array. They are (1) the diode phase shifter, (2) the nonreciprocal ferrite phase 
shifter, and (3) the reciprocal (dual-mode) ferrite phase shifter. Each has its strengths, 
and the choice of which to use is highly dependent on the radar requirements. Each 
will be discussed in turn. For solid-state systems, diodes are used and can be switched 
in a fraction of a microsecond.
Diode Phase Shifters.87–90 Diode phase shifters are typically designed by using 
one of three techniques: (1) switched-line, (2) hybrid-coupled, and (3) loaded-line. 
These are shown diagrammatically in Figure 13.34. The switched-line technique sim -
ply switches in lengths of line in binary increments (e.g., 180 °, 90°, and 45 °) and 
requires a set of diodes for each bit. The diodes are used as switches to control which 
bits are activated to achieve a particular phase state.
The hybrid-coupled technique uses a microwave hybrid and effectively changes the 
distance at which the reflection takes place. This technique is usually used in binary 
increments, and an additional set of diodes is required for each phase state.
The diode phase shifters described above are limited in their ability to handle high 
peak power. Depending on their size and frequency, they are normally restricted to 
power levels of less than 1 kW. For higher power levels, the loaded-line technique 
is used. The diodes are used to switch in increments of capacitance and inductance 
that provide small changes in phase. Because the diodes are decoupled from the main 
transmission line, they need to handle only modest amounts of power in each diode. 
Very high power (i.e., kilowatt) configurations are possible. The technique does require 
many diodes, and the phase shifters are typically large and bulky as compared with the 
switched-line and hybrid-coupled techniques.
ch13.indd   51 12/17/07   2:41:01 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Phased Array Radar Antennas 13.52  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 13
Diode phase shifters have the advantage of being small and light in weight (except 
for high-power devices). They are suitable for stripline, microstrip, and monolithic 
configurations. The main disadvantage of the diode phase shifter is that an additional 
set of diodes is normally required for each additional bit. As lower-sidelobe antennas 
are required, the number of bits increases. For low sidelobe antennas, 5, 6, or 7 bits 
may be required. As the number of bits increases, both cost and loss of the diode 
phase shifters are also increased. For active arrays, the phase shifter losses are not of 
significance because they occur prior to the power amplifier on transmit and after the 
low-noise amplifier on receive. This is not the case with most ferrite devices.
Ferrite Phase Shifters.  Most ferrite phase shifters are nonreciprocal,91–93 
and their early versions used discrete lengths of ferrite (as shown in Figure 13.35) 
to implement each of the bits (180 °, 90°, 45°, etc.). In this configuration, a cur -
rent pulse is passed through each bit, and the ferrite toroid is saturated. When the  
current is removed, the ferrite toroid is said 
to be latched  and retains its magnetization 
owing to its hysteresis properties. If the 
current is in a forward direction, the fer -
rite is latched with a particular phase (e.g., 
180°). The ferrite maintains the phase 
until a current pulse in the opposite direc -
tion is applied. The ferrite phase shifter is 
then latched to the reference phase (0 °). 
This change in phase with a change in cur -
rent direction is due to the nonreciprocal 
nature of the device. As mentioned, early 
devices saturated each bit so that a ferrite 
toroid and electronic driver were required FIGURE 13.34  Diode phase-shifter configurations ( after L. Stark et al .87): (a) switched-line phase bit,  
(b) hybrid-coupled phase bit, and ( c) loaded-line phase bit
FIGURE 13.35  Digital ferrite phase shifter using 
toroids ( after L. Stark87)
ch13.indd   52 12/17/07   2:41:02 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Phased Array Radar Antennas  PHASED ARRAY RADAR ANTENNAS  13.536x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 13
to control each bit individually. Other phase shifters use a single toroid and a single 
driver.94,95 In this configuration, the phase shifter is latched on a minor hysteresis loop 
by only partially magnetizing the ferrite. The distinct advantage of this technique is 
that any number of bits may be implemented while using only a single toroid. They 
have the advantage of low loss and relatively high power operation. Devices that han -
dle up to 100 kW of peak power have been built. They are amenable to waveguide 
construction and are heavier and bulkier than comparable diode devices.
In summary, diodes and nonreciprocal ferrite phase shifters are viable competitors. 
At L band and lower, diode phase shifters are an obvious choice. At S band and higher, 
ferrites should continue to hold an edge in higher-power systems and where additional 
bits are needed for the low phase errors required for low-sidelobe antennas. These com -
ments do not apply for the solid-state systems described below. Ferrite phase shifters 
are more temperature-sensitive than diodes, and the phase will change with a change in 
temperature. This can be controlled by keeping the temperature constant (within a few 
degrees) across the array. A more common technique is to sense the temperature at sev -
eral locations in the array and then correct the phase commands to the phase shifters.
13.10 SOLID-STATE MODULES96–98
A solid-state module may be connected to every radiating element or to every subar -
ray of a phased array antenna, forming what is sometimes called an active aperture . 
Applications range from ultrahigh frequency 
(UHF) for surveillance to X band and above for 
airborne systems.
A typical module is shown in simple sche -
matic in Figure 13.36. It consists of a transmitter 
amplifier chain, a preamplifier for receiving, a 
shared phase shifter with driver, and circulators 
and/or switches to separate the transmit and 
receive paths (the gain around the loop must 
be less than unity to avoid oscillations).
Power amplifiers for transmitting at the 
element level would typically have a gain of 
30 dB or more to compensate for the loss of 
power dividing in the beamformer. Transistors 
are capable of generating high average power 
but only relatively low peak power. High 
duty-cycle waveforms (10 to 20%) are there -
fore required to transmit enough energy effi -
ciently. This lack in high peak power is the 
main disadvantage of the solid-state modules 
in phased array radars. To a great extent, it can 
be compensated for by using more pulse com -
pression in the receiver and extra-wide band -
width to counteract jamming, but at the cost 
of increased signal processing. An important 
advantage of transistors is their potential for 
wide bandwidth. FIGURE 13.36  Typical solid-state module
ch13.indd   53 12/17/07   2:41:03 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Phased Array Radar Antennas 13.54  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 13
The receiver requires an early gain of typically 10 to 20 dB to adequately establish 
a low noise figure and allow for phase shifting and beamforming losses. The module 
also receives interfering signals from all directions within the element pattern (not 
simply the antenna pattern), at all frequencies in the band. Tight tolerances between 
modules are needed to provide amplitude and phase tracking over the band for low-
sidelobe performance. An electronically programmable gain adjustment may be help -
ful to correct module-to-module variations, allowing less demanding specifications. 
The trimmer would also provide a degree of freedom in aperture control for special 
situations. Because the noise figure has been established, the feed network may be 
split to give separate optimum aperture amplitude distributions for transmitting as 
well as for receiving on sum and difference channels. In an alternative configuration, 
the feed network could be designed for a constant amplitude aperture distribution to 
give highest transmit power on the target, and the receiver gain control could be used 
to provide an amplitude taper for the sum channel. Perhaps a secondary feed system 
could be added for the difference channels. Poirier97 has analyzed this case, the effect 
on noise, and the degradation due to amplitude quantization steps.
The module phase shifter operates at low-signal power levels. Its insertion loss may 
be high because it is followed by amplification on transmit and preceded by ampli -
fication on receive. Diode phase shifters are, therefore, quite permissible even with 
many bits (e.g., 5, 6, or 7 bits for low sidelobes). Variations in insertion loss may be 
compensated for dynamically with the gain adjustment.
The circulator at the high-power side provides an impedance match to the power 
amplifier and may be adequate by itself for protecting the receiver. In Figure 13.36, 
the module is shown augmented by a switch that causes absorption of power reflected 
from antenna mismatches and also gives added protection to the receiver during trans -
mission. If weight is an important consideration, as it would be in a space-based sys -
tem, then the circulator could be replaced by diode switches requiring additional logic 
and driving circuitry.
13.11 MULTIPLE SIMULTANEOUS  
RECEIVE BEAMS
With the proliferation of ballistic missiles, future shipboard radar systems will prob -
ably need multi-mission capability, which includes both anti–air warfare (AAW) and 
ballistic missile defense (BMD). The BMD requirement to discriminate small radar 
cross section (RCS) re-entry vehicles (RVs) at long ranges requires that active array 
radars have a large power-aperture-gain/loss-noise temperature (PAG/LT), which is a 
measure of the sensitivity of the radar. Increasing the output power of a T/R module 
only increases the transmit power component of the PAG product. However, adding 
an additional T/R module to the array increases each of the components of the PAG: 
the transmit power, the receive aperture, and the transmit gain. Therefore, radars with 
a BMD function typically have a large number of elements, which results in a large 
aperture. Because a large antenna aperture produces a narrow antenna beamwidth, the 
volume search function will require scanning a large number of beam positions.
Naval ships need to operate in littoral (close to land) environments, as well as in 
the open ocean. The desire to operate closer to land requires shipboard radars to have 
the capability to reject high clutter returns. High clutter rejection is usually achieved 
through the use of pulse doppler waveforms in the first few elevation beam positions. 
ch13.indd   54 12/17/07   2:41:03 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Phased Array Radar Antennas  PHASED ARRAY RADAR ANTENNAS  13.556x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 13
In addition, many of the radar waveforms may be designed to propagate out to the 
instrumented range of the radar. As a result, a major component of the dwell time at 
each beam position is the time required for the pulse to propagate to the instrumented 
range and back. This long propagation time, combined with the large number of beam 
positions due to a narrow antenna beamwidth and a pulse doppler waveform with a 
large number of pulses, results in unsatisfactory long search frame times when using 
a single beam radar.
If the active array radar is sized for long-range detection of ballistic missiles, the radar 
will most likely have sufficient power to detect other targets. A cluster of multiple simul -
taneous receive beams can be used to trade energy for a reduction in the volume search 
frame time. The use of multiple simultaneous receive beams will reduce the search frame 
time, since many beam positions are searched at the same time. When using multiple 
simultaneous receive beams, the transmit beam can be broadened by beam spoiling so 
that the 3-dB beamwidth is larger than that of a uniformly illuminated array with a linear 
phase front. Broadening the beam on transmit reduces the gain of the transmit beam, 
but this loss in gain may be necessary to produce the search frame time required. On 
receive, multiple beams are simultaneously formed in a cluster that covers the volume 
illuminated by the transmit beam. Each receive beam has the full gain and beamwidth 
of a single beam array with the same aperture dimensions. In the cluster of receive 
beams, each of the receive beams may be offset in various directions from the center of 
the spoiled transmit beam. An example of four simultaneous receive beams in a cluster 
is shown in Figure 13.37. To search the same volume covered by this four beam cluster 
with a single beam radar would take approximately four times as long since the trans -
mit and receive beams would need to be sequentially scanned to each beam position. 
Increasing the number of beams in the receive cluster, while also increasing the transmit 
beam spoiling by an equivalent amount, reduces the search frame time.
There is another technique for generating multiple simultaneous beams that does 
not use beam broadening on transmit. In this technique, each pulse in the waveform is 
divided into as many segments as there are beam positions. A pulse segment is transmit -
ted sequentially in each of the desired beam positions, one transmit pulse right after the 
other. After all the pulses have been transmitted, multiple simultaneous receive beams 
are formed with a receive beam located in each of the transmit beam positions. In this 
method, each of the transmit beams has the full array gain. In order to have similar per -
formance to the beam-broadening technique, the transmit pulse segment in each beam 
position would be 1/ N times as long as the transmit pulse in the beam-broadened tech -
nique, where N is the number of simultaneous receive beams. In either case, it is neces -
sary to trade energy for time in order to achieve the desired search frame time.
FIGURE 13.37  A spoiled transmit beam and a 
cluster of four simultaneous receive beams
ch13.indd   55 12/17/07   2:41:03 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Phased Array Radar Antennas 13.56  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 13
A multiple simultaneous receive beam cluster can be formed in several different ways. 
If analog beamforming is used, the receive signals can be split N ways into N separate 
analog beamformers. Each analog beamformer is designed to produce one of the N offset 
beams in a beam cluster. Another way to generate multiple simultaneous receive beams 
is to use digital beamforming (DBF), which is discussed in more detail in the next sec -
tion. DBF is usually preferred when a large number of beams are to be formed.
13.12 DIGITAL BEAMFORMING
Many phased array radars use analog beamforming. In an analog beamformer, the 
received signals from each element are combined at radio frequencies. At the output 
of the analog beamformer, centralized receivers downconvert the signal from radio 
frequency (RF) to an intermediate frequency (IF) and an analog-to-digital converter 
(ADC) is used to digitize the IF signal. In digital beamforming (DBF), the RF signals 
are digitized at either each individual element or each subarray. Once the signals  
have been digitized, various weighted combinations of the digitized signals can 
be used to form multiple simultaneous receive beams. Figure 13.38 shows array  
architectures for analog beamforming and DBF at the element and subarray level. 
FIGURE 13.38  Array architectures for analog and digital beamforming
ch13.indd   56 12/17/07   2:41:05 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Phased Array Radar Antennas  PHASED ARRAY RADAR ANTENNAS  13.576x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 13
The benefits of DBF include improved dynamic range, faster search frame times if 
multiple simultaneous beams are used, and better control of amplitude and phase for 
adaptive nulling and lower sidelobe levels.
Shipboard radars had been designed to operate primarily in open ocean environ -
ments. However, the changing world will require shipboard radars to operate much 
closer to land. As a result, Navy radars must have significantly higher clutter rejection 
capabilities and larger dynamic ranges than existing radar systems. Recently, digital 
beamforming has been proposed for radar systems that must detect small RCS targets 
in severe clutter environments.99
The dynamic range determines the range of power levels that can be processed 
in the linear operating region of the receiver. The radar system must be able to pro -
cess high power clutter returns without saturating the receiver. One reason DBF has 
been proposed for future radar is because DBF provides the radar system with a 
significantly higher dynamic range than can be achieved with analog beamforming, 
which has a centralized receiver. In a DBF architecture, there are N digital receivers, 
one at each of the N elements or subarrays. Therefore, the dynamic range of a DBF 
radar system has 10log( N) higher dynamic range than an analog beamforming radar 
that utilizes the same receiver, provided the noise and distortion in each receiver are 
decorrelated among all receivers.100
DBF can be implemented at either the element level101 or the subarray level. 
Element-level DBF requires a digital receiver, which consists of a downconverter and 
an ADC, at each element. Subarray-level DBF requires a digital receiver at each sub -
array. A fully digital array, which has DBF at the element level, allows for multiple, 
simultaneous independent beams. These independent beams can be steered in any 
direction. DBF at the subarray level can produce a multiple, simultaneous beam clus -
ter located within the subarray pattern. DBF at the subarray level uses phase shifters 
at the element and an analog subarray beamformer, with a digital receiver located at 
the output of each subarray. Time delay steering can be achieved at the subarray level 
through the use of digital time delays. The multiple beam cluster is formed by digitally 
combining the subarrays to form simultaneous beams that are offset from one another. 
In practice, DBF is frequently implemented at the subarray level rather than the ele -
ment level due to the size, weight, and high cost of digital receivers. Another practical 
advantage of subarray-level DBF is that less digital data, which must be processed to 
form the receive beams, is produced than for element-level DBF.
DBF can provide more efficient time-energy management than a single-beam ana -
log beamforming array. Since DBF can produce multiple simultaneous beams, energy 
can be traded off for improved search frame times as was discussed in Section 13.11.
13.13 RADIATION PATTERN NULLING
Phased array antennas can be designed to have deterministic antenna patterns or adap -
tive antenna patterns. When no interfering signals are present, a phased array antenna 
with a deterministic antenna pattern will typically utilize phase weights that provide a 
linear phase front over the array face and amplitude weights that produce the desired 
sidelobe levels. The antenna performance can be characterized by parameters such 
as antenna beamwidth, gain, and peak and RMS sidelobe levels. Interfering radio 
frequency signals that are intentional, such as those produced by jammers, or uninten -
tional, such as those produced by other radars or clutter, may significantly degrade the 
ch13.indd   57 12/17/07   2:41:05 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Phased Array Radar Antennas 13.58  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 13
performance of static-pattern phased array antennas. As a result, methods for placing 
nulls in the direction of the interference in the phased array radiation patterns have 
been the subject of much research.102–105 Either deterministic radio frequency nulling 
or adaptive nulling can be used to place nulls in the antenna pattern in the direction of 
the interfering source.
If the location of the interfering source is stationary and the direction of the interferer 
is known, a deterministic RF null can be placed in the antenna pattern at that specific 
direction. Deterministic antenna patterns with nulls steered in specific directions can 
be achieved by modifying the weights at each element. These modified weights can 
be either the amplitude and phase of each element or only the phase of each element. 
Regardless of whether amplitude and phase nulling or phase-only nulling is used, the 
weights at each element are not time-varying for deterministic RF nulling. Array con -
figurations for performing deterministic RF nulling using amplitude and phase weights 
and phase-only weights at each element are shown in Figure 13.39.
Deterministic RF nulling using amplitude and phase control at each element pro -
vides better performance than phase-only nulling. Deterministic RF nulling can be 
accomplished by using perturbation techniques to generate the weights at each element 
that will produce the antenna pattern with nulls.102 With perturbation techniques, first 
the weights at each element are computed to generate the original antenna pattern with -
out nulls. Then, the original weights are perturbed to produce nulls in the desired direc -
tions of the antenna pattern. The intent of the perturbation algorithm is to maximize 
the signal-to-interference-plus-noise ratio, while minimizing the deviation between 
the original element weights and the perturbed element weights.104 Full amplitude and 
phase control at each element ensures that the perturbed antenna pattern has nulls in the 
desired directions with minimally perturbed weights.102 However, phase-only control 
FIGURE 13.39  Array configurations for perform -
ing deterministic RF nulling: ( a) amplitude and phase 
control at each element and ( b) phase-only control at 
each element
ch13.indd   58 12/17/07   2:41:06 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Phased Array Radar Antennas  PHASED ARRAY RADAR ANTENNAS  13.596x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 13
at each element may result in situations where a solution does not exist.102 An example 
of a deterministic antenna pattern with and without nulling is shown in Figure 13.40. 
The solid line in Figure 13.40 shows a deterministic antenna pattern at broadside for 
a 25-element linear array with l /2 element spacing when no interference is present. 
Uniform illumination and no amplitude and phase errors were assumed. The dashed 
line in Figure 13.40 shows the antenna pattern for the same array when an interfering 
source is present at +21° and amplitude and phase weighting is used to steer a null in 
the pattern in the direction of the interfering source.
Radar systems can utilize deterministic RF nulling to place nulls in both the trans -
mit and the receive antenna patterns. On transmit, nulls can be placed in the direction 
of high ground clutter to reduce the clutter power reflected back toward the antenna. 
Active arrays typically have both amplitude and phase control at each element, which 
allows either full amplitude and phase nulling or phase-only nulling to be used. 
However, when transmitting, it is desirable to have uniform illumination across the 
aperture to produce the highest aperture efficiency possible. Also, for active arrays, 
it is desirable to keep the high-power transmit amplifiers in saturation. Hence, when 
nulling on transmit, it is desirable to use phase-only nulling to maintain the aperture 
efficiency. On receive, amplitude weighting across the array is typically used to pro -
duce the desired sidelobe levels. Because this amplitude weighting produces a taper 
loss on receive, using full amplitude and phase control for nulling the radiation pattern 
is less of a concern than on transmit.
The incorporation of adaptive nulling into phased array antennas allows phased 
arrays to have adaptive antenna patterns on receive. Adaptive techniques are used to 
sense and automatically respond to a time-varying interference environment. The goal 
is to preserve the desired signal while simultaneously reducing unwanted interference. 
This real-time antenna pattern control is accomplished by adjusting the weights at each 
receiver to maximize signal-to-interference-plus-noise ratio. The amplitude and phase 
weight for the signal at each receiver is adaptively computed and implemented so that the 
desired signal combines coherently whereas the interference combines incoherently.
FIGURE 13.40  Deterministic antenna pattern with and without 
nulling for a 25-element linear array. Interfering source is located at 
+21 degrees.
ch13.indd   59 12/17/07   2:41:06 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Phased Array Radar Antennas 13.60  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 13
Adaptive beamforming can be implemented by using auxiliary receivers in a side-  
lobe cancellation system or by using digital beamforming. In a DBF system, adaptive 
beamforming is accomplished either with the use of subarray receivers or with aux -
iliary receivers. If subarray receivers are used, the number of nulls that can be placed 
in the antenna pattern depends upon the number of degrees of freedom (DOF). For 
adaptive beamforming, the number of degrees of freedom is N − 1, where N is the num -
ber of receivers in the DBF array.100 If adaptive beamforming is implemented using 
digital beamforming, element-level DBF will have significantly better performance 
than subarray-level DBF, because subarray-level DBF has far fewer degrees of free -
dom. However, element-level DBF is usually cost prohibitive except for arrays with a 
small number of elements. Hence, subarray-level DBF is frequently pursued because it 
requires far fewer digital receivers. However, subarrays are not the best choice of array 
architectures for a given number of DOF in an adaptive array. 106 In subarray DBF, the 
main beam of each subarray must be aligned with the main-beam direction of the array. 
When an interfering source is present in the sidelobe region, the subarray-level DBF 
architecture does a poor job of sensing this interfering signal because the subarray gain 
is low in the sidelobe region.106
13.14 CALIBRATION OF ACTIVE  
PHASED ARRAY ANTENNAS
Active phased array antennas must be calibrated in order to ensure that the radia -
tion pattern of the antenna meets the antenna performance specifications. Antenna 
characteristics such as sidelobe level and main-beam gain are typically specified, 
but these specifications can be translated into allowable amplitude and phase errors 
at each element.
Calibration can be divided into two categories: factory calibration and in-the-field 
calibration.107 Factory calibration is only performed once, usually at the antenna test 
range of the phased array manufacturer. In-the-field calibration is performed at regu -
lar intervals throughout the life of the array, after it has been deployed. The antenna 
measurements required for factory calibration can be made in three different types 
of antenna ranges: near field, compact, or far field. For large ground-based or ship -
board phased arrays, factory calibration is usually performed using a planar near-field 
antenna measurement facility.108,109 An attractive feature of the near-field range is that 
the amplitude and phase of each element can be measured and a full hemispheric 
antenna pattern can be generated. Near-field ranges are suitable for measuring low-
sidelobe, high-gain antennas.110
Planar near-field antenna measurements are made by scanning a probe in a plane 
parallel to the antenna under test and measuring the amplitude and phase at each probe 
location. In rectangular coordinates, the probe position is given by ( x,y,z). During 
the scanning, the x and y coordinates of the probe are varied and the distance of the 
scanning plane from the antenna under test is kept constant at zo. The value of zo is 
typically a little more than three wavelengths. The phase front should be sampled with 
probe positions that satisfy the Nyquist sampling theorem, which yields a maximum 
sampling distance between points in the x-y plane of ∆x = ∆y = l /2. In practice, the 
active array elements are turned on one at a time in coordination with the probe posi -
tion. Some examples of existing systems that use near-field ranges to perform factory 
calibration are THAAD and SAMPSON.108,109
ch13.indd   60 12/17/07   2:41:06 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Phased Array Radar Antennas  PHASED ARRAY RADAR ANTENNAS  13.616x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 13
For an active array, both the phase and amplitude of each element must be measured 
in order to determine the correction constants for each array element in both transmit 
and receive mode. Full calibration of an active array is measurement intensive. It is com -
mon for phase shifters and attenuators to each have as many as 7 bits or 128 different 
states. In addition, active components should be characterized at several frequencies in 
the operating frequency band and over several temperatures. As a result, thousands of 
measurements are required to fully characterize the performance of each element. Not 
all states need to be measured for each element, but eliminating measurements at some 
of the states will cause the calibrated amplitude and phase errors to increase.108
Phase shifters usually exhibit small variations in amplitude over phase states, 
whereas attenuators exhibit large variations in-phase over gain states. Therefore, it is 
desirable to calibrate the attenuator first. The phase shifter can then be calibrated with -
out changing the attenuator setting.108 Once the characteristics of each T/R channel are 
measured, correction factors are calculated and stored for future use. The appropriate 
correction factors are applied to bring the antenna into calibration for a given mode of 
radar operation.
Once the active phased array is fielded, in-
the-field calibration must be performed to keep 
the antenna within specifications. Active com -
ponents drift over time and these aging effects 
require calibration to be performed in the field. 
A number of different techniques have been 
proposed for in-the-field calibration including 
mutual coupling,111 near-field antennas,109 and 
RF sampling.
Mutual-coupling techniques utilize the 
mutual coupling paths between adjacent array 
elements for transmission of calibration signals 
(see Figure 13.41 a). In this technique, a signal 
is transmitted from an array element, and the 
nearest elements surrounding the transmit ele -
ment are used to receive the transmitted calibra -
tion signal.111 The signal received is compared 
to a stored reference obtained during factory 
tests. Only one element transmits at a given 
time, and this procedure is repeated until all 
the elements are measured. Calibration using 
mutual coupling can be interspersed with nor -
mal radar operating modes and requires only a 
small fraction of the available radar resources.
Another technique to perform in-the-
field calibration uses radiators placed in the 
near field around the periphery of the array 
(see Figure 13.41 b). These additional radia -
tors are dedicated to the calibration of the 
active array. To calibrate the array in receive 
mode, test signals are routed to each of the 
radiators used for calibration.109 The signal 
received from a T/R module is compared to a 
stored reference obtained during factory test.  FIGURE 13.41  Active array calibration 
techniques: ( a) mutual coupling, ( b) near-field 
antennas, and ( c) RF sampling
ch13.indd   61 12/17/07   2:41:07 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Phased Array Radar Antennas 13.62  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 13
The calibration constants are then modified in order to restore the antenna so its 
calibration is as close as possible to the original factory calibration. This technique 
requires several additional transmit and receive hardware channels to be dedicated 
for in-the-field calibration.
RF sampling can also be used to calibrate an active phased array (see Figure 13.41 c). 
The RF sampling technique uses built-in calibration circuitry in the array to inject a 
calibration signal between the T/R module and the radiator. This technique can be used 
to measure RF output power, receive gain, and phase and attenuation bit accuracy. 
These measured values are then compared with reference values. A major disadvantage 
of this technique is that it requires significant additional hardware, including a separate 
built-in test (BIT) manifold. Also, the calibration path does not include the radiator.
13.15 PHASED ARRAY SYSTEMS
A number of phased array radar systems have been built,112 and a representative selec -
tion is briefly reviewed below.
Lockheed Martin Corporation Phased Array Radars.  (Courtesy of Lockheed 
Martin Corporation )
AN/SPY-1 .113,114 This S-band phased array radar is part of the Navy Aegis weapon 
system and was developed by RCA, now Lockheed Martin. It has four phased array 
apertures to give unobstructed hemispherical coverage (Figure 13.1). In its early con -
figuration, it used a simple feed system with, on receive, 68 subarrays, each contain -
ing 64 waveguide-type radiators for a total of 4352 elements. On transmit, subarrays 
were combined in pairs, and 32 such pairs gave a transmit aperture of 4096 radiators. 
The phase shifters fed directly into waveguide radiators, had 5 bits, and were of the 
nonreciprocal, latching garnet configuration. A later version was designed for low 
sidelobes. The subarray size had to be reduced to 2 elements to avoid quantization 
lobes, and similarly, the phase shifter had to be refined by driving it with 7-bit accu -
racy. The resulting phased array has an aperture with a constrained-feed structure and 
4350 waveguide-type radiators. Monopulse sum and difference receive patterns and 
the transmit pattern are separately optimized.
COBRA.  The COunter Battery RAdar (COBRA) C-Band solid -state phased 
array radar (see Figure 13.42) locates rocket launchers, artillery batteries, mortars, 
shell impact points, and jamming directions. The antenna, which is mechanically 
trained, has 2720 radiating elements, each fed by a solid state T/R module to provide 
wide electronic scan coverage. It is produced by Euro-Art GmbH, a consortium of 
Lockheed Martin MS2 (Moorestown, NJ), EADS Deutschland (Unterschleissheim, 
Germany), Thales Air Defence (Bagneux, France), and Thales UK, Limited (Crawley, 
West Sussex, England), for the Ministries of Defence of France, Germany, and the 
United Kingdom.
Volume Search Radar.  The S-band V olume Search Radar (VSR) phased array (see 
Figure 13.43) provides search and AAW capability to the Dual Band Radar System 
for DD(X). It has 2688 radiating elements with a T/R module per element. Although 
the active radiating aperture is approximately circular, the corners have been filled in 
ch13.indd   62 12/17/07   2:41:08 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Phased Array Radar Antennas  PHASED ARRAY RADAR ANTENNAS  13.636x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 13
with terminated elements to form a rectangular aperture for purposes of minimizing 
antenna radar cross section. All active components are accessible from the rear for ease 
of maintenance aboard ship.
Ground-Based Radars (AN/TPS-59, AN/FPS-117, and AN/TPS-77).  Lock-
heed Martin’s long-range, solid-state 3D radar systems (see Figure 13.44) operate 
at L band between 1.2–1.4 GHz. These systems provide position data for en-route 
tracking of commercial aircraft, air surveillance/air defense, navigational assistance, 
tactical control, and tactical ballistic missile (TBM) defense. The AN/TPS-59 was the 
world’s first totally solid-state antenna/array. The AN/FPS-117 was developed shortly 
thereafter and is typically installed and operated at a fixed site, but it can also be con -
figured on a trailer for deployment. The AN/TPS-77 is a mobile/transportable series 
of solid-state radar systems. Each system incorporates primary surveillance radar, sec -
ondary surveillance radar (IFF), command and control display consoles, communica -
tions equipment, various options, and transport configurations customized for each 
customer’s specific mission.FIGURE 13.42  COBRA phased array mounted on radar system 
vehicle ( Courtesy of Lockheed Martin Corporation )
FIGURE 13.43  Front (left) and rear views of Volume Search Radar S-Band engineering development 
model active phased array mounted in near-field test facility during assembly. Rear view shows detail of 
easily replaceable lowest replaceable units. ( Courtesy of Lockheed Martin Corporation )
ch13.indd   63 12/17/07   2:41:09 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Phased Array Radar Antennas 13.64  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 13
The main feature of these systems is the planar phased array, which has modular 
construction with distributed all-solid-state electronics, including RF power genera -
tion and electronic steering in the elevation axis. Antenna rotation for the system 
is at 5, 6 or 10, 12 revolutions per minute (rpm), providing 360 ° azimuth coverage 
while electronically step-scanning in elevation. It provides full performance over 
a nominal 20 ° in the elevation plane to an altitude of 100,000 feet and up to 60 ° 
in elevation during TBM tracking. The antenna/array incorporates monopulse radar 
techniques. These techniques allow accurate target angular position, using three data 
channels—sum, delta azimuth (AZ), and delta elevation (EL)—within the array and 
the data-processing group.
The data-processing group applies moving target indicator (MTI) and doppler 
processing to the receive signal to produce subclutter visibility for target detection. 
Selection of the operating frequency is dependent upon the radar’s mode of opera -
tion and the frequency options selected by the operator. The antenna/array shown 
in Figure 13.44 is constructed of either 54 (AN/TPS-59), 44 (AN/FPS-117), or 34 
(AN/TPS-77) identical horizontal passive row-feed networks, one above another on 
6.6-inch centers. Mounted directly behind each row feed is a dedicated row transmit -
ter and receiver. The row transmitters and receivers are similar for each row. They 
perform all the RF functions, including RF power generation, phase shifting to steer 
the antenna beam in elevation, and receive preamplification to provide a low-noise 
figure. The RF power is generated by direct amplification through modular solid-
state power amplifiers in the row transmitters. The energy from these power modules 
is combined within the row transmitter, which drives the row feed. The RF energy 
from the row feeds is combined in space to form the radiated beam. Unlike a tube 
transmitter, which operates at high peak power and low duty factor, the power mod -
ules operate at low peak power and high duty factors (10% to 20%). Long-duration 
pulses are transmitted and then compressed during receive to obtain the required 
range resolution. A performance margin is built in to the radar system to allow for 
field degradation of the distributed array components between scheduled mainte -
nance periods. Since array component failures induce only a gradual degradation, 
maintenance can be performed on a planned basis. Online system sensitivity and 
performance level is checked and displayed by the performance monitoring and fault 
isolation (MFI) function.FIGURE 13.44  Ground-based radar system configurations ( Courtesy of Lockheed Martin Corporation )
AN/TPS-59  AN/FPS-117 AN/TPS-77
ch13.indd   64 12/17/07   2:41:09 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Phased Array Radar Antennas  PHASED ARRAY RADAR ANTENNAS  13.656x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 13
These long-range, three-dimensional air-surveillance radars provide an off-the-
shelf solution to primary air-surveillance needs. They have been designed for remote 
operation in harsh environments, and with their established logistics support, built-in 
performance monitoring and fault isolation, high reliability, and worldwide invest -
ment, these systems have an inherent low cost of ownership.
Northrop Grumman Corporation Phased Array Radars.  (Courtesy of 
Northrop Grumman Corporation )
AWACS (Airborne Warning and Control System).13,14,115 The Airborne Warning 
and Control System (AWACS) provides all-weather long-range surveillance, com -
mand, control, and communications. The phased array antenna is a 26 ft by 4.5 ft 
elliptically shaped, ultra-low sidelobe array, consisting of 28 slotted waveguides with 
over 4000 slots (see Figure 13.45). Mounted atop the aircraft fuselage in a rotating 
dome, the S-band antenna scans mechanically over 360 ° in azimuth, and scans elec -
tronically in elevation through 28 reciprocal beam-steering phase shifters. In addition, 
28 nonreciprocal beam offset phase shifters provide offset of the receive beam from 
the transmit beam during elevation scanning to compensate for time delay between 
transmit and receive of long-range aircraft returns. The Radar System Improvement 
Program (RSIP) provides the most significant upgrade to the AWACS radar since its 
development in the early 1970s. RSIP introduces new waveforms and processing, 
providing improvements in detection range, angular accuracy, as well as range and 
angular resolution.
AN/TPS-78.  The AN/TPS-78 is an update to the AN/TPS-70/75 S-band, three-
dimensional tactical radar family developed by the Northrop Grumman Corporation 
(Figure 13.46). The AN/TPS-78 planar array shown in Figure 13.46 exhibits very low 
FIGURE 13.45  AWACS antenna ( Courtesy of Northrop Grumman Corporation )
ch13.indd   65 12/17/07   2:41:13 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Phased Array Radar Antennas 13.66  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 13
azimuth sidelobes. The array is a slotted waveguide design of 36 sticks and 94 horizon -
tally polarized slots per stick. The array is fed from a solid-state transmitter and trans -
mits a single fan beam in elevation optimized for maximum gain at low altitudes. On 
receive, the array output is combined into six simultaneous narrow elevation beams 
that cover from 0 to 20 °. Each receive beam is processed in a digital receiver. Accurate 
height information is extracted using amplitude monopulse techniques by compar -
ing receive energy in adjacent beams. A narrow azimuth beamwidth on transmit and 
receive and stacked receive beams provide good radar angle resolution. Azimuth cov -
erage of 360 ° is achieved by rotating the array at a nominal surveillance rate.
A unique feature of the AN/TPS-78 array is that the array has an integral low side-
lobe IFF array embedded in the array face. This not only provides excellent registra -
tion between radar and IFF returns, but also supports fast setup and teardown time for 
transporting the radar in its mobile configuration.
Joint STARS Antenna.  The Joint Surveillance Target Attack Radar System 
(Joint STARS) provides long-range airborne surveillance and tracking of sta -
tionary and moving ground targets (see Figure 13.47). The phased array antenna 
for this system is a 24-ft wide by 2-ft high planar X-band slotted array. It is 
mounted inside a radome underneath the fuselage of an E-8A aircraft and can be 
mechanically rotated ±100° in elevation for operation looking out either side of 
the aircraft. The system operates in a synthetic aperture radar (SAR) mapping 
mode as well as in a three-port azimuth interferometer ground moving target 
indication (GMTI) target detection and tracking mode. Use of the three-port 
aperture on receive enables a clutter suppression interferometry technique that 
allows the operator to detect, accurately locate, and track slow moving ground 
targets in the presence of competing ground clutter .
Raytheon Company Phased Array Radars.  (Courtesy of Raytheon Company )
PATRIOT.116 The PATRIOT is a multifunction phased array radar system devel -
oped by Raytheon for the Army in the form of a lens using an optical feed, as shown 
previously in Figure 13.30. Sum and difference patterns are separately optimized with 
a monopulse feed. The aperture is round and contains approximately 5000 elements. FIGURE 13.46  AN/TPS-78 antenna ( Courtesy of Northrop 
Grumman Corporation )
ch13.indd   66 12/17/07   2:41:14 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Phased Array Radar Antennas  PHASED ARRAY RADAR ANTENNAS  13.676x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 13
It uses 4-bit flux-driven nonreciprocal ferrite phase shifters and waveguide-type radia -
tors at both apertures. The antenna is shown in Figure 13.48. It is mounted on a vehicle 
and folds flat for transportation.FIGURE 13.47  Joint STARS antenna and aircraft ( Courtesy of Northrop Grumman Corporation )
FIGURE 13.48  PATRIOT multifunction phased array ( Courtesy 
of Raytheon Company )
ch13.indd   67 12/17/07   2:41:15 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Phased Array Radar Antennas 13.68  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 13
Terminal High Altitude Area Defense (THAAD).  THAAD is a ground-based sys -
tem designed to destroy the theater ballistic missile threats to troops, military assets, 
and allied territories. THAAD consists of a hit-to-kill missile, radar, launcher, and 
Battle Management/Command, Control, and Communications (BMC3) system.
The THAAD radar (see Figure 13.49) is an X-band, phased array, solid-state radar 
capable of search, threat detection, classification, and precision tracking at long ranges. 
The radar design delivers high power output and beam/waveform agility in order to 
support the long-range functional requirements of the THAAD mission. The THAAD 
element components work in concert to detect, assign, and destroy incoming short- to 
medium-range ballistic missiles by providing the firing battery with target acquisi -
tion, interceptor support, and intercept assessment functions. These functions include 
surveillance, THAAD missile track, in-flight data uplink/downlink, target classifica -
tion/typing/identification, and intercept assessment.
The single face phased-array radar is 12.5 m long, mounted on a Heavy Expanded 
Mobile Tactical Truck and capable of being transported in a C-130 Hercules aircraft. 
The radar is nonrotating and has a 120º field of view. The radar uses its 9.2 m2 full 
field-of-view phased array aperture to acquire theater missile threats at a range of up 
to 1,000 km. This radar uses 25,344 X-band solid-state transmit/receive modules in 
the phased array.
X-Band Radar (XBR).  The nine-story-high XBR is the world’s largest X-band 
radar, weighing four million pounds (see Figure 13.50). The SBX platform that it sits on 
stands more than 250 ft tall and displaces more than 50,000 tons. It consists of a semi-
submersible oil production platform, topped with the XBR. XBR is the primary payload 
on the semi-submersible platform supporting the Ground-Based Midcourse Defense 
(GMD) phase of the Missile Defense Agency (MDA) Ballistic Missile Defense System 
(BMDS). SBX’s floating platform, a modified oil-drilling vessel, was designed for 
FIGURE 13.49  THAAD radar ( Courtesy of Raytheon Company )
ch13.indd   68 12/17/07   2:41:15 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Phased Array Radar Antennas  PHASED ARRAY RADAR ANTENNAS  13.696x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 13
exceptional stability in high winds and storms. Measuring 240 ft wide and 390 ft long, 
the vessel includes a power plant, bridge and control rooms, living quarters, storage 
areas, and enough floor space and infrastructure to support the X-band radar.
The X-band radar itself, which sits on top of the floating platform, is the larg -
est, most sophisticated phased array, electro-mechanically steered X-band radar in the 
world. It consists of thousands of elements driven by transmit/receive (T/R) modules. 
In the X-band radar, they will provide the full fire control sensor functions for the 
Ground-Based Midcourse Defense system, including search, acquisition, tracking, 
discrimination, and kill assessment.
SPY-3.  The AN/SPY-3 Multi-Function Radar (MFR) is the U.S. Navy’s first ship -
board active phased array multifunction radar. It is an X-band active phased array 
radar designed to meet all horizon search and fire control requirements for the Navy. 
MFR is designed to detect low-observable anti-ship cruise missile (ASCM) threats and 
support fire-control illumination requirements for multiple missiles. MFR combines 
the functions provided by several separate radars aboard Navy combatant ships and 
also supports new ship-design requirements for reduced radar cross section and sig -
nificantly reduced manning (no operators).
The radar performs such functions as horizon search, limited above-the-horizon 
search, and fire control track and illumination. One of the most significant design 
features of the radar is to provide automatic detection, tracking, and illumination of 
low-altitude threat missiles in the adverse environmental conditions routinely found 
in coastal waters.
SPY-3 uses three fixed-face arrays, each containing around 5,000 transmit/  
receive (T/R) elements (see Figure 13.51). These elements are connected to  
T/R integrated multi-channel modules, each of which drives eight elements. 
Individual modules are designed to slide into the array structure and provide a 
high-conductivity thermal path to the cooling-array manifold without having any 
connection to the T/R module itself.FIGURE 13.50  SBX—over 250 ft tall and displacing more than 50,000 tons 
(Courtesy of Raytheon Company )
ch13.indd   69 12/17/07   2:41:16 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Phased Array Radar Antennas 13.70  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 13
REFERENCES
 1. A. Blondel, “Improvements in or relating to radiator systems for wireless telegraphy,” Belgian 
Patent 163,516, 1902; British Patent 11, 427, 1903.
 2. S. G. Brown, “Improvements in wireless telegraphy,” British Patent 14,449, 1899.
 3. R. M. Foster, “Directive diagrams of antenna arrays,” Bell System Tech. J ., vol. 5, pp. 292–307, 
April 1926.
 4. R. C. Hansen, Microwave Scanning Antennas , V ols. I, II, and III, New York: Academic Press, 1964.
 5. N. Amitay, R. C. Pecina, and C. P. Wu, “Radiation properties of large planar arrays,” Bell Teleph. 
Syst. Monog ., 5047, February 1965.
 6. A. A. Oliner and G. H. Knittel, Phased Array Antennas , Norwood, MA: Artech House, 1972.
 7. L. I. Stark, “Microwave theory of phased array antennas—A Review,” Proc. IEEE , vol. 62,  
pp. 1661–1701, December 1974.
 8. R. J. Mailloux, “Phased array theory and technology,” Proc. IEEE , vol. 70, March 1982.
 9. A. W. Rudge, K. Milne, A. D. Olver, and P. Knight, The Handbook of Antenna Design , V ol. 2, 
London: Peter Peregrinus, Ltd., 1983.
10. R. C. Johnson and H. Jasik (eds.), Antenna Engineering Handbook , 2nd Ed., New York:  
McGraw-Hill Book Company, 1984.
11. E. Brookner, “Phased array radars,” Sci. Am ., vol. 252, pp. 94–102, February 1985.
12. H. P. Steyskal, “Phased arrays 1985 symposium,” in RADC Rept.  TR-85-171, Rome Air 
Development Center, Bedford, MA, August 1985.
13. E. Brookner, “A review of array radars,” Microwave J ., vol. 24, pp. 25–114, October 1981.
14. E. Brookner, “Radar of the 80’s and beyond,” IEEE Electro 84 , May 1984.FIGURE 13.51  AN/SPY-3 Multi-Function Radar ( Courtesy of Raytheon 
Company )
ch13.indd   70 12/17/07   2:41:16 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Phased Array Radar Antennas  PHASED ARRAY RADAR ANTENNAS  13.716x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 13
15. E. Brookner, “Array radars: An update,” Microwave J ., vol. 30, pt. I, pp. 117–138, February 1987; 
pt. II, pp. 167–174, March 1987.
16. W. A. Harmening, “A laser-based, near-field probe position measurement system,” Microwave J ., 
pp. 91–102, October 1983.
17. R. J. Mailloux, Chapter 21 in Antenna Engineering Handbook , R. C. Johnson and H. Jasik (eds.), 
2nd ed., New York: McGraw-Hill Book Company, 1984.
18. G. V . Borgiotti, Chapter 11 in The Handbook of Antenna Design , A. W. Rudge, K. Milne, A. D. Olver 
and P. Knight (eds.), vol. 2, London: Peter Peregrinus, Ltd., 1983.
19. K. G. Schroeder, “Near optimum beam patterns for phase monopulse arrays,” Microwaves ,  
pp. 18–27, March 1963.
20. J. Frank, “Phased array antenna development,” Johns Hopkins University, Appl. Phys. Lab. 
Rept. TG 882, pp. 114–117, March 1967.
21. W. E. Scharfman and G. August, “Pattern measurements of phased arrayed antennas by focus -
sing into the near zone,” in “Phased Array Antennas,” A. A. Oliner and G. H. Knittel (eds.), 
Norwood, MA: Artech House, 1972, pp. 344–349.
22. D. K. Alexander and R. P. Gray, Jr., “Computer-aided fault determination for an advanced phased 
array antenna,” presented at Proc. Antenna Application Symp., Allerton, IL., September 1979.
23. J. Ronen and R. H. Clarke, “Monitoring techniques for phased-array antennas,” IEEE Trans .,  
vol. AP-33, pp. 1313–1327, December 1985.
24. R. H. Collings, “Current sheet antenna,” U.S. Patent 3,680,136, 1972.
25. A. A. Oliner and R. G. Malech, Chapters 2–4 in Microwave Scanning Antennas , R. C. Hansen, 
vol. III, New York: Academic Press, 1964.
26. L. I. Parad and R. W. Kreutel, “Mutual effects between circularly polarized elements,” in Symp. 
USAF Antenna Res. Develop., Antenna Arrays Sec., Abstr ., University of Illinois, Urbana, 1962.
27. M. I. Skolnik, Introduction to Radar Systems , 2nd Ed., New York: McGraw-Hill Book Company, 
1980, pp. 504–506.
28. J. M. Howell, “Limited scan antennas,” presented at IEEE AP-5 Int. Symp., 1972.
29. J. S. Ajioka, “Frequency-scan antennas,” Antenna Engineering Handbook , Chap. 19, R. C. Johnson 
and H. Jasik (eds.), 2nd Ed., New York: McGraw-Hill Book Company, 1984.
30. W. F. Gabriel, Guest editor, special issue on adaptive antennas, IEEE Trans ., vol. AP-24, 
September 1976.
31. J. R. Forrest, Guest editor, special issue on phased arrays, Proc. IEE  (London ), vol. 127, pt. F, 
August 1980.
32. H. Steyskal, “Digital beamforming antennas—an introduction,” Microwave J ., vol. 30, pp. 107–124, 
January 1987.
33. J. L. Allen, “A theoretical limitation on the formation of lossless multiple beams in linear arrays,” 
IRE Trans ., vol. AP-9, pp. 350–352, July 1961.
34. J. Blass, “The multidirectional antenna: A new approach to stacked beams,” in IRE Int. Conv. 
Rec., vol. 8 pt. 1, 1960, pp. 48–50.
35. H. Gent, The bootlace aerial, Royal Radar Estab. J . (U.K.), pp. 47–57, October 1957.
36. W. Rotman and R. F. Turner, “Wide angle microwave lens for line source application,” IEEE 
Trans ., vol. AP-11, pp. 623–632, November 1963.
37. S. A. Schelkunoff, “A mathematical theory of linear arrays,” Bell, Syst. Tech. J ., vol. 22,  
pp. 80–107, January 1943.
38. J. F. Ramsay, J. P. Thompson, and W. D. White, “Polarization tracking of antennas,” presented at 
IRE Int. Conv., Session 8, Antennas I, 1962.
39. P. M. Woodward, A method of calculating the field over a planar aperture required to produce a 
given polar diagram, J. IEE  (London ), vol. 93, pt. 3A, pp. 1554–1558, 1946.
40. R. C. Hansen, “Aperture theory,” in Microwave Scanning Antennas , vol. I, New York: Academic 
Press, pp. 18–21.
41. J. F. Ramsay, “Lambda functions describe antenna diffraction pattern,” Microwaves , pp. 70–107, 
June 1967.
ch13.indd   71 12/17/07   2:41:17 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Phased Array Radar Antennas 13.72  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 13
42. A. Ksienski, “Equivalence between continuous and discrete radiating arrays,” Can. J. Phys ., 
vol. 39, pp. 35–349, 1961.
43. W. H. Von Aulock, “Properties of phased array,” IRE Trans . Vol. AP-9, pp. 1715–1727, 
October 1960.
44. E. D. Sharp,” Triangular arrangement of planar-array elements that reduces number needed,” 
IRE Trans ., vol. AP-9, pp. 126–129, March 1961.
45. J. L. Allen et al., “Phased array radar studies,” MIT Lincoln Lab. Tech. Rept. 381, March 1965.
46. J. L. Allen and B. L. Diamond, “Mutual coupling in array antennas,” MIT Lincoln Lab. Tech. 
Rept. 424, October 1966.
47. R. W. Bickmore, “Note on effective aperture of electrically scanned arrays,” IRE Trans ., vol. AP-6, 
pp. 194–196, April 1958.
48. B. L. Diamond, Chapter 3 in Mutual Coupling in Array Antennas , J. L. Allen and B. L. Diamond 
(eds.), MIT Lincoln Lab. Tech. Rept. 424, pt. III, October 1966.
49. J. Frank, “Phased array antenna development,” Johns Hopkins University, Appl. Phys. Lab. Rept . 
TG 882, March 1967.
50. P. W. Hannan, “Element-gain paradox for a phased-array antenna,” IEEE Trans ., vol. AP-12,  
pp. 423–43, July 1964.
51. W. Wasylkiwskyj and W. K. Kahn, “Element patterns and active reflection coefficient in uniform 
phased arrays,” IEEE Trans ., vol. AP-22, March 1974.
52. W. Wasylkiwskyj and W. K. Kahn, “Element pattern bounds in uniform phased arrays.” IEEE 
Trans ., vol. AP-25, September 1977.
53. W. K. Kahn, “Impedance-match and element-pattern constraints for finite arrays,” IEEE Trans ., 
vol. AP-25, November 1977.
54. R. E. Willey, “Space tapering of linear and planar arrays,” IRE Trans ., vol. AP-10, pp. 369–377, 
July 1962.
55. H. A. Wheeler, “Simple relations derived from a phased-array antenna made of an infinite current 
sheet,” IEEE Trans ., vol. AP-13, pp. 506–514, July 1965.
56. J. L. Allen, “On array element impedance variation with spacing,” IEEE Trans ., vol. AP-12,  
p. 371, May 1964.
57. P. W. Hannan, “The ultimate decay of mutual coupling in a planar array antenna,” IEEE Trans ., 
vol. AP-14, pp. 246–248, March 1966.
58. T. T. Debski and P. W. Hannan, “Complex mutual coupling measured in a large phased array 
antenna,” Microwave J ., pp. 93–96, June 1965.
59. P. W. Hannan and M. A. Balfour, “Simulation of a phased-array antenna in a waveguide,” IEEE 
Trans ., vol. AP-13, pp. 342–353, May 1965.
60. B. L. Diamond, “Small Arrays—Their analysis and their use for the design of array elements,” in 
Phased Array Antennas , A. A. Oliner and G. H. Knittel (eds.), Norwood, MA: Artech House,1972.
61. C. E. Grove, D. J. Martin, and C. Pepe, “Active impedance effects in low sidelobe and ultra 
wideband phased arrays,” Proc. Phased Arrays Symp ., 1985, pp. 187–206.
62. G. E. Evans and H. E. Schrank, “Low sidelobe radar antennas,” Microwave J ., pp. 109–117, 
July 1983.
63. G. E. Evans and S. G. Winchell, “A wide band, ultralow sidelobe antenna,” presented at Antenna 
Applications Symp., Allerton, I L, September 1979.
64. S. G. Winchell and D. Davis, “Near field blockage of an ultralow sidelobe antenna,” IEEE Trans ., 
vol. AP-28, pp. 451–459, July 1980.
65. D. K. Barton and H. R. Ward, Handbook of Radar Measurement , Englewood Cliffs, NJ:  
Prentice-Hall, 1969, pp. 242–338.
66. J. F. Ramsey, “Lambda functions describe antenna/diffraction patterns,” Microwaves , p. 60, 
June 1967.
67. W. M. Yarnall, “Twenty-seven design aids for antennas, propagation effects and systems planning,” 
Microwaves , pp. 47–73, May 1965.
ch13.indd   72 12/17/07   2:41:17 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Phased Array Radar Antennas  PHASED ARRAY RADAR ANTENNAS  13.736x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 13
68. F. J. Harris, “On the use of windows for harmonic analysis with the discrete Fourier transform,” 
Proc. IEEE , vol. 66, pp. 51–83, January 1978.
69. T. T. Taylor, “Design of line source antennas for narrow beamwidth and low sidelobes,” IEEE 
Trans ., vol. AP-3, pp. 16–28, 1955.
70. T. T. Taylor, “Design of circular apertures for narrow beamwidth and low sidelobes,” IEEE Trans ., 
vol. AP-8, pp. 17–22, 1960.
71. E. T. Bayliss, “Design of monopulse antenna difference patterns with low sidelobes,” Bell Syst. 
Tech. J ., pp. 623–650, May–June 1968.
72. D. K. Barton and H. R. Ward, Handbook of Radar Measurement , Englewood Cliffs, NJ:  
Prentice-Hall, 1969, pp. 256–266.
73. J. L. Allen, “The theory of array antennas,” MIT Lincoln Lab. Rept. 323, July 1963.
74. J. Ruze, “Physical limitations on antennas,” MIT Res. Lab. Electron. Tech. Rept. 248, October 30, 
1952.
75. T. C. Cheston, “Effect of random errors on sidelobes of phased arrays,” IEEE APS Newsletter—
Antenna Designer’s Notebook , pp. 20–21, April 1985.
76. J. Frank and J. Ruze, “Steering increments for antisymmetrically phased arrays,” IEEE Trans ., 
vol. AP-15, pp. 820–821, November 1967.
77. J. Brown (Private communication), 1951.
78. C. J. Miller, “Minimizing the effects of phase quantization errors in an electronically scanned 
array,” in Proc. Symp. Electronically Scanned Array Techniques and Applications , RADC-TDR-
64-225, vol. 1, 1964, pp. 17–38.
79. J. Frank, “Bandwidth criteria for phased array antennas,” in Phased Array Antennas , A. A. Oliner 
and G. H. Knittel, Norwood, MA: Artech House, 1972, pp. 243–253.
80. W. B. Adams, “Phased array radar performance with wideband signals,” AES Conv. Rec ., 
November 1967, pp. 257–271.
81. C. B. Sharp and R. B. Crane, “Optimization of linear arrays for broadband signals,” IEEE Trans ., 
vol. AP-14, pp. 422–427, July 1966.
82. C. Rothenberg and L. Schwartzman, “Phased array signal bandwidth,” IN IEEE Int. Symp. 
Antennas Propag. Dig ., December 1969, pp. 116–123.
83. W. Rotman and R. F. Turner, “Wide angle lens for line source applications,” IEEE Trans .,  
vol. AP-11, pp. 623–632, 1963.
84. J. Blass, “The multi-directional antenna: a new approach to stacked beams,” in Proc. IRE Conv ., 
vol. 8, pt. I, 1960, pp. 48–51.
85. R. F. Kinsey and A. Horvath, “Transient response of center-series fed array antennas,” in Phased 
Array Antennas , A. A. Olinerand and G. H. Knittel (eds.), Norwood, MA: Artech House, 1972, 
pp. 261–271.
86. A. R. Lopez, “Monopulse networks for series feeding an array antenna,” in IEEE Int. Symp. 
Antennas Propag. Dig ., 1967.
87. L. Stark, R. W. Burns, and W. P. Clark, Chapter 12 in Radar Handbook , M. I. Skolnik (ed.), 1st Ed., 
New York: McGraw-Hill Book Company, 1970.
88. J. F. White, Semiconductor Control , Norwood, MA: Artech House, 1977.
89. W. J. Ince, “Recent advances in diode and phase shifter technology for phased array radars,”  
pts. I and II, Microwave J ., vol. 15, no. 9, pp. 36–46, and no. 10, pp. 31–36, 1972.
90. J. F. White, “Diode phase shifters for array antennas,” IEEE Trans ., vol. MTT-22, pp. 658–674, 
June 1974.
91. M. A. Fruchaft and L. M. Silber, “Use of Microwave ferrite toroids to eliminate external magnets 
and reduce switching power,” Proc. IRE , vol. 46, p. 1538, August 1958.
92. J. Frank, C. A. Shipley, and J. H. Kuck, “Latching ferrite phase shifter for phased arrays,” 
Microwave J ., pp. 97–102, March 1967.
93. W. J. Ince and D. H. Temme, “Phase shifters and time delay elements,” in Advances in Microwaves , 
vol. 4, New York: Academic Press, 1969.
ch13.indd   73 12/17/07   2:41:17 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Phased Array Radar Antennas 13.74  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 13
 94. L. R. Whicker and C. W. Young, “The evolution of ferrite control components,” Microwave J ., 
vol. 2, no. 11, pp. 33–37, 1978.
 95. J. DiBartolo, W. J. Ince, and D. H. Temme, “A solid state ‘flux drive’ control circuit for latching-
ferrite-phase shifter applications,” Microwave J ., vol. 15, pp. 59–64, September 1972.
 96. R. A. Pucel (ed.), Monolithic Microwave Integrated Circuits , New York: IEEE Press, 1985.
 97. J. L. Poirier, “An analysis of simplified feed architectures for MMIC T/R module arrays,” Rome 
Air Development Center Rept.  RADC-TR -86-236 (AD A185474), February 1987.
 98. W. H. Perkins and T. A. Midford, “MMIC technology: better performance at affordable cost,” 
Microwave J ., vol. 31, pp. 135–143, April 1988.
 99. B. Cantrell, J. de Graaf, F. Willwerth, G. Meurer, L. Leibowitz, C. Parris, and R. Stapleton, 
“Development of a digital array radar,” IEEE AEES Systems Magazine , pp. 22–27, March 2002.
100. H. Steyskal, “Digital beamforming antennas: an introduction,” Microwave J ., pp. 107–124, 
January 1987.
101. R. C. Hansen, Phased Array Antennas , New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1998.
102. H. Steyskal, R. A. Shore, and R. L. Haupt, “Methods for null control and their effects on the 
radiation pattern,” IEEE Trans. Antennas and Propagation , vol. AP-34, no. 3, pp. 404–409, 
March 1986.
103. W. F. Gabriel, “Adaptive processing array systems,” Proc. of the IEEE , vol. 80, no. 1, pp. 152–161, 
January 1992.
104. S. P. Applebaum, “Adaptive arrays,” IEEE Trans. Antennas and Propagation , vol. AP-24, no. 5, 
pp. 585–598, September 1976.
105 R. J. Mailloux, Phased Array Antenna Handbook , Norwood, MA: Artech House, 2005.
106. M. Zatman, “Digitization requirements for digital radar arrays,” in Proceedings of the 2001 
IEEE Radar Conference , May 1–3, 2001, pp. 163–168.
107. G. H. C. van Werkhoven and A. K. Golshayan, “Calibration aspects of the APAR antenna unit,” 
in IEEE International Conference on Phased Array Systems and Technology , May 21–25, 2000, 
pp. 425–428.
108. J. K. Mulcahey and M. G. Sarcione, “Calibration and diagnostics of the THAAD solid state 
phased array in a planar nearfield facility,” IEEE International Symposium on Phased Array 
Systems and Technology , 1996, pp. 322–326, October 15–18, 1996.
109. M. Scott, “Sampson MFR active phased array antenna,” in IEEE International Symposium on 
Phased Array Systems and Technology , October 14–17, 2003, pp. 119–123.
110. D. Slater, Near-field Antenna Measurements , Norwood, MA: Artech House, 1991.
111. H. M. Aumann, A. J. Fenn, and F. G. Willwerth, “Phased array antenna calibration and pattern 
prediction using mutual coupling measurements,” IEEE Trans. Antennas and Prop ., vol. 37, 
no.7, pp. 844–850, July 1989.
112. E. Brookner, “Phased arrays and radars – past, present, and future,” Microwave J ., vol. 49, 
pp. 24–46, January 2006.
113. R. M. Scudder and W. H. Sheppard, “AN/SPY-1 phased array antenna,” Microwave J ., vol. 17, 
pp. 51–55, May 1974.
114. R. L. Britton, T. W. Kimbrell, C. E. Caldwell, and G. C. Rose, “AN/SPY-1 planned improve -
ments,” in Conf. Rec. Eascon ’82 , September 1982, pp. 379–386.
115. B. Walsh, “An eagle in the sky,” Countermeasures—The Military Electron. Mag ., pp. 30–63, 
July 1976.
116. D. R. Carey and W. Evans, “The PATRIOT radar in tactical air defense,” Microwave J ., vol. 31, 
pp. 325–332, May 1988.
ch13.indd   74 12/17/07   2:41:18 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Phased Array Radar Antennas 