24.16x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 24 Electronic   Counter-Countermeasures A. Farina Analysis of Integrated Systems   SELEX Sistemi Integrati 24.1 INTRODUCTION Since World War II, both radar and electronic warfare (EW) * have achieved a very  high state of performance.1,2 Modern military forces depend heavily on electromagnetic  (EM) systems for surveillance, weapon control, communication, and navigation; thus  access to, and control of, the EM spectrum is vital. 
Electronic countermeasures (ECM)  are likely to be taken by hostile forces to degrade the effectiveness of EM systems.3–7  As a direct consequence, EM systems are more and more frequently equipped with so- called electronic counter-countermeasures (ECCM) to ensure effective use of the EM  spectrum despite an enemy’s use of EW actions. This chapter is devoted to the description of the ECCM techniques and design prin - ciples to be used in radar systems when they are subject to an ECM threat. Section 24.2  starts with a recall of the definitions pertaining to EW and ECCM. 
The topic of radar  signals interception by EW devices is introduced in Section 24.3; the first strategy to  be adopted by radar designers is to try to avoid interception by the opponent electronic  devices. Section 24.4 is dedicated entirely to the analysis of the major ECM techniques  and strategies. It is important to understand the ECM threat to a radar system in order  to be able to efficiently react to it. 
To facilitate the description of the crowded family  of ECCM techniques (Sections 24.6 through 24.10), a classification is attempted in  Section 24.5. Then, the techniques are introduced according to their use in the vari - ous sections of radar, namely, antenna, transmitter, receiver, and signal processing.  A key role is also played by those ECCM techniques that cannot be classified as  electronic, such as human factors, methods of radar operation, and radar deployment  tactics (Section 24.10). 
The ensuing Section 24.11 shows the application of the aforementioned techniques  to the most common radar families, namely, surveillance, tracking, multifunctional,  phased-array, imaging, and over-the-horizon radars. The main design principles (e.g.,  selection of transmitter power, frequency, waveform, and antenna gain) as dictated by  the ECM threat are also discussed in some detail.Chapter 24 *  A list of acronyms is at the end of the chapter before the list of references. ch24.indd   1 12/19/07   5:59:59 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Source: RADAR HANDBOOK. 24.2  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 24 The chapter ends with an approach to the problem of evaluating the efficacy of  ECCM and ECM techniques (Section 24.12). 
There is a lack of theory to properly quan - tify the endless battle between ECCM and ECM techniques. Nevertheless, a commonly  adopted approach to determine the ECM effect on a radar system is based on evaluation  of the radar range under jamming conditions. The advantage of using specific ECCM  techniques can be taken into account by calculating the radar range recovery. 
A list of acronyms used in the chapter and the references appear at the end of  the chapter. 24.2 TERMINOLOGY EW is defined as a military action involving the use of EM energy to determine,  exploit, reduce, or prevent radar use of the EM spectrum.8–11 The operational employ - ment of EW relies upon the capture of radar EM emissions using electronic intelli - gence (ELINT) devices, collating the information in support databases that are then  used to interpret EM emission data, to understand the radar system functions, and  to program reactions against the radar. EW is organized into two major categories:  electronic warfare support measures (ESM) and ECM. 
Basically, the EW community  takes as its job the degradation of radar capability. The radar community takes as its  job the successful application of radar in spite of what the EW community does; the  goal is pursued by means of ECCM techniques. The definitions of ESM, ECM, and  ECCM are listed below.8,11,12 † ESM is that division of EW involving actions taken to search for, intercept, locate,  record, and analyze radiated EM energy for the purpose of exploiting such radiations  in the support of military operations. 
Thus, ESM provides a source of EW information  required to conduct ECM, threat detection, warning, and avoidance. ECM is that divi - sion of EW involving actions taken to prevent or reduce a radar’s effective use of the  EM spectrum. ECCM comprises those radar actions taken to ensure effective use of  the EM spectrum despite the enemy’s use of EW. 
The topic of EW is extremely rich in terms, some of which are also in general use  in other electronic fields. A complete glossary of terms in use in the ECM and ECCM  fields is found in the literature.8,11,13 24.3 ELECTRONIC WARFARE   SUPPORT MEASURES ESM usually consists of several detection and measurement receivers and real time  processor boards dedicated to the interception of radar emissions. The identification of  specific emitters is based on comparison with tactical or strategic ELINT.9,14–17 Emitter  location can be additionally provided through several methods such as triangulation  †  Since the publication of the second edition of this Handbook, the U.S. 
Air Force changed some of the EW terms we  have gotten used to over these many years. ECM is now Electronic Attack (EA), ECCM is Electronic Protection  (EP), and ESM is Electronic Support (ES). These terms are not used in this chapter because they are seldom used  by the radar community who seem to prefer retaining the more familiar expressions ECM, ECCM, and ESM. 
ch24.indd   2 12/19/07   5:59:59 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Electronic Counter-Countermeasures. 
 ELECTRONIC COUNTER-COUNTERMEASURES  24.36x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 24 from remote systems or single platform sequential bearing measurements, difference  time of arrival (DToA) or hyperbolation, and Phase Difference Rate (PDR). Modern  digital receiver technology, coupled with state-of-the-art deinterleaving signal pro - cessing to cleanly isolate and identify individual EM emitters, will enhance situation  awareness. Using techniques such as time and frequency difference of arrival will  improve single and multiple platform spatial location; this will allow EW to be used  to cue targeting systems. 
Radar interception, which is of particular interest in this section, is based on the  reception and measurements of the signals transmitted by radar systems whether pulse  or Continuous Wave (CW). The operational scenario in which ESM should operate is  generally crowded with pulsed radar signals: figures of 500,000 to 1 million pulses per  second are frequently quoted in the literature.9 The center frequency, amplitude, pulse  width, time of arrival (ToA), and bearing of each detected pulse are measured, con - verted in digital format, and packed into a pulse descriptor word (PDW). The train of  PDWs are sent to a pulse-sort processor that deinterleaves the sequences belonging to  different emitters and identifies Pulse Repetition Interval (PRI) values and modulation  laws (random jitter, stagger, switching). 
Further comparison against an emitter data - base, which contains the range of characteristic parameters (frequency, pulse width,  PRI), the related pattern of agility (random, stagger, etc.) for each emitter, the type of  antenna scanning pattern and periods permits the generation of an emitter list with an  identification score. The ESM receiver is used to control the deployment and operation  of ECM; the link between ESM and ECM is often automatic. A single received radar pulse is characterized by a number of measurable parame - ters. 
The availability, resolution, and accuracy of these measurements must all be taken  into account when designing the deinterleaving system because the approach used  depends on the parameter data set available. Obviously, the better the resolution and  accuracy of any parameter measurement, the more efficiently the pulse-sort proces - sor can carry out its task. However, there are limitations on the measurement process  from outside the ESM system (e.g., multipath), from inside the system (e.g., timing  constraints, dead time during reception), and from cost-effectiveness considerations. 
 Angle of arrival is the most important sorting parameter available to the deinterleav - ing process since the target bearing does not vary from pulse to pulse. Therefore,  amplitude comparison monopulse antennas or multiple base interferometric (phase  comparison) systems are often used in order to warrant both 360° spatial coverage and  pulse-based angle of arrival measurement. Monopulse rotating antennas can also be  used when the time to intercept is not critical (this is the ELINT case), and it is possible  to scan sequentially the operational scenario. 
The carrier frequency is the next most important pulse parameter for deinterleav - ing. A common method of frequency measurement is to use a scanning superhetero - dyne receiver that has the advantage of high sensitivity, good frequency resolution,  and immunity with respect to the interference of nearby emitters.9 Unfortunately,  this type of receiver has a poor probability of intercept for the same reasons as the  rotating bearing measurement system. The situation is much worse if the emitter is  also frequency-agile (random variation) or frequency-hopping (systematic varia - tion). 
A common method to allow for wideband frequency measurements is based  on interferometric devices that provide instantaneous frequency measurement with  good accuracy and are able to reject signal interference with lower intensity. The  higher sensitivity and probability of interception are provided by wide instantaneous  band superheterodyne receivers followed by banks of contiguous receiver channels.  ch24.indd   3 12/19/07   5:59:59 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Electronic Counter-Countermeasures. 24.4  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 24 Several technologies have been proposed in the past such as surface acoustic wave  (SAW) filters and Bragg cells.9 The preferred approach is based on digital receivers  that integrate wideband spectral analysis and several post-detection functions, such  as intrapulse modulation measurement and waveform code reconnaissance. 
Pulse width is an unreliable sorting parameter because of the high degree of corrup - tion resulting from multipath transmission. Multipath effects can severely distort the  pulse envelope, for example, by creating a long tail to the pulse and even displacing  the position of the peak. The ToA of the pulse can be taken as the instant that a threshold is crossed, but in the  presence of noise and distortion, this becomes a variable measurement. 
Nevertheless,  the ToA is used for deriving the PRI of the radar. The amplitude of the pulse is taken  as the peak value. Dynamic-range considerations must take into account at least some  three orders of magnitude for range variation and three orders of magnitude for scan  pattern variations. 
In practice, 60 dB instantaneous dynamic range sounds like a mini - mum value; in many applications, it should be larger. The amplitude measurement is  used (along with ToA) for deriving the scan pattern of the emitter.9 The classification of radar interception systems is based on the type of represen - tation they provide of the electronic environment. A radar warning receiver (RWR)  in an airborne installation provides alerts of the presence of threats such as radar on  a missile, supplying the relative bearing on a cockpit-based display. 
Search radars  are not the primary target for these systems, though range advantage due to one-way  propagation with respect to two-way propagation allows radar interception at farther  range than own platform detection. Required sensitivity values range from –38 dBm  (dB milliWatt with respect to the isotropic) to –60 dBm. ESM is the most complex  system and usually comprises the capability to produce a picture of the complete  electronic order of battle in its deployment area and alert function. 
This kind of  system is able to detect and analyze emitter waveforms and scanning patterns. The  reaction time for the reconnaissance of the operational environment may be less  than 10 s, though dangerous emitters and alert functions call for tighter constraints.  Required sensitivity ranges from –55 dBm to better than –80 dBm. 
ELINT systems  are similar to ESM, but may not require 100% probability of intercept. The reaction  time may be minutes or hours. The purpose is not to detect emitters as soon as they  switch on in the operational environment, but to provide detailed characteristics of  emitters to allow the generation of an identification database for RWR and ESM  systems. 
ELINT system sensitivity may reach –90 dBm, but they don’t need to pro - vide 360° surveillance, and they can reach such performance by means of several  directive antennas. The range at which a radar emission is detected by an RWR depends primarily on  the sensitivity of the receiver and the radiated power of the victim radar. The calcu - lation of the warning range can be obtained by the basic one-way beacon equation ,  which provides the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) at the RWR:  S NP RGG kTtr S   =     atRWR4 41 22 πλ π B B L  1 (24.1) where P is the radar radiated power; R is the range from the RWR to the radar; Gt is the  transmitting-antenna gain of the radar; Gr is the receiving-antenna gain of the RWR; l  is the radar wavelength; the quantity kTsB is the total system noise power of the RWR;  and L is the losses. 
ch24.indd   4 12/19/07   6:00:02 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Electronic Counter-Countermeasures. 
 ELECTRONIC COUNTER-COUNTERMEASURES  24.56x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 24 Equation 24.1 is the basis of performance calculation for an RWR. It is noted that  the RWR detection performance is inversely proportional to R2 rather than to R4 of the  radar target detection equation. For this reason, the RWR can detect a radiating radar  at distances far beyond those of a radar’s own target detection capability. 
The radar- versus-interceptor problem is a battle in which the radar’s advantage lies in the use  of matched filtering, which cannot be duplicated by the interceptor (it does not know  the exact radar waveform), while the interceptor’s advantage lies in the fundamental  R2 advantage of one-way versus two-way radar propagation.15–18 Low probability of  intercept (LPI) techniques are applied to radar to win the battle of “to see and not to be  seen”: see Schleher19 and references therein. 24.4 ELECTRONIC COUNTERMEASURES The objectives of an ECM system are to deny information (detection, position, track  initiation, track update, and classification of one or more targets) that the radar seeks  or to surround desired radar echoes with so many false targets that the true information  cannot be extracted.3–7 ECM tactics and techniques may be classified in a number of ways, i.e., by main  purpose, whether active or passive, by deployment, by platform, by victim radar, or  by a combination of these.13–16,20 An encyclopedia of ECM tactics and techniques can  be found in the literature.3,13 Here description is limited to the most common types  of ECM. ECM includes both jamming and deception. 
Jamming  is the intentional and delib - erate transmission or retransmission of amplitude, frequency, phase, or otherwise  modulated intermittent, CW, or noise-like signals for the purpose of interfering with,  disturbing, exploiting, deceiving, masking, or otherwise degrading the reception of  other signals that are used by radar systems.3–13 A jammer is any ECM device that  transmits a signal of any duty cycle for the sole or partial purpose of jamming a  radar system.3–13 Radio signals by special transmitters intended for interfering with or precluding the  normal operation of a victim radar system are called active jamming . They produce at  the input of a victim system a background that impedes the detection and recognition of  useful signals and determination of their parameters. The most common forms of active  noise jamming are spot, swept, and barrage noises. 
Spot noise is used when the center  frequency and bandwidth of the victim system to be jammed are known and confined to  a narrow band. However, many radars are frequency-agile over a wideband as an ECCM  against spot jamming. If the rate of frequency agility is slow enough, the jammer can  follow the frequency changes and maintain the effect of spot jamming. 
Barrage or broad - band jamming is simultaneously radiated across the entire band of the radar spectrum of  interest. This method is used against frequency-agile systems whose rates are too fast to  follow or when the victim’s frequency parameters are imprecisely known. Jammer size is characterized by the effective radiated power ; ERP = GjPj, where Gj  is the transmit antenna gain of the jammer and Pj is the jammer power. 
Passive ECM  is synonymous with chaff, decoys, and other reflectors that require no  prime power. The chaff is made of elemental passive reflectors that can be floated or  otherwise suspended in the atmosphere or exoatmosphere for the purpose of confusing,  screening, or otherwise adversely affecting the victim electronic system. Examples are  metal foils, metal-coated dielectrics (aluminum, silver, or zinc over fiberglass or nylon  ch24.indd   5 12/19/07   6:00:03 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Electronic Counter-Countermeasures. 24.6  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 24 being the most common), string balls, rope, and semiconductors.3,13 Chaff consists of  dipoles cut to approximately a half wavelength of the radar frequency. 
It is suitably  packaged to contain a broad range of dipole lengths designed to be effective over  a wide frequency band. The basic properties of chaff are effective scatter area, the  character and time of development of a chaff cloud, the spectra of the signals reflected  by the cloud, and the width of the band that conceals the target.3,9,21,22 From a radar  viewpoint, the properties of chaff are very similar to those of weather clutter, except  that its broadband in frequency can extend down to VHF. The mean doppler frequency  of the chaff spectrum is determined by the mean wind velocity, while the spectrum  spread is determined by wind turbulence and a shearing effect due to different wind  velocities as a function of altitude.3 Decoys, which are another type of passive ECM, are a class of physically small  radar targets whose radar cross sections (RCS) are generally enhanced by using reflec - tors or a Luneburg lens to simulate fighter or bomber aircraft. 
The objective of decoys  is to cause a dilution of the assets of the defensive system, thereby increasing the sur - vivability of the penetrating aircraft. However, when the decoys grow too large, they  have to be engaged if they are thought large enough to carry a weapon. Penetration Aid (Penaids) could be used by incoming ballistic missiles (BMs).23 Penaid  decoys are only one of several possible penaids. 
A decoy provides another target that the  defense has to handle if the defense cannot distinguish a decoy from a re-entry vehicle. The other major type of active jammer is deceptive ECM (DECM). Deception  is  the intentional and deliberate transmission or retransmission of amplitude, frequency,  phase, or otherwise modulated intermittent or CW signals for the purpose of mislead - ing in the interpretation or use of information by electronic systems.3,13 The categories  of deception are manipulative and imitative. 
Manipulative  implies the alteration of  friendly EM signals to accomplish deception, whereas imitative  consists of introducing  radiation into radar channels that imitates a hostile emission. DECM is also divided  into transponders  and repeaters .3 Transponders generate noncoherent signals that emu - late the temporal characteristics of the actual radar return. Repeaters generate coherent  returns that attempt to emulate the amplitude, frequency, and temporal characteristics of  the actual radar return. 
Repeaters usually require some form of memory for microwave  signals to allow anticipatory returns to be generated; this is usually implemented by  using a microwave acoustic memory or a digital RF memory (DRFM).3 In a DRFM system, the input RF signal is generally first down-shifted in frequency  and then sampled with a high-speed analogue-to-digital converter (ADC). The samples,  stored in memory, can be manipulated in amplitude, frequency, and phase to generate a  wide range of jamming signals. The stored samples are later recalled, processed by the  digital-to-analogue converter (DAC), up converted, and transmitted back to the victim  radar.24 The information content of an intercepted radar signal is mainly carried in the  phase of the signal, and then the amplitude is usually discarded and only the phase  contribution is quantized and processed.25 The phase quantization is performed by the  DRFM by means of M bits into N = 2M levels. 
After the phase quantization, introduced  on the signal by the DRFM, the jamming signal is transmitted back to the victim radar  with an increasing delay with respect to the received radar signal. This delay is quantized  by a range gate pull off (RGPO) device. A range gate stealer system linearly delays the  quantized signal in order to generate a constant range-rate false target. 
The joint effect  of phase and delay quantization in DRFM can be analyzed as reported in Greco, Gini,  and Farina.26 Other artifacts in the deception signals can be introduced by imperfections  in the down-up conversion and demodulation/modulation of the signal performed in the  DRFM device. A detailed analysis of this kind of errors is in Berger.27 ch24.indd   6 12/19/07   6:00:03 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. 
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Electronic Counter-Countermeasures.  ELECTRONIC COUNTER-COUNTERMEASURES  24.76x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 24 The DRFM is the principal means to implement a deception jammer; the range-gate  stealer pulls the radar-tracking gate from the target position through the introduction  of a false target into the radar’s range-tracking circuits. A repeater jammer sends back  an amplified version of the signal received from the radar. 
The deception signal, being  stronger than the radar’s return signal, captures the range-tracking circuits. The decep - tion signal is then progressively delayed by using the DRFM, thereby “walking” the  range gate off the actual target (RGPO technique). When the range gate is sufficiently  removed from the actual target, the deception jammer is turned off, forcing the track - ing radar into a target reacquisition mode.3 Another form of deception is the velocity  gate pull off (VGPO); a combination of RGPO and VGPO is also possible. 
Another DECM technique is called inverse-gain jamming ; it is used to capture the  angle-tracking circuits of a conical-scan tracking radar.3,13 This technique repeats a  replica of the received signal with an induced amplitude modulation that is the inverse  of the victim radar’s combined transmitting and receiving antenna scan patterns.  Against a conically scanning tracking radar, an inverse-gain repeater jammer has the  effect of causing positive feedback, which pushes the tracking-radar antenna away  from the target rather than toward the target. Inverse-gain jamming and RGPO are  combined in many cases to counter conical-scan tracking radars.3 The vulnerability of  conical scan to such countermeasures motivates the use of monopulse trackers that are  almost always used in military tracking radars. 
A different form of DECM used against the main beam of surveillance radar  attempts to cover the target’s skin return with a wide pulse in order to confuse the  radar’s signal-processing circuitry into suppressing the actual target return. What the radar can do against DECM is discussed later; see Section 24.1 1. In the deployment of ECM, several classes can be singled out.3 In the stand-off  jammer  (SOJ) case, the jamming platform remains close to but outside the lethal range  of enemy weapon systems and jams these systems to protect the attacking vehicles. 
 Stand-off ECM systems employ high-power noise jamming that must penetrate through  the radar antenna receiving sidelobes at long ranges. Escort jamming  is another ECM  tactic in which the jamming platform accompanies the strike vehicles and jams radars  to protect the strike vehicles. Mutual-support , or cooperative , ECM involves the coordinated conduct of ECM  by combat elements against acquisition and weapon control radars. 
One advantage of  mutual-support jamming is the greater ERP available from a collection of platforms  in contrast with a single platform. However, the real value of mutual-support jamming  is in the coordinated tactics that can be employed. A favorite tactic employed against  tracking radars, for example, is to switch between jammers located on separate aircraft  within the radar’s beamwidth. 
This blinking has the effect of introducing artificial  glint into the radar tracking circuits, which, if introduced at the proper rate (typically  0.1 to 10 Hz), can cause the radar to break angle track. In addition, blinking has the  desirable effect of confusing radiation homing missiles that might be directed against  the jammer radiations.3 Stand-forward jamming  is an ECM tactic in which the jamming platform is located  between the weapon systems and the strike vehicles and jams the radars to protect the  strike vehicles. The stand-forward jammer is usually within the lethal range of defen - sive weapon systems for a considerable time. 
Therefore, only the use of relatively  low-cost remotely piloted vehicles might be practical; they can assist strike aircraft  or missiles in penetrating radar-defended areas by jamming, ejecting chaff, dropping  expendable jammers or decoys, acting as decoys themselves, and performing other  related ECM tasks. ch24.indd   7 12/19/07   6:00:03 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. 
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Electronic Counter-Countermeasures. 24.8  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 24 A self-screening jammer  (SSJ) is used to protect the carrying vehicle. This situation  stresses the capability of an ECM system relating to its power, signal-processing, and  ESM capabilities. 
Self-protection  (SP) decoy jamming is an off-board technique intended to create  angle deception by causing a missile seeker to transfer angle track from the target to  a decoy. Consequently, the missile guides toward the decoy and away from the target.  A self-protection decoy is most likely to be used by large fighter/attack and bomber  aircraft. 
The SP decoys are expendable or towed. Expendable decoys are ejected (or  dropped) from the aircraft whereas towed decoys are tethered behind the aircraft.  Expendable decoys contain miniature jamming systems that are small enough to fit into  a standard chaff/flare dispenser. 
The decoy orients itself to the air stream by deploying  low-drag aerodynamic fins sufficient to maintain stable flight. The decoy diverges from  the velocity vector of the launch aircraft by natural deceleration as a result of air stream  and falling due to gravity. The decoy typically starts radiating jamming signals toward  the missile seeker immediately after ejection from the aircraft and continues radiation  throughout its flight. 
Decoy ejection is typically commenced when the RWR detects  incoming radar-guided missiles. Multiple decoys are sometimes dispensed at predeter - mined rates in order to improve the cumulative probability of aircraft survival.  A towed decoy  is a small aerodynamically stable body that houses a miniature jam - mer. 
The decoy is deployed by reeling it out on a cable behind the aircraft to a fixed  distance or offset. This offset is chosen such that even if a missile hits the decoy, the  aircraft will not be damaged. The decoy can either be powered by the aircraft via the  cable or be self powered. 
Besides providing power to the decoy, the cable can also be  used as a data link to control jammer operation. Once deployed, the towed decoy can  begin radiating jamming signals toward the missile seeker. When the towed decoy is  no longer needed, it is either reeled in or jettisoned. 
The major drawback with towed  decoys is that they might severely degrade aircraft maneuverability .  According to the platform, the jammer can be classified as airborne, missile-borne,  naval-based, or ground-based. A special class of missile-borne threat is the anti-radiation missile (ARM), having  the objective of homing on and destroying the victim radar. 
The sorting and acquisition  of radar signals is preliminarily made by an ESM system; afterward it cues the ARM,  which continues homing on the victim radar by means of its own antenna, receiver, and  signal processor. Acquisition depends on the direction of arrival (DoA), operating band,  carrier frequency, pulse width, PRI, scan rate, and other parameters of the victim radar.  An ARM homes on the continuous radiation from the radar sidelobes or on the flash of  energy from the main beam. 
ARM benefits from the one-way-only radar signal attenua - tion. However, ARM receiver sensitivity is affected by mismatching losses; accuracy in  locating the victim radar is affected by the limited dimension of the ARM antenna. 24.5 OBJECTIVES AND TAXONOMY   OF ECCM TECHNIQUES The primary objective of ECCM techniques when applied to a radar system is to  allow the accomplishment of the radar intended mission while countering the effects  of the enemy’s ECM. 
In greater detail, the benefits of using ECCM techniques may  be summarized as follows: (1) prevention of radar saturation, (2) enhancement of the  signal-to-jamming ratio, (3) discrimination of directional interference, (4) rejection of  ch24.indd   8 12/19/07   6:00:04 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Electronic Counter-Countermeasures. 
 ELECTRONIC COUNTER-COUNTERMEASURES  24.96x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 24 false targets, (5) maintenance of target tracks, (6) counteraction of ESM, and (7) radar  system survivability.3 There are two broad classes of ECCM: electronic techniques (Section 24.6–24.9)  and operational doctrines (Section 24.10). Specific electronic techniques take place  in the main radar subsystems, namely, the antenna, transmitter, receiver, and sig - nal processor. Table 24.1 shows a categorization of some ECCM techniques along  with the ECM techniques that are used to counter.5,28 Suitable blending of these  ECCM techniques can be implemented in the various types of radars, as discussed  in Section 24.11. 
The ensuing description is limited to the major ECCM techniques; the reader should  be aware that an alphabetically listed collection of 150 ECCM techniques and an ency - clopedia of ECCM tactics and techniques can be found in the literature.8,29 Many other  references describe the ECCM problem, among which Slocumb and West,5 Maksimov  et al.,21 Gros et al.,30 and Johnson and Stoner31 are worth noting.  TABLE 24.1  ECCM Techniques Versus ECM Technique Countered ( Reproduced with permission  from Slocumb and West5 © Artech House 2000 and G. V . 
Morris28) Radar  Subsystem ECCM TechniqueECM Technique Category Countered NoiseFalse TargetRange Gate Pull OffVelocity Gate Pull Off Angle Antenna  relatedLow or ultra-low sidelobes × × Monopulse angle tracking × Low cross-polarized response × SLB (sidelobe blanking) × × SLC (sidelobe canceler) × Electronic scan × × × Adaptive receive polarization × Cross polarization cancellation × Transmitter  relatedLow cross-polarized antenna × High power × Pulse compression × Frequency diversity × Frequency agility × × PRF jitter × × Receiver  relatedRGPO memory nulling × Bandwidth expansion × × Beat frequency detector × × Cover pulse channel processing × Home-on-jam × Leading/trailing edge track × Narrowband doppler noise detector × × Velocity guard gates × × Signal  processing  relatedVGPO reset × × Signal realism × × × Acceleration limiting × × × Censored or ordered statistic CFAR × × Doppler/range rate comparison × × Time average CFAR × Total energy test × ch24.indd   9 12/19/07   6:00:05 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Electronic Counter-Countermeasures. 
24.10  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 24 24.6 ANTENNA-RELATED ECCM Because the antenna represents the transducer between the radar and the environ - ment, it is the first line of defense against jamming. The directivity of the antenna in  the transmission and reception phases allows space discrimination to be used as an  ECCM strategy. Techniques for space discrimination include antenna coverage and  scan control, reduction of main-beam width, low sidelobes, sidelobe blanking, side- lobe cancelers, and adaptive array systems. 
Some of these techniques are useful dur - ing transmission, whereas others operate in the reception phase. Additionally, some  are active against main-beam jammers, and others provide benefits against sidelobe  jammers. Blanking or turning off the receiver while the radar is scanning across the azi - muth sector containing the jammer or reducing the scan sector covered are means to  prevent the radar from looking at the jammer. 
Certain deception jammers depend on  anticipation of the beam scan or on knowledge or measurement of the antenna scan  rate. Random electronic scanning effectively prevents these deception jammers from  synchronizing to the antenna scan rate, thus defeating this type of jammer. A high- gain antenna can be employed to spotlight a target and burn through the jammers. 
An  antenna having multiple beams can also be used to allow deletion of the beam con - taining the jammer and still maintain detection capabilities with the remaining beams.  Although they add complexity, cost, and possibly weight to the antenna, reduction  of main-beam width and control of coverage and scan are valuable and worthwhile  ECCM features of all radars. If an air defense radar operates in a severe ECM environment, the detection range  can be degraded because of jamming entering the sidelobes. 
On transmit, the energy  radiated into spatial regions outside of the main beam is subject to being received  by enemy RWRs or ARMs. For these reasons, low sidelobes are desirable on both  receive and transmit (see Schrank,32 Patton,33 and Chapter 2 in Farina34). Sometimes  the increase in main-beam width that results from low sidelobes worsens the problem  of main-beam jamming; this consequence should be carefully considered in specifying  the antenna radiation pattern. 
Usually, specification of the sidelobes as a single number (e.g., −30 dB) means  that the peak of the highest sidelobe is 30 dB below the peak of the main beam.  The average, or root-mean-square (rms), sidelobe level is often more important.  For example, if 10% of the radiated power is in the sidelobes, the average sidelobe  level is −10 dB, where dB refers to the number of decibels by which the average  sidelobe level is below the gain of an isotropic (ideal) radiator. 
In theory, extremely  low sidelobes can be achieved with aperture illumination functions that are appro - priately tapered. This leads to the well-known tradeoffs among gain, beamwidth, and  sidelobe level.35 In order to keep the beamwidth small with low sidelobes, a larger  and costly (the cost could not be that large unless the radar uses an active aperture)  antenna is needed. The chief problem with the low sidelobe antenna in its early days  was that it had more mechanical problems because it was a waveguide array and  not a reflector. 
Other design principles involved in low antenna sidelobes are the  use of radar-absorbent material about the antenna structure, the use of a fence on  ground installations, and the use of polarization screens and reflectors. This means  that very low sidelobe antennas are costly in terms of size and complexity when  compared with conventional antennas of similar gain and beamwidth characteristics.  Second, as the design sidelobes are pushed lower and lower, a point is reached where  ch24.indd   10 12/19/07   6:00:05 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Electronic Counter-Countermeasures.  ELECTRONIC COUNTER-COUNTERMEASURES  24.116x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 24 minor error contributions to scattered energy (random errors) or misdirected radia - tion (systematic errors) become significant. 
In practice, peak sidelobe levels as low  as −30 to −35 dB (average level, −5 to −20 dB) can be readily realized with phased- array antennas that electronically scan. To obtain sidelobes at levels −45 dB down  from the main beam (average level, below −20 dB), the total phase-error budget  is required to be in the order of 5 ° rms or less. This is difficult in arrays that elec - tronically scan: the errors induced by phase shifters, active components, and feed  elements must be included in this budget. 
Arrays have been realized in practice that  have peak sidelobes in the vicinity of the −45 dB level; however, these are generally  mechanically scanned, and the low error budgets are achieved by using all-passive  feed components. Phased-array developments, which do scan electronically, also  foresee fairly good sidelobe performance; see the following references36–40 for a  view of relevant developments. Two additional techniques to prevent jamming from entering through the radar’s  sidelobes are the so-called sidelobe blanking (SLB) and sidelobe canceler (SLC). 
An  example of the practical effectiveness of the SLB and SLC devices is presented in the  literature, where the plan position indicator (PPI) display is shown for a radar, subject  to an ECM, equipped with and without the SLB and SLC systems.31 Other discrimination means are based on polarization. The polarization character - istics of a radar can be exploited as ECCM techniques in two ways. First, the cross- polarized pattern (i.e., the orthogonal polarization to the main plane of polarization)  of a radar antenna should be kept as low as possible consistent with radar system cost. 
 Ratios of copolarized main-beam peak gain to cross-polarized gain anywhere in the  antenna pattern should be greater than 25 dB to provide protection against common  cross-polarized jamming. This is thought of as an ECCM technique, but it is really  no more than good antenna design. The cross-polarized jamming in this case attacks  a design deficiency in the radar. 
The requirement for good cross-polarization design  practice in a radar antenna system extends to any auxiliary ECCM antennas as well. If  their cross-polarized gains are high, ECCM techniques such as SLC and SLB may not  be effective against cross-polarized noise or repeater jammers.29 In the second use of polarization, the radar antenna system purposely receives  the cross-polarization component of the radar wave in addition to the copolarized  component. The two orthogonally polarized components can be used to discriminate  the useful target from chaff and jammer on the basis of their different polarizations.41  However, limited benefits (a few decibels of cancellation ratio) can be obtained at  the expense of a more complex antenna system (consider, for example, a phased- array with radiating elements able to separately receive and possibly transmit the  two orthogonal components of a radar wave) and of a duplication of the receiver and  signal processing. 
Sidelobe Blanking (SLB) System.  The purpose of an SLB system is to prevent  the detection of strong targets and interference pulses (as they might appear after  pulse compression) entering the radar receiver via the antenna sidelobes. Thus, SLB  is mainly used to eliminate interference from other pulse transmissions and deliber - ate pulse-like jamming. 
Also, SLB is effective against coherent repeater interference  (CRI); here “coherent” means that the interference tries to mimic the coded waveform  radiated by the radar appearing as a spike signal after pulse compression.42–45,34 A  method of achieving this is to employ an auxiliary antenna coupled to a parallel receiv - ing channel so that two signals from a single source are available for comparison.   ch24.indd   11 12/19/07   6:00:05 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. 
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Electronic Counter-Countermeasures. 24.12  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 24 By suitable choice of the antenna gains, one may distinguish signals entering the  sidelobes from those entering the main beam, and the former may be suppressed.  Figure 24.1 a illustrates the radiation pattern of the main antenna together with a  low-gain auxiliary antenna. 
An implementation of the SLB processor is shown in  Figure 24.1 b, where the square-law-detected outputs of the two channels, ideally  identical except for the antenna patterns, are compared. The comparison is made at  each range bin for each pulse received and processed by the two parallel channels.  Thus, the SLB decides whether or not to blank the main channel on a single-sweep  basis and for each range bin. 
A target A in the main beam will result in a large signal  in the main receiving channel and a small signal in the auxiliary receiving channel. A  proper blanking logic allows this signal to pass. Targets and/or jammers J situated in  the sidelobes give small main but large auxiliary signals so that these targets are sup - pressed by the blanking logic. 
It is assumed that the gain GA of the auxiliary antenna  is higher than the maximum gain Gsl of the sidelobes of the radar antenna. The performance of the SLB may be analyzed by looking at the different outcomes  obtained as a consequence of the pair ( u, v) of the processed signals (see Figure 24.1 b). FIGURE 24.1 a Main and auxiliary antenna patterns for the SLB ( after  L. 
Maisel42 © IEEE 1968 ) FIGURE 24.1 b Scheme of sidelobe-blanking system ( after L. Maisel42 © IEEE 1968 ) ch24.indd   12 12/19/07   6:00:07 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. 
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Electronic Counter-Countermeasures.  ELECTRONIC COUNTER-COUNTERMEASURES  24.136x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 24 Three hypotheses have to be tested: (1) the null hypothesis H0 corresponding to the  presence of noise in the two channels, (2) the H1 hypothesis pertaining to the target  in the main beam, and (3) the H2 hypothesis corresponding to target or interference  signal in the sidelobe region. The null and H1 hypotheses correspond to the usual deci - sions of “no detection” and “target detection,” respectively. 
The blanking command is  delivered when H2 is detected. SLB performance can be expressed in terms of the following probabilities: (i) The  probability PB of blanking a jammer in the radar sidelobes, which is the probability of  associating the received signals ( u, v) with H2 when the same hypothesis is true; PB  is a function of the jammer-to-noise ratio (JNR) value, the blanking threshold F, and  the gain margin b = GA/Gsl of the auxiliary antenna with respect to the radar antenna  sidelobes. (ii) The probability PFA of false alarm, which is the probability of associat - ing the received signals ( u, v) with the hypothesis H1 when the true hypothesis is H0;  PFA is a function of the detection threshold a normalized to the noise power level and  of the blanking threshold F. 
(iii) The probability PD of detecting a target in the main  beam, which is the probability of associating the received signal ( u, v) with H1 when  the same hypothesis is true; PD depends, among other things, on the signal-to-noise  power ratio SNR, PFA, and the blanking threshold F. (iv) The probability PFT of detect - ing a false target produced by a jammer entering through the radar sidelobes. PFT is  the probability of associating ( u, v) with H1 when H2 is true; it is a function of JNR,  the thresholds a and F, and the gain margin b. 
(v) The probability PTB of blanking  a target received in the main beam. This is the probability of associating ( u, v) with  H2 when H1 is the true hypothesis. PTB is related to SNR, F, and the auxiliary gain   w = GA/Gt normalized to the gain Gt of the main beam. 
To complete the list of param - eters needed to describe the SLB performance, the last figure to consider is the detec - tion loss L on the main-beam target. This can be found by comparing the SNR values  required to achieve a specified PD value for the radar system with and without the SLB.  L is a function of many parameters such as PD, PFA, F, GA, JNR, and b. 
A numerical  evaluation of these performance parameters can be found in the literature (specifically  Chapter 3 of Farina,34among others42–50). The SLB design requires the selection of suitable values for the following parame - ters (Chapter 3 of Farina,34): (i) the gain margin b  and then the gain GA of the auxiliary  antenna, (ii) the blanking threshold F, and the normalized detection threshold a. The a  priori known parameters are hypothesized to be the radar sidelobe level Gsl and the val - ues of SNR and JNR. 
The design parameters can be selected by trying to maximize the  detection probability PD while keeping at prescribed values the probabilities PB and  PFA and trying to minimize PFT, PTB, and L. The choice of the position of the auxiliary  antenna has an impact on SLB performance in presence, for instance, of multipath; to  avoid its effect, the phase centers of main and auxiliary antennas should be positioned  at the same height with respect to the terrain surface. In modern radar, the blanking of sidelobe impulsive interference may be achieved  by the comparison of signals, pertaining to the same cells of the range-filter map  (RFM) of main beam and SLB channels. 
The RFM is a two-dimensional map col - lecting the radar echoes of all range cells (after pulse compression) and all doppler  filters of a radar burst. The two RFMs  are independently generated for the main and  auxiliary signals and the testing of the main and auxiliary received power values is  performed for all range cells and all doppler filters. This is different from a conven - tional SLB approach (such as the one illustrated in Figure 24.1) operating so that  if interfering/repeater jammer power is detected at a particular range cell, then that  range cell has to be effectively blanked. 
The RFM-based SLB logic greatly reduces  ch24.indd   13 12/19/07   6:00:07 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Electronic Counter-Countermeasures. 
24.14  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 24 the risk of successfully emulating a useful target because a repeater has to appear in  the same target range cell and has to emulate the same target doppler. Sidelobe Canceler (SLC) System.  The objective of the SLC is to suppress  high duty cycle or even continuous noise-like interferences (NLI) (e.g., SOJ)  received through the sidelobes of the radar. 
This is accomplished by equipping the  radar with an array of auxiliary antennas used to adaptively estimate the DoA and  the power of the jammers and, subsequently, to modify the receiving pattern of the  radar antenna to place nulls in the jammers’ directions. The SLC was invented by   P. Howells and S. 
Applebaum.51–52 A sample of subsequent references on SLC are  also in the literature.34,53–55 The conceptual scheme of an SLC system is shown in Figure 24.2. The auxiliary  antennas provide replicas of the jamming signals in the radar antenna sidelobes.  To this end, the auxiliary patterns approximate the average sidelobe level of the  radar receiving pattern. 
In addition, the auxiliaries are placed sufficiently close to  the phase center of the radar antenna to ensure that the samples of the interference  that they obtain are statistically correlated with the radar jamming signal. It is also  noted that as many auxiliary antennas are needed as there are jamming signals to  be suppressed. In fact, at least N auxiliary patterns properly controlled in amplitude  FIGURE 24.2  Principle of SLC operation (connection a only in the closed-loop  implementation techniques); RX: receiverADAPTIVE SYSTEMAUXILIARY ARRAY OUTPUTSIDELOBESTARGET SIGNALJAMMERS VM ZWNW2W1 VNV2V1A1 A2 AN a + + −RX & ADCRX & ADCRX & ADCRX & ADC ch24.indd   14 12/19/07   6:00:08 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Electronic Counter-Countermeasures.  ELECTRONIC COUNTER-COUNTERMEASURES  24.156x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 24 and phase are needed to force to zero the main antenna receiving pattern in N given  directions. 
The auxiliaries may be individual antennas or groups of receiving ele - ments of a phased-array antenna. The amplitude and phase of the signals delivered by the N auxiliaries are controlled  by a set of suitable weights: denote the set with the N-dimensional vector W = (W1, W2,  …, WN). The jamming signal is canceled by a linear combination of the signals from the  auxiliaries and the main antenna. 
The problem is to find a suitable means of controlling  the weights W of the linear combination so that the maximum possible cancellation is  achieved. Owing to the stochastic nature of the jamming signals in the radar and in the  auxiliary channels and to the hypothesized linear combination of signals, it is advis - able to resort to the techniques of linear prediction theory for stochastic processes.  Denote with VM, the radar signal at a certain range bin and with V = (V1, V2, …, VN)   the N-dimensional vector containing the set of signals, at the same range bin, from the   N auxiliary antennas. 
It is assumed that all the signals have bandpass frequency spec - tra; therefore, the signals can be represented by their complex envelopes, which modu - late a common carrier frequency that does not appear explicitly. The jamming signals  in the channels may be regarded as samples of a stochastic process having zero mean  value and a certain time autocorrelation function. For linear prediction problems, the  set of samples V is completely described by its N-dimensional covariance matrix   M = E(V*VT), where E(⋅) denotes the statistical expectation, the asterisk ( ⋅)* indicates  the complex conjugate, and VT is the transpose vector of V. 
The statistical relationship  between VM and V is mathematically represented by the N-dimensional covariance  vector R = E(VMV*). The optimum weight vector Wˆ  is determined by minimizing the  mean square prediction error, which equals the output residual power:  P E Z E VZ M = = − {|| } {|ˆ}2W V |T 2 (24.2) where Z is the system output. It is found that the following fundamental equation  applies:  Wˆ  = mM-1R (24.3) where m is an arbitrary constant value. 
The benefit of using the SLC can be measured  by introducing the jammer cancellation ratio (JCR), defined as the ratio of the output  noise power without and with the SLC:  JCRE V E VE V E VM MTM M= −=−{| | } {|ˆ| }{| | } {| | }2 22 2W V R R M RT −1* (24.4) By applying Eqs. 24.3 and 24.4 to the simple case of one auxiliary antenna and one  jammer, the following results are found:  ˆ{ * } {| | } | |W= = =−E V V E VJCRM A A2 21 1∆ρρ (24.5) It is noted that the optimum weight is related to the correlation coefficient r between  the main signal, VM, and the auxiliary signal, VA; high values of the correlation coef - ficient provide high values of JCR. The problem of implementing the optimum-weight set (Eq. 
24.3) is essentially related  to the real-time estimation of M and R and to the inversion of M. Several processing  ch24.indd   15 12/19/07   6:00:18 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. 
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Electronic Counter-Countermeasures. 24.16  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 24 schemes have been conceived that may be classified in two main categories: (1) closed- loop techniques, in which the output residue (connection a in Figure 24.2) is fed back into  the adaptive system; and (2) direct-solution methods, often referred to as open-loop , which  operate just on the incoming signals VM and V. Broadly speaking, closed-loop methods are  cheaper and simpler to implement than direct-solution methods; one of several practical  implementations is described in Griffiths.56 By virtue of their self-correcting nature, they do  not require components that have a wide dynamic range or a high degree of linearity, and  so they are well suited to analogue implementation. 
However, closed-loop methods suffer  from the fundamental limitation that their speed of response must be restricted in order to  achieve a stable and not noisy steady state. Direct-solution methods, on the other hand, do  not suffer from problems of slow convergence but, in general, require components of such  high accuracy and wide dynamic range that they can only be realized by digital means. Of  course, closed-loop methods can also be implemented by using digital circuitry; in which  case, the constraints on numerical accuracy are greatly relaxed, and the total number of  arithmetic operations is much reduced by comparison with direct-solution methods. 
The  majority of implementations has become open loop with digital technology. Practical considerations (see Chapter 4 of Farina34 for a detailed analysis) often  limit the SLC nulling capabilities to a JCR of about 30 to 40 dB, but their theoreti - cal performance is potentially much higher. Adequate cancellation of the directional  interference is obtained if the receiving channels are properly matched in amplitude  and phase across the radar receiving bandwidth. 
This condition is necessary to attri - bute the amplitude and phase differences measured across the channels only to the  nature (power and DoA) of the impinging interference. There are several sources of  mismatching; the imperfect matching of the analogue receiving channels is one of the  main limitations to the interference cancellation. The effect of this mismatch on the  JCR has been studied in the literature; see Farina57 and references therein. 
For contemporary presence of amplitude and phase mismatches, the JCR has an  expression that is derived in Appendix 2.57 A numerical application of this equation is  shown in Figure 24.3; the parameter values of the study case are quoted in Farina.57  Figure 24.3 shows the JCR contour curves versus the normalized amplitude an and the  phase b (degrees) mismatches of the analogue receiving channels (see Farina57 for the  precise definition of these parameters).  It is seen that to have 40 dB of JCR, one needs to specify tight requirements for  both amplitude (below 1%) and phase (below 0.7°) mismatches. This figure motivates  the need to resort to equalization digital filters to compensate for the mismatches of  the auxiliary channels (in their analogue part) with respect to the main channel. 
This  subject is covered in Farina57 and references therein. Examples of other possible limi - tations to cancellation are listed below34,53,58,59:  1. Mismatch between the main and auxiliary signals including the propagation paths,  the patterns of the main and auxiliary antennas, the paths internal to the system up  to the cancellation point, and the crosstalk between the channels60–62  2. 
The limited number of auxiliary channels adopted in a practical system as com - pared with the number of jamming signals  3. Aperture-frequency dispersion, often expressed in terms of aperture-bandwidth  product37,59,63  4. The limited bandwidth of the majority of the schemes implementing Eq. 
24.3, as  compared with the wideband of a barrage jammer that can be regarded as a cluster,  spread in angle, of narrowband jammers  5. Quadrature errors in synchronous (i.e., I, Q) detectors64–66 ch24.indd   16 12/19/07   6:00:18 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. 
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Electronic Counter-Countermeasures.  ELECTRONIC COUNTER-COUNTERMEASURES  24.176x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 24  6. Digital receiver channel errors such as ADC quantization, sample/hold jitter, and  digital converter offset67,68  7. 
The pulse width that limits the reaction time of the adaptive system, in order to  avoid the cancellation of target signal  8. The target signal in the auxiliary array that may result in nonnegligible steering of  the auxiliaries toward the main-beam direction  9. Multipath delay, often expressed in terms of delay-bandwidth product69–70 10. 
The presence of clutter that, if not properly removed, may capture the adaptive sys - tem, giving rise to nulls along directions different from those of the jammers37,71 11. The tradeoff that has to be sought between the accuracy of weights estimation and  the reaction time of the adaptive system 12. The limited number of time samples available to estimate the jammer covariance  matrix; usually 3 N sample should be available if N is the number of adaptive  channels101 13. 
The antenna rotation rate that might produce a fast time varying power and  jammer DoA101 Joint SLB and SLC.  SLB is effective against spiky signal after pulse compres - sion (like CRI), whereas SLC combats the continuous NLI. As previously stated, both  techniques combat the interferences impinging on the main antenna sidelobes. 
The  two techniques can be jointly used against the simultaneous presence of CRI and NLI.  An approach is to cascade the SLC and SLB techniques as shown in Figure 24.4. The  scheme depicts three receiving channels, each one having an antenna, a receiver, and  an ADC; they provide three signals labeled, respectively, as SLC, MAIN , and SLB. 
 The left-hand side antenna is a low-gain auxiliary performing the SLC processing in FIGURE 24.3  Contour curve of JCR (dB) versus the amplitude (in natural  number, along the horizontal axis) and phase (in degrees, along the vertical axis)  mismatches of the analogue receiving channels0 0.02 0.04 0.06 0.0800.511.52 4035 3530 30 3025 25 25b (°)  an ch24.indd   17 12/19/07   6:00:19 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Electronic Counter-Countermeasures. 
24.18  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 24 the main and sidelobe blanking channels. The center antenna is the high-gain radar  antenna to detect targets notwithstanding impulsive and noise-like interferences. The  right-hand side antenna is a low-gain auxiliary that is used for SLB processing in  the main channel. 
The adaptive cancellation of NLI received by the main antenna is  achieved by the linear combination of the SLC and MAIN  signals with the adaptive  weights W1 and 1, respectively; the resulting adapted signal MAIN ' doesn’t contain the  NLI. Similarly, the adaptive cancellation of NLI received by the rhs auxiliary antenna  is reached by the linear combination of the SLC and SLB signals with the adaptive  weights W2 and 1, respectively; the adapted signal SLB' doesn’t contain the NLI. Once  the NLI is removed from the two channels, then the classic SLB logic can be applied  against the CRI by comparing the amplitude | MAIN '| of the main channel with that  |SLB'| of the blanking channel, which are both NLI free.72 Because the phase centers of the three antennas (the main and the two auxiliaries)  are spaced, in general, more than 0.5 l (where l is the length of the radiated EM  wave), the adapted patterns of the main and SLB channels fluctuate around average  curves due to the presence of grating lobes.72 Nevertheless, a reasonable gain margin  is present between the pattern of the adapted SLB and the sidelobes of the adapted  main antenna; thus, an adequate probability of blanking the CRI in the presence of  adaptively nulled NLI should be expected. 
In order to improve the above gain margin  and, consequently, the blanking probability of CRI, the following processing strategies  are suggested72,73: spatial and frequency diversity. Spatial Diversity.  The rationale is to use two low-gain auxiliaries (instead of one,  as shown in Figure 24.4) for the SLB; because their phase centers will be different, the  grating lobes affecting the adapted patterns of the two SLB antennas will be different  too. 
Taking the greater of the two adapted SLB signals, the gain margin between the  SLB and the main antenna sidelobes will increase with a consequent improvement of  the performance of the blanking logic.FIGURE 24.4  A processing scheme incorporating SLC and SLB devicesRX & ADC xRX & ADC +W1xW2 +RX & ADCAuxiliar y channelMain channelSLB channel MAIN ' SLB' Gate Compar isonMAIN ' SLB' Blanking of adapted main signal range cellMAIN ' SLB' >FF blanking thresholdTo target detectionSLB SLC MAIN x 1 x 1 ch24.indd   18 12/21/07   10:51:26 AMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Electronic Counter-Countermeasures. 
 ELECTRONIC COUNTER-COUNTERMEASURES  24.196x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 24 Frequency Diversity.  Another technique to improve the blanking performance  is to resort to the diversity of the radar carrier frequency; in this case, we need just  one low-gain antenna (as shown in Figure 24.4) for the SLB. The radar operates  in frequency diversity mode, i.e., it radiates a burst of L pulses ( T seconds apart)  with slightly different carrier frequencies.73 The grating lobes in the adapted main  and the L SLB patterns will change as a function of the carrier frequency. 
Taking  the max of the output of the L SLB signals is equivalent to a smoothing of the grat - ing lobes. In a specific example presented in Farina and Timmoneri,73 two carrier  frequencies are used and the values of d/l (where “ d” is the inter-element distance)  for the array of receiving elements are respectively 0.5 and 0.55. The blanking is  separately applied on the received data at the two carrier frequencies; subsequently,  the separate blanking bits are processed by a logic OR (the global blanking logic). 
 The ensuing Figure 24.5 displays the blanking curves for the two separate carrier  frequencies and for the logic OR. It is noted that the frequency diversity and the  logic OR provide an improvement of the blanking probability; this is due to the  different shapes of the antenna patterns at the two slightly different carrier frequen - cies. Figure 24.5 also presents the probability of blanking a useful target ( PTB)  received by the main antenna beam. 
The probabilities are estimated via 200 inde - pendent Monte Carlo simulations. The target SNR is 20 dB; the JNR is 20 dB; the  target DoA is assumed to be evenly distributed in the main-beam angular interval  [–4°, 4°]; details on the numerical parameters used in the study case are in the   reference.73 It is noted that PTB is negligible for F = 0 dB, while PB ≥ 0.9. After a careful performance evaluation of the system depicted in Figure 24.4, it  might be necessary to always resort to either spatial or frequency diversity to improve  the SLB performance. 
The selection of one of the two diversity techniques depends  on overall system considerations related to the impact of adding more auxiliaries and/ or radiating, with the radar, proper carrier frequencies. Furthermore, if compact and  high-speed processing are requested, spatial and frequency diversity techniques can  be fruitfully implemented resorting to systolic schemes. FIGURE 24.5  Blanking probability ( PB) and target blanking probability ( PTB)  versus the blanking threshold F (in dB) for the frequency diversity schemeF (dB) d/λ = 0.5−10 −5 0 5 1 00.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.91 d/λ = 0.55OR PTBPBPB, PTBOR d/λ = 0.55d/λ = 0.5 ch24.indd   19 12/19/07   6:00:24 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Electronic Counter-Countermeasures. 24.20  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 24 Systolic Schemes for SLB and SLC. 
 In the quest for efficient parallel processing,  the systolic schemes come into the scene; their use has been described for the imple - mentation of SLC and more general adaptive array problems in the literature34,74,75 The  rationale and the use of a systolic array that processes the signals received by SLC and  main channel is reported on pages 146–156 of Farina34 and in Farina and Timmoneri.73  Figures 1 to 473 depict the use of a systolic processing scheme that incorporates the  SLB and SLC. The advantage of these schemes resides in the decomposition of the  complex processing for adaptive cancellation of the NLI into a network of simple  processing elements that can be conveniently mapped onto a parallel processing archi - tecture based either on Commercial off the Shelf (COTS) technology or custom Very  Large Scale Integration (VLSI) devices. In the literature76–80 it has been shown that  a wide spectrum of technologies can be used like Field Programmable Gate Arrays  (FPGA), Coordinate Rotation Digital Computer (CORDIC) implemented with VLSI  and optical computers. 
Pioneering work on the use of CORDIC for adaptive null - ing dates back to C. Rader at MIT-Lincoln Laboratory.81,82 The advantage of systolic  implementation is high processing speed and compact, low weight, low power con - sumption hardware. Adaptive Arrays. 
 An adaptive array (Figure 24.6) is a collection of N antennas  with their own receivers (RX) and ADC, feeding a weighting and summing network,  with automatic signal-dependent weight adjustment to reduce the effect of unwanted  FIGURE 24.6  The adaptive array schemex x x. . . 
w1 w2 wNTARGETJAMMER RX & ADCRX & ADCRX & ADCd + |•|2COMP ARISON WITH THRESHOLDH1 H0 aV1 V2 VN ZqJ qS ch24.indd   20 12/19/07   6:00:25 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Electronic Counter-Countermeasures. 
 ELECTRONIC COUNTER-COUNTERMEASURES  24.216x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 24 signals and/or to emphasize the desired signal or signals in the summing network  output. Output signal Z is envelope-detected and compared with a suitable thresh - old a to detect the presence of a useful target (see Chapter 5 in Farina34 and other  sources.53–57,83,84) The adaptive array is a generalization of the SLC described in the  preceding subsection. The basic theory of jammer cancellation and target enhance - ment is considered first; attention is then focused on the following topics: main-beam  jammer cancellation, target DoA estimation in presence of jammer, two-dimensional  adaptive processing for joint clutter and jammer cancellation, adaptivity at the subar - ray level, and superresolution. 
The implementation of the adaptive array concept is  more and more related to digital beamforming85–87 and to digital array radar (DAR)  technologies.88,89 Jammer Cancellation and Target Signal Enhancement.  Adaptive array prin - ciples have found a thorough mathematical treatment since the late 1960s83,84; for a  brief history of adaptive arrays, see Reed90; for an overview of least squares adap - tive processing in military applications with celebration of B. Franklin medal to   B. 
Widrow for pioneering work on adaptive signal processing, see Etter et al.91 The  theory and application of adaptive array principles to radar is well established; for  a look to popular publications see, for instance, Haykin and Steinhardt,92 Smith,93  and Farina et al.94 The basic result is given by the expression of the optimum set  of weights:  ˆW M S*=−µ1 (24.6) where M = E(V*VT) is the N-dimensional covariance matrix of the overall disturbance  (noise and jammer) V received by the array, and S is the N-dimensional vector con - taining the expected signal samples in the array from a target along a certain direction  of arrival. The similarity of Eq. 24.6 to Eq. 
24.3 governing the SLC is immediately  recognized. With respect to SLC, adaptive array techniques offer the capability of enhancing  the target signal while canceling the disturbance. The adaptive system allocates in an  optimum fashion its degrees of freedom to the enhancement of the target signal and to  the cancellation of jammer. 
Several generalizations of the basic theory have been considered, including: (i)  the target model S is not known a priori, as it is assumed in deriving Eq. 24.6; (ii) in  addition to spatial filtering, doppler filtering is performed to cancel clutter and chaff;  and (iii) the radar platform is moving as in shipborne, airborne, or even spaceborne  applications. A relevant advancement of the adaptive array concept is space-time adap - tive processing (STAP).95–98 STAP may be thought of as a two-dimensional adaptive filter that combines receive  beamforming and doppler filtering. 
A basic illustration of STAP is given in Figure 1  of Ward95 where a pictorial view of the interference environment seen by an airborne  radar and the corresponding adapted two-dimensional filter response are shown. The  power spectral density resulting from jammer and clutter is depicted as a function of  the spatial (i.e., the sin(angle)) and the temporal (i.e., doppler) frequencies. Barrage  noise jamming appears as a wall localized in angle and distributed all over doppler  frequencies. 
The clutter echo from a single ground patch has a doppler frequency that  depends on the angle between the clutter patch and the platform flight direction; clutter  from all angles lies on a diagonal ridge across the space-time frequency plane. A main- beam target competes with both main-beam and sidelobe clutter as well as jamming.   ch24.indd   21 12/19/07   6:00:27 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Electronic Counter-Countermeasures. 24.22  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 24 The STAP generates a space-time filtering response with a main beam along the  expected doppler frequency and angle of arrival of target and deep nulls along  the jammer wall and the clutter ridge. 
To perform STAP, the radar should have an  array of N antennas, each with their own receiving channel and ADC. Each channel  receives M echoes from a transmitted train of M coherent pulses. Adaptivity involves  the NM echoes. 
The detection probability PD for the optimum filter of Eq. 24.6 is for a constant  cross section target model84:  P Q PD=( )−2 211 FA iS M S* T, l n(/ )  (24.7) where Q (. , .) is the Marcum Q function‡ and PFA is the prescribed probability of false  alarm. 
It is also shown that the set of weights of Eq. 24.6 provides the maximum value  of the improvement factor If, which is defined as follows:  If=signal–to–interference plusnoisepowerr ratioattheoutput signal–to–interferencep plusnoisepowerratioatthe input (24.8) The If value corresponding to the optimum set of weights of Eq. 24.6 is84  I( )fT I SINR=−S S*M1  (24.9) The signal-to-interference plus noise power ratio ( SINR )I is measured at the input  of a receiving element of the array and refers to one echo pulse. 
The If represents  the performance of the adaptive array: it accounts for the target signal integration  and the interference cancellation. Practical applications of the equation above are, for  instance, in Chapter 5 of Farina.34 Crucial for the understanding of the adapted array  pattern is the concept of eigenvalue-eigenvector decomposition of the interference  covariance matrix M: see again Chapter 5 of Farina34 and Testa and Vannicola.99 An  important technique that mitigates the deleterious effects of the noise eigenvectors,  thus continuing to maintain a prescribed level of low sidelobes in the adapted array  pattern is the so-called diagonal loading.100,101 Adaptive arrays came about after the successful application of SLC, the applica - tion of Eq. 24.6, and of more general and powerful adaptive array concepts (e.g.,  GSLC: generalized SLC34). 
Clearly the efficiency of the adaptive array depends  on the number of degrees of freedom (dof) and the accuracy of receiving chan - nels (e.g., degrees of matching). There is some trade-off between accuracy and  number of channels; a system with one dof is less efficient (and requires maximum  accuracy) than a system with, say, four dof. An adaptive system with N dof can  theoretically suppress ( N – 1) jammers, realistically—as a rule of thumb— N/2 or  N/3. 
If the number of jammers is higher, the adaptive array is still useful because  some jammer suppression is achieved with an accordingly reduced detection range.  ‡  The Marcum Q function is defined as Q a b xx aI ax d xob( ,) e xp ( ) = −+ ∞∫2 2 2 where Io (.) is the modified Bessel function of order 0. ch24.indd   22 12/19/07   6:00:38 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Electronic Counter-Countermeasures.  ELECTRONIC COUNTER-COUNTERMEASURES  24.236x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 24 Concerning the comparison between adaptive beamforming and a very low sid - elobe antenna, it is in the important case of close to main-beam jamming where  adaptive beamforming is superior. 
On the other hand, the adaptive array allows one  to obtain certain lowered sidelobes simultaneously to jamming nulling. Concerning  the practical applicability of adaptive arrays some considerations follow. A num - ber of operational radar systems are adaptive; they are described in the technical  literature.38–40,102 A modern radar with digital processing already has at least four  digital channels (sum, difference in azimuth, difference in elevation, and guard). 
In  general, the number of implemented receiving channels is mainly a matter of cost.  It has been argued that radar systems with a number of adaptive dof of a few tens  are already in operation in the microwave band; the number of adaptive dof may be  more in the over-the-horizon (OTH) radar. For the foreseeable future, the fully adaptive array (i.e., with adaptivity at receiving  element level) has only theoretical value for antennas with a thousand elements. 
There  are radars that are fully adaptive, but they have only a limited number of elements  that can be economically handled in an adaptive array. Arrays with a large number of  receiving elements need some form of processing reduction. One method of partial  adaptivity is to arrange the array elements in subgroups that form the inputs of the  adaptive processor. 
Careful selection of the subgroup elements is necessary to avoid  grating lobes; this topic is discussed in a following section. Another simplification of  the fully adaptive array is the deterministic spatial filtering, where a fixed reduction  of the sidelobes is operated in those directions or solid angles from which the interfer - ences are expected to come. As an example, a probable region with interferences is  the horizon or part of it because jammers are mostly ground-based or at long range. 
 The weights are computed offline, by assuming an a priori known covariance matrix  M, and stored in a memory where a “menu” of weights is available to an operator or  an automatic decision system (pp. 277–283 of Farina34). Main Beam Cancellation (MBC) Systems. 
 The objective of the MBC is to sup - press high duty cycle and NLI received through the main beam of the radar. The  conceptual scheme of MBC is analogous to the scheme of SLC; however, high gain  beams are employed in lieu of low gain auxiliary antennas. Jamming is cancelled by a  linear combination of the signals from the high gain beams and the main antenna. 
The  weights to be applied can be computed by Eq. 24.3. The capability to cancel a certain  number of main-beam interferences depends on the available number of high gain  beams. 
A so-called four-lobed pattern can be used for main-beam interference cancel - lation.103,104 The use of low-gain auxiliary antennas joined to high gain beams allows  the contemporaneous cancellation of sidelobe and main-beam interferences. Target DoA Estimation in Presence of Sidelobe and Main-Beam Interferences.    Phased-array radars are required to detect, locate, and track targets in the presence of  natural interference and jamming. 
Monopulse is the technique of choice to determine  the target angular coordinates when ECM is encountered since it is much harder to  deceive than a conical scan. However, the application of adaptive beamforming (to bet - ter mitigate the presence of an intense jammer) with the related distortion of sum and  difference beam shapes may introduce errors in the conventional monopulse technique,  in particular, if the jammer is close to the main beam105; thus, the conventional mono - pulse technique cannot be applied.106 A Maximum Likelihood (ML) approach for target  DoA estimation is considered, which generalizes the monopulse concept.107–114,104 ch24.indd   23 12/19/07   6:00:39 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. 
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Electronic Counter-Countermeasures. 24.24  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 24 The target angular coordinates—azimuth and elevation ( q, f)—can be estimated by  ML, also in the presence of main-beam and sidelobe jamming, by processing the data  received by a set of low and high gain beams. The set of received radar echoes, V ≡  bS(qT, fT) + d, depends on the angular coordinates of the target, ( qT, fT), the complex  target amplitude b, and white gaussian zero mean noise plus jamming disturbance d. 
 S is a vector containing the values of the patterns of high and low gain antennas in a  certain direction ( q, f). The data V are characterized by a gaussian probability density  function conditioned to the target unknown parameters, i.e., pv(V/b, qT, fT) . The ML  estimation of the target’s unknown parameters is obtained as follows:  (ˆ,ˆ,ˆ) argmin ( ,), , b b bT T bH d θ φ θ φθ φ = −[ ] −−V M V S1S S( ,) a rgmin ( ,, ), , θ φ θ φθ φ [ ] { }= { }b F b      (24.10) where Md is the disturbance covariance matrix, Md = σn2⋅ [I + JNR • S(qJ, fJ) •  S(qJ, fJ)H], depending on the angular coordinates of the jamming ( qJ, fJ)§ and on the  jamming-to-noise power ratio, JNR PJ n=/σ2; in Eq. 
24.10, ( ⋅)H stands for the com - plex conjugate transpose operation. The amplitude b can be separately estimated by  nulling the first derivative of the function to be minimized. By replacing the ampli - tude estimationˆbinto the function to be minimized, the following DoA estimator  is obtained:   (ˆ,ˆ) { ( ,)}S ( , , , θ φ θ φθ φ θ φ θ φ T TH U = = argmax argmax) ) S ( , ) S(, )i i i iM V Md H d− −   12 1θ φ θ φ   (24.11) It can be noted that the numerator of the functional U( q, f) is the squared adapted  output (|( ,) | ) SH d θ φi iM V−1 2 of a generalized array of high and low gain antenna  patterns; the denominator [ ( , ) ( ,)] S MH dS θ φ θ φ i i−1 is a normalizing term that, as we  will see in a moment, plays a key role. 
The U function for a certain pair of angles  (q, f) determines, after comparison with a suitable threshold, if a target is detected.  The same U functional when scanned across a suitable set of ( q, f) angle values  provides, by means of Eq. 24.11, the target DoA estimate. 
We refer to Eq. 24.11 and  its practical implementation as the generalized monopulse technique . The algorithm needs the estimation of the disturbance covariance matrix Md,  which is obtained by the radar echoes corresponding to range cells adjacent to the  cell under test where a potential target is sought. 
The maximum of the U functional  can be estimated by an exhaustive search in the range of values of interest of ( q, f)  or by using a fast recursive algorithm.114 The recursion can be initialized with the  angular coordinates of the main-beam pointing. By replacing the estimated distur - bance covariance matrix into the U functional, a Constant False Alarm Rate (CFAR)  detector is obtained.115 Thus, the comparison of the U functional with a suitable  threshold permits the target detection maintaining the prescribed CFAR. Only for  the range cell in which the detection occurred, the radar signals are taken and further  processed by the ML algorithm to produce the target DoA estimate. 
The performance of the ML estimation algorithm of target DoA can be studied  by resorting to the Cramer-Rao Lower Bound (CRLB) analysis and Monte Carlo   simulations.104,107–109,113,114 In these studies, it is shown that the shape of the U functional   §  Here, just one jammer is considered; but the mathematical approach is easily extended to more than one jammer. ch24.indd   24 12/19/07   6:00:39 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. 
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Electronic Counter-Countermeasures.  ELECTRONIC COUNTER-COUNTERMEASURES  24.256x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 24 depicts the presence of the target as well as of the jamming. It has been demonstrated  that Monte Carlo simulation is in close agreement with CRLB analysis. 
It has been  found that the use of the four-lobed antenna pattern in addition to the conventional  monopulse beams (sum, difference in azimuth, and elevation) can improve the estima - tion of the target DoA in presence of a jammer. Joint Adaptive Jammer and Clutter Cancellation.  Clutter, always present in  a radar, negatively affects the performance of the adaptive jammer cancellation;  therefore, means have to be adopted to effectively contrast the contemporaneous  presence of clutter and jammer. 
When heavy clutter is present, the SLC and adaptive  array will attempt to minimize the power in the adapted output without differentiat - ing between clutter and other forms of interference. In other words, the adapted pat - tern will contain nulls steered in the direction of the main-beam antenna. A number  of techniques may be used to avoid the problems raised by the presence of clut - ter. 
A technique, particularly suitable for low-PRF (Pulse Repetition Frequency)  radar, avoids the influence of close-in clutter returns on adaptive weights by simply  selecting for adaptation the clutter-free ranges at the end of each PRI. This tech - nique does not apply to radars operating in high-PRF range-ambiguous modes with  significant clutter in all range cells. If the clutter and jammer cannot be separated,  either in range or doppler domains, then a two-dimensional (in doppler frequency  and angle) adaptive filter might be required; this is particularly true when the statis - tical features of clutter and jammer are not known a priori. 
In fact, when either the  jamming or clutter statistics cannot be estimated independently of one another, it  becomes difficult to design an effective spatial adaptive filter for jamming rejection  or a temporal adaptive filter for clutter mitigation since the presence of one con - taminates the estimation process for the other.116 This problem is most accentuated  when the clutter-to-jamming ratio approaches unity; in which case, the cascade of a  spatial and a temporal adaptive processors may perform poorly. In such situations,  a joint two-dimensional adaptive filtering in doppler and angle domains represents  a means to cancel the composite disturbance (i.e., the superposition of jamming  and clutter) jointly rather than sequentially.117 The performance advantages of two- dimensional adaptivity shall be traded-off with the computational cost. To reduce  the computational load, different computational strategies may be devised, for  example, by calculating the adapted two-dimensional weights at a rate lower than  the input data and applying them to the radar snapshots at their natural rate. 
An effi - cient algorithmic procedure to extract the weights, named Inverse QR, is detailed in  Bollini et al.75 Other possibilities are to use modern computing technologies like the  FPGA, Power PC, or high-speed optical processor to support the two-dimensional  adaptive processing.80 Adaptivity at the Sub-Array Level . For an operational phased-array radar  (PAR) with thousands of elements, it is not possible to adapt directly the signals from  each radiating element. It is necessary to reduce the system complexity by using  sub-arrays. 
A sub-array is an aggregation of antenna elementary radiators; the whole  antenna can be considered as an array of these super elements. Adaptive process - ing can be applied at the output signals of each sub-array, thus reducing the system  complexity. Provided that the sub-arrays are configured reasonably, the number of  sub-arrays and the receiving channel errors (e.g, channel mismatching) determine  the cancellation performance. 
Thus, the number of sub-arrays is a trade-off between  hardware complexity, cost, and achievable performance. ch24.indd   25 12/19/07   6:00:40 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. 
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Electronic Counter-Countermeasures. 24.26  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 24 It is highly desirable in PAR to have low sidelobes; this is obtained by (i) fixed weight - ing layer with analogue technology (i.e., at the microwave element stage) to reduce the  sidelobe level everywhere; (ii) fixed weights at the digital sub-array level to reach a  prescribed peak-to-sidelobe ratio (PSLR); and (iii) an adaptive weighting layer with  digital technology to put nulls along the jammer DoA of high directional beams (sum,  difference, cluster of high gain patterns) and low gain, possibly omnidirectional, beams  (e.g., guard channel: Ω). Figure 24.7 presents a simplified scheme of a modern PAR. 
Formation of Sum and Difference Patterns . Consider the problem of how to form  sum and difference beams with prescribed low sidelobes in a PAR with sub-arrays.  A strategy is to apply a tapering at element level (i.e., in the analogue receiving sec - tion where one attenuator is generally available per element; thus one taper function  is available to achieve reasonable low sidelobes for both sum and difference beams). 
 Subsequently a fixed digital taper, after the formation of sub-arrays, is applied with a  set of weights for the sum and a different set of weights for each difference channel.  This is schematically illustrated in Figure 24.8 for a uniform linear array (ULA) that  generates a sum and a difference channel. The figure depicts a ULA with 24 receiving  elements clustered into four not overlapping and not regular sub-arrays.118 The calculation of analogue taper is made by resorting to the nulling of fictitious  wide angle jamming, which occupies the whole angular sector where sidelobes of  sum and difference beams have to be kept low. 
In Farina et al.,118 it was found that the  analogue tapering is a compromise between the Taylor (which is the best taper for the  sum beam) and the Bayliss (which is the best taper for the difference beam), the degree  of compromise being regulated by amount of fictitious JNR selected for the sum and  difference beams. A numerical example, reported in Farina et al.118, for a ULA of   N = 24 elements and a uniform distribution of the fictitious jammer out of the main  beams of the sum and difference beams, gives a PSLR of 17.5 dB and 16.5 dB for the  sum and difference beams, respectively.  The next step is to derive the fixed tapers at a digital level for sum and difference  beams; a suitable technique is described in Nickel.119,120 The rationale of the approach  FIGURE 24.7  Scheme of a PARj j j Σ Σ Σ RX & ADCj j j RX & ADCj j j RX & ADC . 
. . . 
. . Digital la yer with fixed weights . 
. . Digital la yer with adaptive weights To further digital processing and displa yThousands of radiating elements T/R modules Phase shifters Hundreds of sub-arra ys Several tens of beam s Tens of beam s Σ, ∆θ, ∆φ, Ω, .... 
. . . 
. . Data rate reductionTapering weight wi Analogue micr owave layer ch24.indd   26 12/19/07   6:00:41 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Electronic Counter-Countermeasures.  ELECTRONIC COUNTER-COUNTERMEASURES  24.276x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 24 is to obtain the sum beam by compensating, at the sub-array level, the analogue taper  at the element level to achieve an overall taper more similar to the Taylor one; this  is obtained by increasing the contribution of central sub-array weights (i.e., the sub- arrays 2 and 3 shown in Figure 24.8) with respect to the weights of the side sub-arrays  1 and 4. 
To obtain the difference beam, the analogue tapering at the element level is  compensated, at the sub-array level, to achieve an overall taper function more similar  to the Bayliss one; this is obtained by decreasing the contribution of the central sub- arrays 2 and 3.  A numerical example is reported in Farina et al.118 with an ULA of N = 24 elements  and M = 4 sub-arrays. The chosen weight is a Taylor tapering with 30 dB of PSLR. 
 There are only 4 digital degrees of freedom; this means that marginal improvement of  performance in terms of PSLR can be achieved. Nevertheless, a PSLR of 25 dB was  obtained for the combination of 24 analogue weights and 4 digital weights. For the  same ULA about 20 dB of PSLR was obtained for the difference channel. 
Considerations Related to Sub-array Adaptivity.  Tapering at the array element level  produces unequal noise power at sub-array outputs because of the different number of  elements in each sub-array. Adaptivity would try to equalize the noise between chan - nels, thus negating the tapering effect.119 The transformation T that encodes the sub-array   architecture * should be such that THT = I. 
In this way, the noise power at sub-array outputs  is equal; subsequently the missing taper weights are applied digitally at sub-array outputs  (weight rescaling).119 As an example consider a linear array of 12 elements and raised  cosine tapering. Figure 24.9 depicts the following. Continuous curve: pattern of array   *  The sub-arrays architecture can be represented by a matrix T; having a number M of columns equal to the number  of sub-arrays and a number N of rows equal to the number of elementary radiators. 
The element tij of the matrix is  defined either as wi if the i-th elementary radiator belongs to the j-th sub-array or as 0 if the i-th elementary radiator  does not belong to the j-th sub-array, where wi is the tapering weight in the analogue layer of Figure 24.8.FIGURE 24.8  Example of a ULA with sub-arrays that generate sum and difference channelsj Sub-array 1  formation Digital tapering for sum beam formation. . .1 8 Sub-array 2  formation. 
. .9 1 2 Sub-array 3  formation. . 
.13 16 Sub-array 4  formation. . .17 24 Digital tapering for difference beam formation Σ ∆Tapering wi at element level RX & ADC RX & ADC RX & ADC RX & ADCj j j j j j j . 
. . . 
. . . 
. . . 
. .Analogue sectionPhase shifters ch24.indd   27 12/19/07   6:00:43 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. 
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Electronic Counter-Countermeasures. 24.28  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 24 of sub-arrays without noise normalization at the output of sub-arrays; it approximately  follows the uniform tapering (dashed line). Dotted line: pattern of array of elements and  of array of sub-arrays after noise normalization and weight rescaling. 
The numerical example follows with Figure 24.10, which portrays the cancellation  of a jammer with the DoA = –50° and a JNR of 30 dB. The continuous line refers to  an unadapted pattern, tapered at the element level, whereas the dotted line pertains to  the adapted pattern at the sub-array level. Sub-arrays are, in general, chosen to be irregular in their shape and position to  avoid grating lobes. 
If a jammer impinges on a grating lobe, the jammer will be  nulled by distorting the grating lobe and, as a consequence, the array main beam  (grating notch). For example, consider a ULA with N = 12 elements; then, form two  types of not overlapping sub-array configurations both having M = 6 sub-arrays. FIGURE 24.9  Examples of the antenna patterns achieved in several casesArray of subarr ays Array of elements; raised cosine taper ing Array of elements;   uniform taper ing −100 −50 0 50 100−40−200Unequal noise at the subarr ay outputs Angle (°)Antenna gain (dB) FIGURE 24.10  Jammer cancellation at sub-array levelAngle (°)   JDoA = −50°−100 −50 0 5 0 100−60−40−200 Unadapted, tapered at element level Adapted at subarr ay levelGain of adapted pattern (dB)Jammer ch24.indd   28 12/19/07   6:00:45 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Electronic Counter-Countermeasures.  ELECTRONIC COUNTER-COUNTERMEASURES  24.296x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 24 The first configuration is regular with two elements for each sub-array. 
The second  configuration is irregular with 2, 1, 4, 2, 1, and 2 elements, respectively. Figure 24.11  shows the SINR at the output of the array versus the jammer DoA. The target DoA  is at 0°, the SNR is 0 dB, the JNR is 30 dB. 
Three curves summarize the system  performance. The dashed line is the array pattern with raised cosine taper: this is  shown for the sake of comparison with the other two curves of the SINR. The dot - ted line is the SINR for the quiescent (absence of adaptivity) pattern: it mimics the  reciprocal of the sidelobe and main-beam pattern. 
The continuous line is the SINR  for the adaptive irregular sub-array architecture; the maximum value of the SINR is  (10log1012 – tapering losses ). Figure 24.12 depicts the SINR for the regular array configuration and absence of  tapering. It is noted that when the jammer DoA is around 80°, the SINR decreases; this  is because of the grating lobe. 
The maximum value of SINR is 10.79 dB = 10log1012,  because there are no tapering losses.FIGURE 24.11  SINR versus the jammer DoA (JDoA)0 20 40 60 8 0 100−40−20020 JDoA (°)SINRout (dB)Adaptivity at subarr ay level No adaptivity , raised cosine taper Pattern with raised cosine FIGURE 24.12  SINR versus the JDoA for a regular sub-array architecture  and no tapering0 20 40 60 80 100−40−30−20−1001020 JDoA (°)SINRout (dB) ch24.indd   29 12/19/07   6:00:46 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Electronic Counter-Countermeasures. 
24.30  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 24 Superresolution . The resolution of a conventional antenna is limited by the well- known Rayleigh criterion, which states that two equal-amplitude noise sources can be  resolved if they are separated in angle by 0.8 l/L, in radians, where l is the wavelength  and L is the aperture length. When the incident wave is received with a high JNR, an  adaptive array antenna may—in principle—achieve a narrower adaptive beamwidth ,  giving a sharper bearing estimation of the incident wave. 
If accurate strobes of the jam - mers can be obtained, these can be exploited to form beams in the jammer directions,  which are used as auxiliary channels for adaptive interference suppression.121 The  interference directions can also be used for deterministic nulling, which is of interest  for main-beam nulling.122 In addition to the interference source directions and source  strengths, this technique can provide other information as to the number of sources  and any cross correlations (coherence) between the sources. Such information can be  used to track and catalogue the interference sources in order to properly react to them;  the jammer mapping—a function running in the background—is useful to select the  modes (e.g., admissible pointing directions and waveforms) of multifunction radar  and for general situation awareness. Superresolution might be able to resolve multiple  independent sources; due to sidelobe superposition and masking problems, superreso - lution might be vital for jammer mapping in case of multiple jammers. 
Superresolution  is also of interest as an ECCM to counter cross-eye jamming in seeker head applica - tions: see Section 12.1 of Wirth.102 The superresolution concept was mainly developed and analyzed by W. F. Gabriel123  at the Naval Research Laboratory (U.S.). 
Different methods for bearing estimation were  described by Gabriel and, subsequently, by other authors.34,124–130 One is the maxi - mum-entropy method (MEM) invented by J. P. Burg. 
It works well with a Howells- Applebaum adaptive beamformer, which has an omnidirectional receiving pattern  except where jammers are present. The presence of jammers is indicated by nulls in  the receiving pattern. Because nulls are always sharper than antenna lobes, jammer  bearings can be obtained more accurately from the adaptive beam pattern, and super - resolution is the result. 
The desired spatial spectrum pattern is obtained as simply the  inverse of the adapted pattern. As Gabriel pointed out, there is not a true antenna pattern  because there is no linear combination of the signals from an array that could produce  such a peaked spatial pattern. It is simply a function computed from the reciprocal of  a true adapted antenna pattern. 
Superresolution and adaptive antennas for jammer can - cellation are intimately related. Roughly speaking, the difference is that one produces  a pattern with the nulls down (adaptive antenna for jammer cancellation) and the other  with the nulls up, i.e., peaks (superresolution of jammers). One limiting factor of superresolution techniques is that they often require the  received signals to obey accurate models of the array manifold. 
This can be violated  due to propagation effects (e.g., spatial spreading and nonstationarity) as well as instru - mental effects (e.g., channel mismatch). These factors also affect the performance of  adaptive antennas for jammer cancellation, but model mismatches can degrade the  performance of superresolution techniques more severely. The higher performance of  the superresolution techniques is often obtained at the expense of requiring a stricter  adherence to the assumed model; if the model is inaccurate, these techniques—which  rely on its heavy exploitation—subsequently become the most sensitive and more  prone to perform badly. 
For efficient superresolution, an array with a reasonable number of sub-arrays is  required; this may be the reason for the lack of application of this technique to practi - cal radar systems except for experimental purposes. Superresolution based on a small  ch24.indd   30 12/19/07   6:00:46 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. 
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Electronic Counter-Countermeasures.  ELECTRONIC COUNTER-COUNTERMEASURES  24.316x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 24 SLC configuration is not efficient, because this leads to the maximum entropy or  autoregressive methods that, being nonlinear processing, have a high probability of  spurious peaks. Practical experiences indicate that the resolution limit is determined rather more by  implementation and environmental factors than by the pure JNR considerations. 
24.7 TRANSMITTER-RELATED ECCM The different types of ECCM are related to the proper use and control of the power,  frequency, and waveform of the radiated signal. One brute-force approach to defeat  noise jamming is to increase the radar’s transmitter power. This technique, when cou - pled with “spotlighting” the radar antenna on the target, results in an increase of the  radar’s detection range. 
Spotlighting or burnthrough modes might be effective, but  a price must be paid. As the radar dwells in a particular direction, it is not looking  elsewhere—where it is supposed to look. In addition, the burnthrough mode is not  effective against chaff, decoys, repeaters, spoofers, and so on. 
More effective is the use of complex, variable, and dissimilar transmitted signals that  place a maximum burden on ESM and ECM. Different ways of operation refer to the  change of the transmitted frequency in frequency-agility or frequency-diversity modes  or to the use of wide instantaneous bandwidth.131–133 Frequency agility  usually refers to  the radar’s ability to change the transmitter frequency on a pulse-to-pulse or a batch- to-batch basis. The batch-to-batch approach allows doppler processing, which is not  compatible with frequency agility on a pulse-to-pulse basis. 
In a waveform with pulse- to-pulse frequency agility, the center frequency of each transmitted pulse is moved, in  either a random or a programmed schedule, between a large number of center frequen - cies. The frequency of the next pulse cannot generally be predicted from the frequency  of the current pulse.134 Frequency diversity  refers to the use of several complementary  radar transmissions at different frequencies, either from a single radar (e.g., a radar hav - ing stacked beams in elevation by employing different frequencies on each elevation  beam38) or from several radars. The objective of frequency agility and diversity is to  force the jammer to spread its energy over the entire agile bandwidth of the radar; this  corresponds to a reduction of the jammer density and resulting ECM effectiveness.29 A good example of the use of the frequency domain for purpose of ECCM is the  Senrad, an experimental long-range air-surveillance radar built and tested at the Naval  Research Laboratory (U.S.)135 Senrad was an example of how to build a radar so as  to force the jammer to dilute its radiated energy per unit bandwidth; it includes both  frequency agility and frequency diversity. 
This radar shows that its unusually wide  bandwidth allows a reduction of the effectiveness of the noise jammer that can seri - ously degrade more narrowband radars. Frequency agility, diversity, and instantaneous wideband techniques represent a  form of ECCM in which the information-carrying signal is spread over as wide a  frequency (or space or time) region as possible to reduce detectability by ESM and/or  ARM and make jamming more difficult. This ECCM technique pertains to the realm  of waveform coding.3,136–137  The ambiguity function (AF) is the tool to characterize waveform coding in terms  of resolution, sidelobe level, and ambiguity.137 In selecting a waveform for a given  radar application, the AF should be tested against the environment in which the radar  ch24.indd   31 12/19/07   6:00:47 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Electronic Counter-Countermeasures. 24.32  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 24 will be expected to operate. 
The so-called environmental diagram depicts spectral,  spatial, and amplitude characteristics of the radar environment (clutter, ECM such as  chaff, intentional interferences, and—perhaps—interferences from neighboring EM  apparatuses) and is used to assist the radar waveform design. An example of an envi - ronmental diagram is on p. 15 of Levanon and Mozeson137: on the range-doppler plane  are shown the regions in which several types of clutter and high altitude chaff are  expected. 
On the same diagram are superimposed the expected target trajectories and  the AF contour of a, say, pulse-burst waveform. As the target follows a particular tra - jectory, the AF will move accordingly and the spurious AF peaks will slide across the  clutter and chaff regions determining the intensity and features of the radar echoes. Waveform coding includes PRF jitter and PRF stagger, which are helpful for some  deception jammer but don’t help against noise jammer. 
Waveform coding makes decep - tion jamming or spoofing of the radar difficult, since the enemy should not know or  anticipate the fine structure of the transmitted waveform; as a consequence, it gives  assurance of maximum range performance against such types of jamming. Intrapulse  coding to achieve pulse compression may be particularly effective in improving target  detection capability by radiation of enough average radar power without exceeding  peak power limitations within the radar and by improving range resolution (larger band - width), which, in turn, reduces chaff returns and resolves targets to a higher degree. Some advantage can be gained by including the capability to examine the jammer  signals, find holes in their transmitted spectra, and select the radar frequency with the  lowest level of jamming. 
This approach is particularly useful against pulsed ECM,  spot noise, and nonuniform barrage noise; its effectiveness depends primarily on the  extent of the radar agile bandwidth and the acquisition speed and frequency tracking of  an “intelligent” jammer. A technique suited to this purpose is referred to as automatic  frequency selection  (AFS).133,138 Another method to reduce the effect of main-beam noise jamming is to increase the  transmitter frequency (as an alternative means to the use of a larger antenna) in order  to narrow the antenna’s beamwidth. This restricts the sector that is blanked by main- beam jamming and also provides a strobe in the direction of the jammer. 
Strobes from  a few spatially separated radars allow the jammer to be located. The availability of solid-state transmitter technology36–40 allows the generation of  high duty cycle waveforms, which may be of some help to realize LPI radar . As a general remark, one of the factors preventing good ECCM is the reduction of  EM spectrum allocated to radar. 
As discussed, operating over a wide spectral range  has important advantages for ECCM, but the civilian and commercial telecommunica - tion systems erode more and more portions of the spectrum at the expense of military  ECCM capability.  24.8 RECEIVER-RELATED ECCM Jamming signals that survive the antenna ECCM expedients can, if large enough,  saturate the radar processing chain. Wide dynamic range receivers need to be used to  avoid saturation. 
A logarithmic (log) receiver might help against noise jamming, but it has detrimen - tal effects against clutter when doppler processing is used. A log receiver is a device  whose video output is proportional to the logarithm of the envelope of the RF input  signal over a specified range. It might be useful in preventing receiver saturation in  ch24.indd   32 12/19/07   6:00:47 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Electronic Counter-Countermeasures.  ELECTRONIC COUNTER-COUNTERMEASURES  24.336x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 24 the presence of variable intensities of jamming noise. 
By comparison with a linear  receiver of low dynamic range, moderate jamming noise levels will normally cause  the computer to saturate so that the target signal will not be detected. The main disad - vantage is that a log characteristic causes spectral spreading of the received echoes. It  would not be possible to maintain clutter rejection in an MTI or pulse doppler radar if  the spectrum of clutter echoes were to spread into the spectral region in which target  returns were expected.21, 29 The main message is that the dynamic range problem is important for the rejection  of jammer as well as clutter, the latter always present in a radar. 
Thus, the recom - mendation is to implement, in a modern radar, a receiver with a wide linear dynamic  range (e.g., 100 dB). This wide dynamic range needs to be maintained also in the ADC  devices with a suitable number of bits; as a rule of thumb, each bit adds 6 dB to the  dynamic range count. Hard or soft limiters can also be used to counter jamming signals. 
They are nonlinear  memoryless devices that cut jamming signals having wide amplitudes. The Dicke-Fix  receiver counters high rates of swept-frequency CW jamming and swept spot noise jam - mers.29,139 In a radar receiver, the Dicke-Fix uses a wideband intermediate-frequency  (IF) amplifier and a limiter ahead of the narrow-bandwidth IF amplifier. The wideband  amplifier allows a rapid recovery time from the effects of the swept jammer, and the  limiter cuts the jamming signal. 
The narrowband target signal, after transit through the  wideband amplifier and the limiter without remarkable degradation, is integrated by   the narrowband filter matched to the signal. The word Fix in the Dicke-Fix was put there  many years ago to indicate it was a “fix” for a problem that occurred at the time and was  to be replaced by something better. It was usually installed with a switch to turn it off, if  necessary. 
Today Dicke-Fix is not used in a modern radar, especially one that employs  doppler processing; thus, it is no longer of interest in many radar applications. Other special processing circuits can be used in the radar to avoid saturation, i.e.,  fast-time-constant (FTC) devices (perhaps of little use in modern radar), automatic  gain control (AGC), and CFAR.8,29,31 However, they cannot be said to be ECCM tech - niques. For example, FTC allows the detection of signals that are greater than clutter  by preventing the clutter from saturating the computer. 
FTC does not provide sub - clutter visibility. AGC keeps the radar receiver operating within its dynamic range,  preventing system overload and providing proper normalization so as to furnish sig - nals of standardized amplitude to radar range, velocity, and angle processing-tracking  circuits. In conclusion, these devices have a place in the radar but not as means for  fighting the ECM battle. 
In summary, there isn’t much that has been done in the receiver to combat ECM  other than to insure there is a good receiver that does its job. Today, modern phased- array multi-channel radar are going to adopt fully digital, software controlled receivers,  as in the DAR case; here, the expected advantages are the wider linear dynamic range  and the within-band calibration of the receivers that will support the adaptivity on sev - eral tens of channels: a distinctive advantage against directional noise jammers. 24.9 SIGNAL-PROCESSING-RELATED ECCM Digital coherent signal processing greatly alleviates the effects of clutter and chaff.3,140  This is motivated by the use of coherent doppler processing techniques such as fixed,  adaptive MTI, or optimum pulse-doppler processing. 
Noncoherent devices are also  ch24.indd   33 12/19/07   6:00:47 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Electronic Counter-Countermeasures. 
24.34  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 24 required because of the limited degree of clutter, chaff, and jammer suppression practi - cally achieved by coherent devices, so that the cancellation residue may still be a sig - nificant source of false alarm. Among the noncoherent devices, it is worth mentioning  the CFAR detector141–145 and the pulse-width discriminator, this latter being effective  against pulsed jammers. The pulse-width discrimination circuit measures the width of  each received pulse. 
If the received pulse is not of approximately the same width as  the transmitted pulse, it is rejected. A pulse-width discrimination technique can help  in rejecting chaff; in fact, echo returns from chaff corridors are much wider than the  transmitted pulse. However, if a target is within the chaff corridor the pulse width  discriminator might also eliminate the target. 
Coherent Processing.  The most effective anti-chaff technique available to radar  is the use of doppler filtering, which exploits the different motion characteristics of the  target and the chaff.3 The characteristics of chaff are similar to those of weather clutter,  except that the chaff-scattering elements are cut to respond to a broad spectrum of radar  frequencies. Weather clutter and chaff differ from ground clutter in that both the mean  doppler shift and the spread are determined by wind velocity and wind shear, the lat - ter arising from the variation of wind velocity with height. 
Chaff moves with the local  wind, and there are ways (adaptive MTI and optimum doppler processing†) to make an  MTI null out both moving and stationary unwanted echoes.55,136,146 There are two basic  doppler filtering techniques that are used. The first is the MTI, which employs a PRF  that provides unambiguous range coverage while using a comb doppler filter whose  nulls are tuned to the average radial speed of chaff.3 The second is the pulse doppler,  which can use a high PRF to provide unambiguous doppler coverage in conjunction  with a doppler filter bank, allowing separation of target from the chaff.3 A problem with  chaff might be when there is a significant wind shear in the atmosphere. With wind  shear, the doppler spectrum from chaff can have a wide spectral width (unless the eleva - tion beamwidth is very narrow as might occur with tri-dimensional radar with stacked  beams in elevation38) so that it is difficult to cancel moving chaff echoes. 
A pulse dop - pler radar has a better chance, but it has problems of its own because of the foldover of  the clutter that might occupy a large range extent. Coherent doppler processors might require relatively large amounts of pulses (e.g.,  more than 10), which must be transmitted at a stable frequency and PRF. A responsive  jammer could measure the frequency of the first transmitted pulse and then center the  jammer to spot-jam the following pulses. 
Also, the requirement for a stable PRF pre - cludes the use of pulse-to-pulse jitter, which is one of the most effective techniques  against deception jammers that rely on anticipating the radar transmitter pulse. Coherent  doppler processors are also generally vulnerable to impulsive radio frequency interfer - ence, especially in radars with a limited number of coherent bursts on target.147 Another ECCM technique to be considered is pulse compression by matched  filtering; it is intimately related to the waveform coding discussed in Section 24.7.  Pulse compression136,137,141 is a pulse radar technique in which long pulses are trans - mitted to increase the energy on the target while still retaining the target range reso - lution of a short pulse transmission. 
It is almost always used in radar for achieving  †  The adaptive MTI estimates the mean doppler frequency of a moving clutter source and places the null of, say, a  binomial MTI. Optimum doppler processing estimates the whole spectrum of clutter and shapes, by means of the  inverse of the clutter covariance matrix, the cancellation filter accordingly; furthermore, with a doppler filter bank,  it integrates the echo signal from moving targets. The optimum filter weights are calculated by an equation similar  to Eq. 
24.6 applied to the radar echoes received by a coherent pulse train transmitted by the radar . ch24.indd   34 12/19/07   6:00:48 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. 
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Electronic Counter-Countermeasures.  ELECTRONIC COUNTER-COUNTERMEASURES  24.356x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 24 high range resolution or reducing the peak power. Pulse compression offers some  ECCM advantage that is discussed hereafter.3,148 When the pulse compression search  radar is compared, from an ESM standpoint, with a conventional search radar with  the same wide pulse, the enemy receiver on a jamming platform will not know (in  the general case) the pulse compression reference code and will be at a disadvantage. 
  Compared with a radar that uses an uncompressed wide pulse, the pulse compression  technique increases the radar’s capability against extended signal returns like chaff  and clutter. In addition, noise from a jammer does not pulse-compress. Extended  clutter tends to be noise like and will not pulse-compress, which keeps down inter - ference displayed to operators.29 The disadvantages of pulse compression are related  to the long duration of the coded pulse, which gives more time for the ECM equip - ment to process the pulse. 
In many cases, pulse compression can provide the means  for easy radar jamming for the enemy ECM operator. Pulse compression is also  vulnerable to cover-pulse jamming, in which the ECM pulse is returned to the radar  with a high JNR such that the normal target return is covered by the jamming pulse.  The width of the ECM pulse is normally wider than the radar skin return.13 This type  of deception can be counteracted by an ECCM technique such as the cover-pulse  channel, where the tracking is on the ECM transmission rather than on the skin  return from the target.29 The digital coherent implementation of the Dicke-Fix receiver concept requires the  use of a coherent hard limiter that preserves the phase of the signal while keeping the  amplitude at a constant value.‡ The coherent limiter is inserted upstream of the pulse  compression filter in a radar that uses phase-coded signals. 
In reception, the jammer  and target signals are cut in amplitude. The preservation of the target signal phase  coding allows the integration of target energy by means of the pulse compression  filter matched to the phase code. The Dicke-Fix processing scheme suffers from three  limitations. 
The first is related to the detection loss experienced when the target does  not compete with the jammer. The second disadvantage refers to the masking effect  of a weak target signal sufficiently close in range (compared with the spatial exten - sion of the code) to a strong target. Furthermore, it cannot be used in conjunction with  doppler processing. 
CFAR.  CFAR is a technique made necessary to prevent the computer from  being overloaded by false alarms, which reduce the capability of the radar to detect  desired targets.141 This processing also plays a role as ECCM; there are three motiva - tions for this. First, the scope of ECM techniques, in a broad sense, is to impair the target detec - tion and tracking performance of a radar system. 
Detection performance is measured  by the probability of detection; tracking performance is determined by the probability  of detection and the probability of false alarm as well. Conventional (cell averaging)  CFAR raises the threshold in the presence of noise jamming and reduces the number of  targets detected. However, the targets that survive can be effectively tracked because  the probability of false alarm has been maintained at sufficiently low levels. 
Without  CFAR and appropriate threshold adjustments, perhaps no targets will be tracked due to  the very large number of false peaks (detections on the jammer), making it through to  saturate the tracker. Conventional CFAR is not really removing the interference: it is  just “hiding” it from the radar operator. However, it is allowing the tracker to operate  ‡  This is used with Barker codes, for instance, where the amplitude limitation doesn’t impair the phase code. 
ch24.indd   35 12/19/07   6:00:48 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Electronic Counter-Countermeasures. 
24.36  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 24 effectively for the targets that survive, and so in this way, it can prevent the overall  failure of the radar. In the limit of no targets being detected (i.e., a very powerful jam - mer), then it could still be argued that no tracks are better than many false tracks. Second, not all jammers are noise jammers. 
Some indeed have a structure in  range-doppler space, and CFAR techniques can potentially be used to lower these  unwanted signals beneath the detection threshold, once again preventing the detec - tion of false tracks, which—from a tactical perspective—can cause serious dilemmas  for a radar operator. Third, there are the adaptive CFAR detectors (AMF, or adaptive matched filter,  for example115) that really are ECCM techniques in the sense that they enhance the  probability of detection against structured interferences (in space and/or time) while  maintaining the constant false alarm rate property that allows these detected targets to  be effectively tracked, rather than being seduced by a high number of false detections.  This type of processing—or similarly derived from the generalized likelihood ratio  test (GLRT)—has been used in some practical radar. 
Furthermore, any self-respecting radar system should make the operator aware of  higher noise levels due to jamming even though they may not be visible on the CFAR  display; the act of performing CFAR should not exclude the operator from knowing  that jamming is present and that the detection threshold has been raised. 24.10 OPERATIONAL-DEPLOYMENT  TECHNIQUES To this point in the chapter, only electronic ECCM techniques have been considered.  However, radar operational philosophy and deployment tactics may also have a sig - nificant effect on the radar’s resistance to ECM, ESM, and ARM. 
This group of tech - niques can be subdivided into those involving the operator, the methods of operation,  the radar deployment tactics, and the friend ESM in support to ECCM.8 An operational  technique against ECM is to use missiles with home on jam (HOJ) guidance to inter - cept noise jammers. HOJ is a means whereby a missile guidance receiver utilizes the  self-screening target jamming signal to develop angular steering information so the  missile can home on that target. The role of the operator in the ECCM chain pertains to the more general topic of  human-factor  ECCM.29 This is a generic ECCM technique that covers the ability of  an air defense officer, a radar operator, a commanding officer, and/or any other air  defense associated personnel to recognize the various kinds of ECM, to analyze the  effect of the ECM, to decide what the appropriate ECCM should be, and/or to take  the necessary ECCM action within the framework of the person’s command structure. 
 However, the human operator is less effective against a simultaneous attack of many  enemy vehicles supported by a strong ECM force. An operator confronted with a large  mix of ECM types and a large number of ECCM techniques is likely to do the wrong  thing and/or react too slowly. In this situation, it might be proper to resort to auto - matically applied ECCM techniques; this is the tendency today. 
However, a possible  concern is that this could, sometimes, hurt the ECCM capability of the radar since a  well-trained operator can often figure out what is happening; but the automatic proces - sor can only make decisions based on preprogrammed logics installed in its computer  and might not recognize when something unusual (as in jamming) occurs. This is a  possible adverse effect of the absence of a decision-making operator. ch24.indd   36 12/19/07   6:00:49 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Electronic Counter-Countermeasures.  ELECTRONIC COUNTER-COUNTERMEASURES  24.376x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 24 The operational methods include emission control (EMCON), the appropriate  assignment of operating frequencies to various radars, the use of combined ECCMs  to meet combined ECMs, the use of dummy transmitters to draw ECM to other fre - quencies, and so on. 
EMCON is a technique for the management of all EM radia - tions of a friendly system, force, or complex to obtain maximum advantages in the  areas of intelligence data reception, detection, identification, navigation, missile guid - ance, etc., over the enemy in a given situation. EMCON permits essential operations  while minimizing the disclosure of location, identification, force level, or operational  intentions to enemy intelligence receptors. It includes the authorization to radiate, the  control of radiation parameters such as amplitude, frequency, phase, direction, and  time, the prohibition of radiation, and the scheduling of such actions for all units and  equipment of a complex.29 The on-off scheduling of the radar’s operation, to include  only those time intervals when surveillance is required, can reduce the probability of  the radar location being found by direction finding (DF) equipment or radar homing  and warning receivers. 
Radar blinking (using multiple radars with coordinated on-off  times) can confuse an ARM seeker and guidance or a DF receiver. Decoy transmitters,  radiating from antennas not located at the radar, may also be employed to confuse DF  receivers and ARMs; these decoys can also operate in conjunction with the radars in  a blinking mode. Proper site selection for ground-based radars in fixed installations can provide a  degree of natural signal masking to prevent, for example, detection by ground-based  ESM equipment. 
A high degree of mobility for tactical systems allows “radiate and run”  operations, which are designed to prevent the radar from being engaged by DF location  techniques and associated weapons.3 The deployment of a radar network with overlap - ping coverage could provide some ECCM benefits. In the netted monostatic case, the  radars have different frequencies for interference reduction purposes; consequently,  the ECM has to consider jamming all radars in the overlapping zone, thus reducing its  efficacy. This is the kind of frequency diversity discussed in Section 24.7. 
Finally, it is worth noting that friendly ESM can support ECCM action by warn - ing of possible hostile activity, providing angular locations of hostile jammers and  information characteristics of jammers. This information is helpful in the selection of  a suitable ECCM action. 24.11 APPLICATION OF ECCM TECHNIQUES This section shows the application of the previously described ECCM techniques to  surveillance, tracking, phased-array, imaging, and over-the-horizon radars. 
The use  of ECCM techniques in other types of radars such as mortar location radars, missile  guidance radars, and navigation radars is considered in the literature.3 Surveillance Radars.  The function of a surveillance radar is to search a large  volume of space and locate the position of targets within the search coverage. The  radar range and the azimuth-elevation coverage depend on the specific radar applica - tions. 
The target reports generated by a surveillance radar are processed to form target  tracks. The key features of a surveillance radar are the detection range in clear, clutter,  and jamming environments, the accuracy and rate of the extracted data, and the false- alarm rate. In the ensuing discussion, the design principles, driven by the requirements  forced by the threat, are mainly addressed.3 ch24.indd   37 12/19/07   6:00:49 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Electronic Counter-Countermeasures. 24.38  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 24 Detection in a clear environment is a feature of early-warning radars,§ which look  primarily for high-altitude targets at long ranges beyond the surface horizon, where the  effects of clutter can be ignored. 
Under these conditions, a simplified analysis states  that radar performance is relatively insensitive to transmitter frequency and waveform  shape; in practice, the lower microwave frequencies are preferred because it is easier  to obtain large antenna and high average power at lower frequencies, and rain clutter  is not important. The maximum detection range on a target with a certain RCS ( s) in  free space, for a surveillance radar that must uniformly search a specified volume in  a given time period, depends on the product of the average transmitter power ( )P and  the effective antenna aperture ( Ar). It also depends on the inverse of the system noise  temperature, but this is of little consequence since the noise temperature is not a major  design issue anymore. 
The situation is more complex when the target to be detected  is of the stealth type.149 Waveform design and operating frequency are relevant parameters in tactical and  volume surveillance radars, which must be able to detect low-flying penetrating tar - gets that attempt to use terrain-shielding effects to escape radar detection. In this case,  the selection of waveform and frequency is made to tackle the problems of masking,  multipath, chaff, clutter, and ECM.134,138,150 The major EW threats to a surveillance radar are (i) noise jamming, (ii) chaff,   (iii) deception jamming, (iv) decoys and expendables, and (v) ARM. Common types of jamming are main-beam noise jamming and sidelobe noise  jamming. 
Against this threat, good radar ECCM performance is achieved by increas - ing the product ( )PAr of average transmitter power by the effective antenna aperture.  A military radar should always have 20 dB more power-aperture product than given  by standard designs, yet this is seldom allowed. The request for a low sidelobe level  has to be traded off with the corresponding degradation of the main-beam width;  the widening of the main-beam width may make the radar more vulnerable to main- beam jamming. 
The noise jammer situation is basically an energy battle between the radar and the  jammer. In the main-beam noise-jamming situation, the advantage is with the jammer  because the radar experiences a two-way propagation loss of its energy as contrasted  with the one-way propagation loss between the jammer and the radar. With sidelobe  jamming, the radar designer can reduce the jammer advantage by low sidelobe design  coupled with the use of sidelobe cancellation techniques. 
With main-beam noise jam - ming, the radar can maximize the received target energy by transmitting more average  power, dwelling longer on the target, or increasing the antenna gain. If the radar’s data  rate is fixed and a uniform angular search rate is dictated by mechanical or search  strategy, then the only option for the radar is to increase its average transmitter power.  The next option is to manage the data rate, thereby allowing a longer dwell time on the  target (burnthrough mode) along specific spatial sectors where needed. 
The ability to  vary the data rate in an optimal manner is one of the principal advantages of phased- array radars.3 Another principle of ECCM design against main-beam noise jamming is to mini - mize the amount of jamming energy accepted by the radar. This is accomplished by  spreading the transmitted frequency range of the radar over as wide a band as pos - sible, thus forcing the jammer into a barrage-jamming mode. This can be obtained by  §  Of course, such radars have to see also targets at shorter ranges where clutter echoes can mask the target’s echo; for  this reason, all long range civil air traffic control radar employ doppler processing. 
ch24.indd   38 12/19/07   6:00:53 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Electronic Counter-Countermeasures. 
 ELECTRONIC COUNTER-COUNTERMEASURES  24.396x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 24 resorting to frequency agility and/or frequency diversity. Some radars incorporate an  AFS device that allows the radar frequency to be tuned to that part of the spectrum  containing the minimum jamming energy.133,138 In accordance with the search-radar equation (see Section 24.12), ECCM perfor - mance appears (explicitly) to be insensitive to frequency. * Increasing the radar fre - quency does not affect the signal-to-interference energy ratio within a radar resolution  cell when the antenna aperture and the radar data rate are held constant. 
The increased  frequency increases both the antenna gain and the number of radar resolution cells that  must be searched by equivalent amounts; the net effect is that the target return power  is increased by the same amount by which the target dwell time is decreased, thereby  holding the target-to-jamming energy ratio constant. Nevertheless, in practice, the  effect of main-beam noise jamming can be reduced with high radar frequency. Higher  frequency radars tend to have narrower antenna beamwidths and larger operating fre - quency bandwidths (5 to 10 percent of radar center frequency) than lower frequency  radars. 
Thus, main-beam jammers will blank smaller sectors of high frequency radars  than of low frequency radars. In addition, main-beam jamming of a narrow beam  radar tends to provide a strobe in the direction of the jammer, which can be used to  triangulate and reveal the jammer location. Wider radar bandwidth, with appropriate  coding, forces the jammer to spread its energy over a wider band, thereby diluting the  effective jamming energy.3 ECCM design principles for main-beam noise jamming also apply to sidelobe  noise jamming, with the addition that the sidelobe response in the direction of the  jammer must be minimized. 
Ultralow sidelobes in the order of, say, 45 dB below  the antenna’s main-beam peak response are feasible by using advanced technology.  Sometimes the control of sidelobe noise jamming by using ultralow-sidelobe anten - nas is not proper; this is true because the main-beam width might be increased two  to three times. In addition, most operational radars do not use ultralow (less than  −40 dB) or low ( −30 to −40 dB) sidelobe antennas and have antenna sidelobes in the  −20 to −30 dB region with average sidelobes of 0 to 5 dB below isotropic. 
SLC has  the potential of reducing noise jamming through the antenna sidelobes, and it is used  for this purpose in operational radars.3 As explained in Section 24.9, ECCM techniques against chaff are mainly those  based on coherent doppler processing.3,152 In particular, the reference152 describes a  comparison of fixed and adaptive doppler cancelers applied to chaff data recorded by  a multifunctional phased-array radar operating at S band. Both cancelers process an  8 pulse coherent burst. The fixed (i.e., nonadaptive) processing is a Dolph-Chebyshev  filter with 60 dB of sidelobe attenuation with respect to peak. 
The adaptive filter, based  on the optimum doppler filtering (see Section 24.9 and the literature55,136,146) has the  weights built around the estimation and inversion of the disturbance (chaff and noise)  covariance matrix. The target detectability is evaluated against a dense chaff cloud.  For the particular set of recorded measurements, it has been shown a substantially  enhanced performance of the adaptive filter over the nonadaptive filter . 
*  As mentioned previously, the lower frequencies might be preferred for long-range surveillance because the usual  radar equation does not include all the pertinent factors. In the jamming case, one should take account that the  jamming antenna on an aircraft has a lower gain at lower frequencies so the jamming power density might be less  at the lower frequencies. Also, when multipath is important, by selecting the radar frequency properly, one might  reduce the jamming power received by being in a null of the jammer transmitting antenna. 
Chaff might not be as  easy to deploy at the lower frequencies.151 In conclusion, the lower radar frequencies might not be as vulnerable as  one might think by examining the traditional radar equation. ch24.indd   39 12/19/07   6:00:53 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. 
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Electronic Counter-Countermeasures. 24.40  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 24 Another class of ECCM techniques is aimed to contrast the deceptive ECM.  Deception jammers have a number of specific characteristics that can be used by  radars to identify their presence. 
The most prominent is that false-target returns must  usually follow the return from the jammer-carrying target and must all lie in the same  direction within a radar PRI. If the deception jammer uses a delay that is greater than  a PRI period to generate an anticipatory false-target return, then pulse-to-pulse PRI  jitter identifies the false-target returns. The generation of false targets in directions  different from that of the jammer-carrying aircraft requires injecting pulse-jamming  signals into the radar’s sidelobes. 
Many radars employ the SLB (see Section 24.6) to  defeat this type of ECM. True-target returns tend to fluctuate from scan to scan with fixed-frequency radars  and from pulse to pulse with frequency-agility radars. Transponder jammers gener - ally send the same amplitude reply to all signals they receive above a threshold and,  therefore, do not simulate actual target fluctuation responses. 
In addition, they usually  appear wider in azimuth than real targets owing to the modulation effect of the radar  scanning antenna’s response on the real target. Repeater jammers can be made to simu - late the actual amplitude response of real targets and, hence, are more effective over  transponder-type jammers from an ECM viewpoint. An operating mode to be included  in a radar to distinguish useful targets from transponder and repeater jammers is based  on a doppler spectrum analysis provided enough time on target is available. 
Additional  expensive techniques against deceptive jamming can be based on the measurement  and analysis of the angular and polarization signatures of the echo signals. The same ECCM considerations apply with decoy targets that have the general  attributes of real targets and are very difficult to identify as false targets. A method  sometimes employed is to test the scintillation characteristics of the detected targets to  determine whether or not they follow those of real targets. 
Expendables that tend to be  designed under stringent economic constraints often return only a steady signal to the  radar. With doppler spectrum analysis, it is possible to look for returns from rotating  components of the target that any form of powered target must possess. Examples are  jet engine or propeller modulation returns associated with aircraft tar gets. 
ARMs pose a serious threat to a surveillance radar. The survivability of a surveil - lance radar to an ARM attack relies upon waveform coding (to dilute the energy in the  frequency range), the management of radiated energy in time and along the angular  sectors, and the adoption of low sidelobes in transmission. These actions make it more  difficult for an ARM to home on radar. 
When an ARM attack is detected, it may be  useful to turn on spatially remote decoy transmitters to draw the ARM away from  the radar site. Blinking with a network of radars achieves better results. The ARM  trajectory is usually selected to attack the radar through the zenith hole region above  the radar, where its detection capability is minimal. 
Thus, a supplemental radar that  provides a high probability of detection in the zenith hole region is required. There are  certain advantages in choosing a low transmitting frequency (UHF or VHF) for the  supplemental radar. The RCS of the ARM becomes greater as the wavelength of the  radar approaches the missile dimensions, causing a resonance effect.3 A low-frequency  radar is somewhat less vulnerable to an ARM attack owing to the difficulty of imple - menting a low-frequency antenna with the limited aperture available in the missile.151  However, low-frequency radar has poor angular resolution. 
Tracking Radars.  Tracking radars provide good resolution and precise measure - ment of the kinematic parameters (position, velocity, and acceleration) of targets. The  estimation, updated with measurements, and prediction of the kinematic parameters  ch24.indd   40 12/19/07   6:00:53 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Electronic Counter-Countermeasures.  ELECTRONIC COUNTER-COUNTERMEASURES  24.416x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 24 as the time runs are the processing steps used to build up the tracks of targets. 
Tracks  allow guidance and control of friendly forces, threat assessment, and enemy target  engagement by weapons. Tracking can be accomplished in four ways: (i) The dedicated  radar tracker (sometimes called a single target tracker  and denoted STT) continuously  points its antenna at a single target by sensing errors from the true target position and  correcting these errors by a servo control system. Then there are two different types of  radars called, in the past, track-while-scan . 
(ii) One is a limited angle scan as in some  air-defense radars and aircraft landing radars, which search a limited angular sector  at a rapid rate (e.g., 10 or 20 times a second). (iii) The other type of track while scan  (TWS) was what is now called automatic detection and tracking (ADT). The ADT  system generates tracks of more than one target by using a series of scan-to-scan target  measurements taken as the antenna samples the target paths. 
(iv) The multifunctional  phased-array radar tracks multiple targets by multiple independent beams, formed by  the same array aperture, that are allotted to different targets. This subsection is lim - ited to the design principles, driven by the threat requirements, of the dedicated radar  tracker.3,153 The ensuing subsection will refer to multifunctional phased-array radar. Good ECCM performance is achieved by radiating as large an average transmitter  power at the highest transmitter frequency practicable, coupled with as low a sidelobe  level as achievable. 
Increasing the transmitter frequency, for a fixed antenna size,  increases the antenna gain Gt, which, in turn, increases the received target power as  Gt2. For main-beam noise jamming, the received jamming power increases directly  as Gt, resulting in a net increase in signal-to-jamming power by a factor proportional  to the antenna gain Gt. Here, it is noted a basic difference between surveillance and  tracking radar: the detection range of a tracking radar improves as the frequency is  increased for a fixed-size antenna. 
The reason for this improvement is that the antenna  gain is directly increased with frequency, thereby focusing more power on the target.  This increased power is integrated for a time, which is inversely proportional to the  bandwidth of the servo control loop. For a surveillance radar, this increased power is  collected for a proportionally shorter time, since the radar must search more cells in  the same time because of the narrower antenna beamwidth. 
With sidelobe jamming, the received jamming power is proportional to the sidelobe  antenna gain, ( Gsl) resulting in a net increase in signal-to-jamming power ratio by  the factor GtGsl−1. As with surveillance radars, sidelobe noise jamming and deception  can be further attenuated by the use of SLC in conjunction with SLB, as described in  Section 24.6. The use of higher transmission frequencies for tracking radars generally make them  less susceptible to noise jamming than surveillance radars. 
In addition, tactical track - ing radars may track the noise jammer in angle. Tracking a noise jammer in angle from  two spatially separated radars provides enough information to locate a jammer with  sufficient accuracy. A more threatening ECM against tracking radars is DECM. 
These threats require  considerably less energy than noise jamming (a feature particularly important on tacti - cal aircraft, where available space is limited). Nevertheless, they are very effective in  capturing and deceiving the range gate (with the RGPO technique), the velocity gate  (with the VGPO technique), and the angle-tracking circuits. A primary ECCM defense  against RGPO is the use of a leading-edge range tracker. 
The assumption is that the  deception jammer needs time to react and that the leading edge of the return pulse  will not be covered by the jammer. PRI jitter and frequency agility both help to ensure  that the jammer will not be able to anticipate the radar pulse and lead the actual skin  interval. Alternatively, the tracking radar might employ a multigate range-tracking  ch24.indd   41 12/19/07   6:00:56 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Electronic Counter-Countermeasures. 24.42  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 24 system to simultaneously track both the skin and false-target returns. 
This approach  utilizes the fact that both the jamming signals and the target return come from the  same angular direction, so that the radar’s angle-tracking circuits are always locked  onto the real target.3 The methodology of introducing VGPO into the radar’s tracking circuits is analogous  to the method used with RGPO. The frequency shift is initially programmed so that the  repeated signal is within the passband of the doppler filter containing the target return.  This is needed to capture the doppler filter containing the target, through the radar’s AGC  action. 
The repeater jammer signal is then further shifted in frequency to the maximum  expected doppler frequency of the radar. The repeated signal is then switched off, forcing  the victim radar to reacquire the target.3 Coherent tracking radars can check the radial  velocity derived from doppler measurements with that derived from differentiated range  data. Anomalous differences provide a warning of the probable presence of a deception  jammer. 
When RGPO and VGPO operate simultaneously, the best defense is the contem - porary tracking of true and false targets in both range and doppler dimensions. The use of  multimode (high, low, and medium PRF) radars can also be an effective ECCM measure  helping to counter range-gate and velocity-gate stealers by switching radar modes. Angle-gate stealing is particularly effective against conical-scanning or sequen - tial-lobing tracking radars. 
It is for this reason that such trackers cannot be used  in military applications. The fundamental problem with these radars is that angle  tracking is accomplished by demodulating the amplitude modulation imposed on  the target return pulses over a complete scanning or lobing cycle. To jam this type of  radar effectively, the radar’s angle-tracking-error-sensing circuits must be captured  with a false amplitude-modulated signal, at the scanning or lobing rate, which is  significantly out of phase with that from the target return. 
When the conical-scan  or lobing modulation is imposed on both the transmitter and the receiver beams, it  is relatively simple for a jammer to synthesize the appropriate jamming signal by  inverting and repeating the transmitter modulation (inverse-gain repeater).154 This  can be partially overcome by a conical scan-on-receiver only (COSRO) system,  where the tracking radar radiates a nonscanning transmitting beam but receives with  a conical-scan beam. The jammer then has no knowledge of the phase of the coni - cally scanned receiving beam and must adopt a trial-and-error method of scanning  the jamming modulation until a noticeable reaction occurs in the tracking radar  beam. (This jamming technique is called jog detection .13) A sequential lobing-   on-receive only (LORO) system conceals the lobing rate from a potential jammer.3  Conical scan and sequential lobing are going to be replaced by the monopulse tech - nique; thus, COSRO and LORO are becoming obsolete. 
Monopulse tracking is inherently insensitive to angle deceptive jamming from a  single point source. This is a result of the monopulse angle-error-sensing mechanism  that forms an error proportional to the angle between the target and the antenna’s  boresight on each return pulse. This is accomplished by comparing signals received  simultaneously in two or more antenna beams, as distinguished from techniques such  as lobe switching or conical scanning, in which angle information requires multiple  pulses. 
Effective monopulse jamming techniques generally attempt to exploit the mon - opulse radar’s susceptibility to target glint or multipath signals.13 One jamming approach, known as cross-eye , used against monopulse radars gener - ates artificial glint into the monopulse tracking loop.13 The inventors of the cross-eye  technique are B. Lewis (NRL, USA) and D. Howard; see their patent155 originally filed  the 1958. 
Cross-eye is basically a two-source interferometer whose antennas usually are  ch24.indd   42 12/19/07   6:00:56 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Electronic Counter-Countermeasures. 
 ELECTRONIC COUNTER-COUNTERMEASURES  24.436x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 24 mounted on the aircraft’s wingtip as far apart as possible. The signals received in each  wingtip antenna are repeated in the opposite wingtip antenna, except for a 180 ° phase  shift, which is inserted in one line to direct an interferometric null toward the victim  radar. In effect, this creates an apparent change of target direction as viewed from the  radar. 
A large repeater gain is required to generate a high jammer-to-signal ratio; oth - erwise, the skin echo will overwhelm the jamming signals in the interferometer pattern  nulls. The maximum effectiveness of the technique implies a considerable delay (on  the order of 100 ns) in the repeated signal, owing to the transmission line and amplifier  between the receiver and transmitter antennas. Thus, leading-edge or multigate range  tracking should be an effective ECCM technique against cross-eye jamming.3,13 Terrain-bounce jamming or terrain scattered interference (TSI) or hot clutter is  another monopulse jamming technique that is used against semiactive missile seekers  and airborne tracking radars. 
With this technique, the jammer aircraft illuminates the  Earth’s surface in front of and below it, so that the semiactive missile homes on the  illuminated ground spot and not on the jammer aircraft. The uncertainty of the terrain  scattering parameters and the possible depolarizing effects of surface reflection are  some of the problems associated with this technique.3 The TSI against airborne radar and the corresponding mitigation techniques are  described in detail in the literature156–158 TSI is a significant problem to military air - borne radar; in fact, an often weak target signal in the main beam has to compete  with jammer that propagates not only via direct-path but also via multipath from the  underlying terrain. Mitigation techniques have been focused on estimating the direct  jammer signal, estimating the linear system created by the multipath, and removing  an estimate of the reflected jammer signal from the main received radar signal158; this  is also allowed by using reference beams pointed at hot clutter.157 Adaptive cancella - tion techniques have to be able to account for the doppler induced by relative motion  between airborne radar and jammer platforms and the jammer signal nonstationarity  that is produced from such a bistatic geometry. 
TSI mitigation for over-the-horizon  (OTH) radar is described in Abramovich et al.159 Monopulse radars that use parabolic reflector antennas are susceptible to jamming  through cross-polarization lobes generated by the reflector surface.3,13 This occurs  because the angle-error-sensing discriminator has an inverse slope for a cross-polarized  signal, which causes the angle-tracking servo to have positive feedback instead of the  negative feedback required for tracking. Monopulse estimates with planar array anten - nas usually have a high resistance to cross-polarization jamming (see Section 11.5 of  Wirth102). With array antennas—in contrast to reflector antennas—all the single antenna  elements have the same polarization-dependent pattern. 
This is multiplied with the array  factor and also applies for the sum and difference patterns. The resultant form of the  beam pattern will thus be independent of polarization. Therefore, the monopulse opera - tion will also not be disturbed.102 Phased-Array Radars . 
 In this subsection, we illustrate, by a numerical exam - ple, the role played by the scheduler in a multifunctional PAR to combat ECM. To this  end, we resort to a benchmark study described in the literature, which defines typical  ECM threats, operational scenarios, and phased-array performance mainly in terms   of target tracking under ECM. The simulation benchmark160 includes two types of  ECM, namely SOJ and RGPO. 
The SOJ, mounted on an aircraft, transmits broadband  noise toward the radar. The SOJ flies an oval (race course) holding pattern in a clock - wise direction at an altitude of 3050 m and a speed of 168 m/s; it is approximately  ch24.indd   43 12/19/07   6:00:57 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. 
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Electronic Counter-Countermeasures. 24.44  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 24 150 km from the radar. The two circular turns are performed at an acceleration of  1.5 g. 
The transmitted SOJ noise impacts the radar with power g  0 not exceeding eight  times the receiver noise power. Thus, a SOJ will not completely hide a target, and it can  be defeated with a higher energy waveform. In RGPO, the target under track repeats  with delay and amplification the radar pulse so as to pull the radar range gate off the  target. 
The time delay is controlled so the false target is separated from the true one  with either linear or quadratic motion. For the linear case, the range of the false target  Rkft is related to the range of the true target Rkt via  R R v t tk kt kft po = + −( )0 (24.12) where vpo is the pull-off rate, tk is the time at which the target is being observed,  and t0 is the initial reference time of the RGPO false target. Alternatively, for the  quadratic case  R R a t tk kt kft po = + −1 202( )  (24.13) where apo is the pull-off acceleration. 
Radar Scheduling.  The scheduling and the tracking functions closely cooper - ate; both interact to update, with current measurements, the target’s state vector, and  make the predictions necessary to point the radar beam at the target the next time it  is observed, select the type of waveform to radiate, and select the threshold to apply  for target detection. A conceptual scheme showing the interaction of scheduling and  tracking is shown in Figure 24.13, where rk, bk, ek are the range, bearing, and eleva - tion measurements at tk; SNRk is the observed SNR at tk; tk+1 is the commanded time  for the next target observation; rk+1|k, bk+1|k, ek+1|k are the predicted range, bearing, and  elevation for beam pointing control at tk+1; Wk+1 is the waveform selection at tk+1; bk+1  is the detection threshold for the dwell set at tk+1; and Xk|k, Pk|k are the target filtered  state estimate and covariance matrix at tk given all the radar measurements up to  tk. 
  FIGURE 24.13  Interaction of radar scheduler and tracking filterRADAR MODEL SCHEDULERTIME DELAYtk, rk, bk, ek, SNRkSURVEILLANCE SCENARIO TRACKING FILTERtk-1, Xk-1/k-1, Pk-1/k-1 rk+1/k, bk+1/k ek+1/k tk, Xk/k, Pk/ktk+1, Wk+1, bk+1 ch24.indd   44 12/19/07   6:01:02 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Electronic Counter-Countermeasures. 
 ELECTRONIC COUNTER-COUNTERMEASURES  24.456x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 24 The scheme is built around two closed loops: (i) the loop encompassing the radar  model, the tracking filter, and the scheduler, and (ii) the tracking filter loop. The sce - nario is observed by the radar at time tk; the radar model provides the measurements  rk, bk, ek and SNRk. The tracking filter updates the previous target state estimate Xk-1|k-1,  and its covariance matrix Pk-1|k-1 at time tk providing the new estimates Xk|k and Pk|k and  the values rk+1|k, bk+1|k and ek+1|k at the next time instant tk+1. 
The scheduler provides the  waveform to radiate Wk+1 and the threshold bk+1 to apply for target detection at tk+1. Selection of the Sampling Period.  The sampling period is chosen among a finite  number of possible different values based on kinematic considerations on the target  (estimated speed) as well as on whether missed detections have occurred. 
If there  is no measurement to be associated to the target, the sampling period is set equal to   Ts = 0.1 s and the waveform of highest energy is selected, so as to possibly avoid a  second missed detection due to the possibly low target-RCS. Conversely, the sam - pling period is selected as follows: - Ts = 0.5 s for targets with estimated speed greater than 400 m/s - Ts = 2 s for targets with estimated speed between 100 and 400 m/s - Ts = 3 s for targets with estimated speed less than 100 m/s Even though the target may accelerate or maneuver, for the sake of simplicity, the  sampling period is selected only on the basis of the target estimated speed. Selection of the Detection Threshold. 
 The presence of a jamming signal can  increase the number of false alarms and wrong plot-track associations up to an unac - ceptable level, thus increasing significantly, the probability of loosing a target under  track. It is, therefore, important that the radar receiver be equipped with a CFAR. Since  the false alarm probability is related to the detection threshold, the latter should be  adapted online based on the intensity of disturbances. 
Selection of the Waveform.  The benchmark161 includes 8 waveforms, indexed by i  and characterized by a different pulse width te(i), so that the waveform can be selected  in order to provide a SNR greater than the detection threshold and thus maintain an  assigned probability of target detection. This can be accomplished by first estimating  the average target RCSk† at time tk, and then computing for each waveform i, the pre - dicted SNRk(i), and finally selecting the waveform index i such that the corresponding  SNRk(i) is just greater than the desired detection threshold plus a given tolerance.161 ECCM: A-SOJ and A-RGPO. 
 Hereafter, specific anti-SOJ  (A-SOJ) and anti- RGPO  (A-RGPO) techniques will be described. A-SOJ is based on estimating the jammer position and power level and then using  such estimates to adapt the radar detection threshold online. • Jammer state estimation . 
Whenever the radar operates in the passive mode, i.e., with - out emitting pulses, bearing bkj and elevation ekj of the jammer as well as the relative  standard deviations skjb and skje, and the jammer-to-noise ratio rkj (in the following  †  The RCS is certainly a fluctuating quantity versus time; it also depends upon the target aspect angle. However, if  enough time-on-target is available, the RCS estimate can be sufficiently accurate. ch24.indd   45 12/19/07   6:01:03 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Electronic Counter-Countermeasures. 24.46  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 24 expressed in dB) are measured. 
This allows the tracking filter to estimate the jammer  state made up of four state components: the two angular positions (bearing and eleva - tion) and the relative angular speeds. The jammer track is initialized by using the first  two measurements provided by the radar. • Jammer power level estimation . 
An estimate of the power level can be obtained by  the first-order linear filter initialized from g0(t1j) = 1 for a suitable filter coefficient  aj ∈ (0,1):  γ α γ αρ o j o jt tkj kjkj( )= ⋅ ( )+ − ⋅−11 1 010( )  (24.14) • Adaptation of the detection threshold . For a given detection threshold b  (in dB), the  probability of false alarm turns out to be:  P G Rkjfa stc= − ( ) +   exp ( )/10 110 02β γ Σ (24.15)  Hence, the detection threshold can be selected at each time instant, tk, in the follow - ing way:  β γk kktkj kjG r = −( ) (− max . , l og ( )/ 9 64 1 010 0 1 stcΣ) )+    { }21 lnPfa (24.16)  where g0(tj k-1) is the most recent available estimate of the jammer power level; the  value bk = 9.64 dB is the one which allows, in the absence of jammers, the desired  false alarm probability Pfa = 10-4; rk|k is the filtered estimate of the target range; Gstc(.)  is the sensitivity time control gain; and Σkj is the normalized antenna gain for the  received signal computed in the radar active mode.161 Because the phased-array radar considered here is a multifunctional one, it has also  a tracking mode that might be affected by the RGPO; for this reason, an A-RGPO is  considered an ECCM technique. 
Whenever RGPO is active, two high-amplitude signals  are received from the radar: the true target’s echo and an RGPO-induced signal. Since  the time at which the target under track activates RGPO is unknown to the tracking  algorithm, the latter must first recognize that RGPO is active and then implement an  appropriate A-RGPO technique. In order to establish whether RGPO is active, the fol - lowing test can be adopted. 
Let N be the number of measurements exceeding the detec - tion threshold of more than 3 dB. Then if N < 2, it is decided that RGPO is not active and  no A-RGPO action is undertaken; otherwise, if N = 2, the A-RGPO ECCMs described  below are applied. Notice that the test also aims at discriminating the type of ECM being  active, i.e., SOJ or RGPO. 
In fact, whenever the noise jammer is in the antenna main  beam many false measurements with high jammer-to-noise ratio are induced; in this  case, it turns out that N > 2 and RGPO is declared inactive. Whenever the jammer is no  longer in the target’s line-of-sight, it may happen that multiple measurements exceed the  detection threshold, but the condition that the excess is greater than 3 dB will be very  unlikely to be fulfilled in practice. Once it has been established that RGPO is active,  several devices can be adopted in order to prevent the loss of the target under track. 
 1. A first approach consists of maintaining two tracks until the RGPO is deactivated. 2. 
A second approach consists of penalizing, in the data association, the measure - ments whose range is greater than the average range of measurements with SNR  higher than the detection threshold.161 ch24.indd   46 12/19/07   6:01:10 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Electronic Counter-Countermeasures. 
 ELECTRONIC COUNTER-COUNTERMEASURES  24.476x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 24 3. A third, more drastic approach, consists of discarding the measurement with higher  range among the two measurements that have exceeded the detection threshold of  more than 3 dB. It is important to guarantee, under RGPO, a very high SNR for the target. 
In fact,  it might happen that the signal produced by the false target overcomes the detection  threshold whereas the one from the true target does not, thus causing an association  error with possible serious consequences in the target’s tracking. Hence, whenever  RGPO is active, a high energy waveform must be selected. A further precaution is the  following: if there are missed detections for at least two out of the last three scans, an  immediate revisit with sampling interval Ts = 0.1 s in search dwell mode is performed. 
 In search mode, the range gate is 10 km instead of 1.5 km, so in this way, it is possible  to obtain a new target measurement for updating the tracking filter and thus avoid the  target’s loss. Simulation Results.  Monte Carlo simulation experiments using the benchmark160  have been carried out in order to assess the benefits of the above described ECCMs. 
 More specifically, the adaptation of the detection threshold has been used as A-SOJ  whereas the technique based on discarding the measurements with higher range has  been adopted as A-RGPO. Three types of targets (numbered 1, 5, and 6) have been  considered: target 1 represents a cargo aircraft while targets 5 and 6 represent fighter/ attack aircrafts with a much higher degree of maneuverability. For each experiment,  the following results are displayed: number of lost targets (over 50 Monte Carlo trials),  Ts (radar sampling time), Tave (average fraction of time required by the radar for target  tracking), PM (average power), position error, and velocity error. 
Table 24.2 shows  simulation results for the Interacting Multiple Model (IMM) tracking162 algorithm in  the absence of ECMs. Tables 24.3 and 24.4 report the results in the presence of SOJ,  without and respectively with A-SOJ. Similarly Tables 24.5 and 24.6 report the results  in the presence of RGPO, without and respectively with A-RGPO. 
The examination of  these tables reveals that the presence of ECMs considerably deteriorates the tracking  performance if no appropriate ECCMs are undertaken. Conversely, the adoption of the  above described A-SOJ and A-RGPO techniques allows the performance that would  be attained in the absence of the corresponding ECMs to be restored. TARGET NO.LOST TARGETS Ts (s) Tave (s) PM (W)POS ERR (m)VEL ERR (m/s) 1 0 1.958 0.5106 10–3 5.7985 116.8 65.26 5 1 0.6772 1.477 10–368.898 95.39 61.29 6 1 1.112 0.899 10–310.774 82.94 58.43TABLE 24.2  Simulation Results Without ECM TABLE 24.3  Simulation Results With SOJ and Without A-SOJ TARGET NO.LOST TARGETS Ts (s) Tave (s) PM (W)POS ERR (m)VEL ERR (m/s) 1 34 1.919 0.521 10–3 6.6179 127.5 71.09 5 15 0.6923 1.444 10–368.411 103 66.78 6 50 ch24.indd   47 12/19/07   6:01:11 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Electronic Counter-Countermeasures. 24.48  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 24 Imaging Radar . 
There are two types of imaging radar that will be discussed:  synthetic aperture radar (SAR) and inverse SAR (ISAR). SAR. SAR allows us to have a high-resolution mapping of the EM backscatter  from an observed scene. 
More precisely, the radar data is obtained in polar coordi - nates, i.e., slant range and azimuth, while a two-dimensional image in the rectangular  coordinates ( x, y) is provided. High resolution in slant-range is obtained by trans - mitting a coded waveform, with a large value of the time-bandwidth product, and  coherently processing—in a filter matched to the waveform—the echo signals. High  resolution along the transversal direction is achieved by forming a synthetic aperture. 
 This requires (i) to put the radar onboard a moving platform, e.g., an aircraft or a  satellite; (ii) to record the EM signals from each scatterer that is illuminated by the  moving antenna beam in successive instants of time, and (iii) to coherently combine  the signals—via a suitable azimuthal matched filter—thus focusing the sliding antenna  pattern in a narrower synthetic beam. Radiometric resolution, another key parameter,  is related to the capability of SAR of distinguishing different objects in the scene  on the basis of their EM reflectivity. Radiometric resolution determines how fine a  sensor can distinguish between objects with similar EM reflection properties. 
It is a  parameter of great importance, especially for those applications oriented to extended  target exploitation like polarimetry and classification. Thus, the radiometric resolu - tion should be optimized mainly for good extended target interpretation, accounting  for all kind of back-scatterers. Multilook processing is commonly used in SAR image TABLE 24.4  Simulation Results With SOJ and A-SOJ TARGET NO.LOST TARGETS Ts (s) Tave (s) PM (W)POS ERR (m)VEL ERR (m/s) 1 1 1.944 0.5144 10–3   6.6179 127.5 71.09 5 1 0.6888 1.452 10–368.411 103 66.78 6 4 1.118 0.8944 10–315.11   80.49 59.59 TABLE 24.5  Simulation Results With RGPO and Without A-RGPO TARGET NO.LOST TARGETS Ts (s) Tave (s) PM (W)POS ERR (m)VEL ERR (m/s) 1 48 1.963 0.5095 10–3 5.044 120.5 66.6 5 50 6 50 TABLE 24.6  Simulation Results With RGPO and A-RGPO TARGET NO.LOST TARGETS Ts (s) Tave (s) PM (W)POS ERR (m)VEL ERR (m/s) 1 0 1.889 0.5295 10–3   6.6179 127.5 71.09 5 1 0.7045 1.419 10–368.411 103 66.78 6 0 1.156 0.8651 10–315.586 124.9 80.26 ch24.indd   48 12/19/07   6:01:11 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Electronic Counter-Countermeasures.  ELECTRONIC COUNTER-COUNTERMEASURES  24.496x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 24 formation in order to reduce the speckle noise. 
Traditional digital multilook processing  consists of an incoherent addition of independent images (looks) of the same scene.  The looks can be obtained by partitioning the available signal bandwidth (range and/ or azimuth) and processing each look independently. The final image is produced by  adding the looks incoherently, pixel by pixel. 
The direct trade-off between geometric  and radiometric resolution must be considered when choosing the number of looks for  processing. One-look processing means a fully coherent use of the bandwidth (best  geometric resolution), and in this case, the speckle noise will obey an exponential dis - tribution where the standard deviation is equal to the mean value in the intensity image  (multiplicative characteristic). For multilook processing, the geometric resolution will  degrade as the number of looks increases and the speckle statistics of the intensity  image obey a gamma distribution, where the standard deviation decreases with the  square root of the number of independent looks.163 SAR images are useful for surveillance and reconnaissance applications. 
However,  jamming could make SAR images unusable. The use of ECCM is, therefore, essen - tial to reducing the vulnerability of SAR to jammers. The susceptibility to intercept  signals from SAR and vulnerability to jamming are described in Goj.164 A simulated  noise jamming produces stripes on the SAR images that demonstrate the effective - ness of jamming against targets like strong point scatterers such as electric power-line  towers, as well as low-reflectivity agricultural patterns and desert land. 
The refer - ences165,166 discuss the significant vulnerability to ECM of spaceborne SAR dur - ing maritime reconnaissance missions. In 1978, typical imagery from Seasat SAR  showed several features that made the SAR a powerful maritime surveillance sensor.  The ships and the wakes produced by the ship motion were imaged. 
The ship image  (a blob) appeared displaced from its wake due to the doppler shift caused by the ship’s  motion relative to the spacecraft. However, the ship’s position at the time of imaging  and its course could be determined from the wake. The ship speed can be calculated  too by the displacement of the ship from its wake. 
All this information is obtainable  only if enough SNR is available for the identification of these image features either  by a human operator or an automatic processor. There exists, therefore, a potential  vulnerability to SAR in the maritime surveillance application if a high level of back - ground noise causes degradations of the SAR image to an extent where ship and wake  can no longer be identified in the image. In the literature165,166 some critical aspects, in  terms of jammer receiver sensitivity and transmitted power, for spot-noise jamming  are considered and the system requirements are derived to determine the feasibility  and practicality of such jammer. 
Results of a computer simulation of an engagement  between SAR and representative jamming system are given to enable the effective - ness of ECM to be assessed. The threats to a SAR are barrage jamming, spot jamming, random pulse jamming,  and repeater jamming. Repeater/deception jamming is a major threat because it might  not be recognizable, whereas the others are, at least in principle, recognizable. 
The  impact of each threat and the possible countermeasures are described in the remaining  part of this section. • Barrage jammer . The disturbance noise extends over the entire swath of the SAR  image, and it shows generally a uniform intensity. 
The radar image of barrage jam - mer noise will exhibit speckle, i.e., a brightness variation from one resolution cell to  another. In addition, because a large number of noise samples are added noncoher - ently, the multiple looks of jammer noise tend to smooth out the intensity variation  from pixel to pixel, just as in the case of thermal noise. ch24.indd   49 12/19/07   6:01:12 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Electronic Counter-Countermeasures. 24.50  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 24 • Spot jammer . 
It also covers the entire swath and with uniform intensity disturbing  noise as for the barrage jammer; however, its image will differ from the barrage noise  because the Fourier transform of narrower band jammer noise will result in speckle  size in the range dimension that is larger than that of thermal noise or clutter. The  processed cross-range dimension is again equal to that of clutter or thermal noise.  Spot jammer noise will appear to be stretched in range. 
• Random pulse jamming . The jammer pulses may also be transmitted at random inter - vals, so that such noise pulses can appear in any part of the range swath. When  observed over a sufficient number of samples, the noise pulses will occupy all parts  of the range swath in one sample or another. 
The azimuth processor forms the sum  of the noise power from all samples within one synthetic aperture length. That sum  will be equal to the total noise power in the aperture, which is proportional to the  average jammer noise power. Also, in this case, the speckle dimension will appear  stretched in range, just as in the spot jammer case. 
However, the random pulse jam - mer speckle will exhibit more pronounced brightness variations than that from spot  or barrage jamming, because fewer noise samples are added noncoherently, thereby  reducing the smoothing effect of multiple looks. • Repeater jamming .167 The enemy may utilize the transmitting radar to send out a  signal within the band of the SAR to confuse the SAR system receiver. The jamming  signal causes the SAR to receive and process erroneous information that results in  severe degradations in the SAR images and/or formation of the image of nonexistent  targets. 
A deception jamming could be composed of manipulated replicas of the  transmitted radar signals via DRFM. In Hyberg168 the possibility of preventing SAR  mapping through coherent DRFM jamming has been investigated. A software model  has been developed and verified in several flight trials in the case of a ground-based  DRFM jammer. 
 ECCM techniques for SAR can be divided into (i) antenna-based techniques (low  sidelobes, adaptive arrays) and (ii) transmitter/receiver/processing–based techniques  (frequency agility, pulse coding). • Low sidelobes . SAR antennas with low sidelobes reduce the level of jamming  power received and, in addition, reduce the probability of being intercepted by  ECM stations (in the sidelobe region).169 In relation to low sidelobes, the following  comment is in order. 
In a conventional radar, the effect of low sidelobes is clear,  but there is a difference in SAR because the beamwidth is much wider than in  other radar applications. In principle, the finer the resolution the smaller the SAR  physical antenna and the wider is its beamwidth. Thus, jamming in the main beam  is more likely in a SAR than in other radars because of the wide main beam. 
To  get false targets into the SAR, it would have to come from the main beam, so low  sidelobes might not be much involved in deception jammer. Likewise, main-beam  jamming may be more of a threat to SAR than sidelobe jamming. • Adaptive arrays . 
The references170–172 deal with the rejection of a barrage noise  jamming using an adaptive spatial nulling. Equipping the SAR system with an  antenna partitioned into several sub-apertures connected to parallel channels  (i.e., multichannel SAR) allows spatial adaptive processing to suppress the  interfering signal. In Farina and Lombardo,170 the performance of such a tech - nique is evaluated in terms of SAR impulse response, detection performance of  point target, and radiometric resolution of an extended scene. 
In Ender171 a SAR  image, taken with an experimental four-channel SAR jammed by a small 1 watt  ch24.indd   50 12/19/07   6:01:12 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Electronic Counter-Countermeasures. 
 ELECTRONIC COUNTER-COUNTERMEASURES  24.516x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 24 noise jammer leading to a JNR in the raw data of about 30 dB when the jammer  passes the center of the main beam, is depicted. The de-jammed image by adap - tive spatial suppression is also shown demonstrating the good performance of  adaptive spatial cancellation. The reference171 provides a comprehensive study  of anti-jamming spatial adaptive techniques including also the space/slow-time  anti-jamming filter with suitable image reconstruction algorithm. 
Results indi - cate that the slow-time STAP provides superior interference cancellation than  spatial-only filtering. SAR usually involves wideband processing, requiring for  adaptive nulling techniques, peculiar algorithms. Efficient broadband jammer  nulling has to be countered with space/fast-time (i.e., range cell) processing.172  The expected number of spatial dof is not higher; we have only to add the dof  in time. 
The adaptive beamforming algorithms have to be implemented into the  SAR processing which is always space-time processing (typically post-doppler).   Rosenberg and Gray173 tackle the problem of mitigating the effects of an airborne  broadband jammer present in the main beam of a SAR. In addition to this, mul - tipath reflections from the ground, known as hot-clutter, will add a nonstationary  interference component to the image. 
The authors show the image degradation from  hot-clutter, the limited restoration that multi-channel spatial imaging and slow-time  STAP can provide, and how fast-time STAP can improve the final image quality. • Frequency agility . SAR processing needs phase coherence for obtaining the syn - thetic aperture, thus frequency agility has to be used with care. 
Frequency chang - ing during a synthetic aperture length time results in a change of focal length  (different coefficient of the quadratic phase term) of the phase history of the illu - minated targets that degrades the cross-range resolution. SAR operating in burst  mode can change its central frequency from one look to another, without any  degradation in image quality. Given the efficiency of simple broadband jamming  and modern ESM, we need to conclude that frequency agility is not of great help  in SAR ECCM. 
• Pulse coding .167 An effective ECCM against a DRFM repeat jammer is to change  the radar transmitted pulse code from one PRI to another. The radar maintains  the same carrier and bandwidth; however, the pulses are coded to be approxi - mately orthogonal to each other (i.e., their cross-correlation is approximately  equal to zero). Such a radar is less susceptible to a DRFM repeater because  (i) the jammer cannot adapt easily since the radar signal is varying in the PRI  domain, and (ii) the signal transmitted by a DRFM repeater jammer at a given  PRI (i.e., the radar signal that is used by the SAR at the previous PRI) is approxi - mately orthogonal to the radar signal that the SAR is utilizing at the current PRI,  and thus, a matched filtering with the current PRI radar signal would weaken the  DRFM repeater jammer signal. 
In Soumekh167 a novel method is outlined that  combines the above mentioned pulse diversity radar signaling with a new coher - ent two-dimensional processing of the measured data to effectively suppress a  DRFM repeater jammer. ISAR . The inverse SAR is a method of reconstructing a high-resolution two- dimensional EM intensity image of moving targets (e.g., ships, aircraft) in the range  and cross-range (doppler) domains. 
ISAR imaging is important in military applications  such as target recognition and classification (since it can usually recognize the class of  target) that can also be used to cue weapon systems. The need for coherent countering  of these imaging sensors is a high priority for EW. The references174,175 present the  ch24.indd   51 12/19/07   6:01:13 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Electronic Counter-Countermeasures. 24.52  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 24 design of a pipelined all-digital image synthesizer capable of generating false-target  images from a series of intercepted ISAR chirp pulses, thus providing RF imaging  decoy capability. 
The image synthesizer modulates the phase samples from a phase  sampling DRFM that stores intercepted ISAR pulses. The image synthesizer must also  synthesize the temporal lengthening and amplitude modulation caused by the many  reflective surfaces of a target and must generate a realistic doppler profile for each sur - face. The position of a false target image in range can be controlled by delaying in time  the read-out samples going to the image synthesizer. 
The range-doppler image of a ship  with 32 range bins is synthesized as an example in Pace et al.175 ECCM techniques to  defeat this type of jamming signals are similar to those proposed for SAR. Over-the-Horizon Radar.  An important defense-related role of high frequency  (HF) over-the-horizon (OTH) radar is to provide a capability for early warning detec - tion and tracking of air and ship targets. 
By using the ionosphere as a propagation  medium, skywave  OTH radars can operate at very long distances to achieve detection  and tracking at ranges of 500–3000 km. On the other hand, surface-wave  OTH radars  exploit vertically polarized HF signals (3–30 MHz) and the conductive properties of  sea water to detect targets at ranges limited to about 250 km. This upper limit generally  applies to large ships and frequencies in the lower HF band.176,177 ECM to OTH Radar. 
 For both skywave and surface-wave OTH radar systems,  the ionosphere also propagates unwanted interference signals to the radar site, par - ticularly at night when the ionosphere is prone to propagating radio frequency inter - ference (RFI) sources from very long distances. RFI can arise from unintentional and  intentional anthropogenic emitters in the user-congested HF band, as well as jamming  sources. Jamming sources may be located on the target platform itself (self-screening)  and received by the main antenna beam or radiate from a separate location (stand-off)  and be received mainly through the antenna beampattern sidelobes. 
The jamming sig - nal may be incoherent with the radar waveform and operate in a “spot” or “barrage”  fashion to raise the noise floor in both range and doppler search spaces to potentially  impair detection performance, or it can be coherent with the radar waveform, as in the  case of deception jamming, which may generate false targets and potentially impair  the tracking system from following the true target. Impact of Ionosphere.  An important aspect that distinguishes OTH radar from  line-of-sight systems is the impact of the ionospheric propagation medium on the  characteristics of the received  interference. 
The ionosphere is stratified with differ - ent reflecting layers, so a single interference source is often received as a number of  multipath components with different DoAs, both in elevation (due to the different  heights of reflection points) and in azimuth (due to layer-dependent ionospheric tilts  or gradients). In addition to multipath, each interference component is subjected to  temporal and spatial distortions caused by the dynamic behavior of electron density  irregularities present in the individual reflecting layers.178 This physical phenomenon  is known not only to deform the interference wavefronts relative to the anticipated  plane wavefront, but also to induce a significant level of spatial nonstationarity on the  various interference components over time intervals commensurate with the coherent  processing interval of OTH radars (in the order of a few to tens of seconds).179,180 Relevance to Interfering Signals.  Sources of interference within the radar coverage  (e.g., on an airborne platform) can potentially screen the platform in range and impair  the detection of other targets with similar azimuth but possibly at different ranges. 
  ch24.indd   52 12/19/07   6:01:13 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Electronic Counter-Countermeasures. 
 ELECTRONIC COUNTER-COUNTERMEASURES  24.536x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 24 Such sources can expect good propagation to the radar receiver because the choice of  operating frequency is usually optimized for the coverage area. In the case of stand- off interference sources, which are located arbitrarily with respect to the surveillance  region (e.g., a ground-based emitter), propagation conditions will generally be sub - optimum. However, such sources may have greater power and antenna gain at their  disposal, allowing the signals to reach the radar receiver with appreciable strength,  sometimes after propagation via highly disturbed and nonstationary ionospheric paths  (as commonly occurs in the equatorial and polar regions). 
Under normal circumstances,  OTH radars seek to find relatively clear frequency channels in the user-congested HF  spectrum, so the presence of interference from other manmade sources is effectively  diminished by suitable frequency selection. When jamming is present, the radar may  need to operate with much higher than usual levels of interference that can degrade  performance. For this reason, protection in the form of ECCM techniques becomes  necessary. 
ECCM Techniques.  Electronic protection for OTH radar antenna arrays can be  provided in the form of adaptive signal processing in space and time. The stochastic  constraints adaptive beamforming and STAP methods181–184 were developed specifi - cally for the HF environment to address the rejection of nonstationary interference  while protecting the clutter doppler spectrum properties. 
A method for time-varying  spatial adaptive processing (TV-SAP)185 that addresses the same problem was found to  be more attractive for practical implementation due to the much lower computational  cost in real-time applications, as well as greater robustness in protecting sub-clutter  visibility after doppler processing. The problem of reducing false alarms caused by  strong sidelobe targets and spatially structured (non-gaussian distributed) RFI was  treated in Fabrizio et al.,186 where the advantages of adaptive subspace detectors rela - tive to conventional approaches were shown. STAP techniques with temporal degrees  of freedom spaced at the PRI (i.e., slow-time) have been proposed in Farina et al.187  to jointly cancel RFI and clutter when both are of similar strength but neither can be  isolated for estimation, whereas an alternative low-dimension STAP formulation with  temporal taps spaced at the range cell interval (i.e., fast-time) has been proposed in  Fabrizio et al.,188 to jointly cancel sidelobe and main-beam RFI that exhibits correla - tion in the range dimension. 
The STAP methods used in OTH radar are very similar  conceptually to those adopted for airborne radar, especially the former tap architec - ture.187 The chief difference is that in benign conditions (free of significant co-channel   interference‡), STAP is not indicated for OTH radar because the sidelobe clutter does  not typically mask doppler shifted targets any more than the main-beam clutter.§   A possible exception to this is shipborne HF surface-wave radar, * although such sys - tems have been proposed, they have not yet demonstrated their practical utility . ‡  Co-channel interference for OTH radar refers mainly to other transmissions in the HF spectrum that either fully or  partially overlap the radar bandwidth. §  The main beam and sidelobe clutter received by airborne radars can have quite different doppler shifts due to  the movement of the platform with respect to the ground resulting in the angle-doppler coupling of the clutter. 
 However in OTH radar, main beam and sidelobe clutter from a single ionospheric mode typically have simi - lar doppler spectrum characteristics because the radar is stationary. This means that sidelobe clutter appears at  roughly the same doppler shift as main beam clutter and doppler filtering can be used effectively for detecting  targets usually without special need to reject the sidelobe clutter spatially. *  Obviously the situation may change in shipborne HF surface wave radar because the platform is moving with  respect to the sea surface and hence a conceptually similar situation arises for the clutter as encountered in  airborne radar. 
ch24.indd   53 12/19/07   6:01:14 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Electronic Counter-Countermeasures. 
24.54  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 24 24.12 ECCM AND ECM EFFICACY There is a need for a quantitative measurement of the efficacy of one or more ECCM  electronic techniques when a radar equipped with these devices is subject to an ECM  threat. One performance measure generally used for an unjammed search radar is the  detection range of a certain target against a system noise background; this situation is  referred to as detection in clear environment . When the radar is jammed, it is of inter - est to calculate the degradation of the detection range with respect to self-screening,  standoff, and escort jammers. 
These calculations apply to both search and tracking  radars. For tracking radars, it is also worthwhile to consider the degradation of mea - surement accuracy and resolution. The benefits of using ECCM techniques such as  frequency agility, coherent doppler processing, very low sidelobe antennas, and SLC  can be easily assessed at a first approximation by properly modifying the parameters  involved in the radar equation. 
If, for instance, an SLC is adopted against an SOJ, its  net effect is to reduce jamming power by the amount of jammer cancellation ratio that  the SLC can offer. The prediction of radar range is difficult because of the many factors that are hard  to represent with models of the required accuracy. The factors involve the target to  be detected (target returns of an unknown statistical nature), the natural environ - ment in which the target is embedded (e.g., clutter returns, unintentional interference,  uncontrollable environmental refraction, and absorption), the random nature of the  interference, and the radar itself (system noise temperature, signal distortions, etc.). 
 Nevertheless, radar range prediction made under average conditions provides a pre - liminary and useful indication of performance under ECM threat and ECCM design  effectiveness that produces baseline values prior to simulation and operational tests.  A classical book presents accurate detection range equations in a variety of practical  situations.189 In the second part of this section, a review of software tools available for  the prediction of range equation in jamming and chaff conditions is given. Of course, the radar equation is a simplification in assessing ECM-ECCM interac - tions; a measure of ECCM effectiveness should involve the whole weapon system in  which the radar operates. 
The measure of effectiveness should be expressed in terms  of the number of attackers destroyed or the probability of radar survival. References  in the literature attempt to assess the ECCM efficacy.190–194  Simulation is another means to assess the ECCM benefits in radar and weapon  systems.193 An advantage of this approach resides in the capability to artificially  generate different types of threats and to look at the radar160,161 and weapon system  reactions. However, the simulation of such a complex system is a difficult, time- consuming task that sometimes involves the use of ad-hoc programming languages  suitable for simulation. 
Simulation of a complex system on a digital computer is a technique used for the  analysis, design, and testing of a system whose behavior cannot be easily evaluated  by means of analysis or computation. The procedure essentially consists of reproduc - ing the algorithms of a suitable model of the examined system by means of computer  programs. Proper inputs to the model, corresponding to the most relevant operational  conditions for the real system, can be generated by the same computer programs. 
The  outputs obtained are compared with some reference values (expected or theoretical)  to assess system performance. When random inputs are provided, a number of statisti - cally independent trials are performed to achieve a significant sample of the output  values from which reliable statistics can be estimated.  ch24.indd   54 12/19/07   6:01:14 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Electronic Counter-Countermeasures.  ELECTRONIC COUNTER-COUNTERMEASURES  24.556x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 24 The accuracy and detail of the model may vary from a coarse functional description  of the system to a very accurate one, according to the purpose of the simulation and  the required accuracy of the results. 
However, it is desirable to limit the complexity  of the simulation tools in order to have manageable programs, giving results that are  easily interpreted. The accuracy in representing each system function depends upon  its relevance with respect to system performance. When a very complex system is to  be simulated, it is generally preferred to resort to several programs of limited com - plexity in lieu of a single bulky simulation. 
This approach corresponds to partitioning  the whole system into subsystems separately modeled in detail. From each partial  simulation, a limited number of relevant features are extracted and employed to build  a simplified model of the overall system. Simulation is particularly important to account for the adaptive nature (e.g., CFAR,  adaptive beamforming, automatic radar management, adaptive tracking, adaptive clut - ter cancellation) of modern radar systems.195 In this case, traditional static measures  such as detection range against a given target will no longer adequately define the  capabilities of radar systems. 
Measures of radar dynamic characteristics, such as the  susceptibility to processor overload or the time to adapt in changing conditions, are  more important. Modeling and simulations to evaluate the radar response to standard - ized changing scenarios represent an attractive technical solution.195 Simulation is always of value; however, the effectiveness of ECM and ECCM is  ultimately done, when possible, with tests of real EW capabilities against real radar  systems under real-world conditions. This is especially important for radar equipped  with adaptive techniques since they might not be always fully modeled in a simulation  as they are in the real-world environment in which they must operate. 
The Radar Equation in Jamming and Chaff Conditions.  An example of radar  range performance under noise jamming is reported on pp. 14–19 of Farina,34 where  the important role played by a radar with low sidelobe antennas is also noted. 
Today  the use of computer programs for predicting radar performance under jamming, clut - ter, and chaff, and in the presence of various refined propagation models is well estab - lished: there are programs developed in house by individual radar companies196 or  available on the market.197 The Radar Work Station (RWS) is an example of a developed in-house program196;  RWS originates from the modeling and simulation activities carried out for prediction  of radar performance in several scenarios. One main objective of RWS is to provide  the radar analyst or system designer with a friendly but comprehensive toolkit for  prediction of radar performance based on well recognized, flexible, and documented  mathematical models. A broad range of radar types (bi-dimensional, multi-beam three- dimensional, phased-array), composite clutter, ECM and propagation scenarios, and  a target’s kinematics and RCS features are covered. 
Input and output data can be  saved, loaded, and exported to other similar applications or for general use (i.e., MS  Office tools for data analysis). A second purpose is to provide a handy and reliable  tool for technicians and engineers performing system setup at the site or acceptance  tests by means of field trials, by providing not only the software tools and models but  also, where required, a database of prediction results, and allowing simple parametric  excursions thereof, without the need to consult a bulky reference documentation. In  brief, the most valuable outcomes that can be obtained with the RWS are radar range  calculation, radar elevation coverage diagrams in clear, ECM and multi-propagation  both for coherent and noncoherent radars; range and velocity responses in complex  ch24.indd   55 12/19/07   6:01:15 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Electronic Counter-Countermeasures. 24.56  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 24 scenarios (multiple clutter sources, user defined trajectory) in terms of signal-to-dis - turbance power ratio and detection probability; and radar range and height accuracy  calculation, radar resolution evaluations employing suitable data extracting logics. 
 The RWS suite consists of the following main modules: C\C ++ and Fortran (to calcu - late special functions like Gamma and Bessel K) coded libraries; a standard library of  Windows APIs (Application Programming Interfaces) to draw the coverage diagrams;  a template library to implement the matrix algebra; an application based on MS Office  Excel to code the Blake Chart†; a set of Visual Basic tools to evaluate some aspects  of radar performance (e.g., ADC jitter, atmospheric loss, tapering loss, etc.); and an  unformatted archive of radar data, as simple ASCII files, pertinent to performance,  environment, trajectories, terrain height, and waveform. User-friendly interfaces run  on low-cost platforms (PC) and popular environments (Win98, WinNT, Win2000,  Windows XP, Vista) for users and developers. In the RWS, the chaff volume clutter model is characterized in terms of volume  extent, EM reflectivity, and doppler spectrum. 
The signal-to-noise plus chaff ratio  is determined on the basis of the chaff location in the space, the antenna receiving  pattern, and the radiated radar waveform. The radar equation can be applied, and the  signal processing scheme can be emulated to determine the amount of chaff mitiga - tion. A barrage noise jammer is modeled in terms of effective radiated power (ERP)  and frequency band of operation. 
The signal-to-noise plus jammer ratio is determined  on the basis of the JDoA and the antenna receiving patterns; the radar equation is then  applied; and suitable ECCM signal processing schemes can be emulated to determine  to which extent the jammer is attenuated. Computer Aided Radar Performance Evaluation Tool (CARPET) is an example  of available software on the market. In the CARPET 1.0 manual,197 the equations  for calculating the contributions from chaff (volume clutter) in the signal-to-   interference ratio are described on pp. 
59 and 60, and the equations for calculating  the contribution from noise jamming (barrage or responsive) are described on p. 61.  CARPET is programmed in C ++ and has a Windows XP-compatible user-friendly  graphical interface. 
†  Actually, it is a generalized Blake chart (that improves on the original Blake chart), which includes details such as  antenna patterns, processing, system losses, etc., in a suitable electronic format.ACRONYM LIST ADC Analogue-to-Digital Converter ADT Automatic Detection and Tracking AF Ambiguity Function AFS Automatic Frequency Selection AGC Automatic Gain Control AMF Adaptive Matched Filter API Application Programming Interface A-RGPO Anti Range Gate Pull Off ARM Anti Radiation Missile A-SOJ Anti-Stand Off Jammer ch24.indd   56 12/19/07   6:01:15 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Electronic Counter-Countermeasures. 
 ELECTRONIC COUNTER-COUNTERMEASURES  24.576x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 24 BM Ballistic Missile CARPET Computer Aided Radar Performance Evaluation Tool CFAR Constant False Alarm Rate CORDIC COordinate Rotation Digital Computer COSRO Conical Scan-on-Receiver Only COTS Commercial Off The Shelf CRI Coherent Repeater Interference CRLB Cramer-Rao Lower Bound CUT Cell Under Test CW Continuous Wave DAC Digital-to-Analogue Converter DAR Digital Array Radar DECM Deceptive ECM DF Direction Finding DoA Direction of Arrival Dof Degree of freedom DRFM Digital Radio Frequency Memory DToA Difference Time of Arrival EM Electromagnetic EA Electronic Attack ECCM Electronic Counter-Counter Measure ECM Electronic Counter Measure ELINT ELectronic INTelligence EMCON EMission CONtrol EP Electronic Protection ERP Effective Radiated Power ES Electronic Support ESM Electronic warfare Support Measure EW Electronic Warfare FFT Fast Fourier Transform FPGA Field Programmable Gate Arrays  FTC Fast Time Constant GA Genetic Algorithm GSLC Generalized Side Lobe Canceler HOJ Home On Jam HF High Frequency IF Intermediate Frequency IMM Interacting Multiple Model ISAR Inverse Synthetic Aperture Radar JCR Jammer Cancellation Ratio JDoA Jammer Direction of Arrival JNR Jammer-to-Noise Ratio LORO Lobing-On-Receive Only LPI Low Probability of Intercept MBC Main Beam Canceler MEM Maximum Entropy Method ML Maximum Likelihood MTD Moving Target Detector MTI Moving Target Indicator ch24.indd   57 12/19/07   6:01:15 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Electronic Counter-Countermeasures. 
24.58  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 24 NLI Noise Like Interference OTH Over The Horizon PAR Phased-Array Radar PDR Phase Difference Rate PDW Pulse Description Word Penaids Penetration Aid Decoy PPI Plan Position Indicator PRF Pulse Repetition Frequency PRI Pulse Repetition Interval PSLR Peak-to-Side Lobe Ratio RCS Radar Cross Section RF Radio Frequency RFI Radio Frequency Interference RFM Range Filter Map RGPO Range Gate Pull Off RWR Radar Warning Receiver Rms Root Mean Square RWS Radar Work Station RX Receiver SAR Synthetic Aperture Radar SAW Surface Acoustic Wave SINR Signal-to-Interference plus Noise Ratio SLB SideLobe Blanking SLC SideLobe Canceler SNR Signal-to-Noise Ratio SOJ Stand Off Jammer SP Self-Protection SSJ Self-Screening Jammer STAP Space-Time Adaptive Processing STT Single Target Tracker ToA Time of Arrival TSI Terrain Scattered Interference TV-SAP Time-Varying Spatial Adaptive Processing TWS Track While Scan UHF Ultra High Frequency ULA Uniform Linear Array VGPO Velocity Gate Pull Off VHF Very High Frequency VLSI Very Large Scale Integration ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The Author wishes to warmly thank his colleagues for their cooperation in this work:  Dr. L. Timmoneri, Dr. 
L. Ortenzi, and Dr. E. 
Andreta (SELEX Sistemi Integrati, Italy),  Dr. G. A. 
Fabrizio (DSTO, Australia), Dr. U. Nickel (FGAN, Germany), Prof. 
L. Chisci,  Dr. A. 
Benavoli, and Dr. S. Romagnoli (University of Florence, Italy), Dr. 
M. Grazzini  (Elettronica SpA, Italy), and Dr. S. 
Kogon (MIT, Lincoln Laboratory, U.S.). ch24.indd   58 12/19/07   6:01:16 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. 
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Electronic Counter-Countermeasures.  ELECTRONIC COUNTER-COUNTERMEASURES  24.596x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 24 REFERENCES  1. S. 
L. Johnston, “World War II ECCM history,” suppl. to IEEE Int. 
Radar Conf. Rec ., May 6–9,  1985, pp. 5.2–5.7. 
  2. A. E. 
Hoffmann-Heiden, “Anti-jamming techniques at the German AAA radars in World War II,”  suppl. to IEEE Int. Radar Conf. 
Rec ., pp. 5.22–5.29, May 6–9, 1985.  3. 
D. C. Schleher, Introduction to Electronic Warfare , Norwood, MA: Artech House, Inc., 1986. 
 4. D. C. 
Schleher, Electronic Warfare in the Information Age , Norwood, MA: Artech House, Inc., 1999.  5. B. 
J. Slocumb and P. D. 
West, “ECM modeling for multitarget tracking and data association,”  in Multitarget-Multisensor Tracking: Applications and Advances , vol. III, Y . Bar-Shalom and   W. 
D. Blair (eds.), Norwood, MA: Artech House, Inc., 2000, pp. 395–458. 
 6. F. Neri, Introduction to Electronic Defense , 2nd Ed., Norwood, MA: Artech House, Inc., 2001. 
  7. L. Nengjing and Z. 
Yi-Ting, “A survey of radar ECM-ECCM,” IEEE Trans ., vol. AES–31, no. 3,  pp. 
1110–1120, July 1995.  8. S. 
L. Johnston (ed.), Radar Electronic Counter-Countermeasures , Norwood, MA: Artech House,  Inc., 1979.  9. 
Special Issue on electronic warfare, IEE Proc ., vol. 129, pt. F, no. 
3, pp. 113–232, June 1982. 10. 
W. A. Davis, “Principles of electronic warfare: Radar and EW,” Microwave J ., vol. 
33, pp. 52–54,  56–59, February 1980. 11. 
L. B. V an Brunt, The Glossary of Electronic Warfare , Dunn Loring, V A: EW Engineering, Inc., 1984. 
12. Department of Defense, Joint Chiefs of Staff, Dictionary of Military and Associated Terms , JCS  Pub-1, September 1974. 13. 
L. B. Van Brunt, Applied ECM , vol. 
1, Dunn Loring, V A: EW Engineering, Inc., 1978. 14. R. 
G. Wiley, Electronic Intelligence: The Analysis of Radar Signals , Norwood, MA: Artech  House, Inc., 1985. 15. 
R. G. Wiley, Electronic Intelligence: The Interception of Radar Signals , Norwood, MA: Artech  House, Inc., 1986. 
16. R. G. 
Wiley, ELINT: The Interception and Analysis of Radar Signals , Norwood, MA: Artech  House, Inc., 2006. 17. R. 
A. Poisel, Electronic Warfare Target Location Methods , Norwood, MA: Artech House, Inc., 2005. 18. 
E. P. Pace, Detecting and Classifying Low Probability of Intercept Radar , Norwood, MA: Artech  House, Inc., 2003. 
19. D. C. 
Schleher, “LPI radar: Fact or fiction,” IEEE AES Magazine , vol. 21, no. 5, pp. 
3–6,   May 2006. 20. S. 
L. Johnston, “Philosophy of ECCM utilization,” Electron. Warfare , vol. 
7, pp. 59–61,   May–June, 1975. 21. 
M. V . Maksimov, et al., Radar Anti-Jamming Techniques , Norwood, MA: Artech House, Inc.,  1979. 
(Translated from Russian, Zaschita at Radiopomekh, Soviet Radio, 1976.) 22. D. Clifford Bell, “Radar countermeasures and counter-countermeasures,” Mil. 
Technol .,   pp. 96–111, May 1986. 23. 
J. A. Adam and M. 
A. Fischetti, “Star Wars. SDI: The grand experiment,” IEEE Spectrum ,   vol. 
23, no. 9, pp. 34–46, September 1985. 
24. S. J. 
Roome, “Digital radio frequency memory,” Electronic & Communication Engineering  Journal , pp. 147–153, August 1990. 25. 
J. W. Goodman and M. 
Silvestri, “Some effects of Fourier Domain Phase Quantization,” IBM J.  Res. Develop ., pp. 
478–484, September 1970. 26. M. 
Greco, F. Gini, and A. Farina, “Combined effect of phase and RGPO delay quantization on  jamming signal spectrum,” Proc. 
of IEEE Int. Conf. on Radar , Radar 2005, Washington, DC  (USA), May 10–12, 2005, pp. 
37–42. 27. S. 
D. Berger, “Digital radio frequency memory linear gate stealer spectrum,” IEEE Trans .,   vol. AES–29, no. 
2, pp. 725–735, April 2003. ch24.indd   59 12/19/07   6:01:16 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Electronic Counter-Countermeasures. 24.60  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 24 28. 
G. V . Morris et al., “Principles of electronic counter-countermeasures,” short lecture notes,  Georgia Institute of Technology, 1999. 
29. L. B. 
Van Brunt, Applied ECM , vol. 2, Dunn Loring, V A: EW Engineering, Inc., 1982. 30. 
P. J. Gros, D. 
C. Sammons, and A. C. 
Cruce, “ECCM Advanced Radar Test Bed (E/ARTB)  systems definition,” IEEE Nat. Aerosp. Electron. 
Conf. NAECON 1986 , May 19–23, 1986,   pp. 251–257. 
31. M. A. 
Johnson and D. C. Stoner, “ECCM from the radar designer’s view point,” Microwave J .,  vol. 
21, pp. 59–63, March 1978. 32. 
H. E. Schrank, “Low sidelobes phased-array and reflectors antennas,” in Aspects of Modern  Radar , E. 
Brookner (ed.), Norwood, MA: Artech House, Inc., 1988. 33. W. 
T. Patton, “Low Sidelobe Antennas for Tactical Radars,” IEEE Int. Radar Conf. 
Rec .,   April 28–30, 1980, pp. 243–254. 34. 
A. Farina, Antenna Based Signal Processing Techniques for Radar Systems , Norwood, MA:  Artech House, Inc., 1992. 35. 
F. J. Harrys, “On the use of windows for harmonic analysis with the Discrete Fourier Transform,”  Proc. 
IEEE , vol. 66, pp. 51–83, January 1978. 
36. E. Brookner, “Trends in radar systems and technology to the year 2000 and beyond,” in Aspects  of Modern Radar , E. 
Brookner (ed.), Artech House, Inc., Norwood, MA, 1988. 37. E. 
Brookner, “Phased-array around the world. Progress and future trends,” IEEE Int. Symp. 
on  Phased-Array Systems and Technology 2003 , Boston (USA), October 14–17, 2003, pp. 1–8. 38. 
M. Cicolani, A. Farina, E. 
Giaccari, F. Madia, R. Ronconi, and S. 
Sabatini, “Some phased-array  systems and technologies in AMS,” IEEE Int. Symp. on Phased-Array Systems and Technology ,  Boston (USA), October 14–17, 2003, pp. 
23–30. 39. W. 
Kuhn, W. Sieprath, L. Timmoneri, and A. 
Farina, “Phased-array radar systems in support of the  Medium Extended Air Defense System (MEADS),” IEEE Int. Symp. on Phased-Array Systems  and Technology , Boston (USA), October 14–17, 2003, pp. 
94–100. 40. A. 
R. Moore, D. M. 
Salter, and W. K. Stafford, “MESAR (Multi-Function, Electronically Scanned,  Adaptive Radar),” Proc. 
of Int. Conf. Radar 97 , Edinburgh, October 14–16, 1997, Publication no. 
 449, London, UK: IEE, pp. 55–59. 41. 
D. Giuli, “Polarization diversity in radars,” Proc. IEEE , vol. 
74, pp. 245–269, February 1986. 42. 
L. Maisel, “Performance of sidelobe blanking systems,” IEEE Trans ., vol. AES–4, no. 
1,   pp. 174–180, March 1968. 43. 
P. O. Arancibia, “A sidelobe blanking system design and demonstration,” Microwave J ., vol. 
21,  pp. 69–73, March 1978; reprinted in Ref. 8, 1979. 
44. D. H. 
Harvey and T. L. Wood, “Designs for sidelobe blanking systems,” IEEE Int. 
Radar Conf.  Rec., April 1980, pp. 41–416. 
45. M. O’Sullivan, “A comparison of sidelobe blanking systems, IEE Int. 
Conf. Radar–87 , Conf.   Pub. 
281, London, UK, October 19–21, 1987, pp. 345–349. 46. 
A. Farina and F. Gini, “Calculation of blanking probability for the sidelobe blanking (SLB) for  two interference statistical models,” IEEE Signal Processing Letters , vol. 
5, no. 4, pp. 98–100,  April 1998. 
47. A. Farina and F. 
Gini, “Blanking probabilities for SLB system in correlated clutter plus thermal  noise,” IEEE Trans ., vol. SP–48, no. 5, pp. 
1481–1485, May 2000. 48. A. 
Farina and F. Gini, “Design of SLB systems in presence of correlated ground clutter,”   IEE Proc ., vol. 147, pt. 
F, no. 4, pp. 199–207, 2000. 
49. A. De Maio, A. 
Farina, and F. Gini, “Performance analysis of the sidelobe blanking system for  two fluctuating jammer models,” IEEE Trans ., vol. AES–41, no. 
3, pp. 1082–1090, July 2005. 50. 
D. A. Shnidman and S. 
S. Toumodge, “Sidelobe blanking with integration and target fluctuation,”  IEEE Trans ., vol. AES–38, no. 
3, pp. 1023–1037, July 2002.  51. 
P. W. Howells, “Intermediate Frequency Sidelobe Canceler,” U.S. 
Patent 3,202,990,   August 24, 1965. 52. S. 
P. Applebaum, P. W. 
Howells, and C. Kovarik, “Multiple Intermediate Frequency Side-Lobe  Canceler,” U.S. Patent 4,044,359, August 23, 1977. 
ch24.indd   60 12/21/07   10:52:12 AMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Electronic Counter-Countermeasures. 
 ELECTRONIC COUNTER-COUNTERMEASURES  24.616x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 24 53. R. A. 
Monzingo and T.W. Miller, Introduction to Adaptive Arrays , New York: John Wiley &   Sons, 1980. 54. 
J. Hudson, Adaptive Array Principles , London: Peter Peregrinus Ltd., 1981. 55. 
R. Nitzberg, Adaptive Signal Processing for Radar , Norwood, MA: Artech House, Inc., 1992. 56. 
H. D. Griffiths, “A four-element VHF adaptive array processor,” Proc. 
2 nd IEE Int. Conf.  on Antennas and Propagation , IEE Conf. 
Pub. no. 195, pt.1, York (UK), April 13–16, 1981,   pp. 
185–189. 57. A. 
Farina, “Digital equalisation in adaptive spatial filtering: a survey,” Signal Processing , Elsevier,  vol. 83, no. 1, pp. 
11–29, January 2003. 58. B. 
D. Carlson, L. M. 
Goodman, J. Austin, M. W. 
Ganz, and L. O. Upton, “An ultralow-sidelobe  adaptive array antenna,” The Lincoln Laboratory Journal , vol. 
3, no. 2, pp. 291–310, 1990. 
59. W. F. 
Gabriel, “Adaptive digital processing investigation of DFT sub-banding vs. transversal  filter canceler,” Naval Research Laboratory, NRL Report 8981, July 28, 1986, Washington,  DC (USA). 60. 
A. Farina and R. Sanzullo, “Performance limitations in adaptive spatial filtering,” Signal  Processing , Elsevier, vol. 
81, no.10, pp. 2155–2170, October 2001. 61. 
K. Gerlach, “The effects of IF bandpass mismatch errors on adaptive cancellation,” IEEE Trans .,  vol. AES–26, no. 
3, pp. 455–468, May 1990. 62. 
A. Farina, G. Golino, L. 
Timmoneri, and G. Tonelli, “Digital equalisation in adaptive spatial  filtering for radar systems: Application to live data acquired with a ground-based phased-array  radar,” Radar 2004 , Toulouse, France, October 19–21, 2004. 63. 
R. Fante, R. Davis, and T. 
Guella, “Wideband cancellation of multiple mainbeam jammers,”  IEEE Trans ., vol. AP–44, no. 10, pp. 
1402–1413, October 1996. 64. F. 
E. Churchill, G. W. 
Ogar, and B. J. Thompson, “The correction of I and Q errors in a coherent  processor,” IEEE Trans ., vol. 
AES–17, no. 1, pp. 131–137, January 1981. 
65. K. Gerlach, “The effect of I, Q mismatching errors on adaptive cancellation,” IEEE Trans .,   vol. 
AES–28, no. 7, pp. 729–740, July 1992. 
66. K. Gerlach and M. 
J. Steiner, “An adaptive matched filter that compensates for I, Q mismatch  errors,” IEEE Trans ., vol. SP–45, no. 
12, pp.3104–3107, December 1997. 67. A. 
Farina and L. Ortenzi, “Effect of ADC and receiver saturation on adaptive spatial filtering of  directional interference,” Signal Processing , Elsevier, vol. 83, no. 
5, pp. 1065–1078, 2003. 68. 
A. Farina, R. Sanzullo, and L. 
Timmoneri, “Performance limitations and remedies in adaptive  spatial filtering with timing errors,” Signal Processing , Elsevier, vol. 82, no. 2, pp. 
195–204,  February 2002. 69. D. 
R. Morgan and A. Aridgides, “Adaptive sidelobes cancellation of wide-band multipath   interference,” IEEE Trans ., vol. 
AP–33, no. 8, pp. 908–917, August 1985. 
70. R. L. 
Fante, “Cancellation of specular and diffuse jammer multipath using a hybrid adaptive  array,” IEEE Trans ., vol. AES–27, no. 10, pp. 
823–837, September 1991. 71. A. 
Farina and L. Timmoneri, “Cancellation of clutter and e.m. interference with STAP algorithms. 
 Application to live data acquired with a ground-based phased-array radar demonstrator,” Proc.   of 2004 IEEE Radar Conf ., Philadelphia (USA), April 26–29, 2004, pp. 486–491. 
72. A. Farina, L. 
Timmoneri, and R. Tosini, “Cascading SLB and SLC devices,” Signal Processing ,  Elsevier, vol. 45, no. 
2, pp. 261–266, 1995. 73. 
A. Farina and L. Timmoneri, “Systolic schemes for Joint SLB, SLC and adaptive phased-array,”  Proc. 
of Int. Conf. on Radar , Radar 2000, Washington, DC, USA, May 7–12, 2000, pp. 
602–607. 74. L. 
Timmoneri, I. K. Proudler, A. 
Farina, and J. G. McWhirter, “QRD-Based MVDR algorithm for  adaptive multipulse antenna array signal processing,” IEE Proc ., vol. 
141, pt. F, no. 2, pp. 
93–102,  April 1994. 75. P. 
Bollini, L. Chisci, A. Farina, M. 
Giannelli, L. Timmoneri, and G. Zappa, “QR versus IQR  algorithms for adaptive signal processing: performance evaluation for radar applications,”  IEE Proc ., vol. 
143, pt. F, no. 5, pp. 
328–340, October 1996. 76. A. 
Farina and L. Timmoneri, “Real time STAP techniques,” Electronics & Communications  Engineering Journal, Special Issue on STAP , vol. 11, no.1, pp. 
13–22, February 1999. ch24.indd   61 12/19/07   6:01:17 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. 
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Electronic Counter-Countermeasures. 24.62  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 24 77. P. 
Kapteijin, E. Deprettere, L. Timmoneri, and A. 
Farina, “Implementation of the recursive QR  algorithm on a 2*2 CORDIC test-board: a case study for radar application,” Proc. of the 25 th  European Microwave Conf ., Bologna (Italy), September 4–7, 1995, pp. 500–505. 
78. A. D’Acierno, M. 
Ceccarelli, A. Farina, A. Petrosino, and L. 
Timmoneri, “Mapping QR  decomposition on parallel computers: a study case for radar applications,” IEICE Trans. on  Communications , vol. E77–B, no. 
10, pp. 1264–1271, October 1994. 79. 
A. Farina and L. Timmoneri, “Parallel processing architectures for STAP,” in Applications of  Space-Time Adaptive Processing , R. 
Klemm (ed.), London, UK, IEE Radar, Sonar and Navigation  Series 14, 2004, pp. 265–302. 80. 
A. Farina, A. Averbouch, D. 
Gibor, L. Lescarini, S. Levit, S. 
Stefanini, and L. Timmoneri, “Multi- channel radar: Advanced implementation technology and experimental results,” Proc. of Int. 
 Radar Symp ., IRS2005, Berlin (Germany), September 6–8, 2005, pp. 317–329. 81. 
C. M. Rader, “Wafer scale integration of a large scale systolic array for adaptive nulling,” The  Lincoln Laboratory Journal , vol. 
4, no. 1, pp. 3–29, 1991. 
82. C. M. 
Rader, “VLSI systolic array for adaptive nulling,” IEEE Signal Processing Magazine ,   vol. 13, no. 4, pp. 
29–49, July 1996. 83. S. 
P. Applebaum, “Adaptive arrays,” Syracuse University Research Corporation Rept. SPL TR  66–1, 1966. 
This report is reproduced in IEEE Trans ., vol. AP–24, pp. 585–598, September 1976. 
84. L. E. 
Brennan and I. S. Reed, “Theory of adaptive radar,” IEEE Trans ., vol. 
AES-9, no. 1,   pp. 237–252, March 1973. 
85. B. Wardrop, “The role of digital processing in radar beamforming,” GEC J. 
Res ., vol. 3, no. 1,   pp. 
34–45, 1985. 86. P. 
Valentino, “Digital beamforming: new technology for tomorrow’s radars,” Def. Electron .,   pp. 102–107, October 1984. 
87. H. Steyskal, “Digital beamforming antennas: an introduction,” Microwave J ., pp. 
107–124,  January 1987. 88. B. 
Cantrell, J. de Graaf, L. Leibowitz, E. 
Willwerth, G. Meurer, C. Parris, and R. 
Stapleton,  “Development of a Digital Array Radar (DAR),” Proc. of  IEEE Radar Conf. 2001 , Atlanta  (Georgia), May 1–3, 2001 pp. 
157–162. 89. M. 
Zatman, “Digitization requirements for digital radar arrays,” IEEE Radar Conf. 2001 , Atlanta  (Georgia), May 1–3, 2001, pp. 163–168. 
90. I. S. 
Reed, “A brief history of adaptive arrays,” Subdury/Wayland Lecture Series , Raytheon   Div. Education, notes 23, October 1985. 91. 
D. Etter, A. Steinhardt, and S. 
Stoner, “Least squares adaptive processing in military applica - tions,” IEEE Signal Processing Magazine , vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 
66–73, May 2002. On occasion  of the 2001 B. Franklin Medal awarded to B. 
Widrow for pioneering work on adaptive signal  processing. 92. S. 
Haykin and A. Steinhardt, Adaptive Radar Detection and Estimation , New York: John Wiley  & Sons, Inc., 1992. 93. 
S. T. Smith, “Adaptive Radar,” in Wiley Encyclopedia of Electrical and Electronic Engineering ,  J. 
G. Webster (ed.), vol. 1, New York: Wiley, 1999 (updated 13 July 2007), pp. 
263–289. 94. A. 
Farina, C. H. Gierull, F. 
Gini, and U. Nickel (eds.), Special Issue “New trends and find - ings in antenna array processing,” Signal Processing , Elsevier, vol. 84, no. 
9, pp. 1477–1688,  September 2004. 95. 
J. Ward, “Space-time adaptive processing for airborne radar,” MIT Lincoln Laboratory Technical  Report TR–1015, December 13, 1994. 96. 
R. Klemm, Principles of Space-Time Adaptive Processing , 3rd Ed., London, UK: IET Radar,  Sonar and Navigation Series 21, 2006. 97. 
R. Klemm (ed.), Applications of Space-Time Adaptive Processing , London, UK: IEE Radar, Sonar  and Navigation, Series 14, 2004. 98. 
J. R. Guerci, Space-Time Adaptive Processing for Radar , Norwood, MA: Artech House, Inc., 2003. 
99. B. Testa and V . 
Vannicola, “The physical significance of the eigenvalues in adaptive arrays,”  Digital Signal Processing , vol. 15, pp. 91–96, 1995. 
ch24.indd   62 12/19/07   6:01:17 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Electronic Counter-Countermeasures. 
 ELECTRONIC COUNTER-COUNTERMEASURES  24.636x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 24 100. B. D. 
Carlson, “Covariance matrix estimation errors and diagonal loading in adaptive arrays,”  IEEE Trans ., vol. AES–24, no. 3, pp. 
397–401, July 1988. 101. A. 
Farina, P. Langsford, G. C. 
Sarno, L. Timmoneri, and R. Tosini, “ECCM techniques for  a rotating, multifunction, phased-array radar,” Proc. 
of the 25 th European Microwave Conf ,  Bologna (Italy), September 4–7, 1995, pp. 490–495. 102. 
W. D. Wirth, Radar Techniques Using Array Antennas , London, UK: IEE Radar, Sonar,  Navigation and Avionics, Series 10, 2001. 
 103. J. B. 
Hoffman and B. L. Gabelach, “Four-channel monopulse for main beam nulling and track - ing,” Proc. 
of IEEE National Radar Conf. NATRAD ’97 , Syracuse, New York, May 13–15, 1997,  pp. 94–98. 
104. A. Farina, P. 
Lombardo, and L. Ortenzi, “A unified approach to adaptive radar processing  with general antenna array configuration,” Special Issue on “New trends and findings in  antenna array processing for radar,” Signal Processing , Elsevier, vol. 84, no. 
9, pp. 1593–1623,  September 2004. 105. 
R. C. Davis, L. 
E. Brennan, and I. S. 
Reed, “Angle estimation with adaptive arrays in external  noise field,” IEEE Trans ., vol. AES–12, no. 2 pp. 
179–186, March 1976. 106. P. 
Langsford A. Farina, L. Timmoneri, and R. 
Tosini, “Monopulse direction finding in pres - ence of adaptive nulling,” presented at IEE Colloquium on Advances in Adaptive Beamforming,  Romsey, UK, June 13, 1995. 107. F. 
C. Lin and F. F. 
Kretschmer, “Angle measurement in the presence of mainbeam interference,”  Proc. of IEEE 1990 Int. Radar Conf ., Arlington (V A), USA, May 7–10, 1990, pp. 
444–450. 108. U. 
Nickel, “Monopulse estimation with adaptive arrays.” IEE Proc ., vol. 130, pt. F, no. 
5,   pp. 303–308, October 1993. 109. 
M. Valeri, S. Barbarossa, A. 
Farina, and L. Timmoneri, “Monopulse estimation of target DoA  in external fields with adaptive arrays,” IEEE Symp. of Phased-Array Systems and Technology ,  Boston (MA), USA, October 15–18, 1996, pp. 
386–390. 110. U. 
Nickel, “Performance of corrected adaptive monopulse estimation,” IEE Proc ., vol. 146,   pt. F, no. 
1, pp. 17–24, February 1999. 111. 
J. Worms, “Monopulse estimation and SLC configurations,” Proc. of IEEE Radar Conf . 
1998,  Dallas, TX, May 11–14, 1998, pp. 56–61. 112. 
U. Nickel, “Overview of generalized monopulse estimation,” IEEE AES Magazine , vol. 21,   no. 
6, part 2 of 2, pp. 27–56, June 2006. 113. 
A. Farina, G. Golino, and L. 
Timmoneri, “Maximum likelihood estimator approach for the esti - mation of target angular coordinates in presence of main beam interference: Application to live  data acquired with a ground-based phased-array radar,” Proc. of IEEE 2005 Int. Radar Conf .,  Alexandria (V A), USA, May 9–12, 2005, pp. 
61–66. 114. A. 
Farina, G. Golino, and L. Timmoneri, “Maximum likelihood estimate of target angular  coordinates under main beam interference: Application to recorded live data,” in Advances in  Direction-of-Arrival Estimation , S. 
Chandran (ed.), Norwood, MA: Artech House, Inc., 2006,  pp. 285–303. 115. 
J. Robey, D. Fuhrmann, E. 
Kelly, and R. Nitzberg, “A CFAR adaptive matched filter detector,”  IEEE Trans ., vol. AES–28, no. 
1, pp. 208–216, January 1982. 116. 
A. Farina, G. Golino, and L. 
Timmoneri, “Comparison between LS and TLS in adaptive process - ing for radar systems,” Proc. of IEE , vol. 150, pt. 
F, no. 1, pp. 2–6, February 2003. 
117. A. Farina and L. 
Timmoneri, “Cancellation of clutter and e.m. interference with STAP algorithm.  Application to live data acquired with a ground-based phased array radar,” Proc. 
of IEEE 2004  Radar Conf ., Philadelphia (USA), April 26–29, 2004, pp. 486–491. 118. 
A. Farina, G. Golino, S. 
Immediata, L. Ortenzi, and L. Timmoneri, “Techniques to design sub- arrays for radar phased-array antennas,” IEE Int. 
Conf. on Antennas and Propagation  (ICAP )  2003 , March 31– April 3, 2003, pp. 17–23. 
119. U. Nickel, “Sub-array configurations for digital beamforming with low sidelobes and adap - tive interferences suppression,” Proc. 
IEEE 1995 Int. Radar Conf ., Alexandria (VA), USA,  May 8–11, 1995, pp. 714–719. 
ch24.indd   63 12/19/07   6:01:18 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Electronic Counter-Countermeasures. 
24.64  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 24 120. U. Nickel, “Monopulse estimation with sub-array output adaptive beam forming and low side  lobe sum and difference beams,” IEEE Symp. 
on Phased-Array Systems and Technology , Boston  (MA), USA, October 15–18, 1996, pp. 283–288. 121. 
E. Brookner and J. M. 
Howells, “Adaptive-Adaptive Array Processing,” IEE Int. Conf. Radar–87 ,  Conf. 
Pub. 281, London, October 19–21, 1987, pp. 257–263. 
122. L. W. 
Dicken, “The use of null steering in suppressing main beam interference,” IEE Int. Conf.  Radar–77 , Conf. 
Pub. 155, London, October 25–28, 1977, pp. 226–231. 
123. W. F. 
Gabriel, “Spectral analysis and adaptive array superresolution techniques,” Proc. IEEE ,  vol. 68, pp. 
654–666, June 1980. 124. U. 
Nickel, “Fast subspace methods for radar applications,” in Advanced Signal Processing:  Algorithms, Architectures and Implementation VII , F. T. Luk (ed.), SPIE Proc. 
Series vol. 3162  (Conf. Rec. 
SPIE San Diego 1997), pp. 438–448. 125. 
U. Nickel, “Aspects of implementing superresolution methods into phased array radar,” Int.  Journal Electronics and Communications  (AEÜ), vol. 
53, no. 6, pp. 315–323, 1999. 
126. U. Nickel, “Spotlight MUSIC: Superresolution with sub-arrays with low calibration effort,” IEE  Proc ., vol. 
149, pt. F, no. 4, pp. 
166–173, August 2002. 127. U. 
Nickel, “Superresolution and jammer suppression with broadband arrays for multi-function  radar,” Chapter 16 in Applications of Space-Time Adaptive Processing , R. Klemm (ed.), London:  IEE, 2004, pp. 543–599. 
128. H. Lee, “Eigenvalues and eigenvectors of covariance matrices for signal closely spaced in  frequency,” IEEE Trans ., vol. 
SP–40, no. 10, pp. 2518–2535, October 1992. 
129. Special Issue on Superresolution, The Lincoln Laboratory Journal , vol. 10, no. 
2, pp. 83–222. 130. 
S. T. Smith, “Statistical resolution limits and complexified Cramer-Rao bound,” IEEE Trans .,  vol. 
SP–53, no. 5, pp. 1597–1609, May 2005. 
131. D. K. 
Barton, Radar , vol. 6, Frequency Agility and Diversity , Norwood, MA: Artech House,  Inc., 1977. 132. 
B. Bergkvist, “Jamming frequency agile radars,” Def. Electron ., vol. 
12, pp. 75.78–81.83,  January 1980. 133. 
S. Strappaveccia, “Spatial jammer suppression by means of an automatic frequency selection  device,” IEE Int. Conf. 
Radar–87 , Conf. Pub. 281, London, October19–21, 1987, pp. 
582–587. 134. C. 
H. Gager, “The impact of waveform bandwidth upon tactical radar design,” IEE Int. Conf. 
 Radar-82 , London, October 18–20, 1982, pp. 278–282. 135. 
M. I. Skolnik, G. 
Linde, and K. Meads, “Senrad: An advanced wideband air surveillance radar,”  IEEE Trans ., vol. AES–37, no. 
4, pp. 1163–1175, October 2001. 136. 
B. L. Lewis, F. 
F. Kretschmer, and W. W. 
Shelton, Aspects of Radar Signal Processing , Norwood,  MA: Artech House, Inc., 1986. 137. N. 
Levanon and E. Mozeson, Radar Signals , New York: John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 2004. 138. 
G. Petrocchi, S. Rampazzo, and G. 
Rodriguez, “Anticlutter and ECCM design criteria for a low  coverage radar,” Proc. Int. Conf. 
Radar , Paris, France, December 4–8, 1978, pp. 194–200. 139. 
V . G. Hansen and A. 
J. Zottl, “The detection performance of the Siebert and Dicke-Fix CFAR  detectors,” IEEE Trans ., vol. AES–7, pp. 
706–709, July 1971. 140. S. 
L. Johnston, “Radar electronic counter-countermeasures against chaff,” Proc. Int. 
Conf.  Radar , Paris, France, May 1984, pp. 517–522. 
141. M. I. 
Skolnik, Introduction to Radar Systems , 3rd Ed., New York: McGraw-Hill, 2001. 142. A. 
Farina and F. A. Studer, “A review of CFAR detection techniques in radar systems,”  Microwave Journal , pp. 
115–128, September 1986. 143. E. 
Conte and A. De Maio, “Mitigation techniques for non-gaussian sea clutter,” IEEE Journal of  Oceanic Engineering , vol. 29, no. 
2, pp. 284–302, April 2004. 144. 
E. Conte, A. De Maio, A Farina, and G. 
Foglia, “CFAR behavior of adaptive detectors: an  experimental analysis,” IEEE Trans ., vol. AES–41, no. 1, pp. 
233–251, January 2005. 145. M. 
C. Wicks, W. J. 
Baldygo, and R. D. Brown, “Expert System Application to Constant False  Alarm Rate (CFAR) Processor,” U.S. 
Patent 5, 499, 030, March 12, 1996. ch24.indd   64 12/19/07   6:01:18 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. 
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Electronic Counter-Countermeasures.  ELECTRONIC COUNTER-COUNTERMEASURES  24.656x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 24 146. A. 
Farina (ed.), Optimised Radar Processors , London: Peter Peregrinus, Ltd., 1987. 147. E. 
Fong, J. A. Walker, and W. 
G. Bath, “Moving target indication in the presence of radio fre - quency interference,” Proc. IEEE 1985 Int. 
Radar Conf ., Arlington (VA), USA, May 6–9, 1985,  pp. 292–296. 148. 
L. B.Van Brunt, “Pulse-compression radar: ECM and ECCM,” Def. Electron ., vol. 
16,   pp. 170–185, October 1984. 149. 
H. Kushel, “VHF/UHF. Part 1: characteristics,” Electronics & Communications Engineering  Journal , vol. 
14, no. 2, pp. 61–72, April 2002. 
150. R. J. 
Galejs, “V olume surveillance radar frequency selection,” Proc. of IEEE 2000 Int. Radar  Conf ., Alexandria (V A), USA, May 7–12, 2000, pp. 
187–192. 151. H. 
Kushel, “VHF/UHF. Part 2: operational aspects and applications,” Electronics &  Communications Engineering Journal , vol. 14, no. 
3, pp. 101–111, June 2002. 152. 
W. N. Dawber and N. 
M. Harwood, “Comparison of doppler clutter cancellation techniques for  naval multi-function radars,” IEE Int. Conf. 
Radar 2002 , Conf. Pub. No. 
490, Edinburgh, UK,  15-17 October 2002, pp. 424-428. 153. 
A. I. Leonov and K. 
J. Fomichev, Monopulse Radar , Norwood, MA: Artech House, Inc., 1987. 154. 
S. L. Johnston, “Tracking radar electronic counter-countermeasures against inverse gain jam - mers,” IEE Int. 
Conf. Radar–82 , Conf. Pub. 
216, London, October 1982, pp. 444–447. 155. 
B. L. Lewis and D. 
H. Howard, “Security Device,” U.S. Patent, 4, 006, 478, February 1, 1977,  filed August 15, 1958. 
156. R. L. 
Fante and J. A. Torres, “Cancellation of diffuse jammer multipath by an airborne adaptive  radar,” IEEE Trans ., vol. 
AES–31, no. 2, pp. 805–820, April 1995. 
157. S. Kogon, “Algorithms for mitigating terrain-scattered interference,” Electronics &  Communications Engineering Journal , vol. 
11, no. 1, pp. 49–56, February 1999. 
158. S. Bjorklund and A. 
Nelander, “Theoretical aspects on a method for terrain scattered inter - ference mitigation in radar,” Proc. of IEEE 2000 Int. Radar Conf ., Alexandria (VA), USA,  May 9–12, 2005, pp. 
663–668. 159. Y . 
Abramovich, S. J. Anderson, and A. 
Y . Gorokov, “Stochastically constrained spatial and  spatio-temporal adaptive processing for non-stationary hot clutter cancellation,” Chapter 17 in  Applications of Space-Time Adaptive Processing , R. Klemm (ed.), London: IEE Radar, Sonar  and Navigation, Series 14, 2004, pp. 
603–697. 160. W. 
D. Blair, G. A. 
Watson, T. Kirubarajan, and Y . Bar-Shalom, “Benchmark for radar allocation  and tracking in ECM,” IEEE Trans ., vol. 
AES–34, no.4, pp.1097–1114, 1998. 161. T. 
Kirubarajan, Y . Bar-Shalom, W. D. 
Blair, and G. A. Watson, “IMMPDAF for radar management  and tracking benchmark with ECM,” IEEE Trans ., vol. 
AES–34, no.4, pp.1115–1134, 1998. 162. H. 
Blom and Y . Bar-Shalom, “The interacting multiple model algorithm for systems with  Markovian switching coefficients,” IEEE Trans ., vol. AC–33, no. 
8, pp. 780–783, August 1988. 163. 
A. Moreira, “Improved multilook techniques applied to SAR and SCANSAR imagery,” IEEE  Trans. on Geoscience and Remote Sensing , vol. 
29, no. 4, pp. 529–534, July 1991. 
164. W. Goj, Synthetic Aperture Radar and Electronic Warfare , Dedham, MA: Artech House, Inc., 1989. 
165. C. J. 
Condley, “The potential vulnerability to increased background noise of synthetic aper - ture radar in the maritime environment,” IEE Colloquium on Synthetic Aperture Radar ,  November 29, 1989, pp. 10/1–10/5. 166. 
C. J. Condley, “Some system considerations for electronic countermeasures to synthetic aperture  radar,” IEE Colloquium on Electronic Warfare Systems , January 14, 1991, pp. 
8/1–8/7. 167. M. 
Soumekh, “SAR-ECCM using phased-perturbed LFM chirp signals and DRFM repeat  jammer penalizer,” IEEE Trans ., vol. AES–42, no. 1, pp. 
191–205, January 2006. 168. P. 
Hyberg, “Assessment of modern coherent jamming methods against synthetic aperture radar  (SAR),” Proc. of EUSAR ’98 , European Conf. on Synthetic Aperture Radar , Friedrichshafen,  Germany, May 25–27, 1998, pp. 
391–394. 169. C. 
Boesswetter, “ECCM effectiveness of a low sidelobe antenna for SAR ground mapping,”  AGARD A VP Symp. “ Multifunction Radar for Airborne Application s,” Toulouse, 1985. ch24.indd   65 12/19/07   6:01:19 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Electronic Counter-Countermeasures. 24.66  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 24 170. 
A. Farina and P. Lombardo, “SAR ECCM using adaptive antennas,” Proc. 
of IEEE Long Island  Section, Adaptive Antenna Systems Symp ., Long Island, USA, November 1994, pp. 79–84. 171. 
J. H. Ender, “Anti-jamming adaptive filtering for SAR imaging,” Proc. 
of IRS ’98 , Int. Radar  Symp ., Munich, Germany, September 15–17, 1998, pp. 1403–1413. 
172. J. A. 
Torres, R. M. Davis, J. 
D. R. Kramer, and R. 
L. Fante, “Efficient wideband jammer  nulling when using stretch processing,” IEEE Trans ., vol. AES–36, no. 
4, pp. 1167–1178,  October 2000. 173. 
L. Rosenberg and D. Gray, “Anti-jamming techniques for multi-channel SAR imaging,”   IEE Proc ., pt. 
F, vol. 133, no. 3, pp. 
234–242, June 2006. 174. P. 
E. Pace, D. J. 
Fouts, S. Ekestrom, and C. Karow, “Digital false target image synthesizer for  countering ISAR,” IEE Proc ., pt. 
F, vol. 149, no. 5, pp. 
248–257, October 2002. 175. P. 
E. Pace, D. J. 
Fouts, and D. P. Zulaica, “Digital image synthesizer: Are enemy sensors really  seeing what’s there?,” IEEE Aerospace and Electronic Systems Magazine , vol. 
24, no. 2, pp. 3–7,  February 2006. 
176. L. Sevgi, A. 
Ponsford, and H. C. Chan, “An integrated maritime surveillance system based on  high-frequency surface-wave radars, part 1: Theoretical background and numerical simulations,”  IEEE Antennas and Propagation Magazine , vol. 
43, no. 5, pp. 28–43, October 2001. 
177. A. Ponsford, L. 
Sevgi, and H. C. Chan, “An integrated maritime surveillance system based on  high-frequency surface-wave radars, part 2: Operational status and system performance,” IEEE  Antennas and Propagation Magazine , vol. 
43, no. 5, pp. 52–63, October 2001. 
178. G. A. 
Fabrizio, “Space-time characterization and adaptive processing of ionospherically-propa - gated HF signals,” Ph.D. dissertation, Adelaide University, Australia, July 2000. 179. 
G. A. Fabrizio, D. 
A. Gray, and M. D. 
Turley, “Experimental evaluation of adaptive beamforming  methods and interference models for high frequency over-the-horizon radar,” Multidimensional  Systems and Signal Processing – Special Issue on Radar Signal Processing Techniques , vol.14,  no. 1/2/3, pp. 241–263, January–July 2003. 
180. G. A. 
Fabrizio, Y. I. Abramovich, S. 
J. Anderson, D. A. 
Gray, and M. D. Turley, “Adaptive  cancellation of nonstationary interference in HF antenna arrays,” IEE Proc ., vol. 
145, pt. F,   no. 1, pp. 
19–24, February 1998. 181. Y . 
I. Abramovich, A. Y . 
Gorokhov, V . N. Mikhaylyukov, and I. 
P. Malyavin, “Exterior noise  adaptive rejection for OTH radar implementations,” IEEE Int. Conf. 
on Acoustics, Speech, and  Signal Processing 1994, ICASSP’94 , Adelaide (Australia), 1994, pp. 105–107. 182. 
S. J. Anderson, Y . 
I. Abramovich, and G. A. 
Fabrizio, “Stochastic constraints in non stationary  hot clutter cancellation,” IEEE Int. Conf. on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing 1997,  ICASSP–97 , Munich, Germany, vol. 
5, pp. 21–24, April 1997, vol. 5, pp. 
3753 – 3756. 183. Y . 
I. Abramovich, N. Spencer, and S. 
J. Anderson, “Stochastic constraints method in non station - ary hot clutter cancellation–part 1: Fundamentals and supervised training applications,” IEEE  Trans ., AES–34, no. 4, pp. 
1271–1292, 1998. 184. Y . 
I. Abramovich, N. Spencer, and S. 
J. Anderson, “Stochastic constraints method in non   stationary hot clutter cancellation–part 2: Unsupervised training applications,” IEEE Trans .,   vol. AES–36, no. 
1, pp. 132–150, 2000. 185. 
G. A. Fabrizio, A. 
B. Gershman, and M. D. 
Turley, “Robust adaptive beamforming for HF  surface wave over-the-horizon,” IEEE Trans ., vol. AES–40, no. 2, pp. 
510–525, April 2004. 186. G. 
A. Fabrizio, A. Farina, and M. 
D. Turley, “Spatial adaptive subspace detection in OTH radar,”  IEEE Trans ., vol. AES–39, no. 
4, pp. 1407–1428, October 2003. 187. 
A. Farina, G. A. 
Fabrizio, W. L. Melvin, and L. 
Timmoneri, “Multichannel array processing in  radar: State of the art, hot topics and way ahead,” Proc. Sensor Array and Multichannel Signal  Processing IEEE Workshop  (invited paper), Sitges, Spain, July 18–21, 2004, pp. 11–19. 
188. G. A. 
Fabrizio, G. J. Frazer, and M. 
D. Turley, “STAP for Clutter and Interference Cancellation  in a HF Radar System,” IEEE Int. Conf. 
on Acoustics , Speech, and Signal Processing 2006 ,  ICASSP 2006, Toulouse, France, May 2006. 189. D. 
K. Barton, Radar System Analysis and Modeling , Norwood, MA: Artech House, Inc., 2005. ch24.indd   66 12/19/07   6:01:19 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Electronic Counter-Countermeasures.  ELECTRONIC COUNTER-COUNTERMEASURES  24.676x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 24 190. 
S. L. Johnston, “The ECCM improvement factor (EIF): illustration examples, applications, and  considerations in its utilization in radar ECCM performance assessment,” Int. 
Conf. Radar ,  Nanjing (China), November 4–7, 1986, pp. 149–154. 
191. J. Clarke and A. 
R. Subramanian, “A game theory approach to radar ECCM evaluation,” Proc.  of IEEE 1985 Int. 
Radar Conf. , Arlington (V A), USA, May 6–9, 1985, pp. 197–203. 
192. L. Nengjing, “Formulas for measuring radar ECCM capability,” IEE Proc ., vol. 
131, pt. F,   pp. 417–423, July 1984. 
193. L. Nengjing, “ECCM efficacy assessment in surveillance radar analysis and simulation,” IRS  ’98, Int. 
Radar Symp ., Munich, Germany, September 15–17, 1998, pp. 1415–1419. 194. 
D. H. Cook, “ECM/ECCM systems simulation program, electronic and aerospace systems  record,” IEEE Conv. 
Rec. EASCON ’68 , September 9–11, 1968, pp. 181–186. 
195. S. Watts, H. 
D. Griffiths, J. R. 
Hollaway, A. M. Kinghorn, D. 
G. Money, D. J. 
Price, A. M.  Whitehead, A. 
R. Moore, M. A. 
Wood, and D. J. Bannister, “The specification and measure - ment of radar performance,” IEE Int. 
Conf. Radar 2002 , Conf. Pub. 
no. 490, Edinburgh, UK,  October 15–17, 2002, pp. 542–546. 
196. F. A. 
Studer, M. Toma, and F. Vinelli, “Modern software tools for radar performance assessment,”  Proc. 
of IRS ’98 , Int. Radar Symp ., Munich, Germany, September 15–17, 1998, pp. 1079–1090. 
 197. A. G. 
Huizing and A. Theil, CARPET 2.11 Software  + User Manual , The Hague, The Netherlands:  TNO Defense, Security and Safety, 2004. ch24.indd   67 12/19/07   6:01:19 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Electronic Counter-Countermeasures. 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 24   blind folio 24.68 ch24.indd   68 12/19/07   6:01:20 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Electronic Counter-Countermeasures. 