4.16x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 4 Pulse Doppler Radar* John P . Stralka   William G. 
Fedarko Northrop Grumman Corporation 4.1 CHARACTERISTICS AND APPLICATIONS The primary benefit of pulse doppler radar is its ability to detect small-amplitude mov - ing target returns against an overwhelmingly large-amplitude clutter background. Nomenclature.  Radars that rely on the doppler effect to enhance target detec - tion are called doppler radars .1 The doppler effect manifests itself when there is   a relative range rate, or radial velocity, between the radar and the target. 
When the  radar’s transmit signal is reflected from such a target, the carrier frequency of the  return signal will be shifted. Assuming a monostatic radar (i.e., collocated transmit - ter and receiver), the roundtrip distance is twice the distance between the transmitter  and the target. The doppler frequency shift fd is a function of the carrier wavelength  l and the relative radial velocity (range rate) between the radar and the target Vrelative ,  and is written as fd = −2Vrelative /l, where l = c/f is the wavelength, c is the speed of  light, and f is the carrier frequency. 
When the target is moving away from the radar,  the relative radial velocity, or range rate, is defined to be positive and results in a  negative doppler shift. Doppler radars can be either continuous wave (CW)† or pulsed radars. CW radars  simply observe the doppler shift between the carrier frequency of the return signal  relative to the transmit signal. 
Pulsed systems measure doppler by using a coherent  train of pulses where there is a fixed or deterministic phase relationship of the carrier  frequency between each successive radio frequency (RF) pulse. Coherence concen - trates the energy in the frequency spectrum of the pulse train around distinct spectral  lines, separated by the pulse repetition frequency (PRF). This separation into spectral  lines allows for discrimination of doppler shifts. 
Doppler radars using pulsed transmissions are more complex than CW radars, but  they offer significant advantages. Most important is the time gating of the receiver. Chapter 4 *  David H. 
Mooney and William A. Skillman wrote this chapter for the first edition (1970). William H. 
Long  joined the authors for the second edition (1990). John P. Stralka and William G. 
Fedarko updated the material  for this edition. †  To assist the reader, abbreviations used throughout this chapter are defined in a list at the end of the chapter. ch04.indd   1 12/20/07   4:51:48 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Source: RADAR HANDBOOK. 4.2 RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 4 Time gating allows the blanking of direct transmitter leakage into the receiver. 
This  permits the use of a single antenna for transmit and receive, which otherwise would  not be feasible for CW radar due to excessive transmit/receive isolation requirements.  Pulsed radars can also use range gating, a specific form of time gating, which divides  the interpulse period into cells or range gates . The duration of each cell is typically  less than or equal to the inverse of the transmit pulse bandwidth. 
Range gating helps  eliminate excess receiver noise from competing with target returns and allows range  measurement with pulse delay ranging (i.e., measuring the time between transmission  of a pulse and reception of the target echo). Pulsed transmission doppler radars have historically been categorized as moving  target indication  (MTI)  or pulse doppler . MTI typically eliminates clutter by passing  the received returns from multiple coherent pulses through a filter with a stopband  placed in spectral regions of heavy clutter concentrations. 
Moving targets with dop - pler frequencies outside the stopband are passed onto detection processing. Pulse  doppler radars, on the other hand, resolve and enhance targets within a particular  doppler band while rejecting clutter and other returns outside the doppler band of  interest. This is typically accomplished with a contiguous bank of doppler filters  formed between two of the coherent pulse train’s spectral lines, one of which is the  central line. 
Range gating precedes the doppler filter bank. The bandwidth of each  doppler filter is inversely proportional to the duration of the coherent pulse train that  is processed to form the doppler filter bank. This process forms a matched filter to  the entire pulse train.2,3 MTI and pulse doppler radars share the following characteristics: ● Coherent transmission and reception; that is, each transmitted pulse and the receiver  local oscillator are synchronized to a free-running, highly stable oscillator . 
● Coherent processing to reject main-beam clutter, enhance target detection, and aid  in target discrimination or classification. MTI radars can also be implemented using a doppler filter bank, blurring the historic  delineation between MTI and pulse doppler radars. As a result, this book will define  MTI radars as those radars whose PRF is sufficiently low enough to provide an unam - biguous range measurement, via pulse delay ranging, over the radar’s instrumented  range. 
The unambiguous range Ru is given by c/(2fR), where c is the speed of light  and fR is the PRF. Radars with PRFs that result in range ambiguities within the range  coverage of interest will be referred to as pulse doppler radars and will be the focus  of this chapter. Applications. 
 Pulse doppler is applied principally to radar systems requiring  the detection of moving targets in a severe clutter environment. Table 4.1 lists typi - cal applications and requirements.4–12 This chapter will deal principally with airborne  applications, although the basic principles can also be applied to the surface-based  case. Only monostatic radars will be considered. 
PRFs.  Pulsed radars that employ doppler are divided into three broad PRF cat - egories: low, medium, and high. A low-PRF radar is one in which the ranges of interest  are unambiguous while the radial velocities (doppler frequencies) are usually highly  ambiguous. 
As discussed previously, this type of radar is called moving target indica - tion (MTI) . MTI radars are generally not categorized as pulse doppler radars, although  the principles of operation are similar.13 ch04.indd   2 12/20/07   4:51:48 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. 
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Pulse Doppler Radar.  PULSE DOPPLER RADAR  4.36x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 4 The converse of a low-PRF radar is a high-PRF radar that can measure doppler  unambiguously over the span of radial velocities of interest, but is usually highly  ambiguous in range. A medium-PRF radar has both range and doppler ambigui - ties.14–17 A blend of medium and high PRF, known as high-medium PRF (which will  be discussed later), is characterized as having only a single-ambiguity for the radial  velocities of interest. 
For this chapter, a pulse doppler radar is characterized as having  a PRF anywhere within the medium to high PRF regime that results in ambiguous  range measurements during a coherent processing interval. A comparison of MTI and pulse doppler radars is shown in Table 4.2. Previously  undefined terms will be defined throughout the chapter. 
The table assumes an airborne  radar application designed to detect other aircraft. Such an application is commonly  referred to as air-to-air .Radar Application Requirements Airborne or spaceborne surveillance Long detection range; accurate range data Airborne interceptor or fire control Medium detection range; accurate range, velocity, and  angle data Ground-based surveillance Medium detection range; accurate range data Battlefield surveillance   (slow-moving target detection)Medium detection range; accurate range, velocity data Missile seeker Short detection range; accurate velocity and angle rate data;  may not need true range information Surface-based weapon control Short range; accurate range, velocity data Meteorological Good velocity resolution Missile warning Short detection range; very low false-alarm rateTABLE 4.1  Pulse-Doppler Applications and Requirements TABLE 4.2  Comparison of MTI and Pulse Doppler Radars for Air-to-Air Advantages Disadvantages Low PRF MTI range unambiguous doppler ambiguousCan sort clutter from targets on basis  of range. Front-end sensitivity time  control (STC) suppresses sidelobe  detections at short ranges and reduces  dynamic range requirements.Multiple blind speeds. 
Usually  does not measure radial target  velocity. Poor ground-moving  target rejection. Medium PRF Pulse Doppler range ambiguous doppler ambiguousPerformance at all target aspects. 
 Good ground-moving target rejection.  Measures radial velocity. Less range  eclipsing than in high-PRF.Sidelobe clutter can limit  performance. 
Ambiguity  resolution required. Low antenna  sidelobes necessary. Rejection  of sidelobe returns of discrete  ground targets needed. 
High PRF Pulse Doppler range ambiguous doppler unambiguousAllows thermal noise-limited  detection of targets with high radial  velocities. Single doppler blind  zone at zero velocity. Good ground- moving target rejection. 
Measures  radial velocity.Limited low radial velocity target  detection. Range eclipsing. Large  number of range ambiguities  preclude pulse delay ranging. 
 High stability requirements due  to range folding. ch04.indd   3 12/20/07   4:51:49 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. 
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Pulse Doppler Radar. 4.4 RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 4 Table 4.3 provides the span of PRFs and corresponding transmit duty cycles  (ratio  of transmit pulse width to interpulse period) for the various pulse doppler waveforms  used in a X-band airborne fire-control radar. Keep in mind that the operating frequency  of the radar, along with its required range and radial velocity coverage, determines  whether a PRF is considered medium, high-medium, or high. 
Also, modern multi - function radars are typically capable of utilizing waveforms from the various PRF  categories in order to carry out their diverse missions. Pulse Doppler Spectrum.  The transmitted spectrum of a pulse doppler radar con - sists of discrete lines at the carrier frequency f0 and at sideband frequencies f0 ± ifR, where  fR is the PRF and i is an integer. 
The envelope of the spectrum is determined by the pulse  shape. For the rectangular pulses usually employed, a sin( x)/x spectrum is obtained. Using a constant-velocity airborne radar, the received spectrum from a stationary  target has lines that are doppler-shifted proportionally to the radial velocity between the  radar platform and the target. 
The two-way doppler shift is given by fd = (2VR/l)cos(y0),  where l is the radar wavelength, VR is the radar platform speed, and y0 is the angle  between the velocity vector and the line of sight to the target. (Note that the relative  radial velocity (range rate) to the stationary target is Vrelative  = −VR cos(y0), which makes  the later equation for doppler shift consistent with the one presented at the beginning  of the chapter.) Illustrated in Figure 4.1 is the received pulsed spectrum with returns  from distributed clutter, such as the ground or weather, and from discrete targets, such  as aircraft, automobiles, tanks, etc. Figure 4.2 shows the unfolded spectrum (i.e., no spectral foldover from adjacent  PRF lines) in the case of horizontal motion of the radar platform, with a speed VR. 
 The clutter-free region is defined as that portion of the spectrum in which no ground  clutter can exist. (A clutter-free region usually does not exist with medium PRFs  due to doppler folding.) The sidelobe clutter region, 4 VR/l in width, contains ground  clutter power from the sidelobes of the antenna, although this clutter power may be  below the noise level in part of the region. The main-beam clutter region, located at  f0 + (2VR/l)cos(y0), contains the strong return from the main beam of the antenna TABLE 4.3  Typical Values for an X-band (10 GHz) Airborne Fire-Control Radar Pulse Doppler Waveform PRF Transmit Duty Cycle Medium PRF   10 −40 kHz  5−10% High-medium PRF  60−100 kHz 10−20% High PRF 120−300 kHz 15−50% FIGURE 4.1  Clutter and target frequency spectrum from a horizontally moving platform ch04.indd   4 12/20/07   4:51:52 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Pulse Doppler Radar.  PULSE DOPPLER RADAR  4.56x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 4 striking the ground at a scan angle of y0, measured from the velocity vector. 
Rain and  chaff clutter may also be large when the main beam illuminates a rain or chaff cloud.  Motion due to winds may displace and/or spread the return in frequency. Altitude-line clutter is due to the radar return from ground clutter at near normal  incidence directly below the radar platform, and is at zero doppler if there is no vertical  component of platform velocity. 
A discrete target return in the main beam is shown at  fT = f0 + (2VR /l)cos(y0) + (2VT /l)cos(yT), where the target speed is VT , with an angle  yT between the target velocity vector and the radar target line of sight. The components  of the spectrum shown in Figure 4.2 will also vary with range, as discussed later. (Note  that the direction of VT cos(yT) is assumed to be the opposite of VR cos(y0) resulting in  a relative range rate of Vrelative  = −VT cos(yT) − VR cos(y0), which is consistent with the  definition for doppler shift stated at the beginning of the chapter .) Figure 4.3 illustrates the various clutter doppler frequency regions as a function  of the antenna main-beam azimuth and relative radar and target velocities, again  for an unfolded spectrum. 
The ordinate is the radial or line-of-sight component of  target velocity in units of radar platform velocity, so the main-beam clutter region  is at zero velocity and the sidelobe clutter region frequency boundaries vary sinu - soidally with antenna azimuth. Thus, the figure shows the doppler regions in which  the target becomes clear of sidelobe clutter. For example, if the antenna main-beam  azimuth angle is at zero, any head-on target ( VT  cos(yT) > 0) is clear of sidelobe  clutter, whereas if the radar is in trail behind the target ( yT = 180° and y0 = 0°), the  target’s radial velocity has to be greater than twice that of the radar to become clear  of sidelobe clutter. 
The sidelobe clear and clutter regions can also be expressed in terms of the aspect  angle with respect to the target, as shown in Figure 4.4.18 Here, collision geometry  is assumed in which the radar and target aircraft fly straight-line paths toward an  intercept point; the look angle of the radar y0 and the aspect angle of the target yT are  constant for a given set of radar and target speeds VR and VT, respectively. The center of  the diagram is the target, and the angle to the radar on the circumference is the aspect  angle. The aspect angle and look angles satisfy the equation VR sin(y0) = VT sin(yT), FIGURE 4.2  Unfolded spectrum (with no clutter positioning) ch04.indd   5 12/20/07   4:51:53 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Pulse Doppler Radar. 4.6 RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 4 which is defined as a collision course. 
The target aspect angle is zero for a head-on  condition and 180° for a tail chase. The aspect angle corresponding to the boundary  between the sidelobe clutter region and the sidelobe clear region is a function of the  relative radar-target velocity ratio and is shown in Figure 4.4 for four cases. Case 1 is  where the radar and target speeds are equal and the target can be seen clear of sidelobe  clutter in a head-on aspect out to 60° on either side of the target’s velocity vector. 
 Similarly, Cases 2 through 4 show conditions where the target’s speed is 0.8, 0.6, and  0.4 times the radar’s speed, in which case the target can be seen clear of sidelobe clut - ter over a region of up to ±78.5° relative to the target’s velocity vector. Again, these  conditions are for an assumed collision course. As is evident, the aspect angle of the  target clear of sidelobe clutter is always forward of the beam aspect. 
Ambiguities and PRF Selection.  Pulse doppler radars are ambiguous in range  and possibly doppler. As mentioned earlier, the unambiguous range Ru is given by  c/(2fR), where c is the speed of light and fR is the PRF. 
If the airborne target radial velocity to be observed is between VT,max,opening  for  opening targets (positive range rate) and −VT,max,closing  for closing targets (negative  range rate), then the minimum value of PRF,  fR min, which is unambiguous in velocity   (in both magnitude and sense, i.e., positive and negative), is  f V V VR T T g ,min ,max, ,max, ( ) = + + 2closing opening λ (4.1) where Vg is the upper limit for ground moving target rejection. V refers to the speed,  or the magnitude of the range rate.FIGURE 4.3  Clutter and clutter-free regions as a function of target velocity and azimuth NOTE:  Width of altitude-line and main-beam clutter regions varies with conditions; azimuth is measured  from radar platform velocity vector to the antenna boresight or to the line of sight to the target;  horizontal-motion case. ch04.indd   6 12/20/07   4:51:57 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Pulse Doppler Radar.  PULSE DOPPLER RADAR  4.76x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 4 However, some pulse doppler radars employ a PRF that is unambiguous in veloc - ity magnitude only, i.e., fR,min = 2 [max( VT,max,closing , VT,max,opening ) + Vg] / l, and rely on  detections in multiple PRFs during the time on target to resolve the sign ambiguity in  doppler. 
These radars can be described as high-medium -PRF and can be considered  to be in the high-PRF category if the older definition of high PRF (no velocity ambi - guity) is extended to allow one velocity ambiguity, that of doppler sense. The lower  PRF eases the measurement of true range while retaining the high-PRF advantage of  a single blind-speed region near zero doppler. High-medium PRF is becoming more  prevalent in modern airborne radars for air-to-air search. 
The choice between high and medium PRF involves a number of considerations,  such as transmitter duty cycle limit, pulse compression availability, signal-processing   capability, measurement accuracy requirements, etc., but often depends on the   need for all-aspect target detectability. All-aspect coverage requires good perfor - mance in tail chase, where the target doppler is in the sidelobe clutter region near  the altitude-line. In a high-PRF radar, the range foldover may leave little clear  region in the range dimension, thus degrading target detectability. 
By using a lower  or medium PRF, the clear region in range is increased at the expense of velocity  foldover for high-doppler targets that are in the clutter-free region in high PRF. As  an example, Figure 4.5 shows the clutter-plus-noise-to-noise ratio in range-doppler  coordinates for two different X-band waveforms at similar altitudes and aircraft  velocities. The range dimension represents the unambiguous range interval Ru, and  the frequency dimension represents the PRF interval, with the main-beam clutter,  altitude-line, and sidelobe clutter regions clearly discernible. 
In both waveforms,  the main-beam clutter return is positioned to DC through clutter positioning via an FIGURE 4.4  Sidelobe clutter-clear regions versus target aspect angle. Note the target is at the center of the  plot with the radar platform on the circumference.CASE COLLISION COURSE RADAR CLEAR REGION NOSE TAIL TARGETSIDELOBE CLUTTER REGION 180°165°150°135°120°105° 75° 60° 30° 15° 0°VR VTVT/VR 1 12 23 34 4VR - RAD AR AIRCRAFT VELOCITY VECT OR  VT - TARGET VELOCITY VECT OR1 0.8 0.6 0.4 VR TARGETASPECTANGLE CASE ch04.indd   7 12/20/07   4:51:58 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. 
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Pulse Doppler Radar. 4.8 RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 4 offset applied to the transmit frequency. The medium-PRF spectrum (PRF = 24 kHz)  contains a range-doppler region in which the sidelobe clutter is below thermal noise  and in which good tail-aspect target detectability can be achieved. 
The 69 kHz high- medium PRF waveform has a much more severe clutter folding, and tail aspect  targets would compete with sidelobe clutter at nearly all ranges, but the clutter-free  region is much larger. Because the clutter is folded in both range and doppler with medium-PRF, a num - ber of PRFs may be required to obtain a satisfactory probability of sufficient detections  to resolve the range and doppler ambiguities. The multiple PRFs move the relative  location of the clear regions so that all-aspect target coverage is achieved. 
Since the  sidelobe clutter generally covers the doppler region of interest, the ratio of the region  with sidelobe clutter below noise relative to the total range-doppler space is a function  of the radar altitude, speed, and antenna sidelobe level. If a high-PRF waveform is used, the clear-range region disappears because the  sidelobe clutter folds in range into the unambiguous range interval (assuming the tar - get doppler is such that it still competes with the sidelobe clutter). However, in those  doppler regions free of sidelobe clutter, as shown in Figure 4.3 and Figure 4.4, target  detectability is limited only by thermal noise, independent of radar altitude, speed,  and sidelobe level. 
This requires system stability sidebands to be well below noise for  the worst-case main-beam clutter. Thus, although medium PRF provides all-aspect  target coverage, the target is potentially competing with sidelobe clutter at all aspects,  whereas with high PRF, a target can become clear of sidelobe clutter at aspect angles  forward of the beam aspect. For targets with sufficient radial velocity, high PRF is typically more efficient than  medium PRF. 
The transmit pulse width is usually limited by the transmitter’s ability to  preserve the pulse amplitude and phase characteristics over the duration of the transmit  pulse. For a fixed transmit pulse width and peak power, a waveform with a higher PRF  will have a higher transmit duty cycle resulting in a higher average transmit power. For  a given coherent processing time, more energy is placed on the target, which improves  detectability. 
For this reason, high PRF is used for long-range search of high-speed  closing targets.FIGURE 4.5  Clutter-plus-noise-to-noise ratio in range-doppler space Main-beam ClutterSidelobe Clutter“Clutter-free” Region Range Gate Number Filter Number (256-Point FFT)20 0 5 0 100 150 200 2502030 10405060 406080100120140160 0 100 200 300 400 5001020304050Range Gate Number (Clutter + Noise)/Noise (dB) Main-beam Clutter Altitude-line Sidelobe Clutter“Clutter-free” Region Filter Number (512-Point FFT)Medium PRF (PRF = 24 kHz, Alt = 1400 ft) High-medium PRF (PRF = 69 kHz, Alt = 1300 ft)Main-beam Altitude-line Altitude-line ch04.indd   8 12/20/07   4:52:00 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Pulse Doppler Radar. 
 PULSE DOPPLER RADAR  4.96x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 4 Range Gating.  Range gating divides the time between transmit pulses into mul - tiple cells or range gates. Range gating eliminates excess receiver noise and clutter  from competing with the signal and permits target tracking and range measurement. 
 The range gate is typically matched to the bandwidth of the transmit pulse. In a surveil - lance radar, a number of receiver gates are used to detect targets that may appear at  any range within the interpulse period. Figure 4.6 illustrates the general case where the  gate spacing ts, the gate width tg, and the transmitted pulse tt are all unequal. 
Selecting  tt = tg maximizes target return signal-to-noise ratio and, as a result, range performance.  Selecting tg > ts creates overlapped range gates and reduces the range gate straddle  loss (Section 4.6) but can increase the possibility of range ghosts unless contiguous  detections from straddled target returns are “clumped” prior to the ambiguity resolu - tion (Section 4.4). With range gating, the range measurement accuracy is on the order  of the range gate size (150 m/ µs), but this can be improved to a fraction of the gate  width by amplitude centroiding. 
Timeline Definitions.  Pulse doppler radar works on several different time  scales. Various organizations have their own nomenclature for time-based parameters. 
 Therefore, the timeline definitions used throughout this chapter are defined here. Figure 4.7 illustrates the different time scales. Starting at the lowest level, a series  of coherent pulses are transmitted at a pulse repetition frequency (PRF). 
The time  between the pulses is the interpulse period  (IPP), which is simply the inverse of the  PRF. The receive portion of the IPP is broken up into range gates. The transmit duty  cycle  is the transmit pulse width divided by the IPP. 
The train of pulses is called the  coherent processing interval  (CPI). The coherent processing forms a bank of doppler  FIGURE 4.6  Example of range gates with 50% overlap equally spaced in the interpulse period.   tb represents the extra blanking time after the transmit pulse to allow for receiver/protector recovery .GATE 5 GATE 4 GATE 3 GATE 2 GATE 1 TRANSMIT 5τs 4τs 3τs 2τs τs 6τsτbACTIVE RECEIVE TIMERECEIVER RECOVERY TIMETRANSMIT  TIMEBLANKED RECEIVE TIME τs τt0τg ch04.indd   9 12/20/07   4:52:01 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Pulse Doppler Radar. 4.10  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 4 filters for each range gate resulting in a range-doppler map for a CPI, similar to that  shown in Figure 4.5. 
Several CPIs with the same PRF, but possibly different transmit carrier frequen - cies, can be noncoherently combined via postdetection integration  (PDI). If frequency  modulation (FM) ranging is used, all the CPIs that are noncoherently integrated must  have the same FM slope. The grouping of CPIs is a look. 
Detections are determined  for the range-doppler cells in a look. Multiple looks with different PRFs or frequency modulations are used to resolve  range and/or doppler ambiguities. This group of looks is a dwell. 
A dwell is associated  with a particular antenna line-of-sight or beam position . Target reports are generated  for each dwell. A bar refers to a line of beam positions at a constant elevation. 
In search, a multi - bar raster  scans the beam over an assigned area or volume to create a frame . A frame  may have multiple bars. Typically, the antenna will visit every beam position once  during a search frame. 
Basic Configuration.  Figure 4.8 shows a representative configuration of a pulse  doppler radar utilizing digital signal processing under the control of a mission processor.   Included are the antenna, receiver/exciter, signal processor, and data processor. 
The  radar’s control processor receives inputs from the on-board systems, such as the iner - tial navigation system (INS), and operator controls via the mission processor, and  performs as a master controller for the radar hardware. Coherent processing requires that all frequency down-conversions, including the  final conversion to baseband, retain the coherent phase relationship between transmit - ted and received pulses. All the local oscillators are phase referenced to the same master  oscillator , which is also used to produce the transmitted waveform. 
The in-phase  (I)  and quadrature  (Q) components at baseband represent the real and imaginary parts,  respectively, of a complex number whose complex argument in phasor notation is the  phase difference between the transmitted and received pulses. The complex modulus,  or magnitude, is proportional to the received echo strength.FIGURE 4.7  Pulse doppler dwell timelineLook 2 Look 3 Look 1Beam PositionBarFrame PulsestimeCPI 1CPI 2CPI 3CPI 4 ch04.indd   10 12/20/07   4:52:03 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. 
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Pulse Doppler Radar.  PULSE DOPPLER RADAR  4.116x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 4 FIGURE 4.8  Typical pulse doppler radar configurationFFTEnvelope DetectorPDI CFARDetection  EditingRange/  Doppler  CorrelationDwell  Target  ReportTo  Mission  Processor &  Operator  Display FFTPulse  CompressionPulse  Compression Pulse  Compression Pulse  CompressionAvg FFTElevation  Angle  MeasurementAvg FFT GuardEnvelope DetectorPDIAzimuth  Angle  MeasurementSignal ProcessorFrom ReceiverAntenna Receiver  ProtectorCAGC LNA NAGC ∆AZ ∆AZ∆EL ∆ELGuardIF  Matched FilterDigital I/Q  GenerationDigital Matched  FilterA/DMaster  OscillatorReference  Generator SynchronizerSynthesizerClutter Offset  GeneratorOutput  GeneratorPower AmpTransmit LO1  Generator LO1Clock LO2Beam Steering Computer Same as Σ Channel Same as Σ Channel Same as Σ Channel To Signal ProcessorControl  ProcessorMode  Control  Mission  Processor Digital Controls to  Individual  Components Data ProcessorINS CFARRFI  Edit RFI  Edit RFI  Edit RFI  EditΣ Σ ch04.indd   11 12/20/07   4:52:04 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. 
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Pulse Doppler Radar. 4.12  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 4 Master Oscillator.  The master oscillator provides a free-running, stable reference  sinusoid on which the system synchronization is based. 
Synchronizer.  The synchronizer distributes precisely timed strobes and clocks for  the various components of the radar system to ensure the time alignment of transmit  waveforms and the reception of their corresponding returns. These low-jitter timing  signals are used to enable and disable the transmit power amplifier to create the trans - mit pulse train, blank the receiver during transmission, and form the range gates. 
Reference Generator.  The reference generator outputs fixed frequency clocks and  local oscillators (LOs). Synthesizer. 
 The synthesizer generates the transmit carrier frequency and the  first local oscillator (LO1) frequency. Frequency agility is provided to the transmit  and LO1 signals. Clutter Offset Generator. 
 The clutter offset generator shifts the transmit carrier  slightly, so that on receive the main-beam clutter is positioned at zero doppler fre - quency, or DC (direct current) after basebanding. The same effect could be obtained  by shifting the receiver LO1 frequency. With the clutter at DC, the spurious signals  caused by certain receiver nonlinearities, such as mixer intermodulation products and  video harmonics, also fall near DC and can be filtered out along with the main-beam  clutter.19 The frequency shift applied is a function of the antenna main-beam line- of-sight relative to the platform’s velocity vector. 
This process is known as clutter  positioning . Output Generator.  The output generates the pulsed radio frequency (RF) transmit  signal, which is the transmit drive signal that is amplified by the power amplifier prior  to being fed to the transmit antenna. 
Antenna.  The antenna can be mechanically or electronically scanned. Modern  pulse doppler radars have migrated to the use of active electronically scanned arrays  (AESAs).20 AESAs contain transmit/receive (T/R) modules, each comprising a trans - mit power amplifier and a receive low-noise amplifier (LNA) along with an attenuator  and phase shifter, at each antenna element. 
If the same antenna is used for transmit and receive, a duplexer must be included.  This duplexer is usually a passive device, such as a circulator, which effectively  switches the antenna between the transmitter and receiver. Considerable power may  be coupled to the receiver since typically no more than 20 to 25 dB of isolation may  be expected from ferrite circulators. 
Antennas may form various beams. The transmit beam can be formed with uniform  aperture illumination to maximize the amount of energy on target, whereas the receive  sum ( Σ) beam is typically formed with a low-sidelobe taper to minimize the returns  from ground clutter. The Σ beam is used for target detection and, acting as a spatial filter,   is the first line of defense against clutter and interference in the sidelobe region. 
To  facilitate target tracking, angle measurements with accuracies finer than the antenna  beamwidth are usually required. A technique to obtain such angle measurements of   a target on a single pulse is called monopulse . Monopulse can be characterized as  amplitude or phase, with phase being preferable due to its advantage in angle accuracy  for a given signal-to-noise ratio. 
Phase monopulse uses a delta  or difference beam,  ch04.indd   12 12/20/07   4:52:05 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Pulse Doppler Radar. 
 PULSE DOPPLER RADAR  4.136x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 4 which is essentially formed by dividing the aperture into two halves and subtracting  the corresponding phase centers. Monopulse beams, delta-azimuth ( ∆AZ) and delta- elevation ( ∆EL), are formed to provide phase monopulse azimuth and elevation angle  measurements.21 Self-calibration routines controlled by the control processor ensure  that the phase and amplitude match of the receiver channels enables accurate mono - pulse measurements. A guard beam with a near-omnidirectional pattern is formed for  sidelobe detection blanking as discussed in Section 4.2. 
Receiver/Protector (R/P).  The receiver/protector is a low-loss, fast-response,  high-power switch that prevents the transmitter output from the antenna’s duplexer  from damaging the sensitive receiver front end. Fast recovery is required to minimize  desensitization in the range gates following the transmitted pulse. 
R/Ps can be imple - mented with a gas discharge tube, in which a gas is ionized by high-power RF. A diode  limiter can be used instead of or in conjunction with the gas discharge tube. The R/P  can be reflective or absorptive, but must have low insertion loss to minimize impact  on receive chain noise figure. 
Clutter Automatic Gain Control (CAGC).  The CAGC attenuator is used both for  suppressing transmitter leakage from the R/P into the receiver (so the receiver is not  driven into saturation, which could lengthen recovery time after the transmitter is  turned off) and for controlling the input signal levels into the receiver. The received  levels are kept below saturation levels, typically with a clutter AGC in search and a  target AGC in single-target track, to prevent spurious signals, which degrade perfor - mance, from being generated. 
Noise Automatic Gain Control (NAGC).  The NAGC attenuator is used to set the  thermal noise level in the receiver to support the required dynamic range, as discussed  in Section 4.3. The attenuation is commanded based on measurements of the noise  during periodic calibration. 
Digital Preprocessing.  The advent of high-speed, high-dynamic range analog- to-digital converters (A/Ds) allows IF-sampling and digital basebanding. The digital  IF-sampled output of the receiver is downconverted to baseband (DC) via a digital  product detector (DPD).22 Superior I/Q image rejection is an advantage of a DPD. 
The I and Q signals are passed through the digital portion of the pulse matched  filter. The combination of the IF matched filter and the digital matched filter form the  receiver’s single-pulse matched filter. Digital Signal Processing. 
 Following digital preprocessing is a doppler fil - ter bank for main-beam clutter rejection and coherent integration. RF interference  (RFI) that is pulsed and asynchronous to the radar timing can often be detected  prior to the coherent integration. Range-IPP cells where RFI is detected are then  “repaired” to prevent corruption of the output spectrum. 
The filter bank is usually  realized by using the fast Fourier transform (FFT); however, the discrete Fourier  transform (DFT) can be used when the number of filters is small. Appropriate  weighting is employed to reduce the filter sidelobes. The amount of weighting can  be chosen adaptively by sensing the peak signal levels (usually main-beam clutter)  and selecting the doppler weighting dynamically. 
If pulse compression modulation is used on the transmit pulse to increase energy on  target, pulse compression can be performed digitally either before or after the doppler  ch04.indd   13 12/20/07   4:52:05 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Pulse Doppler Radar. 
4.14  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 4 filter bank. The advantage of pulse compression after the filter bank is that the effects of  doppler on pulse compression can be largely removed by tailoring the pulse compres - sion to the doppler offset of each doppler filter. However, this increases the total amount  of signal processing required. 
The envelope at the output of the FFT is formed with a linear ( I Q2 2+ ) or square- law ( I Q2 2+) detector. Historically, linear detectors were used to manage dynamic  range in fixed-point processors. Square-law detectors are preferred for some modern  floating-point processors. 
Postdetection integration (PDI) may be used where each  range-gate −doppler-filter output is linearly summed over several CPIs. For each range- doppler cell in the Σ channel, the PDI output is compared with a detection threshold  determined by a constant-false-alarm-rate (CFAR) process.23–26 Cells with amplitudes  greater than the CFAR threshold are labeled as detections. Similar processing is done in the ∆AZ and ∆EL channels with exceptions, as shown in  Figure 4.8. 
For those range-doppler cells with declared detections, the imaginary part  of the ∆AZ/Σ and ∆EL/Σ ratios are used for phase comparison monopulse to estimate the  azimuth and elevation angles, respectively, relative to the center of the Σ main beam.  The angle estimates are computed for each coherent look and then averaged over the  number of CPIs noncoherently integrated via PDI. The guard channel is processed similar to the Σ channel. 
The guard channel’s pur - pose is to blank sidelobe detections, as described in Section 4.2. Postprocessing.  Following the CFAR is detection editing, which contains the side-   lobe discrete rejection logic. 
Following detection editing, range and velocity ambi- guity resolvers work over several looks within a dwell. The final detection outputs,  along with their corresponding unambiguous range, velocity, and angle measurements,  and their estimated accuracies, are passed to the mission processor for tracking and  operator display. 4.2 PULSE DOPPLER CLUTTER General. 
 Clutter returns from various scatterers have a strong influence on the design  of a pulse doppler radar as well as an effect on the probability of detection of point targets.  Clutter scatterers include terrain (both land and sea), weather (rain, snow, etc.), and chaff.  Since the antennas generally used in pulse doppler radars have a single, relatively high- gain main beam, main-beam clutter may be the largest signal handled by the radar when  in a down-look condition. 
The narrow beam limits the frequency extent of this clutter  to a relatively small portion of the doppler spectrum. The remainder of the antenna pat - tern consists of sidelobes, which result in sidelobe clutter. This clutter is generally much  smaller than the main-beam clutter but covers much more of the frequency domain. 
The  sidelobe clutter from the ground directly below the radar, the altitude-line, is frequently  large owing to a high reflection coefficient at steep grazing angles, the large geometric  area, and the short range. Range performance is degraded for targets in the sidelobe clutter  region wherever the clutter is near or above the receiver noise level. Multiple PRFs may  be used to move the target with respect to the sidelobe clutter in the range-doppler map,  thus avoiding completely blind ranges or blind frequencies due to high clutter levels. 
This  relative motion occurs due to the range and doppler foldover from range and/or doppler  ambiguities. If one PRF folds sidelobe clutter and a target to the same apparent range and  doppler, a sufficient change of PRF will separate them. ch04.indd   14 12/20/07   4:52:10 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Pulse Doppler Radar.  PULSE DOPPLER RADAR  4.156x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 4 Ground Clutter in a Stationary Radar. 
 When the radar is fixed with respect  to the ground, both stationary main-beam and sidelobe clutter returns occur at zero- doppler offset from the transmit carrier frequency. The sidelobe clutter is usually  small compared with main-beam clutter as long as some part of the main beam  strikes the ground. The clutter can be calculated as in a pulsed radar, then folded in  range as a function of the PRF. 
Ground Clutter in a Moving Radar.  When the radar is moving with a velocity  VR, the clutter is spread over the frequency domain as illustrated in Figure 4.2 for the  special case of horizontal motion. The foldover in range and doppler is illustrated  in Figure 4.9 for a medium-PRF radar where the clutter is ambiguous in both range  and doppler. 
The radar platform is moving to the right at 1000 kt with a dive angle   of 10°. The narrow annuli (iso-range contours) define the ground area that contributes  to clutter in the selected range gate. The five narrow hyperbolic bands (iso-doppler  contours) define the area that contributes to clutter in the selected doppler filter. 
 The shaded intersections represent the area, or clutter patches, that contributes to  the range-gate −doppler-filter cell. Each clutter patch contributes clutter power as a  function of the antenna gain in the direction of the clutter patch and the reflectivity  of the clutter patch. The main beam illuminates the elliptical area to the left of the ground track. 
Since  this area lies entirely within the filter area, the main-beam clutter falls within this filter,  and all other filters receive sidelobe clutter. Four range annuli are intersected by the  main-beam ellipse, so the main-beam clutter in this range gate is the vector sum of  the signals received from all four clutter patches. Owing to this high degree of range  foldover, all range gates will have approximately equal clutter. 
FIGURE 4.9  Plan view of range-gate and doppler-filter areas. Radar altitude = 10,000 ft; velocity =  1000 kt to right; dive angle = 10°; radar wavelength = 3 cm; PRF = 15 kHz; range gate width = 6.67 µs;  range gate = 4; doppler filter at 2 kHz; bandwidth = 1 kHz; beamwidth = 5° (circular); main-beam azimuth =   20°; depression angle = 5°. ch04.indd   15 12/20/07   4:52:14 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Pulse Doppler Radar. 4.16  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 4 If the main beam were scanned 360° in azimuth with the same radar platform  kinematics, the main-beam clutter would scan in doppler frequency so that it would  appear in the selected filter ten times (twice for each hyperbolic band). 
In between,  the filter would receive sidelobe clutter from all darkened intersections. With the use  of the proper clutter offset (which would vary as a function of main-beam azimuth)  on the transmit frequency, as described in Section 4.1, the doppler of the main-beam  clutter return will be zero or DC. Clutter Return: General Equations. 
 The clutter-to-noise ratio from a single  clutter patch with incremental area dA at a range R is  C NP G G d A R L kTBT R C s n=av λ σ π2 0 3 44( ) (4.2) where  Pav = average transmit power  GT  = transmit gain in patch direction  GR  = receive gain in patch direction  l  = operating wavelength  s  0  = clutter backscatter coefficient  LC  = losses applicable to clutter  k  = Boltzmann’s constant = 1.38054 × 10−23 W/(Hz/K)  Ts  = system noise temperature, K  Bn  = doppler filter bandwidth LC refers to losses that apply to distributed surface clutter, as opposed to discrete,  resolvable targets. These losses will be discussed in Section 4.6. The clutter-to-noise ratio from each radar resolution cell is the integral of Eq. 
4.2  over the doppler and range extent of each of the ambiguous cell positions on the  ground.27–31 Under certain simplified conditions, the integration can be closed-form,32  but in general, numeric integration is required. Main-beam Clutter.  The net main-beam clutter-to-noise power in a single range  gate in the receiver can be approximated from Eq. 
4.2 by substituting the range gate’s  intersected area (ct a 2 cos( ) Rqaz) within the main beam on the ground for dA and sum - ming over all ambiguities of that range gate that are within the main beam.33  C NP c L kT BG G RC s nT R=av azλ θ τ πσ α2 30 32 4( / ) ( ) cos( )∑ ∑  (4.3) The summation limits are the lower and upper edges in the elevation dimension of the  smaller of the transmit and receive beams where  qaz = azimuth half-power beamwidth, radians  t = compressed pulse width  a = grazing angle at clutter patch The remaining terms are as defined following Eq. 4.2. If the main beam is pointed below the horizon, the main-beam clutter spectral width  ∆f due to platform motion measured 6 dB down from the peak is approximately34   ∆fVR BB= + +2 80 02 0 0 λθ φ θθ φ θcos( )sin( )cos( )cos( ) c c hτ φ θ φsin ( )cos( ) cos( )3 0 0 0 2     (4.4) ch04.indd   16 12/20/07   4:52:32 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Pulse Doppler Radar.  PULSE DOPPLER RADAR  4.176x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 4 where  VR =  radar ground speed  l = RF wavelength  qB = 3 dB one-way antenna azimuth beamwidth, radians  f0 = main-beam depression angle relative to local horizontal, radians  q0 = main-beam azimuth angle relative to the horizontal velocity, radians  t = compressed pulse width  h = radar altitude When the magnitude of the main-beam azimuth angle is greater than half of the azi - muth beamwidth ( | |θ θ0 2 ≥B), the main-beam clutter power spectral density can be  modeled with a gaussian shape with a standard deviation sc = 0.3∆f. 
Main-beam Clutter Filtering.  In a pulse doppler radar utilizing digital signal  processing, main-beam clutter is rejected by either a combination of a delay-line clut - ter canceler (MTI filter) followed by a doppler filter bank or by a filter bank with low  filter sidelobes, which are achieved via weighting.35 In either case, the filters around  the main-beam clutter are blanked to minimize false alarms on main-beam clutter. This  blanked region in doppler is known as the main-beam clutter notch . 
The choice between these options is a trade-off of quantization noise and com - plexity versus the filter-weighting loss. If a canceler is used, filter weighting can be  relaxed over that with a filter bank alone, since the canceler reduces the dynamic- range requirements into the doppler filter bank (if the main-beam clutter is the largest  signal). Without a canceler, heavier weighting is needed to reduce sidelobes to a level  so that the filter response to main-beam clutter is below the thermal-noise level. 
This  weighting increases the filter noise bandwidth and hence increases the loss in signal- to-noise ratio. Choosing the proper weighting is a compromise between rejecting main-beam  clutter and maximizing target signal-to-noise ratio. To dynamically make this com - promise, the filter weighting can be adaptive to the main-beam clutter level by mea - suring the peak return level (usually main-beam clutter) over the IPPs, and selecting  or computing the best weighting to apply across the CPI. 
Another technique that  is applicable to high-medium and high PRF is to generate a hybrid filter weight - ing by convolving two weighting functions. The result is a filter with significantly  less weighting loss and low far-out sidelobes, but at a cost of relatively high near-   in sidelobes. To evaluate the effect of main-beam clutter on target detection performance,  the clutter-to-noise ratio must be known for each filter where targets are to be  detected. 
A general measure that can be easily applied to specific clutter levels is  the improvement factor I. When using a doppler filter bank, as opposed to an MTI  filter, the improvement factor is defined for each doppler filter as the ratio of the  signal-to-clutter power at the output of the doppler filter to the signal-to-clutter  power at the input.36 The signal is assumed to be at the center of the doppler filter.  Incorporating the effect of filter weighting, the improvement factor for a doppler  filter is given by37  I KA A A n m Tn nN n m c( ) exp ( )=   − −=− ∑ 012 2π σ2 2 01 01 2 { } − [ ] =− =− ∑∑ cos ( ) πK n m N mN nN (4.5) ch04.indd   17 12/20/07   4:52:39 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Pulse Doppler Radar. 4.18  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 4 where  Ai = IPP weight, 0 ≤ i ≤ N−1  N = number of IPPs in CPI  sc = standard deviation of clutter spectrum  K = filter number ( K = 0 is the DC filter)  T = interpulse period Clutter-transient Suppression. 
 When (1) the PRF is changed for multiple- PRF ranging, (2) the slope is changed in linear FM ranging, or (3) the RF carrier is  changed, the transient change in the clutter return may cause degradation unless it is  properly handled.38 Since the clutter is usually ambiguous in range in a pulse doppler  radar, the clutter power increases at each interpulse period (IPP) as clutter return is  received from the farther ambiguities, until the horizon is reached. This phenomenon  is called space charging . Note that although an increasing number of clutter returns  are received during the charging period, the vector sum may actually decrease owing  to the random phase relations of the returns from different patches. 
If a clutter canceler (MTI filter) is used, the output cannot begin to settle to its  steady-state value until space charging is complete. Some settling time must be  allowed before signals are passed to the filter bank. Therefore, the coherent integra - tion time available during each CPI is reduced from the total CPI time by the sum of  the space charge time and the transient settling time. 
The canceler settling time can  be eliminated by precharging  the canceler with the steady-state input value.39 This is  done by changing the canceler gains so that all delay lines achieve their steady-state  values on the first IPP of data. If no canceler is used, signals can be passed to the filter bank after the space charge  is complete, so that the coherent integration time is the total CPI time minus the space  charge time. Altitude-line Clutter Blanking. 
 The reflection from the earth directly beneath  an airborne pulse radar is called altitude-line clutter. Because of specular reflec - tion over smooth terrain, the large geometric area, and relatively short range, this  signal can be large. It lies within the sidelobe clutter region of the pulse doppler  spectrum. 
Because it can be much larger than diffuse sidelobe clutter and usually has a  relatively narrow spectral width, altitude-line clutter is often removed either by a  special CFAR that prevents detection of the altitude-line, or by a tracker-blanker  that removes these reports from the final output. In the case of the tracker-blanker,  a closed-loop tracker is used to position range and velocity gates around the altitude  return and blank the affected range-doppler region. Note that at very low altitudes,  the angles that subtend the first range gate on the ground can be quite big, and the  spectral width widens. 
Sidelobe Clutter.  The entire clutter spectrum can be calculated for each range  gate by Eq. 4.2 if the antenna pattern is known in the lower hemisphere. 
In preliminary  system design, the exact gain function may not be known, so one useful approximation  is that the sidelobe radiation is isotropic with a constant gain of GSL. Sidelobe Discretes.  An inherent characteristic of airborne pulse doppler radars  is that echoes from large, resolvable objects on the ground (discretes), such as build - ings, may be received through the antenna sidelobes and appear as though they were  ch04.indd   18 12/20/07   4:52:39 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Pulse Doppler Radar.  PULSE DOPPLER RADAR  4.196x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 4 smaller moving targets in the main beam. 
This is a particularly severe problem in  a medium-PRF radar, where all-aspect target performance is usually desired, since  these returns compete with targets of interest. In a high-PRF radar, there is little if any  range region clear of sidelobe clutter, such that the sidelobe clutter portion of the dop - pler spectrum is often not processed (since target detectability is severely degraded in  this region). Further, in a high-PRF radar, especially at higher altitudes, the relative  amplitudes of the distributed sidelobe clutter and the discrete returns are such that the  discretes are not visible in the sidelobe clutter. 
The apparent radar cross section (RCS), sapp, of a sidelobe discrete with an RCS  of s is sapp = s GSL2, where GSL is the sidelobe gain relative to the main beam. The  larger-size discretes appear with a lower density than the smaller ones, and a model  commonly assumed at the higher radar frequencies is shown in Table 4.4. Thus, as a  practical matter, 106 m2 discretes are rarely present, 105 m2 are sometimes present, and  104 m2 are often present. 
Two mechanizations for detecting and eliminating false reports from sidelobe dis - cretes are the guard channel and postdetection sensitivity time control (STC). These  are discussed in the paragraphs that follow. Guard Channel. 
 The guard channel mechanization compares the outputs of  two parallel receiving channels, one connected to the main antenna and the sec - ond to a guard antenna (the Σ and Guard channel in Figure 4.8, respectively), to  determine whether a received signal is in the main beam or the sidelobes.40–44 The  guard channel uses a broad-beam antenna that (ideally) has a pattern above the  main-antenna sidelobes. The returns from both channels are compared for each  range-doppler cell that had a detection in the main channel. For these range-doppler  cells, when the guard channel return is greater than that of the main channel, the  detection is rejected (blanked). 
If the main channel return is higher, the detection  is passed on. A block diagram of a guard channel mechanization is shown in Figure 4.10. After  the CFAR (which ideally would be identical in both channels), there are three thresh - olds: the main channel, guard channel, and main-to-guard-ratio thresholds. 
The detec - tion logic of these thresholds is also shown in Figure 4.10. The blanking that occurs because of the main/guard comparison affects the  detectability in the main channel, the extent of which is a function of the thresh - old settings. The threshold settings are a tradeoff between false alarms due to  sidelobe returns and detectability loss in the main channel. 
An example is shown  in Figure 4.11 for a nonfluctuating target, where the ordinate is the probability   of detection in the final output of the sidelobe blanker and the abscissa is the   signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) in the main channel. The quantity B2 is the ratio of   the guard channel SNR to the main channel SNR and is illustrated in Figure 4.12.  TABLE 4.4  Discrete Clutter Model Radar Cross Section (m2) Density (per square mile) 1060.01 1050.1 1041 ch04.indd   19 12/20/07   4:52:40 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Pulse Doppler Radar. 4.20  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 4 FIGURE 4.10  Two-channel sidelobe blankerDetection LogicSquare Law DetectorMain Channel CFAR Main-To- Guard Ratio ThresholdPost Detection IntegrationMatched Filter and Doppler Filterbank (FFT)Main Channel Antenna Guard Channel AntennaSquare Law DetectorGuard Channel CFARPost Detection IntegrationGuard Channel ReceiverMatched Filter and Doppler Filterbank (FFT)Detections Out 0 → No Detect  1 → DetectMGRM GMain Channel Receiver M 0  0 0 0  1  1 1  10  0 1  1  0 0 1  10  1 0  1  0 1  0  1No No No  No  Yes  Yes  No  YesG MGR Detect? ch04.indd   20 12/20/07   4:52:41 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Pulse Doppler Radar.  PULSE DOPPLER RADAR  4.216x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 4 FIGURE 4.11  Probability of detection versus signal-to-noise ratio with a guard channel FIGURE 4.12  Main and guard antenna patterns ch04.indd   21 12/20/07   4:52:42 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Pulse Doppler Radar. 4.22  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 4 B2 is small for a target in the main beam and large, 0 dB or so, for a target at the  sidelobe peaks. 
In the example shown, there is a 0.5 dB detectability loss due to  the guard blanking for targets in the main beam. Ideally, the guard antenna gain pattern exceeds that of the main antenna at all angles  in space (except for the main beam) to minimize detections through the sidelobes. If  not, however, as illustrated in Figure 4.11 and Figure 4.12, returns through the sidelobe  peaks of the main pattern above the guard pattern have a significant probability of  detection in the main channel and would represent false detections. 
Postdetection STC.  In the ambiguity resolution, as the output returns are  range-correlated, they are subjected to postdetection STC, or RCS thresholding,  applied inside the range correlation process. Target returns that range correlate  inside the STC range, but fall below the STC threshold, are likely sidelobe discretes  and are blanked or removed from the correlation process (and kept from ghosting  with other targets). 
The basic logic is shown in Figure 4.13.45 Basically, the CFAR output data is  correlated (resolved) in range three times. Each correlator calculates unambiguous  range using M out of the N sets of detection data (e.g., three detections required  out of eight PRFs). No doppler correlation is used since the doppler is ambiguous. 
  The results of the first two correlations are used to blank all outputs that are likely  to be sidelobe discretes from the final range correlator. Here, three range correla - tors are used in which the first, the A correlator, resolves the range ambiguities  within some nominal range, say, 10 nm, beyond which sidelobe discretes are not  likely to be detected. A second correlator, the B correlator, resolves the range  ambiguities out to the same range, but before a target can enter the B correlator,  its amplitude is thresholded by a range-varying threshold (the STC threshold). 
 A range gate by range gate comparison is made of the correlations in the A and B  correlators, and if a range gate correlates in A and not in B, that gate is blanked  out of the third correlator, the C correlator. The C correlator resolves the range  ambiguities within the maximum range of interest. An alternative mechanization  is to replace the range-varying STC with an equivalent RCS threshold inside the  range correlation process. 
The RCS is computed for each possible unfolded range  (starting from the shortest range) and compared to the RCS threshold. Detections  that range correlate, but are below the RCS threshold, are prevented from cor - relating with other detects (and all of their unfolded ranges are also prevented   from correlating). The principle behind the postdetection STC approach is illustrated in Figure 4.14,  where the return of a target in the main beam and a large discrete target in the side- lobes is plotted versus unambiguous range (that is, after the range ambiguities have  been resolved). 
Also shown are the normal CFAR threshold and the STC threshold  versus range. A discrete return in the sidelobes is below the STC threshold, and a  return in the main beam is above the threshold, such that the sidelobe discrete can be  recognized and blanked without blanking the target in the main beam. The STC onset  range represents the range at which a large discrete target in the sidelobes exceeds the  CFAR threshold. 
ch04.indd   22 12/20/07   4:52:43 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Pulse Doppler Radar. 
 PULSE DOPPLER RADAR  4.236x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 4 FIGURE 4.13  Single-channel sidelobe blanker using postdetection STC or RCS thresholding to remove sidelobe discretes.Unambiguous Detections Out Matched Filter, Weighting & FFTSquare Law DetectorCFARAmbiguous Detections PRF #1 Ambiguous Detections PRF #2“A” Range Correlator  Range Unfolding & M of N Correlation (out to STC Onset Range)“C” Range Correlator  Range Unfolding & M of N Correlation of remaining detects “B” Range Correlator  Range Unfolding & M of N Correlation with  STC (or RCS) threshold (out to STC Onset Range) Ambiguous Detections PRF N STC function or RCS ThresholdMatched Filter, Weighting & FFTSquare Law DetectorCFAR Matched Filter, Weighting & FFTSquare Law DetectorCFAR“A • B” = if M of N in “A” & NOT M of N in “B”Blanking Logic: if “A • B”  blank detects (and their unfolded ranges) ch04.indd   23 12/20/07   4:52:44 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Pulse Doppler Radar. 
4.24  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 4 4.3 DYNAMIC-RANGE AND STABILITY  REQUIREMENTS Doppler processing separates moving targets from clutter and allows them to be  detected while only competing against thermal noise, assuming that the targets have  sufficient radial velocity ( > 2VR/l) and the PRF is high enough for an unambiguous  clutter spectrum. Coherence, the consistency of phase of a signal’s carrier frequency  from one pulse to the next, is crucial for doppler processing. Without careful system  design, amplitude and phase instabilities during the coherent integration time will  broaden the main-beam clutter spectrum and raise the noise floor that clutter-free tar - gets must compete with for detection. 
Nonlinearities in the system can also cause  discrete spurious spectral signals that can be mistaken as targets. The instantaneous  dynamic range of the system governs the system linearity and hence sensitivity in a  strong clutter environment. The driving factor upon stability requirements is when the  main-beam clutter level is at the saturation point of the receiver . 
Dynamic Range.  Dynamic range, as discussed here, can be referred to as instan - taneous dynamic range  and is the linear region above thermal noise over which the  receiver and signal processor operate before any saturation (clipping) or gain limiting  occurs. If saturations occur, spurious signals that degrade performance may be gener - ated. 
For example, if main-beam clutter saturates, spurious frequencies can appear  in the doppler passband normally clear of main-beam clutter, and this may generate  false-target reports. An automatic gain control (AGC) function is often employed to  prevent saturations on either main-beam clutter in search or the target in Single-Target  Track mode. However, the use of AGC degrades the system’s sensitivity, so large FIGURE 4.14  Postdetection STC levelsUnambiguous Range (log scale)Amplitude (dB) CFAR ThresholdSTC Onset RangeTarget in Main Bea mSTC Threshol dSidelobe Discrete ch04.indd   24 12/21/07   2:37:23 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Pulse Doppler Radar.  PULSE DOPPLER RADAR  4.256x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 4 instantaneous dynamic range is preferable. 
If saturations occur in a range gate during  an integration period, an option in a multiple-range gated system is simply to blank  detection reports from that gate. When a MTI filter is not used, the doppler filter bank  for each range gate can be examined to determine if there are any detections due  to spurious signals from large clutter, with subsequent editing of these detections if  the measured clutter-to-noise ratio exceeds the dynamic range. Similar logic can be  applied to saturated range gates to determine if the largest signal in the filter bank is  in the passband or represents saturated clutter returns. 
Saturated returns with the peak  signal in the doppler passband can represent valid targets at short ranges and need not  be subjected to the sidelobe blanking logic. The most stressing dynamic-range requirement is due to main-beam clutter when  searching for a small, low-flying targets. Here, full sensitivity must be maintained in  the presence of the clutter to maximize the probability of detecting the tar get. 
The dynamic-range requirement of a pulse doppler radar, as determined by main- beam clutter, is a function not only of the basic radar parameters such as power, antenna  gain, etc., but of radar altitude above the terrain and the radar cross section (RCS) of  low-flying targets. As an example, Figure 4.15 shows the maximum clutter-to-noise  ratio ( C/Nmax) that appears in the ambiguous-range interval, i.e., after range folding, for  a medium-PRF radar as a function of radar altitude and the range of the intersection of  the peak of the main-beam with the ground. Note that the clutter-to-noise ratio is a rms  power ratio measured at the A/D converter. 
A peak power ratio would be 3 dB higher.  FIGURE 4.15  Dynamic-range example ch04.indd   25 12/20/07   4:52:46 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. 
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Pulse Doppler Radar. 4.26  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 4 The amplitude of clutter returns fluctuate over time and are modeled as a stochastic  process. The clutter-to-noise ratio represents the mean value of this process over time. 
 Figure 4.15 assumes a pencil-beam antenna pattern and a constant-gamma model for  clutter reflectivity.46 The antenna beam is pointed at the ground corresponding to the  range of the target. At longer ranges (small look-down angles), clutter decreases with  increasing radar altitude since range folding is less severe owing to less of the main  beam intersecting the ground. At shorter ranges, clutter increases with radar altitude  since the clutter patch size on the ground increases. 
While Figure 4.15 is for a medium- PRF radar, similar curves result for a high-PRF radar. Also shown in Figure 4.15 is the single-scan probability of detection Pd versus  range for a given RCS target in a receiver with unlimited dynamic range. If it is  desired to have the low-flying target reach at least, say, an 80% Pd before any gain  limiting (i.e., the use of AGC) occurs, the dynamic-range requirement is driven by the  main-beam clutter levels C/Nmax of 53 dB at 1000 ft, 44 dB at 5000 ft, and 41 dB at  15,000 ft for this example. 
The higher the desired probability of detection or the lower  the radar altitude, the more dynamic range is required. Further, if the specified target  RCS is reduced, the dynamic-range requirement for the same desired Pd increases as  the Pd-versus-range curve in Figure 4.15 shifts to the left. In a pulse doppler radar using digital signal processing, the A/D converters are  usually selected to have a dynamic range that meets or exceeds the usable dynamic  range set by the maximum clutter-to-noise ratio ( C/Nmax) and the system stability. 
The  peak dynamic range, defined as the maximum peak sinusoidal signal level relative to  the rms thermal-noise level that can be processed linearly, is related to the number of  amplitude bits in the A/D converter by  S NN maxlog[ ]  =− dB quantAD,amp noise202 1 10 a a   (4.6) where [ Smax/N]dB = maximum input peak sinusoidal level relative to rms noise, dB  NAD,amp  =  number of amplitude bits (not including sign bit) in the A/D  converter  [noise]quanta = rms thermal-noise voltage level at the A/D converter, quanta The rms thermal-noise voltage level at the A/D converter is given in terms of quanta .  A single quanta refers to a unit quantization level of the A/D converter. From the relationship described above and assuming the A/D converter limits the  dynamic range, the A/D converter size can now be determined. 
Additional margin to  allow for main-beam clutter fluctuations above the mean value also needs to be con - sidered. Since main-beam clutter time fluctuation statistics are highly dependent on  the type of clutter being observed, such as sea clutter or clutter from an urban area, and  are generally unknown, a value of 10 to 12 dB above the rms value is often assumed  for the maximum peak level (this also includes the 3 dB difference between the rms  and peak values of a sinusoidal signal). Thus, the required number of amplitude bits in  the A/D converter as determined by the main-beam clutter is  NC N AD,am pdB dCEIL[fluct_ma rgin] ≥+ [(/ ) ]max B B 10 quanta 20log noise +     [ ] 6 (4.7) ch04.indd   26 12/20/07   4:52:51 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Pulse Doppler Radar.  PULSE DOPPLER RADAR  4.276x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 4 where CEIL( x) is the smallest integer ≥ x. 
The instantaneous dynamic range supported  by an A/D converter improves about 6 dB per bit.47 For the example cited in Figure 4.15, where the maximum C/N is 53 dB at a 1000-ft  radar altitude and with a fluctuation margin of 10 dB and thermal noise at 1.414 quanta  (3 dB), the A/D converter requires at least 11 amplitude bits plus a sign bit for a total  of 12 bits to achieve the peak A/D dynamic range of 63 dB. The upper portion of  Figure 4.16 illustrates this case. The lower portion of Figure 4.16 will be used in the  stability discussion to follow. 
Stability.  To achieve the theoretical clutter rejection and target detection and  tracking performance of a pulse doppler system, the reference frequencies, timing sig - nals, and signal processing circuitry must be extremely stable.48–52 In most cases, the  major concern is with short-term rather than long-term stability. Long-term stability  mainly affects velocity or range accuracy or spurious signals (due to PRF harmonics)  but is relatively easy to make adequate. 
Short-term stability refers to variations within  the round-trip radar echo time or during the signal coherent integration time. The most  severe stability requirements relate to the generation of spurious modulation sidebands  on the main-beam clutter, which raise the system noise floor or can appear as targets at  the detectors. Thus, the maximum ratio of main-beam clutter to system noise measured  at the receiver output ( C/N), including the fluctuation margin as discussed above, is the  predominant parameter that determines stability requirements. 
Target returns compete with clutter returns and noise for detection. Suppose desired  targets have sufficient radial speed so that they lie in the clutter-free region of doppler  frequency when a pulse doppler waveform is used. These targets now have to compete  only with system noise. 
This noise can be both additive and multiplicative. Additive  noise tends to mask multiplicative noise in low-performance radars. Additive noise sources can be external to the radar, such as atmospheric noise  (sky temperature), ground noise (black body radiation), and jammers, or they can be  internal, such as thermal noise. 
Thermal noise is also known as Johnson noise  and  3 dBq 0 dBq66 dBq 63 dBq 56 dBq RMS Thermal Noise at A/D53 dB Mean C/ NMAXMaximum Peak Sinsusoidal Level (A/D Sat)  Maximum RMS Sinsusoidal Level (A/D Sat) 10 dB Clutter Fluctuation Headroom 63 dB  Peak A/D Dynamic Range Gated Phase Noise Power4 dB MarginIntegrated Discrete Level at CFAR Total Integration Gain Discrete Level Requirement−60 dBc −56 dBc3 dBc 0 dBc FIGURE 4.16  Dynamic range and stability levels ch04.indd   27 12/20/07   4:52:52 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Pulse Doppler Radar. 
4.28  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 4 gaussian noise , the latter term arising from the gaussian statistics of its voltage prob - ability density function. Thermal noise is always present in the radar receiver and is  the ultimate limit on radar sensitivity. The absolute level of additive noise sources is  determined by the source and its relation to the radar. 
Proper system design can reduce  thermal noise to a level where multiplicative noise can become significant in limiting  the radar sensitivity. Multiplicative noise is characterized by either a time-varying amplitude (ampli - tude modulation, AM) or a time-varying phase (phase modulation, PM, or frequency  modulation, FM). The absolute level depends on the strength of the signal (carrier)  on which the noise source is riding. 
Multiplicative noise sources are frequency insta - bilities, power supply ripple and noise, 1/ f noise, timing jitter, and unwanted mixer  products ( discretes  or spurs ). Multiplicative noise modulates radar returns by varying  their amplitude or phase and is present on all radar returns being most apparent on  large returns such as main-beam clutter. The result in the spectral domain is spurious  modulation sidebands. 
Random multiplicative noise broadens the spectrum of the car - rier frequency. Discrete multiplicative noise sources generate discrete spectral lines  that can cause false alarms. System stability is characterized by the overall two-way (transmit and receive)  composite system frequency response, which is the return of a nonfluctuating target  as a function of doppler frequency. 
System frequency response should be defined by  the doppler passband.53 The focus of this section will be the stability requirements for  doppler frequencies separated enough from the carrier to be outside the ground mov - ing target notch. The concern in this region is white phase noise, which determines the  phase noise floor. Low frequency (i.e., closer to the carrier) stability is more applicable  to air-to-ground pulse doppler modes such as GMTI and SAR. 
The location of an instability source within the system will determine whether it is  imparted upon a return signal via the transmit path, receive path, or both. Instabilities  either on transmit or receive are called independent . Those imposed on both transmit  and receive are common . 
Amplitude instabilities caused by AM tend to be considered independent since  the LOs drive the mixers in the receiver into compression. Also, transmitters work  most efficiently when driven into compression (i.e., where the power amplifier is satu - rated and provides a constant output power level regardless of small deviations on the  input). Instabilities due to PM (of which FM is a special case) tend to dominate those  due to AM. 
As such, the focus will be on phase disturbances: random phase noise and  discrete sinusoidal signals (spurious signals). Random Phase Noise . Random phase noise riding on a large signal can mask  weak target returns. 
The object is to specify system phase noise so that it is well below  the thermal noise when a large signal at the A/D saturation level is present in the  receiver. (A signal at A/D saturation is the largest signal that can be linearly processed  by the radar receiver.) Then the radar sensitivity is limited by thermal noise (always  present) plus a small increase in the total noise level caused by the phase noise. The phase noise of oscillators and other components is typically specified as the  multiplicative noise that rides on a continuous waveform, or CW phase noise. 
In pulse  doppler radar, transmit gating interrupts the continuous waveform to produce a pulsed  waveform. Gated  phase noise is the result of gating CW phase noise. The spectrum of  a pulsed (gated) signal is different from CW. 
The resulting noise, the gated noise, can  be much different from the CW noise, especially for low duty cycle waveforms and  noise close to the carrier. It is preferable to make noise measurements on equipment  ch04.indd   28 12/20/07   4:52:52 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. 
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Pulse Doppler Radar.  PULSE DOPPLER RADAR  4.296x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 4 under the same gating conditions that will be used in the radar system. Some devices,  such as high power transmitters, cannot operate continuously and only gated noise  measurements are possible. 
The gated phase noise spectrum is the summation of the  CW phase noise spectrum replicas centered at frequencies ± nfR, where fR is the PRF  and n is an integer. The total gated phase noise in the PRF bandwidth fR equals the total  CW phase noise in the transmit pulse bandwidth. In terms of stability requirements, the  system requirements are derived using gated phase noise, which in turn is converted to  a CW value for specifying components such as oscillators. 
The CW phase noise floor  is smaller by a factor of the ratio of the PRF to the transmit bandwidth when the CW  phase noise is assumed to be white. Sensitivity loss due to phase noise is quantified by the increase in the system noise  floor in the “clutter-free” doppler filters due to the phase noise sidebands on a large  signal such as main-beam clutter. Sensitivity loss is the amount by which the total  noise (thermal plus phase) exceeds the thermal noise level, as shown in Eq. 
4.8. A  gated phase noise to thermal noise ratio of −4 dB results in an approximately 1.5 dB  sensitivity loss. This assumes a worst-case scenario with the main-beam clutter return  at the A/D saturation level. 
CAGC, discussed in Section 4.1, is typically used to regu - late the mean clutter to a level below A/D saturation (typically by the amount of the  expected clutter fluctuation level). With CAGC, sensitivity loss will be less than or  equal to the calculated worst-case value.  [ ] log Sensitivity LossGated PhaseN dB= +10 110o oisePowe r Density Thermal NoisePowe r Densi ity   (4.8) Table 4.5 contains a calculation of the phase noise floor requirements for an  180 kHz PRF waveform. 
Clutter levels that require a 12-bit (sign plus 11 amplitude  bits) A/D converter are assumed, as shown in Figure 4.16. The transmit pulse duration  is 1.75 µs, resulting in a transmit pulse bandwidth of approximately 0.5 MHz since  no pulse compression is used. The rms thermal-noise power is the thermal-noise floor  within the receive portion of IPP. 
This power level is given in decibels with respect  to the carrier amplitude (dBc). The thermal-noise density is obtained by dividing this  power by the PRF bandwidth. The maximum gated phase noise floor is set to be 4 dB  below the thermal noise floor for at most a 1.5 dB sensitivity loss. 
The CW phase noise  floor is then obtained by multiplying by the PRF to transmit bandwidth ratio. TABLE 4.5  CW Phase Noise Density Floor Calculation Parameter Value [dB] Units Comment Thermal Noise Power at A/D −60.0 dBc 12-bit A/D (sign +11 bits) thermal  noise set at 1.414 quanta 1 / PRF Bandwidth −52.6 dB/Hz 180 kHz PRF waveform Thermal Noise Density Floor at A/D -112.6 dBc/Hz Phase Noise to Thermal Noise Ratio −4.0 dB Margin for at most 1.5 dB  sensitivity loss Gated Phase Noise Density Floor -116.6 dBc/Hz PRF-to-Transmit Bandwidth Ratio −5.0 dB 0.5 MHz transmit pulse bandwidth  1.75 µs pulse width w/ no PC CW Phase Noise Density Floor -121.6 dBc/Hz ch04.indd   29 12/20/07   4:52:55 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. 
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Pulse Doppler Radar. 4.30  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 4 The system-level CW phase noise floor requirement ( −121.6 dBc/Hz) is allocated  to the contributing hardware units. The percentages are based on experience and nego - tiations with the subsystem designers. 
A possible allocation is provided in Table 4.6. Discretes.  Some sources of discrete sidebands are ripple on power supplies and  the pickup of digital clocks. 
It is desirable to keep the integrated discrete sidebands  below noise at the CFAR input to prevent detecting these discretes and producing false  alarms. All coherent and postdetection integration must be accounted for when we  specify discrete phase noise requirements. Common discretes are affected by the time-delay between the portion imparted  on the transmit and that on receive. 
The time-delay changes the correlation between  the phase of the spurious modulating frequency from the transmit path with the phase  from the receive path.54 This can relieve the common discrete level requirement for  low-PRF (or MTI) waveforms that are range unambiguous. However, for highly range  ambiguous medium-PRF and high-PRF waveforms, the assumption is made that the  noise common to transmit and receive adds noncoherently in the downconversion  process. As a result, the common discrete power increases by 3 dB. 
Table 4.7 provides the calculation for the system requirements for independent  and common discrete levels. As in Table 4.5, a maximum clutter level requiring a  12-bit A/D is assumed and the rms thermal-noise level at the A/D converter is set  to 1.414 quanta. To form the doppler filters, 2048 pulses are coherently integrated. 
TABLE 4.6  Notional Subsystem Phase Noise Allocation SubsystemAllocationAdjustment for  Common Source [dB] Requirement [dBc/Hz] Percentage dB Transmitter 20.0% −7.0 0.0 −128.6 ExciterAM 12.5% −9.0 0.0 −130.6 PM 37.5% −4.3 −3.0 −128.9 Reciver 20.0% −7.0 0.0 −128.6 Synchronizer 10.0% −10.0 −3.0 −134.6 System 100.0% -121.6 TABLE 4.7  Discrete Level Requirement Calculation Parameter Value [dB] Units Comment Thermal Noise Power at A/D −60.0 dBc 12-bit A/D (sign +11 bits) thermal noise  set at 1.414 quanta Total  Integration  GainNumber of Pulses  Coherently Integrated33.1 dB 2048 IPPs integrated per CPI Dopper Filter Weighting −2.66 dB 90 dB Dolph-Chebyshev weighting loss Number of CPIs  Noncoherently  Integrated3.82 dB PDI of 3 CPIs per Look 10 log10(Npdi0.8) Thermal Noise Power at CFAR −94.3 dBc Effective noise level after integration Discrete to Thermal Noise Margin −4.0 dB Provides low PFA due to discretes Independent Discrete Requirement -98.3 dBc Common Discrete Requirement -101.3 dBc 3 dB less than Independent Discrete ch04.indd   30 12/20/07   4:52:56 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Pulse Doppler Radar. 
 PULSE DOPPLER RADAR  4.316x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 4 To reduce doppler filter sidelobes, a 90 dB Dolph-Chebyshev weighting is applied,  which reduces the coherent integration SNR gain by about 2.66 dB. For detection,  three CPIs are integrated noncoherently via PDI for an approximate integration gain   in dB of 10 log10(NPDI0.8), or 3.82 dB. This results in a thermal-noise level of −94.3 dBc  at the detector. 
A discrete to thermal-noise margin of −4 dB is used to provide a low  PFA due to discretes. The common discrete requirement is made 3 dB more stringent  relative to the independent requirement as discussed above. 4.4 RANGE AND DOPPLER AMBIGUITY RESOLUTON Medium and high-medium PRF waveforms usually use multiple discrete PRF ranging  to resolve range ambiguities, while linear FM ranging is commonly employed when  high-PRF waveforms are used. 
Multiple Discrete PRF Ranging.  The techniques for calculating true range  from several ambiguous measurements generally involve sequential measurement of  the ambiguous range in each PRF, followed by an unfolding  and correlation process.  The unfolding creates a vector of possible ranges for each valid detection by adding a  set of integers [0 … K] times the unambiguous range interval:  R Rc fK Runfold a mbiguous 0 = +2[ ]…  (4.9) where the unambiguous range interval = c/(2fR), with c = speed of light and fR = PRF. 
 The set of integers [0… K] are referred to as the range ambiguity numbers, with K deter - mined by the maximum range of interest ( K = CEIL[2 Rmax fR /c]). Range correlation  occurs when the unfolded detections are scanned and a correlation window is applied  across looks, as shown in Figure 4.17. In this example, the correlated target range  has an ambiguity number of 4 (5th time around echo) on PRF 1, and an ambiguity   Unambiguous Range Interval D1 D2 D3PRF 2 PRF 3PRF 1D1, D2, D3 = Ambiguous range measurements for looks 1, 2, 3 Range correlation: M of N = 3 (of 3)Unfolded ranges= Transmit and receive blank time FIGURE 4.17  Range correlation example with 3 PRFs ch04.indd   31 12/20/07   4:53:00 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Pulse Doppler Radar. 4.32  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 4 number of 3 on PRFs 2 and 3. 
The IPP lengths (often expressed in range gates per IPP )  are usually kept relatively prime (no common factors except the number 1) to permit  unambiguous ranging at the maximum possible range. The logic for correlation requires at least M detections across the N PRFs in a  dwell to declare a target report (with M typically ≥ 3 for medium- and high-medium  PRF waveforms). Range ghosts occur if the correlated range does not represent the  true target range and typically occur when there is more than one detection per look. 
 Range ghosts can also occur if a target detection on a single look correlated with other  dissimilar target(s), or if multiple range correlations occurred on a set of detections  corresponding to a single unique target (i.e., multiple unfolded ranges fell within the  correlation window). One method for efficiently scanning and correlating the unfolded detections  involves coarse binning , as shown in Figure 4.18. Here, ambiguous detections are  first amplitude centroided and then unfolded, as discussed previously, but with the  results stored in an array whose elements are the coarse bins. 
These bins have a size  less than or equal to the shortest IPP, and correlation involves scanning identical bins  across all of the PRFs in the dwell and applying a correlation window. In the example  shown in Figure 4.18, the bins are set to nine range gates (shortest IPP length), and the  fifth coarse bin contains detections across the three PRFs that fall within the correla - tion window of ± 0.3 range gates. Blank, or empty, bins occur when the unfolded range  falls outside a particular coarse bin interval. 
Key advantages to this approach are the  ability to change the range correlation window dynamically and perform motion com - pensation easily for the range change across the dwell due to radar platform motion  and/or the target’s motion (if the unambiguous doppler has been resolved prior to this  process). Additionally, the range gate sizes do not need to stay the same across the  set of PRFs used in the dwell; in this case, the ambiguous range gate measurements  on each look are first converted to common distance units (e.g., meters) prior to the  unfolding and scanning/correlation processes. Unfolded ranges (Ambiguous RG = 3.1)Unfolded ranges (Ambiguous RG = 8.9)Unfolded ranges (Ambiguous RG = 6.2)9 18 27 36 45 543.1 12.1 21.1 30.1 39.1 48.1D1 9 18 27 36 45 5418.9 28.9 38.9 48.9D2 8.9 Correlation window = ±0.3 Range Gates9 18 27 36 45 546.2 17.2 28.2 39.2 50.2D3 Blank bins occur when unfolded range falls outside of bin edgesPRF 2 = 10 RG/IPP PRF 3 = 11 RG/IPP PRF 1 = 9 RG/IPP Coarse bin size is set bythe shortest IPP = 9 RG FIGURE 4.18  Range correlation using coarse binning on unfolded, centroided ambiguous detections. 
In  this example, range gate size is the same for all three PRFs. ch04.indd   32 12/20/07   4:53:01 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. 
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Pulse Doppler Radar.  PULSE DOPPLER RADAR  4.336x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 4 Additional criteria can be used to reject range ghosts, such as selecting the corre - lated range with the highest M-of-N value, selecting the detections based on the mini - mum variance across the M detections, or using maximum likelihood techniques.55  The computed radar cross section (RCS) of correlations can also be used in the   correlation process to reject sidelobe discrete detections as described in Section 4.2  (postdetection STC). The ghosting problem can be mitigated further by a combination of doppler and/or  monopulse binning. 
Resolving the doppler ambiguities first (prior to range correla - tion) will reduce the set of detections to those within the doppler correlation window.  For cases where this is not feasible (generally the lower medium PRFs), utilizing both  range and doppler correlation will reduce ghosts. Using monopulse measurements to  segregate and bin targets that are distinguishable in angle can also reduce ghosting  when there are a significant number of detections in a dwell. 
A typical medium- or high-medium-PRF pulse doppler waveform cycles through  N unique PRFs in a processing dwell ( N typically being 5 to 8). The medium PRFs  generally cover nearly an octave in frequency for good doppler visibility and ground  moving target rejection. However, high-medium PRFs have inherently good doppler  visibility (since they are ambiguous in sign only), so the span of the PRFs in a set of  N PRFs is usually much less than an octave. 
Additional constraints on PRF selection  for both waveforms include good visibility in sidelobe clutter (where some PRFs may  be obscured by clutter in portions of the ambiguous range interval) and minimization  of ghosts in the ambiguity resolution processing. Doppler Ambiguity Resolution.  Resolution of the unambiguous doppler-velocity  is needed for medium-PRF waveforms, and it is generally done with a similar unfolding  and correlation technique, as described previously for range ambiguities. 
As shown in  Figure 4.19, velocity unfolding of detections involves adding a set of signed integers  0 2 PRF1 Vel PRF1 Vel - PRF1 Vel 0 PRF2 Vel - PRF2 Vel PrfVel = PRF Velocity = fR λ/2 AmbVel = Ambiguous velociy = PrfVel * Fcentroid /NFFTAmbVel1Correlated  Doppler-velocity AmbVel2 FIGURE 4.19  Doppler-velocity correlation performed on two detections across two looks. Ambiguous  detections are unfolded out to a maximum positive and negative velocity . ch04.indd   33 12/20/07   4:53:02 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Pulse Doppler Radar. 4.34  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 4 times the PRF velocity  (first blind speed) to each measured ambiguous radial velocity  as follows:  Vf F NJ KR unfoldcentroid FFT0 = +−  λ 2[ ]… …  (4.10) where fRl/2 is the first blind speed (PRF velocity), Fcentroid  is the amplitude-cen - troided doppler filter number, NFFT is the number of filters in the doppler filter bank,  and [ −J … 0 … K] represents the set of doppler ambiguity numbers covering the  maximum negative and positive doppler-velocities for the targets of interest. 
For  cases where there are only a few ambiguities in doppler, doppler correlation may be  performed prior to or in conjunction with range correlation to minimize ghosting. High-PRF Ranging.  Range-ambiguity resolution in high PRF is performed by  modulating the transmitted signal and observing the phase shift of the modulation  on the return echo. 
Modulation methods include varying the PRF, either continu - ously or in discrete steps; varying the RF carrier, with either linear or sinusoidal  FM; or some form of pulse modulation such as pulse-width modulation (PWM),  pulse-position modulation (PPM), or pulse-amplitude modulation (PAM). Of these  modulation techniques, PWM and PPM may have large errors because of clipping  of the received modulation by eclipsing or straddling (discussed in Section 4.6), and  PAM is difficult to mechanize in both the transmitter and the receiver. Consequently,  they will not be further considered here. 
Linear-Carrier FM.  Linear frequency modulation (FM) of the carrier can be used  to measure range. The modulation and demodulation to obtain range are the same as  used in frequency-modulated continuous-wave (FM-CW) radar,56 but the transmission  remains pulsed. 
Suppose the dwell time is divided into two looks. In the first look, no FM is applied,  and the doppler shift of the target is measured. In the second look, the transmitter  frequency is varied linearly at a ratefin one direction (i.e., increasing or decreasing  in frequency). 
During the roundtrip time to the target, the local oscillator has changed  frequency so the target return has a frequency shift, in addition to the doppler shift, that  is proportional to range. The difference in the frequency ∆f of the target return between  the two looks is found, and the target range calculated from  Rc f f=∆ 2 (4.11) The problem with only two FM segments during a dwell is that, with more than a  single target in the antenna beamwidth, range ghosts result. For example, with two tar - gets present at different dopplers, the two frequencies observed during the FM period  cannot be unambiguously paired with the two frequencies observed during the no-FM  period. 
To mitigate this problem, a three-segment scheme is used with the following  segments: no-FM, FM-up, and FM-down. The range is found by selecting returns from  each of the three segments that satisfy the relations  f f f1 0 2 < <  (4.12)  f f f1 2 02 + =  (4.13) ch04.indd   34 12/20/07   4:53:20 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. 
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Pulse Doppler Radar.  PULSE DOPPLER RADAR  4.356x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 4 where f0, f1, and f2 are the frequencies observed during the no-FM, FM-up, and   FM-down segments, respectively. The range then is found from Eq. 
4.11, where  ∆f f f f f f f = − − −2 0 2 1 0 1 2 or or ( ) /  (4.14) An example is shown in Table 4.8. If more than two targets are encountered during a dwell time, ghosts again result, as  only N − 1 simultaneously detected targets can be resolved ghost-free where N is the  number of FM slopes. However, this problem is not severe in practice, since multiple  targets in a single beamwidth are usually a transient phenomenon. 
The accuracy of the range measurement improves as the FM slope increases since  the observed frequency differences can be more accurately measured. The FM slope is,  however, limited by clutter-spreading considerations, since during the FM periods, the  clutter is smeared in frequency and can appear in frequency regions normally clear of  clutter.57 A no-FM, FM-up, double FM-up scheme is recommended to prevent desired  targets from competing with main-beam clutter. Range accuracies on the order of 1 or  2 miles can be reasonably achieved. 
4.5 MODE AND WAVEFORM DESIGN Modern multifunction pulse doppler radars utilize various modes to accomplish tasks  such as search and track. Each mode uses certain waveforms optimized for the detec - tion and measurement of various target characteristics. For example, the radar operator might select a search mode and specify a search  volume that the radar will raster scan, as shown in Figure 4.7. 
Valid detections in  search are then converted to tracks in the radar computer. These tracks need to be  updated by a track mode on a regular basis depending on the track accuracy required.  High track accuracy is needed for threatening targets or those that need a fire control TABLE 4.8  Three-slope FM Ranging Example There are two targets, A and B; FM slope = 24.28 MHz/s. 
Target A B Range (nmi) 10 20 Doppler frequency (kHz) 21 29 FM shift (kHz)  3  6 Observed Frequencies f0, no FM (kHz) 21 29 f1, FM up (kHz) 18 23 f2, FM down (kHz) 24 35 Possible sets that satisfy the relations shown in Eq. 4.12 and Eq. 4.13 are f1 f0 f2 2f0f1 + f2 Target? Range (nmi) 18 21 24 42 42 Yes 10 18 21 35 42 53 No 18 29 35 58 53 No 23 29 35 58 58 Yes 20 ch04.indd   35 12/20/07   4:53:23 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Pulse Doppler Radar. 4.36  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 4 solution in order to engage, as opposed to nonthreatening targets where a general situ - ational awareness is sufficient and high accuracy is not required. 
Search.  The two primary search modes are Autonomous Search  and Cued Search .  In Autonomous Search the operator selects a range, azimuth, and elevation coverage,  and the radar searches each beam position that covers this volume once per frame. 
The  time it takes to complete a frame is known as the revisit or frame time. The frame time   should be minimized to enhance the cumulative probability of detection of tar gets. Modern radar systems can take advantage of on- and off-board cues to increase  the probability of acquiring a target using Cued Search. 
A Cued Search mode adjusts  the search volume and waveform selection according to the accuracy of the cue’s  parameters. Radars with electronically scanned array (ESA) antennas can interleave other func - tions (track updates, Cued Search, calibrations, etc.) with Autonomous Search. The  radar computer’s resource manager must ensure that the maximum frame time is not  exceeded with the inclusion of these other functions during a search frame. 
For airborne pulse doppler radars, Autonomous Search can have two submodes:  Forward-aspect  and All-aspect Search . Forward-aspect Search is designed to detect  head-on engagement targets with high closing speeds that are not competing against  main-beam or sidelobe clutter. Forward-aspect Search uses high-duty high-PRF wave - forms to maximize the energy on target and provide long detection range. 
Forward- aspect Search waveforms include Velocity Search  (VS), High-PRF Range-While-Search   (HRWS), and Alert /Confirm . All-aspect Search can be either a single high-medium PRF  waveform that has acceptable performance for targets that are competing with sidelobe  clutter, or the combination of Forward-aspect Search high-PRF waveforms interleaved  with medium-PRF waveforms designed to detect targets competing with sidelobe clut - ter, such as Medium-PRF Range While Search  (MRWS). Velocity Search. 
 VS is a high-PRF search waveform that measures doppler fre - quency unambiguously (with the possible exception of sense), but does not measure  range. This is the classic high-PRF waveform. The transmit duty cycle is maximized  to increase detection range. 
The receiver may be range gated to match the bandwidth  of the transmit waveform, but range measurement is not attempted. A VS dwell will consist of a single look at a given PRF. The coherent integration  time is maximized within the limits of the maximum expected target radial acceleration. 
 VS is optimized for Swerling I and III target amplitude fluctuation statistics and the  cumulative probability of detection of incoming targets over several search frames. High-PRF Range-While-Search.  Like VS, HRWS is a high-PRF waveform. 
 However, linear-carrier FM ranging is used to obtain a range measurement, as described  in Section 4.4. This range measurement comes at the expense of frame time with the  addition of various FM slopes for each dwell. The accuracy of this range measurement  is dependent upon the linear FM ranging slopes. 
Alert/Confirm.  The beam agility of ESA-based radars allows the use of sequen - tial detection techniques.58 A simplification of such techniques is known as Alert/ Confirm.59,60 The goal of Alert/Confirm is to provide high sensitivity while managing  false alarms and minimizing the search frame time. By transmitting a longer Confirm   dwell for ranging only at beam positions where a shorter-dwell Alert  has detected  ch04.indd   36 12/20/07   4:53:23 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Pulse Doppler Radar.  PULSE DOPPLER RADAR  4.376x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 4 targets, Alert/Confirm provides the range measurement of classic HRWS waveforms  without the frame time expense of transmitting linear FM ranging dwells every beam  position. 
The Confirm dwell can also be used to control false alarms, permitting the  Alert dwell to be more sensitive than classic VS. The Alert phase is used to search each beam position of the frame for the presence  of a target. A VS waveform is used with a low detection threshold and a corresponding  false alarm time on the order of a few seconds. 
The lower detection threshold increases  sensitivity. When an Alert dwell declares a detection, a Confirm dwell is scheduled  for that Alert dwell’s beam position. If monopulse measurements are available on the  Alert detection, the Confirm beam can be centered on the detection to decrease beam - shape loss. 
The Confirm dwell is typically a HRWS waveform and only examines  doppler filters within a window centered about the filter of the Alert detection cue. The  Confirm dwell must produce a detection corresponding to the Alert detection in order  for a valid detection declaration. The Confirm dwell is used to manage false alerts  and provide a range measurement for target detections. 
The Alert and Confirm detec - tion thresholds are designed to achieve overall false alarm time equal to conventional  search (one every few minutes). Along with using the same PRF in Alert and Confirm,  the time between these dwells, or latency , should be minimized to prevent a valid Alert  detection from being eclipsed during the Confirmation dwell. Low-latency also allows the use of Correlated  Alert/Confirm. 
Here, a Swerling  I target RCS fluctuation model is assumed. This implies that when the same RF car - rier frequency is used for Alert and Confirm, the target RCS will be relatively constant  between the two dwells,61 providing additional range enhancement in terms of the  cumulative probability of detection. Medium-PRF Range While Search. 
 A medium-PRF waveform is used to detect  targets competing with sidelobe clutter that would be undetectable in HRWS. MRWS  allows the detection of nose aspect targets at wide scan angles that are crossing the  radar line-of-sight, such that their low closing velocity places them in sidelobe clut - ter and tail aspect targets in lead pursuit engagements (an attack geometry where the  nose of the attacking aircraft is pointed ahead of the target’s present position). MRWS  provides complete situational awareness (perception of the surrounding tactical envi - ronment), but does not have the maximum detection range provided by the higher duty  cycle of HRWS for thermal noise-limited targets. 
The MRWS waveform uses M-of-N detection processing; a typical waveform  might be 3-of-7. Each MRWS dwell is made up of N looks each with a different PRF.  Detection is required on at least M looks to resolve target range and range rate unam - biguously. 
The detection thresholds are set to provide approximately one false alarm  per minute. The effectiveness of MRWS is dependent on the ability to detect targets at the required  ranges while simultaneously rejecting discrete clutter detections. Low two-way antenna  sidelobes along with the combination of techniques discussed in Section 4.2, such as  guard channel blanking and postdetection STC, are used to mitigate sidelobe clutter  discrete false alarms. 
MRWS also uses pulse compression to decrease the amount of sidelobe clutter that  targets must compete with. The lower PRF reduces eclipsing and the amount of clut - ter range-folding. Transmit carrier frequency diversity dwell-to-dwell forces Swerling  I and III target fluctuation statistics and improves cumulative probability of detec - tion performance. 
Frequency diversity look-to-look within a dwell produces Swerling  II and IV statistics and is better suited for high single-scan probability of detection. ch04.indd   37 12/20/07   4:53:23 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. 
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Pulse Doppler Radar. 4.38  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 4 MRWS can also be implemented with a high-medium PRF, which is characterized  by the waveform’s doppler coverage being unambiguous in doppler magnitude, but  not doppler sense, for the maximum target doppler of interest. The resulting single  blind speed due to main-beam clutter permits as wide of a clutter rejection notch  as required to reject main-beam clutter or ground moving targets and still not result  in doppler blind speeds for targets of interest. 
M-of-N ranging provides better range  measurement accuracy than linear FM ranging used in HRWS. The PRFs used in a  dwell must be chosen to resolve the high number of range ambiguities within the  instrumented range. Track. 
 Target tracking is done by making range, range rate, and azimuth and eleva - tion angle measurements on targets. Range measurements are obtained using range gat - ing and centroiding on the target return with range ambiguities being resolved within the  tracker. Range rate (i.e., doppler) measurements are formed with a centroid on the target’s  doppler return in the filter bank. 
Angle measurements can be obtained using monopulse,  sequential lobing, or conical scan, with monopulse being the prominent choice in mod - ern radars. The tracker creates windows, or groups of contiguous range-doppler cells,  around each of these measurements in order to associate detections with existing tracks.  The tracker, usually implemented with a nine-state (position, velocity, and acceleration)  Kalman filter, estimates target motion in an inertial coordinate system. 
Multiple-Target Tracking  (MTT) can be accomplished in several ways. One  method ( Track-While-Scan , or TWS) is to use the normal search mode with FM or  multiple-PRF ranging and store the range, angle, and doppler of the reported detec - tions in the radar computer. These detections are then used to form and update track  files. 
The antenna scans in a normal search pattern, and a scan-to-scan correlation is  made on the detections that update the track files. Although tracking accuracies are  less than can be achieved in a dedicated single-target track, multiple targets can be  tracked simultaneously over a large volume of space. A second method of Multiple-Target Tracking, Pause-While-Scan , particularly  applicable to ESA-based radars, is to scan in a normal search pattern, pause on  each search detection, and enter a Single-Target Track mode for a brief period. 
The  advantage is that the resulting range, angle, and doppler measurements are more  accurate than those made with a scanning antenna, but the time to search a volume  in space is increased. Transition-to-Track,  or Track Acquisition, is used to confirm search target detec - tions and provide improved range accuracy when needed. If the target is successfully  acquired, a track file in the radar computer is initiated. 
The Track Acquisition wave - form’s parameters depend upon the type of search waveform that produced the target  detection. The Track Acquisition waveform’s thresholds are set to reject false alarms  and reduce the false track initiation rate to less than one per hour . For Track Acquisition, a search detection from VS would require a HRWS wave - form to obtain a range measurement. 
HRWS and Alert/Confirm waveforms are followed  by range gated high-PRF dwells using M-on-N ranging to achieve the necessary range  accuracy for single PRF track updates. The unambiguous HRWS range measurement of  the search detection is used to help resolve the range ambiguity. For MRWS detections,  another MRWS dwell is used for Track Acquisition. 
Once the track file is initiated, several  rapid track updates are used to firmly establish the track. When doing Single-Target Track updates, a single PRF waveform can be used.  The range and/or doppler ambiguities are resolved in search and, if necessary, in the  Transition-to-Track phase. 
By using the unambiguous range and velocity predictions  ch04.indd   38 12/20/07   4:53:24 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Pulse Doppler Radar. 
 PULSE DOPPLER RADAR  4.396x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 4 of the target provided by the tracker, a single PRF can be chosen such that range and  doppler eclipsing is avoided with high probability. The length of the dwell is adapted  to provide sufficient energy on target so that its return signal-to-noise ratio will pro - vide the necessary measurement accuracies required by the tracker. This adaptive  track update waveform allows the search revisit time to be maintained while tracking  multiple targets. 
4.6 RANGE PERFORMANCE The radar range equation is used to determine the performance of pulse doppler radar.  The radar range equation must include losses, both system and environmental, that  will degrade the strength of return signals at the detector. Probability of detection ( Pd)  depends on target signal-to-noise ratio and probability of false alarm ( PFA), which  itself is a function of waveform. 
The false alarm probability determines the detection  threshold and is referenced to an individual range-doppler cell. This per-cell probabil - ity is derived from the specified false report time for the system. Radar Range Equation. 
 In the doppler region where the signal does not fall in  clutter, performance is limited only by system noise. The signal-to-noise power ratio  in the range-doppler cell at the detector prior to postdetection integration for a target  at range R is given by  SNR=  R Ro4  (4.15)  RP G G kTB LoT R T s n T=  av λ σ π2 31 4 4( )/  (4.16) where Ro = range at which SNR is equal to 1  sT = target radar cross section  LT = losses applicable to the target The remaining terms are as defined following Eq. 4.2. 
The net loss LT used to com - pute SNR for a target is generally higher than the net loss LC used to compute CNR  in Eq. 4.2. LT includes losses, such as eclipsing and range gate straddle, doppler filter  straddle, CFAR, and guard blanking, that are applicable to resolvable targets but not  to distributed clutter. 
The target SNR represents the envelope ( I Q2 2+  for a linear detector or I 2 + Q2  for a square-law detector) of the target return compared to that of just noise. The enve - lope is measured after the entire coherent matched filter process (i.e., transmit pulse  matched filter, pulse compression, and coherent doppler filtering). Therefore, SNR is  associated with a single CPI. 
Losses.  Some of the losses inherent in, but not necessarily unique to, pulse dop - pler radars that employ digital signal processing are discussed below. Some of the  losses may be incorporated into the other variables in the radar range equation. 
Care  must be taken to account for all of the system losses while avoiding redundancies.  ch04.indd   39 12/20/07   4:53:31 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. 
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Pulse Doppler Radar. 4.40  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 4 Most front-end  losses are applicable to both targets and clutter. Losses applicable  only to targets will be indicated. 
RF Transmit Loss.  This loss accounts for RF ohmic losses between the transmit - ter or RF power amplifier and the antenna radiator, which can include losses from  connectors, circulators, and radiating elements. Radome Loss. 
 Most radars require a radome to protect the antenna from environ - mental elements and to conform to the platform’s shape. Radomes will have a loss that  may depend on the scan angle of the antenna. This loss must be accounted for on transmit  and receive (i.e., a two-way loss). 
Propagation Loss.  Propagation through the atmosphere results in a loss, espe - cially at higher radar carrier frequencies. This loss is a function of range, altitude, and  weather. 
It is also a two-way loss. Propagation loss is more of a environmental loss  than a system loss, but can be grouped with the other losses that make up net loss in  the radar range equation. Scan Loss. 
 Broadside electronically scanned array antennas are subject to reduc - tion in gain when the main beam is scanned off broadside. The projected area of the  ESA aperture decreases as beam scans from broadside. Projected area drops as cosine  of scan (cone) angle. 
Mutual coupling between radiating elements further reduces the  effective area. Scan loss must be accounted for on transmit and receive. Beamshape Loss. 
 This target-specific loss accounts for the loss in gain when the  target is not located at the peak of the beam. Beamshape loss is defined as the increase  in the power or the SNR required to achieve the same probability of detection on a tar - get spread uniformly over the specified beam coverage as would occur with a target at  beam center. Beamshape loss is used primarily in search detection range performance  calculations. 
RF Receive Loss.  This loss is similar to RF Transmit Loss except it accounts for  ohmic losses from the antenna face to the first low-noise amplifier. This loss may be  included in the receive system noise figure or system temperature value. 
IF Matched Filter Loss.  The matched filter for a pulse doppler waveform includes  the analog IF matched filter in the receiver and any subsequent digital integration of  A/D samples to match the duration of the transmit pulse. IF matched filter loss quanti - fies how well the analog IF matched filter compares to the ideal matched filter for that  point in the reception chain. 
Quantization Noise Loss.  This loss is due to the noise added by the A/D conver - sion process and to truncation due to finite word lengths in the signal-processor that  follow.62 This loss can also be incorporated into the receiver noise figure value. Pulse Compression Mismatch Loss. 
 This is caused by the intentional mismatch - ing of the pulse compression filter to reduce time (range) sidelobes. Eclipsing and Range Gate Straddle Loss.  The large amount of range ambiguity  inherent in pulse doppler waveforms results in the possible eclipsing of target returns  ch04.indd   40 12/20/07   4:53:32 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Pulse Doppler Radar.  PULSE DOPPLER RADAR  4.416x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 4 when the receiver is blanked during pulse transmission. 
In a multiple range gate sys - tem, the returns may also straddle gates reducing the pulse matched filter output of  a single gate. Because of eclipsing and range gate straddle, the value of Ro, given by  Eq. 4.16, may fall anywhere between zero and a maximum value, depending on the  exact location of the target return within the interpulse period. 
Figure 4.20 illustrates the effect of eclipsing and range gate straddle on the output  of the pulse matched filter over the IPP. Each range gate is assumed to be matched to  the transmit pulse bandwidth, which for unmodulated pulses (i.e., no pulse compression  modulation) is the inverse of the pulse duration. Therefore, referring to Figure 4.6, the  gate width tg equals the transmitted pulse tt. 
In Figure 4.20, the IPP is 5 tg. The plots on  the left represent a range gate spacing of ts equal to tg. Range gate straddle loss can be  reduced by the use of overlapping gates at the expense of extra hardware and process - ing. 
The rightmost plots represent the use of 50% range gate overlap ( ts = tg/2). The  maximum pulse matched filter output as a function of return delay is shown in terms of  relative voltage and power. The “voltage” plot shows the cumulative effect of convolv - ing the return pulse with the matched filter of each range gate. 
For a single range gate,  this is simply the convolution of two rectangular pulses, which results in a triangular  response. To compute loss, the matched filter output in terms of power (i.e., voltage  squared) must be used. When the PRF is high, so that many range ambiguities occur, the target range delay  may be considered to be random from frame to frame, with a uniform distribution over  the IPP. 
A measure of performance reduction due to eclipsing and range gate straddle  is found by 1. Using the uneclipsed detection curve ( Pd vs. S/N) for the waveform and select - ing a particular SNR of interest S/N0 along with its corresponding probability of  detection Pd,0. 
2. Reduce S/N0 by a factor related to the relative output “power” of the matched  filter as a function of ambiguous range within the IPP. (See the third row of plots  in Figure 4.20.) 3. 
With the reduced SNR, determine the new Pd as a function of ambiguous range  within the IPP from the uneclipsed detection curve. 4. Average these new Pd values across the IPP. 
The result will be a new detection curve including the average effect of eclipsing and  range gate straddle. For a fixed Pd, the difference in SNR between the uneclipsed and  the eclipsed detection curves is the average eclipsing and range gate straddle loss. This  difference represents the average increase in signal-to-noise ratio required to obtain  the same probability of detection with eclipsing and straddle, as in the case where  the transmit pulse is received by a matched gate with no straddle. 
Since the detection  curve changes shape, the loss depends on the probability of detection selected, which  is depicted in Figure 4.21. For accurate results, eclipsing and range gate straddle loss  must be computed together. A less accurate approximation compares the average signal-to-noise ratio over the  interpulse period with the signal-to-noise ratio of the matched case. 
In the case of N  continuous range gates spanning the duration of the IPP, each of which are matched to  the transmit pulse width, the approximate average eclipsing and straddle loss is63   approximate eclipsingand r angegatestraddl leloss=12 7 6N N− (4.17) ch04.indd   41 12/20/07   4:53:34 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Pulse Doppler Radar. 
4.42  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 4 FIGURE 4.20  Concept of eclipsing and range gate straddle loss. The top row of plots shows the transmit pulse for a single IPP of a pulse doppler waveform with a  duty cycle of 20%. The second row of plots shows the relative voltage of the maximum pulse matched filter (MF) output as a function of range-ambiguous target return  within the IPP. 
The third row of plots shows the output in terms of relative power .1No RG Overlap: τt = τg = τs ; τb = 0 ; IPP = 5τg 0Transmit Pulse 0 1 2 3 4 5 1 0.5 0MF Output “Voltage” 0 1 2 3 4 5 0.51 0MF Output “Power” 0 1 2 Time Normalized by Range-Gate Duration3 4 5150% RG Overlap: τt = τg = 2τs ; τb = 0 ; IPP = 5τg 0Transmit Pulse 0 0.5 1.5 2.5 3.5 4.5 1 2 3 4 5 0.5 1.5 2.5 3.5 4.51 0.5 0MF Output “Voltage ” 0 1 2 3 4 5 0.5 1.5 2.5 3.5 4.50.51 0MF Output “Power ” 0 1 2 Time Normalized by Range-Gate Duration3 4 5 ch04.indd   42 12/20/07   4:53:36 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Pulse Doppler Radar. 
 PULSE DOPPLER RADAR  4.436x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 4 Eq. 4.17 assumes an unmodulated, rectangular transmit pulse shape with the receive  gate matched to the transmit pulse width. There is no range gate overlap. 
The first gate  of the N range gates are blanked for the transmit pulse. As shown in Figure 4.21, this  approximation is only valid for a Pd near 50%. There are several other details that have not been included in Figure 4.21. 
As shown  in Figure 4.6, a portion of the first valid receive range gate (and possibly a portion  of the last range gate in the IPP) is typically blanked to avoid receiving transients of  the transmit-to-receive (and receive-to-transmit) switching. Also, if pulse compres - sion modulation is used on the transmit pulse, the range gate duration will be reduced  to match the transmit pulse bandwidth. All of these effects should be included when  computing the eclipsing and range gate straddle loss. 
Doppler Filter Weighting Loss.  This loss results from the increased noise band - width of the doppler filters that occurs because of filter sidelobe weighting. The loss  can also be accounted for by an increase of the doppler filter noise bandwidth instead  of as a separate loss. 
Doppler Filter Straddle Loss.  This loss is due to a target not always being in the  center of a doppler filter. It is computed by assuming a uniformly distributed target dop - pler over one filter spacing and is a function of the doppler filter sidelobe weighting. 
This  loss can be reduced (at the expense of increased processing) by zero-padding the collected  data and performing a higher-point FFT to form highly overlapped doppler filters.FIGURE 4.21  Comparison of detection performance with and without eclipsing and range gate  straddle loss. The approximate performance using Eq. 4.17 is also provided. 
The performance with  eclipsing and range gate straddle loss with the use of 50% overlapped range gates is shown.120% duty, 5 RG/IPP, PFA = 1e-006, Npdi = 1, Marcum Target 0.9 0.8 0.7 0.6Probability of Detection0.5 0.4 0.3 0.2 0.1 010 11 12 13 14 Uneclipsed Signal-to-Noise Ratio (dB)15 16 17 18 19 20w/o Eclipsing and RG Straddle w/ Eclipsing and RG Straddle (Approx.) w/ Eclipsing and RG Straddlew/ Eclipsing and RG Straddle (50% Overlap) ch04.indd   43 12/20/07   4:53:36 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Pulse Doppler Radar. 
4.44  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 4 CFAR Loss.  This loss is caused by an imperfect estimate of the detection thresh - old compared with the ideal threshold. The fluctuation in the estimate necessitates  that the mean threshold be set higher than the ideal, hence a loss. 
It is only applicable  to targets. Guard Blanking Loss.  This target-specific loss is the detectability loss in the main  channel caused by spurious blanking from the guard channel. 
(See Figure 4.1 1.) Probability of False Alarm.  Radar detection performance is determined by  the detection threshold, which in turn is set to provide a specified probability of  false alarm.64–68 As described in Section 4.4, pulse doppler radars often employ  a multilook detection criterion to resolve range ambiguities. This can be accom - plished with linear-FM ranging as in the HRWS waveform or M-of-N ranging used  by MRWS. 
These ambiguity resolution techniques dictate how the probability of  false alarm per range-doppler cell is computed. These calculations assume a noise- limited environment. For HRWS, different linear-FM slopes are applied to looks 2 through m of a m-look  dwell, where m is typically 3. 
The PRF is high enough for at most only a doppler sign  ambiguity. Detections in looks 2 through m, must correlate in doppler with detections  in the first look, which has no slope. A doppler correlation window is set equal to  the maximum doppler offset due to linear-FM ranging from a target at the maximum  instrumented range. 
For doppler-only correlation, the PFA per range-doppler cell to  provide a specified false report time is  PNT m nN N Trd fmFA FM FR=        −1 2 1ln( )  1m  (4.18) where Nr = number of independent range samples processed per IPP  Nf =  number of independent doppler filters visible in the doppler passband  (number of unblanked filters/FFT weighting factor)  Td =  total dwell time of the multiple PRFs including postdetection integration  (if any), space change, and any dead time  n = number of looks in a dwell time  m =  number of detections required for a target report (for a typical HRWS  dwell, n = 3 and m = 3)  m n   = binomial coefficient = n!/[m!(n-m)!]  TFR =  false-report time (per Marcum’s definition where the probability is   0.5 that at least one false report will occur in the false-report time; this  can be related to the average time TA VG between false reports by    TFR ≈ TA VG ln(2))  NFM =  kFM,max (2Rmax/c) = number of independent doppler filters in the doppler  correlation window  kFM,max  = steepest linear-FM slope magnitude  Rmax = maximum instrumented range ch04.indd   44 12/20/07   4:53:41 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Pulse Doppler Radar. 
 PULSE DOPPLER RADAR  4.456x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 4 Alert/Confirm increases sensitivity by allowing more false alarms in Alert and rely - ing on Confirm to reject those false alerts. The Alert/Confirm combination is designed  to provide the same false report time TFR as a conventional waveform. A specified  fractional increase F in frame time accounts for the execution of Confirm dwells to  reject false Alert detections. 
F is on the order of 5–10%. When using a VS Alert and a  3-look HRWS Confirm, the probability of false alarm per range-doppler cell, PFA,a and  PFA,c for Alert and Confirm, respectively, is  PT N N T PNTad a r a f a a c r cdFA FR FA,, , , , , ,,ln( )= =2 1 2c c fN N TF Fln( ) ,2 1 21 3 cue F M F R×+    (4.19) where Td,a = total Alert dwell time  Nr,a = number of independent range samples processed per IPP in Alert  Nf,a =  number of independent doppler filters visible in the Alert doppler   passband  TFR,a = Td,c /F = Alert false report time  Td,c = total Confirm dwell time  F = fractional increase in frame time allocated to Confirm (5–10%)  Nr,c = number of independent range samples processed per IPP in Confirm  Nf,cue =  number of independent doppler filters in the Confirm window centered  about the doppler of the Alert detection cue  NFM =  number of independent doppler filters in Confirm linear-FM ranging  doppler correlation window  TFR = overall Alert/Confirm false report time The M-of-N ranging used in MRWS requires correlation in range and can be viewed  as a binary detector. MRWS is typically a medium-PRF waveform with range and dop - pler ambiguities. 
Doppler is used for clutter mitigation in each look, and the doppler  ambiguity may not need to be resolved since the tracker can determine range rate from  successive dwells. A typical MRWS M-of-N correlation would be three detections out  of eight looks (i.e., m = 3 and n = 8). For range-only correlation, the PFA in each range- doppler cell is given by  PNT m nN Tfdm FA ruFR=          1 21 ln( ) (4.20) where Nru =  number of independent range samples in the output unambiguous-range  interval (display range/range gate size) ch04.indd   45 12/20/07   4:53:45 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Pulse Doppler Radar. 4.46  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 4 For better false alarm rejection, doppler correlation can be used for MRWS. 
In the  case where both range and doppler correlation are used, the required PFA is  PT m nN N T Wd mFA fu ruFR=         −ln( )2 1 1m  (4.21) where Nfu = number of independent doppler filters in the unambiguous doppler region  W =  width (in doppler filters) of the correlation window applied to detections  following initial detection Probability of Detection.  Using the PFA per range-doppler cell, the probability  of detection ( Pd) of a given look can be determined for a given target SNR, the num - ber of CPIs noncoherently integrated ( Npdi), and the target RCS fluctuation model  assumed.69 The inverse problem of determining the required SNR for a given Pd can be  solved via approximations.70 Universal detection equations have been published that  provide reasonably accurate results and are reproduced here.71 Again, the assumption  that targets are in a gaussian noise-limited environment is made. For a single look with Npdi CPIs noncoherently integrated and a specified PFA per  range-doppler cell, the Pd as a function of SNR for a Marcum (nonfluctuating) target  can be approximated as  P P N P Pd( , , ) . 
ln[ ( ) ] SNR erfcFA pdi FA FA = − − +1 20 8 4 1N NNNpdi pdipdiSNR21 2 21 2− − + −        (4.22) where erfc(·) is the complementary error function. The required SNR as a function of  Pd for a Marcum target is approximated as  SNRreqd FA pdi pdi pdipdi( , , ) P P NN NN d = + −η η22 21 4 (4.23) where  η= − − − − − 0 8 4 1 0 5 0 8 4 . ln[ ( ) ] .ln[ P P . 
P Pd FA FA sign( )d d d P( ) ] 1−   For Swerling fluctuating target models, the Pd and required SNR can be approxi - mated, respectively, as  P P N n KK P N N d e mm( , , , )( , ) (SNRFA pdi1 FA pdi pd=−−2 2i i pdiSNR− +        n N nne ee), 12  (4.24)  SNRFA pdi1 pdi( , , , )( , ) ( )P P N nK P n N n d em d e e=− −−2 2 K K P nn Nm d ee −−  1 pdi ( , )21  (4.25) ch04.indd   46 12/20/07   4:53:57 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Pulse Doppler Radar. 
 PULSE DOPPLER RADAR  4.476x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 4 where nN Ne=   1 2 2, , , ,pdi pdifor Swerling I targget (chi-squared distribution w ith 2 degre s ssoffreedom) for Swerling I I target (chi-s squared distribution w ith2 d egressofpdiN freedom) for SwerlingIIItarget(chi-squar red distribution w ith 4 degre ssoffreedom) ) for Swerling I V target (chi-squared distri ibution w ith4 d egressoffreedom)pdiN K x d Pd x m( ,) ,= −   12 2 = chi-squared distribution survival function72 Km−1( p,d ) = inverse chi-squared distribution survival function P xxt e dt t e dttx t( ,)( ,) ( )αγ α αα α= =− − − −∞∫ ∫Γ1 0 1 0 = regularized lower incomplete gamma function The integral of the chi-squared distribution Km(x,d ) and its inverse Km−1 ( p,d ) are often  included in mathematical computation software packages.73 When M-of-N detection (i.e., binary detection) is used within a dwell, the probabil - ity of detection for each look ( Pd,look) is used to compute the probability of detection  for a dwell ( Pd,dwell). When a dwell requires m detections out of n looks for a target  declaration, the Pd,dwell is  Pk nP Pd k mn dk dn , , , ( )dwell look look =   − =−∑ 1k k (4.26) For Alert/Confirm detection performance, the Pd for the Alert dwell and the Pd  for the Confirm dwell are individually computed as a function of SNR. Care must  be taken to normalize the SNR to account for differences in doppler filter bandwidth  between the Alert and Confirm waveforms. 
The multiplication of normalized prob - ability of detection curve for the Alert dwell with that of the Confirm dwell results  in an estimate of the composite Pd vs. S/N curve for Alert/Confirm. More accurate  results must include the effects of latency between the Alert and Confirm dwells. 
Search detection performance is often characterized by the cumulative probabil - ity of detection, Pd,cum, which is defined as the probability that the radar will detect  a closing target at least once by the time the target has closed to a specified range.  Pd,cum is only defined for closing targets. The cumulative probability of detection for  the kth scan, or frame, is  P k P i P k Pd d ik d, , ,[ ] [ [ ]] [ ]cum ss cum= − − = − +=∏1 1 11 d d d k P k, , [ ]( [ ])ss cum 1−  (4.27) where Pd,ss[k] is the single-scan probability of detection on the kth scan. 
The accumula - tion of single-scan probability of detections is started at a range where the target’s Pd,ss  is approximately 5%. There is an optimal search frame time for cumulative detection  performance. A balance must be achieved. 
A short frame time limits the amount of  energy placed on target per dwell and lowers the single-scan Pd. A long frame time  allows the target to close in range more between revisits, thus lowering the benefit  of the accumulation. Figure 4.22 illustrates the difference between single-scan and  cumulative probability of detection. 
ch04.indd   47 12/20/07   4:54:07 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Pulse Doppler Radar. 
4.48  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 4 Clutter-limited Case.  The foregoing discussion assumed that the target fell  in the noise-limited (i.e., clutter-free) part of the doppler band. If the target falls  in the sidelobe clutter region, the range performance will be degraded, since the  total interference power (system noise plus clutter) against which the target must  compete is increased. 
The foregoing discussion can be applied to the sidelobe clut - ter region, however, by interpreting Ro as the range where the signal is equal to  sidelobe clutter plus system noise.74–76 The CFAR loss may also be higher owing  to the increased variability of the threshold when the clutter varies over the target  detection region. More accurate calculations of detection performance in the side- lobe clutter limited case should include the proper clutter RCS fluctuation models  and CFAR techniques.77 LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS AESA active electronically scanned array A/D analog-to-digital AGC automatic gain control AM amplitude modulation CAGC clutter automatic gain control CFAR constant false alarm rate CNR clutter-to-noise power ratio CPI coherent processing interval CW continuous wave ∆AZ delta-azimuth antenna beam (used for monopulse angle estimation) ∆EL delta-elevation antenna beam (used for monopulse angle estimation) dBc decibels with respect to the carrier DC direct current DFT discrete Fourier transformFIGURE 4.22  Single-scan vs. cumulative Pd as a function of range for a fixed  radial-velocity moving target1 0.9 0.8 0.7 0.6 0.5 0.4 0.3 0.2 0.1 0 20 24 28 32 36 40 Range (nmi )Probability of Detection 44 48 52 56 60Single ScanCumulativ e Target Closes 2 nmi per Sca n ch04.indd   48 12/20/07   4:54:08 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Pulse Doppler Radar.  PULSE DOPPLER RADAR  4.496x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 4 DPD digital product detector ESA electronically scanned array FFT fast Fourier transform FM frequency modulation FM-CW frequency-modulated continuous-wave HRWS high-PRF range-while-search I inphase IF intermediate frequency INS inertial navigation system IPP interpulse period LNA low-noise amplifier LO local oscillator MF matched filter MRWS medium-PRF range-while-search MTI moving target indication MTT multiple-target tracking NAGC noise automatic gain control PAM pulse-amplitude modulation Pd probability of detection PC pulse compression PDI postdetection integration (noncoherent integration) PFA probability of false alarm PM phase modulation PPM pulse-position modulation PRF pulse repetition frequency PWM pulse-width modulation Q quadrature RCS radar cross section RFI radio frequency interference rms root-mean-square RF radio frequency R/P receiver protector RWS range-while-search Σ sum receive antenna beam (primary beam used for detection) SLB sidelobe blanker SNR signal-to-noise power ratio STC sensitivity time control TWS track-while-scan T/R transmit/receive VS velocity search REFERENCES  1. 
IEEE Standard Radar Definitions,  IEEE Std 686–1997, 1997, p. 20.  2. 
D. C. Schleher, MTI and Pulsed Doppler Radar,  Norwood, MA: Artech House, Inc., 1991,   pp. 
ix–x.  3. F. 
E. Nathanson, Radar Design Principles, 2nd Ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1991, pp. 
471–472.  4. M. 
I. Skolnik, Introduction to Radar Systems,  Chapter 3, 3rd Ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2000. 
 5. G. W. 
Stimson, Introduction to Airborne Radar,  Chapter 3 & Part X, 2nd Ed., Raleigh, NC:  SciTech Publishing, Inc., 1998. ch04.indd   49 12/20/07   4:54:09 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. 
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Pulse Doppler Radar. 4.50  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 4  6. P. 
Lacomme, J. Hardange, J. Marchais, and E. 
Normant, Air and Spaceborne Radar Systems:   An Introduction.,  Chapter 2, Norwich, NY: William Andrew Publishing, LLC, 2001.  7. S. 
A. Hovanessian, Radar System Design and Analysis , Chapter 12, Norwood, MA: Artech House,  Inc., 1984.  8. 
M. I. Skolnik, Radar Applications , New York: IEEE Press, 1988. 
 9. R. J. 
Doviak, D. S. Zrnic, and D. 
S. Sirmans, “Doppler weather radar,” in Proceedings of the  IEEE,  vol. 67, no. 
11, 1979, pp. 1522–1553. 10. 
P. Mahapatra, Aviation Weather Surveillance Systems: Advanced Radar and Surface Sensors  for Flight Safety and Air Traffic Management,  London, UK: The Institution of Electrical  Engineers, 1999. 11. 
K. C. Overman, K. 
A. Leahy, T. W. 
Lawrence, and R. J. Fritsch, “The future of surface   surveillance-revolutionizing the view of the battlefield,” in Record of the IEEE 2000  International Radar Conference,  May 7–12, 2000, pp. 
1–6. 12. Defense Science Board, Future DoD Airborne High-Frequency Radar Needs/Resources,  Office of the Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition and Technology, Washington, DC,  April 2001. 
13. M. I. 
Skolnik, Introduction to Radar Systems, 3rd Ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2002,   pp. 171–172. 
14. G. W. 
Stimson, Introduction to Airborne Radar,  2nd Ed. Raleigh, NC: SciTech Publishing, Inc.,  1998, pp. 329–333. 
15. F. C. 
Williams and M. E. Radant, “Airborne radar and the three PRFs,” Microwave Journal ,  July 1983 and reprinted in M. 
I. Skolnik, Radar Applications.  New York: IEEE Press, 1988,  pp. 
272–276. 16. D. 
C. Schleher, MTI and Pulsed Doppler Radar , Artech House, Inc., 1991, pp. 59–73. 
17. G. Morris and L. 
Harkness, Airborne Pulsed Doppler Radar,  2nd Ed. Norwood, MA: Artech  House, Inc., 1996, p. 4. 
18. W. H. 
Long and K. A. Harriger, “Medium PRF for the AN/APG-66 radar,” in Proceedings of the  IEEE,  vol. 
73, issue 2, February 1985, pp. 301–311. 19. 
B. Cantrell, “ADC spurious signal mitigation in radar by modifying the LO,” in Proceedings of  the 2004 IEEE Radar Conference,  April 26–29, 2004, pp. 151–156. 
20. H. Hommel and H. 
Feldle, “Current status of airborne active phased array (AESA) radar   systems and future trends,” in 2005 IEEE MTT-S International Microwave Symposium Digest,   June 12–17, 2005, pp. 1449–1452. 21. 
S. M. Sherman, Monopulse Principles and Techniques , Norwood, MA: Artech House, Inc., 1984. 
22. L. E. 
Pellon, “A double Nyquist digital product detector for quadrature sampling,” IEEE  Transactions on Signal Processing , vol. 40, issue 7, pp. 1670–1681, July 1992. 
23. G. Minkler, CFAR: The Principles of Automatic Radar Detection in Clutter , Baltimore, MD:  Magellan Book Company, 1990. 
24. R. Nitzberg, Radar Signal Processing and Adaptive Systems,  Chapter 7, Norwood, MA: Artech  House, Inc., 1999. 
25. M. Weiss, “Analysis of some modified cell-averaging CFAR processors in multiple-target situa - tions,” IEEE Transactions on Aerospace and Electronic Systems,  vol. 
AES-18, no.1, pp. 102–144,  January 1982. 26. 
P. P. Gandhi and S. 
A. Kassam, “Analysis of CFAR processors in nonhomogeneous background,”  IEEE Transactions on Aerospace and Electronic Systems,  vol. 24, no. 
4, July 1988. 27. J. 
Farrell and R. Taylor, “Doppler radar clutter,” IEEE Transactions on Aeronautical &  Navigational Electronics,  vol. ANE-11, pp. 
162–172, September 1964 and reprinted in D. K.  Barton, CW and Doppler Radars,  Section VI-2, Vol. 
7. Norwood, MA: Artech House, Inc., 1978,  pp. 351–361. 
28. L. Helgostam and B. 
Ronnerstam, “Ground clutter calculation for airborne doppler radar,” IEEE  Transactions on Military Electronics,  vol. MIL-9, pp. 294–297, July–October 1965. 
ch04.indd   50 12/20/07   4:54:09 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Pulse Doppler Radar. 
 PULSE DOPPLER RADAR  4.516x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 4 29. A. L. 
Friedlander and L. J. Greenstein, “A generalized clutter computation procedure for  airborne pulse doppler radars,” IEEE Transactions on Aerospace and Electronic Systems,   vol. 
AES-6, pp. 51–61, January 1970 and reprinted in D. K. 
Barton, CW and Doppler Radars,   Section VI-3, Vol. 7, Norwood, MA: Artech House, Inc., 1978, pp. 363–374. 
30. M. B. 
Ringel, “An advanced computer calculation of ground clutter in an airborne pulse doppler  radar,” in NAECON ’77 Record,  pp. 921–928 and reprinted in D. K. 
Barton, CW and Doppler  Radars,  Section VI-4, V ol. 7. Norwood, MA: Artech House, Inc., 1978, pp. 
375–382. 31. R. 
L. Mitchell, Radar Signal Simulation,  Chapter 11, Norwood, MA: Artech House, Inc., 1976. 32. 
J. K. Jao and W. 
B. Goggins, “Efficient, closed-form computation of airborne pulse doppler clut - ter,” in Proceedings of the 1985 IEEE International Radar Conference,  Washington, DC, 1985,  pp. 17–22. 
33. W. A. 
Skillman, SIGCLUT: Surface and Volumetric Clutter-to-Noise, Jammer and Target Signal- to-Noise Radar Calculation Software and User’s Manual,  Norwood, MA: Artech House, Inc.,  1987, pp. 1–4. 34. 
D. C. Schleher, MTI and Doppler Radar,  Norwood, MA: Artech House, Inc., 1991, pp. 
131–135. 35. F. 
J. Harris, “On the use of windows for harmonic analysis with the discrete Fourier transform,”  in Proceedings of the IEEE,  vol. 66, no. 
1, January 1978, pp. 51–83. 36. 
W. A. Skillman, Radar Calculations Using the TI-59 Programmable Calculator,  Norwood, MA:  Artech House, Inc., 1983, p. 
308. 37. R. 
E. Ziemer and J. A. 
Ziegler, “MTI improvement factors for weighted DFTs,” IEEE Transactions  on Aerospace and Electronic Systems, vol. AES-16, pp. 393–397, May 1980. 
38. H. R. 
Ward, “Doppler processor rejection of ambiguous clutter,” IEEE Transactions on Aerospace  and Electronic Systems,  vol. AES-11, July 1975 and reprinted in D. K. 
Barton, CW and Doppler  Radars,  Section IV–11, V ol. 7. Norwood, MA: Artech House, Inc., 1978, pp. 
299–301. 39. R. 
H. Fletcher and D. W. 
Burlage, “An initialization technique for improved MTI performance in  phased array radar,” in Proceedings of the IEEE , vol. 60, December 1972, pp. 1551–1552. 
40. D. H. 
Harvey and T. L. Wood, “Design for sidelobe blanking systems,” in Proceedings of the 1980  IEEE International Radar Conference,  Washington, DC, 1980, pp. 
410–416. 41. L. 
Maisel, “Performance of sidelobe blanking systems,” IEEE Transactions on Aerospace and  Electronic Systems,  vol. AES-4, pp. 174–180, March 1968. 
42. H. M. 
Finn, R. S. Johnson, and P. 
Z. Peebles, “Fluctuating target detection in clutter using sid - elobe blanking logic,” IEEE Transactions on Aerospace and Electronic Systems,  vol. AES-7,  pp. 
147–159, May 1971. 43. A. 
Farina, Antenna-based Signal Processing Techniques for Radar Systems , Chapter 3, Norwood,  MA: Artech House, Inc., 1992, pp. 59–93. 44. 
D. A. Shnidman and S. 
S. Toumodge, “Sidelobe blanking with integration and target fluctua - tion,” IEEE Transactions on Aerospace and Electronic Systems,  vol. 38, no. 
3, pp. 1023–1037,  July 2002. 45. 
D. H. Mooney, “Post Detection STC in a Medium PRF Pulse Doppler Radar,” U.S. 
Patent  4,095,222, June 13, 1978. 46. F. 
E. Nathanson, Radar Design Principles,  2nd Ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, Inc., 1991,   pp. 
281–282. 47. J. 
B. Tsui, Digital Techniques for Wideband Receivers,  2nd Ed., Raleigh, NC: SciTech Publishing  Company, 2004, pp. 163–166. 
48. L. P. 
Goetz and W. A. Skillman, “Master oscillator requirements for coherent radar sets,” in IEEE- NASA Symposium on Short Term Frequency Stability, NASA-SP-80, November 1964. 
49. R. S. 
Raven, “Requirements for master oscillators for coherent radar,” in Proceedings of the IEEE,   vol. 54, February 1966, pp. 237–243 and reprinted in D. 
K. Barton, CW and Doppler Radars,   Section V-I, V ol. 7, Artech House, Inc., Norwood, MA, 1978, pp. 
317–323. 50. R. 
S. Raven, Correction to “Requirements for master oscillators for coherent radar,” in Proceedings  of the IEEE,  vol. 55, issue 8, August 1967, p. 
1425. ch04.indd   51 12/20/07   4:54:10 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. 
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Pulse Doppler Radar. 4.52  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 4 51. M. 
Gray, F. Hutchinson, D. Ridgely, F. 
Fruge, and D. Cooke, “Stability measurement problems  and techniques for operational airborne pulse doppler radar,” IEEE Transactions on Aerospace  and Electronic Systems,  vol. AES-5, pp. 
632–637, July 1969. 52. A. 
E. Acker, “Eliminating transmitted clutter in doppler radar systems,” Microwave Journal,   vol. 18, pp. 
47–50, November 1975 and reprinted in D. K. Barton, CW and Doppler Radars,   Section V-3, V ol. 
7. Norwood, MA: Artech House, Inc., 1978, pp. 331–336. 
53. J. A. 
Scheer and J. L. Kurtz, Coherent Radar Performance Estimation,  Norwood, MA: Artech  House, Inc., 1993, pp. 
158–159. 54. S. 
J. Goldman, Phase Noise Analysis in Radar Systems Using Personal Computers,  Chapter 2,  New York: John Wiley & Sons, Inc, 1989. 55. 
G. V . Trunk and M. 
W. Kim, “Ambiguity resolution of multiple targets using pulse-doppler wave - forms,” IEEE Transactions on Aerospace and Electronic Systems,  vol. 30, no. 
4, pp. 1130–1137,  October 1994. 56. 
F. E. Nathanson, Radar Design Principles,  2nd Ed. 
New York: McGraw-Hill, Inc., 1991,   pp. 449–452. 57. 
M. B. Ringel, “The effect of linear FM on the ground clutter in an airborne pulse doppler radar,”  in NAECON '79 Record,  vol. 
2, Dayton, OH, May 15–17, 1979, pp. 790–795. 58. 
F. E. Nathanson, Radar Design Principles,  2nd Ed. 
New York: McGraw-Hill, Inc., 1991,   pp. 120–123. 59. 
G. W. Stimson, Introduction to Airborne Radar,  2nd Ed. 
Mendham, NJ: SciTech Publishing, Inc.,  1998, pp. 506–507. 60. 
P. L. Bogler, Radar Principles with Applications to Tracking Systems, New York: John Wiley &  Sons, Inc., 1990, pp. 
262–266. 61. R. 
A. Dana and D. Moraitis, “Probability of detecting a Swerling I target on two correlated  observations,” IEEE Transactions on Aerospace and Electronic Systems,  vol. 
AES-17, no. 5,  pp. 727–730, September 1981. 
62. R. E. 
Ziemer, T. Lewis, and L. Guthrie, “Degradation analysis of pulse doppler radars due to sig - nal processing,” in NAECON 1977 Record,  pp. 
938–945 and reprinted in D. K. Barton, CW and  Doppler Radars,  Section IV-12, V ol. 
7, Norwood, MA: Artech House, Inc., 1978, pp. 303–312. 63. 
P. Lacomme, J. Hardange, J. 
Marchais, and E. Normant, Air and Spaceborne Radar Systems: An  Introduction,  Norwich, NY: William Andrew Publishing, LLC, 2001, pp. 150–151. 
64. J. I. 
Marcum, “A statistical theory of target detection by pulsed radar,” IEEE  Transactions on  Information Theory,  vol. IT-6, pp. 59–267, April 1960. 
65. P. Swerling, “Probability of detection for fluctuating targets,” IEEE Transactions on Information  Theory,  vol. 
IT-6, pp. 269–308, April 1960. 66. 
L. F. Fehlner, “Target detection by a pulsed radar,” Report TG 451, Johns Hopkins University,  Applied Physics Laboratory, Laurel, MD, 2 July 1962. 
67. D. P. 
Meyer and H. A. Mayer, Radar Target Detection: Handbook of Theory and Practice. 
  New York: Academic Press, 1973. 68. J. 
V . DiFranco and W. L. 
Rubin, Radar Detection,  Norwood, MA: Artech House, Inc., 1980. 69. J. 
V. DiFranco and W. L. 
Rubin, Radar Detection,  Norwood, MA: Artech House, Inc., 1980,  pp. 287–445. 70. 
D. A. Shnidman, “Determination of required SNR values,” IEEE Transactions on Aerospace and  Electronic Systems,  vol. 
38, no. 3, pp. 1059–1064, July 2002. 
71. D. K. 
Barton, “Universal equations for radar target detection,” IEEE Transactions on Aerospace  and Electronic Systems,  vol. 41, no. 3, pp. 
1049–1052, July 2005. 72. M. 
Evans, N. Hastings, and B. Peacock, Statistical Distributions,  3rd Ed. 
New York, John Wiley  & Sons, Inc., 2000, p. 13. 73. 
W. H. Press, S. 
A. Teukolsky, W. T. 
Vetterling, and B. P. Flannery, Numerical Recipes in C:  The Art of Scientific Computing,  2nd Ed. 
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1992,  pp. 213–222. ch04.indd   52 12/20/07   4:54:10 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Pulse Doppler Radar.  PULSE DOPPLER RADAR  4.536x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 4 74. 
D. Mooney and G. Ralston, “Performance in clutter of airborne pulse MTI, CW doppler and pulse  doppler radar,” in 1961 IRE Convention Record , vol. 
9, part 5, 1961, pp. 55–62 and reprinted in  D. K. 
Barton, CW and Doppler Radars,  Section VI-1, V ol. 7. Norwood, MA: Artech House, Inc.,  1978, pp. 
343–350. 75. M. 
B. Ringel, “Detection range analysis of an airborne medium PRF radar,” in IEEE 1981  NAECON Record,  Dayton, OH, 1981, pp. 358–362. 
76. P. E. 
Holbourn and A. M. Kinghorn, “Performance analysis of airborne pulse doppler radar,”  in Proceedings of the 1985 IEEE International Radar Conference,  Washington, DC, 1985,  pp. 
12–16. 77. D. 
A. Shnidman, “Radar detection probabilities and their calculation,” IEEE Transactions on  Aerospace and Electronic Systems , vol. 31, no. 
3, pp. 928–950, July 1995. ch04.indd   53 12/20/07   4:54:10 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Pulse Doppler Radar. 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 4   blind folio 4.54 ch04.indd   54 12/20/07   4:54:10 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Pulse Doppler Radar. 