11.16x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 11
Solid-State T ransmitters
Michael T. Borkowski
Raytheon Company
11.1 INTRODUCTION
For commercial applications, the transistor has all but replaced vacuum tube technol -
ogy in transmitters operating at VHF and below. Since the 1980s, the power output 
capability among various solid-state technologies has increased to the point where they 
are actively pursued as replacements for some vacuum electronics in radar transmitters; 
this is not, however, a universally attractive solution. The transition from high-power 
klystrons, traveling wave tubes (TWTs), crossed-field amplifiers (CFAs), and magne -
trons, to solid-state electronics has actually been very gradual because the power output 
of individual solid-state devices is quite limited compared to typical radar requirements. 
Nevertheless, transmitter designers have learned that the required higher power levels 
for radar transmitters can be achieved with a solid-state technology because transis -
tors and transistor amplifier modules can be readily combined in parallel to achieve 
a composite higher equivalent power output. As depicted in Figure 11.1, this design 
attribute helps to extend the solid-state performance envelope well into the region that 
had previously been dominated by only vacuum electronics.1,2 It is not the intent of this 
chapter to delineate the relative merits of these sometimes competing technologies, 
but rather to describe the limits, design practices, and characteristics of the solid-state 
technology for use in the common radar frequency ranges. The advantages of solid-
state technologies will be described; some of the key semiconductor technologies and 
devices will be discussed; and some examples of solid-state component and transmitter 
design will be presented.
11.2 ADVANTAGES OF SOLID STATE
Although the gap in performance capabilities between the solid-state and vacuum 
electronics technologies can be wide, there still exist relevant trades involving cost, 
maintainability, and reliability, and this design tradespace can be very complicated. 
Some point to the continued maturation of vacuum electronics3 and suggest that both 
vacuum tubes and solid-state devices will be appealing in high performance radars for 
many years to come. Others note still that the best value in electronic equipment is pro -
vided when the “appropriate technology”4 is applied to affordable military electronics, 
recognizing that tubes and solid state may remain as complementary design solutions Chapter 11
ch11.indd   1 12/17/07   2:25:22 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Source: RADAR HANDBOOK 11.2  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 11
for future system requirements. For example, microwave power tubes continue to pro -
vide significantly higher power output and efficiencies than solid-state power ampli -
fiers for high performance millimeter-wave radars.5 Compared with tubes, solid-state 
devices offer the following advantages:
● No hot cathodes are required; therefore, there is no warmup delay, no wasted heater 
power, and virtually no limit on transistor operating life. Under certain operating 
conditions, the prediction of the median time to failure (MTTF) for some RF transis -
tors can exceed 1,000 years.
● Transistor amplifiers operate at much lower voltages; therefore, power supply volt -
ages are on the order of volts rather than kilovolts to avoid the need for large spac -
ings, oil filling, or encapsulation. Compared with a high-voltage power supply, a 
low-voltage supply uses fewer nonstandard parts and is generally less expensive.
● Transmitters designed with solid-state devices exhibit improved meantime between 
failures (MTBF) in comparison with tube-type transmitters. Amplifier module 
MTBFs greater than 500,000 hours have been extrapolated from accelerated life 
testing. A factor of 4 improvement in transmitter system MTBF has been reported 
for an S band solid-state transmitter replacing a klystron transmitter .6
● Graceful degradation of system performance occurs when individual modules fail. 
Power output degrades by 20*log (1– b) as devices fail, where b  is the fraction of 
failed devices.7 This results because a large number of solid-state devices must be 
combined to provide the power for a radar transmitter, and they are easily combined 
in ways that degrade gracefully when individual units fail.
● The ability to demonstrate wide bandwidth is a significant characteristic of solid-
state devices. While high-power microwave radar tubes can achieve 10 to 20% band -
width, solid-state transmitter modules can achieve up to 50% bandwidth or more 
with acceptable efficiency.FIGURE 11.1  By combining the outputs of thousands of transistor amplifiers, 
the cumulative average power output of solid-state technologies can effectively 
compete with the performance capabilities of vacuum tube technology, as shown 
in the center overlap region where competing amplifier solutions coexist.
ch11.indd   2 12/17/07   2:25:22 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Solid-State Transmitters  SOLID-STATE TRANSMITTERS  11.36x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 11
● Flexibility can be realized. A module with both transmit and receive path amplifiers 
(T/R module) can be associated with every antenna element in phased array sys -
tems. RF distribution losses that normally occur in a tube-powered system between 
a point-source tube amplifier and the face of the array are thus eliminated. In addi -
tion, phase shifting for beam steering can be implemented at low power levels on the 
input feed side of an active array module; this avoids the high-power losses of the 
phase shifters at the radiating elements and raises overall efficiency. Also, peak RF 
power levels at any point are relatively low because the outputs are combined only 
in space. Furthermore, amplitude tapering can be accomplished by turning off or 
attenuating individual active array amplifiers. For phased array systems with modest 
power levels, the solid-state solution offers advantages that make it attractive as the 
basis for a radar transmitter.
The general replacement of high-power microwave tubes by solid-state devices has 
not been straightforward. Attempts to replace existing tube-type transmitters with a solid-
state retrofit have been hindered by the requirement to be a form, fit, functional replace -
ment for the incumbent hardware. Radar transmit waveforms that previously had been 
architected to make optimum use of the high peak power and low duty cycle capability 
of the tube no longer favor the solid-state transmitter. A low duty cycle environment is 
not the most cost-effective solution for solid-state devices because transistors exhibit 
much shorter thermal time constants than the replacement tube and are more efficiently 
operated using a lower composite peak power at a higher duty cycle. As an example of 
the dilemma, an L-band microwave transistor that is capable of perhaps 50 watts (W)  
average power cannot provide much more than 300 watts of peak power without over -
heating during the pulse. The short pulse lengths and low duty cycles typical of older 
tube-type radars thus make very inefficient use of the average power capabilities of 
microwave transistors. To replace the old, well-proven 5J26 L-band magnetron that 
develops 500 W of average RF power at 0.1% (typical) duty cycle would require 2500 
to 5000 of the 50-watt transistors just described. However, with a 10% duty cycle the 
500-watt average power requirement could be provided by only 25 to 50 of the 50-watt 
transistors. In other words, microwave transistors are much more cost-effective when 
the required radar system average power can be provided by a lower peak power at a 
higher duty cycle. As a result, there have been relatively few direct replacements of 
older low duty cycle transmitters by solid-state transmitters. Some initiatives, such as 
the solid-state AN/SPS-40 replacement that was motivated by the attractive reliability, 
maintainability, and availability characteristics of a modular solid-state system, have 
not seen the success once envisioned due to the acquisition cost of solid-state replace -
ment transmitters. For new radar systems, system designers have been motivated by 
these considerations to choose as high a duty cycle as possible, both to reduce the peak 
power required and to permit using solid-state devices at a reasonable cost.
The decision to use a high transmitter duty cycle, however, has significant impact 
on the rest of the radar system. Operation at a high duty cycle generally requires the 
use of pulse compression to provide the desired unambiguous range coverage together 
with reasonably small range resolution. Other consequences follow in turn: the wide 
transmitted pulse used with pulse compression blinds the radar at short ranges, so a 
“fill-in” pulse must also be transmitted and processed. To prevent points of strong clut -
ter from masking small moving targets, the signal processor must achieve low pulse 
compression time sidelobes and high clutter cancellation ratio. As a result, it is much 
easier to design a solid-state transmitter as part of a new system than it is to retrofit one 
into an old system that usually does not have all these features.
ch11.indd   3 12/17/07   2:25:23 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Solid-State Transmitters 11.4  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 11
The use of solid-state does not eliminate all the problems of transmitter design. 
The RF combining networks must be designed with great care and skill to minimize 
combining losses in order to keep transmitter efficiency high. Suitable isolation from 
excessive voltage-standing-wave ratio (VSWR) must be provided to protect the micro -
wave transistors from undesired operational stresses, and their harmonic power output 
must be properly filtered to meet MIL-STD-469 and other specifications on RF spec -
trum quality. Also, just as in tube-type transmitters, energy management is still crucial. 
Each dc power supply must have a capacitor bank large enough to supply the energy 
drawn by its solid-state modules during an entire pulse, and each power supply must 
recharge its capacitor bank smoothly between pulses without drawing an excessive 
current surge from the power line.
As a result of unavoidable losses in combining the outputs of many solid-state 
devices, it is especially tempting to avoid combining before radiating, since combining 
in space is essentially lossless. For this reason, many solid-state transmitters consist 
of amplifier modules that feed either rows, columns, or single elements of an array 
antenna. Especially in the last-named case, it is necessary to build the modules (and 
usually their power supplies) into the array structure. Generally, solid-state devices 
or modules are combined in one of three fundamental configurations to generate the 
required transmitter power levels. Figure 11.2 shows that this may involve either 
the combination of amplifier outputs to a single port to feed a mechanically rotating 
antenna or some combination of electronic phase steering and amplification distrib -
uted among many fixed elements of a planar two-dimensional array .
Because of the large number of individual modules in a typical solid-state trans -
mitter, failure of an individual or a few modules has little effect on overall transmitter 
performance. The module outputs add as voltage vectors, so the loss of 20% of the 
modules, for example, results in a reduction to 80% of voltage output, which is 64% 
of power output. Even this is only a 2-dB reduction (the difference between 64 and 
80% of the power ends up in the combiner loads or in sidelobes if the combining is 
in space). As a result of this “graceful degradation,” overall reliability of solid-state 
transmitters is very high even if maintenance is delayed until convenient scheduled 
periods; however, this advantage should not be abused. Consider a case where 20% 
of 1000 modules are allowed to fail before output power falls below requirements, 
and assume that maintenance occurs at scheduled three-month intervals. In this case, 
module MTBF need only be 22,000 h to provide 90% confidence that the transmitter 
FIGURE 11.2  Common solid-state transmitter configurations may combine many amplifiers in parallel 
to a single antenna port ( a), or may use phase-shift elements to electronically steer a beam ( b), or may utilize 
transmit/receive modules with phase-shift capability at every element to steer a beam ( c).
ch11.indd   4 12/17/07   2:25:23 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Solid-State Transmitters  SOLID-STATE TRANSMITTERS  11.56x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 11
will not “fail” in less than three months; however, the cost of replacement modules and 
labor would be very unattractive because nearly 40% of the transmitter would have to 
be replaced every year. Higher MTBFs are thus essential to ensure that the transmitter 
is not only available but also affordable. Fortunately, solid-state module reliability has 
proven to be even better than the MIL-HDBK-217 predictions. AN/FPS-115 (PA VE 
PAWS), for example, has grown to 141,000 hours, which is 2.3 times the predicted 
value. This includes the actual T/R module MTBF, along with the receiver transmit/
receiver (T/R) switches and phase shifters as well as the power amplifiers. In fact, 
MTBF for the output power transistors measures better than 1.1 million hours.
11.3 SOLID-STATE DEVICES
Although the RF power-generating capability of single transistors is small with 
respect to the overall peak and average power requirements of a radar transmitter, 
transistors are used quite effectively by combining the outputs of many identical 
solid-state amplifiers. The power output level from a particular device is a function 
of not only the chosen technology, but also the frequency and other conditions, such 
as pulse width, duty cycle, ambient temperature, operating voltage, and the presented 
load impedance.
Technologies and Construction.  Semiconducting materials used in the fabri -
cation of transistors are considered to be those materials that are typically neither 
conductors nor insulators. The charge carrying properties of these semiconducting 
materials can be modified dramatically through the substitution of minute amounts 
of impurity ions or through crystal lattice defects, either of which act to modulate the 
flow of electrons. Semiconductor materials from which transistors are fabricated for 
use in solid-state radar transmitters have generally been either silicon or one of the 
so-called compound semiconductors, such as gallium arsenide (GaAs), indium phos -
phide (InP), silicon carbide (SiC), gallium nitride (GaN), or silicon germanium (SiGe). 
Semiconductors like silicon or gallium arsenide have found early wide acceptance 
because it has proven practical to control their crystal lattice defects accurately and 
repeatably during transistor manufacturing. Some semiconductors, such as gallium 
nitride (GaN) or silicon carbide (SiC), are referred to as wide bandgap semiconduc -
tors. Semiconductors that exhibit large bandgap values are especially capable of pro -
ducing very high output power levels with acceptable gain at the frequencies used in 
most radar applications.
Transistors are three-terminal devices and are classified as either bipolar or unipolar. 
Figure 11.3 helps to portray the construction differences among common microwave 
three-terminal devices, and this figure is referenced multiple times in succeeding sec -
tions. The bipolar junction transistor (BJT) is so named because the conduction path 
through the transistor makes use of both majority and minority charge carriers to estab -
lish current flow in the semiconductor. It is a current-controlled device with the collec -
tor current modulated by the current flowing between the base-emitter junction. This 
compares to the operation of a field effect transistor (FET), or a unipolar device, where 
charge is carried with only one type of charge carrier. The remaining transistor construc -
tions in Figure 11.3 are all variants of a FET. An external voltage, applied to the gate 
terminal of a FET, controls the width of the depletion region below the gate terminal. As 
the width of the depletion region is varied, so too is the equivalent resistance between 
ch11.indd   5 12/17/07   2:25:23 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Solid-State Transmitters 11.6  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 11
the drain and source contacts, allowing the current flowing between the drain and source 
to be modulated accordingly; hence, FETs are referred to as voltage controlled devices . 
There exist numerous FET variants due to sometimes subtle construction or mate -
rial differences. Among these are the MOSFET (Metal-Oxide-Semiconductor FET), 
MESFET (Metal Semiconductor FET), and HFET (Heterostructure FET). The common 
HFET devices are referred to as the HEMT (High Electron Mobility Transistor) and 
PHEMT (Pseudomorphic High Electron Mobility Transistor).
To be useful in a radar transmitter amplifier, the transistor must be capable of oper -
ating at the appropriate high frequency with good efficiency, while demonstrating 
useful power gain with adequate thermal management properties to ensure high reli -
ability. There is not one transistor type or one semiconductor material that is univer -
sally useful across all the common radar bands from UHF through W band. In fact, 
among the radar bands, there is often a different dominant device type, along with its 
attendant design and fabrication methodologies, that offers the optimum performance 
for that band.
A first order approximation8 of the power output from a single-stage solid-state 
amplifier using a FET as the semiconductor device is given by the relationship
 PRFMAX  = IMAX * (VDGB − |VP| − VK )/8 (11.1)FIGURE 11.3  Transistors are three-terminal semiconductor devices that allow a small voltage or 
current to control a larger voltage or current. Some cross sections of common transistor types used in 
the design of radar transmitters are the ( a) GaAs MESFET, ( b) GaAs PHEMT, ( c) Silicon MOSFET, 
(d ) Silicon LDMOS FET, ( e) Silicon BJT, and ( f) GaN HEMT on SiC Substrate.
ch11.indd   6 12/17/07   2:25:24 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Solid-State Transmitters  SOLID-STATE TRANSMITTERS  11.76x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 11
In this relationship, IMAX is the maximum open channel current, VDGB is the gate-
drain breakdown voltage, VP is the pinchoff voltage, and VK is the knee voltage. These 
transistor parameters define the transfer characteristics in the I-V (current-voltage) 
plane, and the boundaries of the I-V plane define the peak power performance enve -
lope of the transistor. Also, there is an optimum load impedance that will maximize the 
power output that can be delivered from an amplifier; and to a first order estimate, that 
load impedance is represented by the line that transversely cuts across the I-V plane 
from the region of the breakdown voltage to the region of the knee voltage, as shown 
in Figure 11.4. The ability of a transistor to demonstrate gain at high frequencies is 
impacted by the mobility and saturated velocity of charge carriers in the semiconduc -
tor. The ability of a transistor to demonstrate high power output is impacted by the 
breakdown voltage, the current capability, and the knee voltage of the transistor.
Silicon device types cost-effectively satisfy the requirements of reliability, elec -
trical performance, packaging, cooling, availability, and maintainability at lower 
radar-band frequencies, typically UHF, L band, and into S band. These devices  
are usually manufactured as discretely packaged transistors and require external 
impedance-matching circuitry in order to function appropriately in an amplifier. High 
performance transistors at higher frequencies than S band are usually built using 
compound semicondctors. Such transistors can result in high cutoff frequencies and 
demonstrate gain at frequencies much higher than silicon. For example, electrons in 
gallium arsenide (GaAs) travel approximately twice as fast as they do in silicon. It has 
a higher saturated electron velocity and higher electron mobility, allowing it to func -
tion at frequencies into the W band. GaAs transistors generate less noise than silicon 
devices when operated at high frequency so they also make superior low-noise ampli -
fiers. A key attribute that makes GaAs an attractive technology is that the GaAs FET 
can be fully integrated with the passive circuitry that is necessary to provide the bias -
ing, loading, filtering, and switching functions that are necessary for multistage T/R 
module designs. Unlike the silicon power transistors, the GaAs FET and its associated 
FIGURE 11.4  Typical transistor current-voltage continuum (I-V plane) 
showing key FET dc performance limits with optimum load line for  
power output shown. Higher power output is achieved when the maxi -
mum channel current ( IMAX) and the breakdown voltage ( VDGB) are both 
increased. Optimum amplifier design places the load line as indicated.
ch11.indd   7 12/17/07   2:25:24 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Solid-State Transmitters 11.8  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 11
batch-processed monolithic microwave integrated circuitry (MMIC) fabrication tech -
nology allow for circuit functions to be processed into very, very small, conveniently 
packaged chips. The wide bandgap semiconductors, such as SiC and GaN, are also 
compatible with MMIC processing but are also capable of very high power output 
levels. These semiconductors have material properties that lead to high breakdown 
voltage with commensurately high channel currents—an order of magnitude higher 
power output than GaAs (Table 11.1).
For the upper end of the solid-state microwave spectrum, i.e., the millimeter-
wave range, the single-port microwave diode can be used as a low-power oscillator. 
Unfortunately, the power output and efficiency of these devices are, in general, very 
low; in fact, the efficiency is significantly lower than that of their tube counterparts. 
However, CW and pulsed power output are attainable up to 300 GHz.
Peak and Average Power Limitations.  A first-order limit on the RF power out -
put capability of a transistor is its breakdown voltage and maximum current handling 
capability. Within that limit, the maximum practical level of power output that can be 
obtained from a single transistor over a given bandwidth is governed by the thermal 
dissipation limit of the device. As devices become larger and the dissipative heat flux 
from the top surface of the transistor chip to the bottom layer of the transistor chip 
increases, the junction temperature increases to the point where the transistor becomes 
thermally limited. Regardless of the semiconductor used, the electrical performance 
and operating lifetime degrade at increasingly higher temperatures.
There is a composite thermal time constant associated with the numerous thermally 
resistive layers between the transistor junction and the heat sink or cold plate to which 
the device is attached. This occurs because each layer (semiconductor, ceramic sub -
strate, metal base, etc.) exhibits both a thermal resistance and a thermal capacitance. 
Then, there exists an equivalent thermal time constant ( t) for each packaging material 
layer. This thermal time constant has been approximateded9 as
 t  =  0.4053 * (F2rC/KTH)  (11.2)
where F is thickness (cm), r is density (gm/cc), C is specific heat (Wsec/gm °C), and 
KTH is thermal conductivity ( W/cm°C). For example, Figure 11.5 shows that when the 
pulse width and duty cycle for a given GaAs transistor is increased from 20 µs and 10% 
to 3000 µs and 25%, respectively, there is a 70 °C increase in the overall junction tem -
perature. Although the transistor may operate reliably at a desired output power level 
for the shorter pulse width, it would suffer from a decrease in long-term reliability  
if operated at the same power level for the longer pulse width. Thus, if required to Units Silicon GaAs InP SiC GaN
Bandgap Energy eV  1.1  1.4  1.3 3.2 3.4
RF Power Density W/mm 0.6–0.8 0.8–1.8 0.2–0.4 2.0–4.0 3.0–10.0
Dielectric Constant — 11.8 12.8 12.5 9.7 9.0
Breakdown Field 106 V/cm  0.6  0.7  0.5 2.5 3.5
Thermal Conductivity W/m°C 130 46 68 370 170
Electron Mobility cm2 /Vsec 700 4700 5400 600 1600
Saturated Velocity 107 cm/sec  1.0  2.0  0.9 2.0 2.5TABLE 11.1  Key Semiconductor Characteristics of the Primary Semiconductors Used for Power 
Generation in Solid-state Transmitters (The high saturated velocity, breakdown field, and thermal 
conductivity of SiC and GaN make them attractive for high-power-amplifier applications.)
ch11.indd   8 12/17/07   2:25:25 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Solid-State Transmitters  SOLID-STATE TRANSMITTERS  11.96x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 11
maintain long-term reliability at the longer pulse width, the dissipation in the transis -
tor would have to be reduced to bring the junction temperature down to an acceptable 
level. De-rating the inherent short-pulse capability by lowering the dissipated power 
in the transistor, perhaps by reducing the operating voltage and power output, is one 
method of achieving the desired reliability. Another method may involve the reduction 
in ambient temperature with the use of chilled fluid in the amplifier heat-sink. These 
are not always practical solutions and one finds that the layout of the transistor itself 
is often optimized for a particular pulse width and duty cycle in order to achieve the 
optimum performance and reliability at the lowest operating temperature.
The active transistor area on the surface of the chip (the chip is sometimes called 
the die) is typically divided into manageable units (cells), where the cell size is often 
optimized for a particular application or range of applications. In addition to frequency 
considerations, pulse width and duty cycle or, as a result, the peak and average dis -
sipated power, are the parameters that determine the cell size and arrangement of 
cells on a chip. The ultimate operating junction temperature of the transistor is largely 
dependent on the transient heating that will be encountered and the layout and area of 
the individual cells. For devices that are designed to operate for long pulses or CW, an 
increase in the average power capability of the transistor can be achieved by dividing 
the active area of a transistor into small, thermally isolated cell areas.
Since the overall thermal time constant for a typical power transistor die itself may 
be on the order of 100–200 µs, the tradeoff between peak and average power versus 
device size can be significant for solid-state radars using pulse compression with pulse 
widths in the 10 to 1000 µs range. As an example, the thermal time constant of a silicon 
die with a thickness of 5 mils is approximately 90 µs whereas a gallium arsenide die 
with a thickness of 4 mils is approximately 170 µs. Thus, for an operating pulse width FIGURE 11.5  One limit of transistor capability is determined by the maximum junction temperature, 
which in turn is determined by the thermal time constant, and this results in very different capabilities as a 
function of operating pulse width and duty cycle.160220
200
180
160
140
120
100GaAs Power Amp Transient Temperature
Response 20 µsec @ 10% dutyGaAs Power Amp Transient Temperature
Response 3000 µsec @ 25% dutyGaAs Die (0.004"  thk)
CuMo Spreader (0.015" thk)
CuMo Base (0.040" thk)
τGaAs  = 170 µsec
τGuMo = 825 µsec
τGuMo  = 5,850 µsec
150
140
130 Temperature (°C)
Temperature (°C)120
110
100
0100 200 300 400 500
Time-µsec2000 4000 6000 8000 10000 12000 14000 0
Time-µsec600 700 800 900
ch11.indd   9 12/17/07   2:25:26 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Solid-State Transmitters 11.10  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 11
representative of a solid-state radar with pulse compression (~300 µs), the tempera -
ture rise across the silicon die has reached 96% of its steady-state value, but for an 
operating pulse width representative of a shorter range fire control radar (~20 µs), the 
temperature rise across the silicon die has only reached 20% of its steady-state value. 
If the voltage and current threshold of the transistor has not been reached, the shorter 
pulse width operation could allow for significantly larger power capability to be dem -
onstrated. Usually, a very detailed thermal analysis using the finite element method is 
required to quantify these relationships during transistor and amplifier design.
Background and descriptions of the common three-terminal device types and their 
associated technologies as utilized for the common radar bands are described in the 
following sections.
Silicon Bipolar Junction Transistor . The silicon bipolar junction transistor 
(BJT) was the earliest of the microwave power devices and found its way into tube 
replacement transmitters and phased array applications starting in the late 1970s. At 
lower frequencies, especially below 3 GHz, the Si BJT has been shown to be capable 
of very high power levels for transistors. Amplifier design is realizable for frequencies 
up through S band, where the tradeoff between device performance and overall sys -
tem cost begins to reach a point of diminishing returns. The silicon bipolar transistor 
technology is now very mature, but the demand for these high performance devices 
is low because the production quantities required for radar systems is small relative 
to commercial silicon electronic products. Thus, there tends to be a small number of 
manufacturers who provide quality devices for use in amplifier designs.
Silicon-based microwave power transistors can actually be considered hybrid 
microelectronic circuits and are generally single-chip or multichip transistors com -
bined in parallel within a flanged hermetic package. Some form of internal impedance 
prematching circuitry is often included in order to preserve the intrinsic bandwidth of 
the semiconductor chip and to make the task of external impedance matching easier. 
The internal matching also increases the terminal impedances of the packaged device 
to a level where the component losses of the circuitry external to the transistor become 
less critical. Figure 11.6 is an example of a 230-watt internally matched power tran -
sistor hybrid using the Si BJT semiconductor technology. It shows the transistor die, 
along with the capacitors and wires that are used as low-pass and high-pass impedance-
matching components to achieve an acceptable level of impedance prematching.
The microwave power Si BJT is invariably an NPN structure (Figure 11.3 e) with 
a vertical diffusion profile; i.e., the collector contact forms the bottom layer of the 
chip. The P-type base region has been diffused or implanted into the collector, the  
N-type emitter has been diffused or implanted into the base, and both base and emitter 
regions are accessible from the top surface of the chip. The collector region consists 
of an N-doped, low-resistivity epitaxial layer that is grown on a very low resistivity 
silicon substrate. The characteristics of the epitaxial layer, i.e., thickness and resistiv -
ity, can determine the upper limit of performance of the device in terms of ruggedness, 
efficiency, and saturated power output.
The fundamental limitation on high-frequency Si BJT performance is the overall 
collector-to-emitter delay time. If a signal is introduced to either the base or the emit -
ter, four separate regions of attenuation or time delay are encountered: the emitter-base 
junction capacity charging time, the base transit time, the collector depletion-layer 
transmit time, and the collector capacitance-resistance charging time. High-frequency 
transistor design is concerned with optimizing the physical parameters that contribute 
to the time-delay components.10
ch11.indd   10 12/17/07   2:25:26 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Solid-State Transmitters  SOLID-STATE TRANSMITTERS  11.116x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 11
The design challenge for high-power Si BJTs is to maintain a uniform high current 
density over a large emitter area with a minimum temperature rise. High-frequency 
devices require shallow, narrow, high-resistance base regions under the emitter 
region, causing most of the current carried in the device to be crowded along the 
periphery of the emitter. Thus, in order to maximize the current-handling capability of 
the device and, hence, the power output capability of the device, the emitter periphery 
is maximized. Because the capacitance of the collector-base junction appears as a 
deleterious parasitic electrical component, the emitter-periphery to base-area ratio, 
or Ep/Ba, is maximized where possible. Generally, higher-frequency devices exhibit 
higher Ep/Ba ratios; and to obtain a high Ep/Ba ratio very fine line geometries are 
required, where the term geometry  refers to the surface construction details of the 
transistor dice.
Silicon LDMOS FET . The silicon Laterally Diffused Metal-Oxide Semi-  
conductor (LDMOS) transistor is beginning to supersede the silicon power BJT as 
a replacement device, especially at the VHF, UHF, and L-band frequencies. In par -
ticular, the commercial communications industry has found that the Si LDMOS FET 
dominates as a cell phone base-station power amplifier because of the higher gain, 
linearity, and efficiency that it demonstrates compared to the silicon BJT. Although it 
is a FET, its construction characteristics, packaging, and design challenges are very 
similar to the design challenges of the Si BJT.FIGURE 11.6  A 230-watt L-band long-pulse and high-duty-
cycle silicon bipolar power transistor in a custom hermetic, 
dual-leaded, low-inductance package has an overall footprint of 
0.40" × 0.45." ( Photograph courtesy of Raytheon Company )
ch11.indd   11 12/17/07   2:25:27 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Solid-State Transmitters 11.12  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 11
The silicon LDMOS FET (Figure 11.3 d) is processed on p+ material with a lightly 
doped p-type epitaxial layer, and just like the silicon BJT, multiple impurity implants 
form the various junctions. It is still considered a slower device than other semiconduc -
tors, such as GaAs, because the mobility in silicon MOSFET channels is relatively low. 
Although the bulk mobility of silicon is lower than GaAs, it does not preclude the sili -
con LDMOS FET as a high frequency power transistor. The continuous process fabrica -
tion improvement in the silicon CMOS industry has resulted in sub-micron production 
transistor feature sizes, and the smaller feature sizes allow for a compensated increase 
in higher frequency operation; that is, it can exhibit usable gain into S band. In particu -
lar, the LDMOS structure enables a short channel as a result of the lateral diffusion of 
the p-type implant. The resulting short channel contributes to improved high frequency 
response in spite of the lower mobility of silicon. The measured breakdown voltages 
can be in excess of 100 V , so operation at higher voltages is possible, or conversely, a 
higher level of margin in ruggedness can be achieved for a given operating voltage; the 
latter is a key advantage for high-reliability power amplifier applications.
The underside of the LDMOS transistor dice is the source connection; thus, the chip  
can be mounted directly to a metal package base. This is unlike the Si BJT where the 
high voltage collector contact is the underside of the chip. As a result of not having to 
electrically isolate the underside of the LDMOS chip, there is no need to use the poten -
tially toxic beryllium oxide based packages that permeate the Si BJT product lines. 
The lower source inductance achieved with direct attachment to the metal flange of a 
package base enables higher gains to be demonstrated for comparable Si BJT power 
levels at frequencies below 2 GHz, but these devices are presently not attractive at 
frequencies above S band.
A primary advantage of the LDMOS device is thermal stability. The drain current 
has a negative temperature coefficient; therefore, the LDMOS FET is not suscep -
tible to thermal runaway and does not require the amount of gain-degrading resistive 
emitter ballasting that is commonly required in a Si BJT to help normalize junction 
temperatures. A more thermally stable device allows for the more efficient power com -
bining of transistor cells within a package. This contributes to a lower performance 
sensitivity to load mismatch—a problem that has complicated the design process for 
the Si BJT. Figure 11.7 and Figure 11.8 summarize the performance envelope for com -
mercially available silicon bipolar junction transistors and silicon LDMOS FETs for 
given transmit waveforms.11–14
GaAs PHEMT.  The GaAs Pseudomorphic High Electron Mobility Transistor 
(PHEMT) is actually a heterostructure material (Figure 11.3 b) consisting of slightly 
strain-mismatched crystal layers. A very simplified description portrays an AlGaAs 
layer over an InGaAs channel on a GaAs substrate forming a high quality two-
dimensional electron gas layer, often referred to as the 2DEG. This 2DEG exhibits  
superior electron transport properties resulting in a very confined channel with 
fewer opportunities for charge carrier collisions. This allows for a very high-quality 
transistor that can be made with useful gain beyond W band. Higher mobility and 
electron velocity can be engineered by increasing the percentage content of indium 
in the channel of the FET. This can be accomplished up to a point, where beyond 
approximately 25% indium content, the lattice strain differential results in degrading 
performance and reliability. These techniques can result in transistors with bigger 
bandgap differences than otherwise possible for the chosen materials. The fabrication 
of these transistors employs the use of advanced semiconductor processing such as 
Molecular Beam Epitaxy (MBE) or Molecular Organic Chemical Vapor Deposition 
ch11.indd   12 12/17/07   2:25:28 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Solid-State Transmitters  SOLID-STATE TRANSMITTERS  11.136x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 11
(MOCVD) fabrication techniques to achieve the high performance characteristics. 
These are capital-intensive semiconductor processing steps that are required in 
order to achieve the high quality channel characteristics that define a microwave or  
millimeter-wave power transistor. Optimizing the molecular content of the FET 
channel for best performance is sometimes referred to as bandgap engineering . The 
challenge for the device engineer is to develop a transistor that supports the highest 
voltage/current operation while demonstrating the best high frequency gain.FIGURE 11.7  Performance space of commercially available silicon power transistors
FIGURE 11.8  Performance space of commercially available silicon power transistors
ch11.indd   13 12/17/07   2:25:28 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Solid-State Transmitters 11.14  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 11
The complication in power transistor design extends beyond the exotic material 
fabrication technologies that are used to define the basic FET. Tailored construction 
techniques are used to control the electric field intensity and improve the breakdown 
voltage; enhancements such as the field plate,15,16 double gate recess,17 or automatic 
etch stop layers18 are fabrication and design techniques that are used to optimize the 
PHEMT performance for a given operating frequency range to bring higher value, 
performance, or reliability to the semiconductor fabrication process.
The fundamental three-fingered FET structure (drain-gate-source), shown as a GaAs 
PHEMT FET in cross-section in Figure 11.9, has power performance limitations that 
are mitigated by employing a structured design approach for achieving high power-
output levels. As shown in Figure 11.10, the smallest physical construction dimension 
of the gate electrode is called the gate length ; the longer of the dimensions is called 
the gate width . The current carrying capability (and hence the power capability) of the 
FET is increased as the gate width is increased. There is a limit as to how long the gate 
width can be increased before phase differential and signal attenuation along the longer 
dimension of the gate width begin to have a deleterious impact on amplifier perfor -
mance. In practice, the maximum gate width can be found to approach approximately 
400 µm, 150 µm, or 60 µm for S band, X band, or Ka band frequencies, respectively.
With a limitation on maximum gate width, additional current and hence power 
capability can only be achieved by combining multiple gate electrodes in parallel. Gate 
electrodes, or fingers  as they are often referred to, are generally grouped in logically 
convenient substructures (cells) that are stepped and repeated to form a symmetric cor -
porate hierarchy of combined transistors. The outputs of all fingers are required to be 
combined in phase and then impedance-matched to the appropriate level. An industry-
wide figure-of-merit for capability of the semiconductor and the unit FET is the power 
output density, and this is given in units of watts/mm of total FET gate width or gate 
periphery. For operating voltages of 7–10 volts, a normalized power output density of 
0.6–0.8 W/mm should be expected; for more advanced GaAs PHEMT structures oper -
ating at 11–28 volts, one can expect to deliver 1.1–2.0 W/mm of normalized power 
output density. Thus, to achieve a power level of 20 watts at 10 GHz, when operating 
from 15 volts, approximately 80 gate fingers must somehow be combined in parallel to 
FIGURE 11.9  Cross section of a 0.25 µm double gate–recessed GaAs 
PHEMT transistor, showing gate, drain, and source metals ( Photograph 
courtesy  of Raytheon Company )
ch11.indd   14 12/17/07   2:25:29 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Solid-State Transmitters  SOLID-STATE TRANSMITTERS  11.156x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 11
deliver the power. Higher numbers of paralleled fingers necessarily lead to decreasing 
input and output impedances, further complicating the ability to provide the desired 
impedance match over the desired bandwidth. Higher impedance transformation 
ratios and wider bandwidths invariably contribute to additional loss in the match -
ing networks, whether these networks are hybrid construction or MMIC construction. 
Additional losses degrade the inherent power, gain, and efficiency characteristics of the 
intrinsic FET. The most appropriate amplifier design for a given application requires 
optimization of the transistor, and the variables that affect that optimization, such as 
unit gate length, gate width, number of gate fingers, cell construction, impedance 
matching circuits, and bias networks, all require detailed attention during the design 
of the amplifier. Excellent compilations of industry performance have been published 
for further insight.19,20 These references outline state-of-the-art power output density 
and efficiencies of compound semiconductors from 1 through 100 GHz.
Wide Bandgap Semiconductors.  Since the inception of solid-state, Zolper21 
draws historical reference to the first, second, and third generation of semiconduc -
tor materials as (1) silicon, (2) gallium arsenide or indium phosphide, and the (3) 
so-called wide bandgap semiconductors (WBGS). The latter are dominated by the 
silicon carbide (SiC) MESFET and the gallium nitride (AlGaN/GaN) heterojunction 
field effect transistor (HFET). The advent of the third semiconductor generation opens 
enormous new possibilities in the area of high power amplifiers for use in solid-state. 
The WBGS materials are able to produce very high power-output levels (5–20 w/mm) FIGURE 11.10  Typical two-stage GaAs MMIC power amplifier with insert 
showing multiple paralleled gate fingers in final stage unit cell ( Photograph 
courtesy of Raytheon Company )
ch11.indd   15 12/17/07   2:25:29 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Solid-State Transmitters 11.16  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 11
from high bus voltages (25–75 volts), while maintaining transistor-like properties at 
higher operating temperatures than Si or GaAs.22 They are finding application in the 
S band, C band, or X band frequency ranges. The interest in development is being 
fueled by both the military for high performance sensors and also by commercial 
interests for high-power wireless base-station amplifiers. In particular, the GaN HFET 
device demonstrates physical properties that make it useful as a high gain device with 
very high power output capability into the W band. The SiC MESFET will likely be 
competitive at the lower frequency ranges of L band through C band.23
The thermal conductivity of the SiC substrate is superior to GaAs by nearly an 
order of magnitude, and the normalized power outputs are much, much higher in the 
wide bandgap semiconductors than currently being achieved using GaAs at any volt -
age. The higher thermal conductivity of SiC enables more efficient thermal manage -
ment. Coupled with the high breakdown voltage and channel current capability of the 
SiC MESFET, measured results of 80 watts of CW power output with an 8 dB associ -
ated level of large signal gain at 3.1 GHz from a 58 V drain supply voltage have been 
reported24 from a single transistor cell.
Electron mobility in the GaN HEMT at saturated drift velocities is high enough that 
high gain with simultaneous high power output and high efficiencies can be achieved 
with voltages as low as 20 to 30 volts. With a GaN epitaxial layer processed on a SiC 
substrate, the current state-of-the-art for transistor performance is defined on several 
fronts in the semiconductor industry by the following performances: (1) pulsed power-
added-efficiency (PAE) of 68% at 30 V and 10 GHz on a 1.25 mm FET, and CW 
power of 5 W at 30 V and 10 GHz on a single 1.25 mm transistor;25 (2) power density 
of 8.6 W/mm at 40 GHz;26 (3) less than 0.2 dB power degradation after 15,000 hours  
RF operation at 28 V with channel temperatures of 150 °C.27 Power-added efficiency 
is a circuit designer’s term and is defined by
 PAE = (PO − PI)/PDC (11.3)
where PO is the RF power output, PI is the RF power input, and PDC is the total  
dc power input.
Figure 11.11 and Figure 11.12 illustrate the advantages of GaN at 10 GHz when 
compared with the physical geometry of an identically sized GaAs PHEMT transistor. 
GaAs Circuit FET Behavioral Model  
10 GHz, 1mm, 7V, 25C
010203040506070
−8−4 0 4 8 12 16 20 24
RF Drive (dBm)Po(dBm), PAE(%)
02468101214
Gain (dB )Po (Power Output)
PAE (Efficiency )
Gn (Gain)
FIGURE 11.11  Typical 10-GHz performance curves for a 1 mm 
periphery GaAs PHEMT FET operating at +7 V using a CW (100% 
duty) waveform
ch11.indd   16 12/17/07   2:25:30 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Solid-State Transmitters  SOLID-STATE TRANSMITTERS  11.176x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 11
In this example, a GaAs PHEMT with 1 mm of total gate periphery (Figure 11.11) is 
compared with an identical 1 mm GaN HEMT (Figure 11.12). These figures portray 
the power output ( Po), power-added efficiency (PAE), and gain ( Gn). Performance for 
each is referenced to 10 GHz for CW operation. The GaAs PHEMT operates at 7 V; 
the GaN HEMT operates at 28 V . From these performance curves, one sees that the 
small signal gains are nearly identical in the 12–13 dB range, as are the large signal 
efficiencies, but the power output capability of the GaN HEMT is 8 dB greater than 
for the GaAs PHEMT of the same size.
11.4 DESIGNING FOR THE SOLID-STATE  
BOTTLE TRANSMITTER
Radar transmitter design invariably requires significant radiated power from the 
antenna in order to project to the minimum range requirement while maintaining some 
minimum signal-to-noise ratio on receive. The impact of the requirement for high radi -
ated power is fundamental to the design of solid-state transmitters—high power must 
be achieved by combining the outputs of lower-power amplifiers in order to develop 
the required radiated levels. Transistor fingers are combined into MMIC amplifi -
ers; amplifiers are combined into modules; and modules are combined into systems. 
Generally, the combining takes on one of two different configurations using either 
space-combined or corporate-combined architectures. The phased array is a common 
example of the space-combined configuration wherein each radiating antenna ele -
ment is fed by an amplifier module and the wavefront is formed in space. The com -
mon example of the corporate-combined design is the “solid-state bottle,” wherein a 
mechanically rotating antenna is fed from a single port, and the power at the port is 
the summation of the outputs of many amplifier modules. Those modules might be 
physically located, for example, below deck on a ship away from the antenna. Solid-
state transmitter designs have been built around each of these generic forms, and the 
components that are required in the implementation of each share similar character -
istics and devices.GaN Circuit FET Behavioral Model 
10 GHz, 1mm, 28V, 25C
010203040506070
0 4 8 12 16 20 24 28 3 2
RF Drive (dBm)Po(dBm), PAE(%)
02468101214
Gain (dB)Po (Power Output)
PAE (Efficiency)
Gn (Gain)
FIGURE 11.12  Typical 10-GHz performance curves for a 1 mm 
periphery GaN HEMT FET operating at +28 V using a CW (100% 
duty) waveform
ch11.indd   17 12/17/07   2:25:31 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Solid-State Transmitters 11.18  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 11
In the corporate-combined solid-state bottle, high power levels are generated at a 
single point by combining the outputs of many power amplifier modules. In general, 
a power amplifier module, as shown in Figure 11.13, consists of a number of identical 
amplifiers that are parallel-combined and isolated from one another through the use 
of microwave combining and isolating techniques. Drive power for this parallel group 
is obtained from driver or predriver stages, using phase- and amplitude-matched mir -
ror-imaged microwave power dividers. A circulator at the module output port is com -
monly used to protect the amplifier from the damaging effects of high-load VSWR, 
most notably from the antenna. Also, ancillary circuitry such as energy storage capaci -
tance for pulsed operation, built-in-test (BIT) sensors, or adaptive control components 
may be included.
Amplifier & Module Design.  Solid-state amplifiers for use in transmitter 
design are often referenced by their class of operation. Amplifiers are designated 
as operating either Class-A, -B, -AB, -C, -D, -E, -F, or -G. Class-A, -AB, -B, and 
-C generally refer to analog amplifiers whereas Class-D, -E, -F, and -G generally 
refer to switching-mode amplifiers. Each class of operation for the analog modes 
is defined by the manner in which the transistor is biased; each class of operation 
FIGURE 11.13  Solid-state power amplifier module combines many single stage amplifiers together with 
matched phase and amplitude using resistively isolating combining techniques
ch11.indd   18 12/17/07   2:25:31 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Solid-State Transmitters  SOLID-STATE TRANSMITTERS  11.196x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 11
for the switching modes is defined by the manner in which the transistor is biased 
and how the waveshape of current and voltage is manipulated. For example, current 
swing in an amplifier that is biased Class-A replicates exactly the input signal up 
to the point where the transistor voltage and current limits are reached. In practice, 
Class-A amplifiers are the most linear as well as the least efficient. High dynamic-
range linear receive amplifiers are biased Class-A, and audio amplifiers may be also 
be biased Class-A to preserve the linearity of the input signal. Class-B amplifiers 
are biased such that conducting current in the transistor flows for exactly one half 
of the input signal voltage swing. Push-pull amplifiers may be biased in this fashion 
such that one transistor operates over the positive input signal swing, and the sec -
ond transistor operates over the negative input signal swing. Higher efficiency but 
higher distortion is experienced when compared with a Class-A design. The Class-
AB operated amplifier is biased just above 50% conduction using a trickle quiescent 
current and is also commonly used as a push-pull amplifier. Class-C amplifiers are 
biased such that conducting current in the transistor flows for less than 50% of the 
incident input voltage signal. This allows for the highest efficiency at the expense 
of power gain and with the highest level of nonlinear operation. Class-C biased 
transistors are actually “off” without the presence of an RF signal on the input. For 
use in radar transmitter amplifiers, the Class-C amplifier offers higher efficiency 
over Class-A, -B, or -AB. In practice, they can be made to be “self-biasing” and 
have been the preferred class of operation for the silicon bipolar transistors used at 
UHF, L band, and S band. Because this class of operation is inherently nonlinear, as 
the transistor modulates between being off and saturated through each RF cycle, the 
harmonic content is high, and appropriate filtering of undesired higher order spec -
tral content must be applied at the output of the transmitter. The amplifier Class-D, 
-E, -F, and -G are high efficiency switching amplifier configurations that require 
specialized termination of the signal harmonics (filtering) in order to maximize the 
amplifier efficiency. These can be complicated hardware implementations but may 
be warranted where incremental improvement in efficiency brings benefit to the 
transmitter system.
Silicon BJTs that operate in the HF through S-band frequency ranges are commonly 
biased either Class-B or Class-C. Class-C operation is the preferred mode because 
the RF output power of the amplifier is maximized for a given prime power input. In 
general, the base-emitter junction is reverse-biased, and collector current is drawn for 
less than half of an RF cycle. Collector current is drawn only when the input voltage 
exceeds the reverse bias across the input and the output voltage is developed across a 
resonant-tuned load. The net result is high amplifier efficiency. The practical implica -
tions of a Class-C-biased amplifier stage are as follows:
● No quiescent dc current is drawn while the device is not being driven, such as in 
the radar receive mode. Hence, there is no power dissipation in the amplifier while 
the transmitter is operating in this mode.
● Only one power supply voltage is necessary for the collector terminal of the transis -
tor. The Class-C operation is a self-bias, wherein the transistor draws collector cur -
rent only when the RF voltage swing on the input exceeds the built-in potential of 
the emitter-base junction. Additional reverse biasing may be introduced as a result 
of the voltage drop induced by current flow across parasitic resistance of the base 
or emitter-bias return, and in common base operation, this will result in degraded 
power gain.
ch11.indd   19 12/17/07   2:25:31 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Solid-State Transmitters 11.20  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 11
● Class-C-biased amplifiers are very sensitive to any deviations from the nominal 
operating point. Class-C-biased amplifiers exhibit sensitivity to RF drive level and 
load impedance that may degrade the output pulse characteristics. A single-stage 
Class-C biased BJT amplifier will typically exhibit a very narrow “linear” transfer 
characteristic; the linear region may exist over only a narrow 1- to 3-dB window of 
RF input drive. This becomes strikingly critical when several Class-C-biased stages 
are cascaded in series, as is common in most amplifier configurations. The final tier 
of output transistors in a serial amplifier chain must be driven into saturation by the 
preceding stages, and the drive level must be held relatively constant as a function 
of time and temperature. Since these devices exhibit this narrow operating range, 
small decreases in the input RF drive level to a multistage amplifier may bring the 
final tier of devices out of saturation. Failure to control these conditions accurately 
can result in unacceptably degraded output pulse fidelity.
In a very simple sense, the design of an amplifier module consists of matching the 
power transistors to the proper impedance level and then combining the power levels 
at these impedances. A typical packaged power transistor has low input and output 
impedances that must be transformed up to higher level, usually 50 ohms. Thus, the 
typical amplifier design task must address both low-loss and inexpensive reactive 
impedance-transforming networks that can provide the proper source and load imped -
ances to the transistor. The common medium for providing this function is a microstrip 
transmission line. Microstrip is a quasi-TEM mode transmission-line medium that 
requires photolithographically defined lines on a low-loss, high-quality dielectric sub -
strate. Reactive components that are necessary as impedance-matching elements can 
be approximated in the microstrip format. An inexpensive reactive matching network 
can be formed by using an interconnected pattern of microstrip elements. Shunt- and 
series-connected inductive reactances as well as shunt capacitive reactances, are the 
most easily fabricated and most frequently used matching elements.
Power Combining.  A power combiner coherently adds together the RF output 
voltages of individual amplifiers and delivers the sum total of the modules’ output 
power, minus the losses of the combiner, to a single port. The outputs of identical 
single-stage power amplifiers are commonly summed by using well-documented28 
splitting and combining techniques (Figure 11.14). These techniques also address  
isolation between paralleled amplifiers. Having isolation between adjacent ports 
means that if one device fails, the power combiner provides a fixed load impedance 
to the remaining device; however, half the power of the remaining active device will 
be dissipated in the isolation resistor of the combiner. In order to achieve the most 
efficient combining of parallel amplifier stages, the phase and amplitude balance 
of individual stages should be as similar as possible. Any deviations from identical 
phase and amplitude balance result in power output lost to the resistive terminating 
port of the combiner. The power lost to similarity differences, from either phase or 
amplitude, is dictated by vector addition and is given by:
 PLOST = 20*log ((SQRT (P12 + P22 + 2*P1*P2*COS(q)))/(P1 + P2))  (11.4)
where q  is the phase difference in degrees between two amplifiers that are summed 
together, SQRT indicates the “square root of,”, and P1 and P2 are the power levels of 
each amplifier in watts. Figure 11.15 quantifies the impact of lost performance due to 
phase or amplitude imbalance.
ch11.indd   20 12/17/07   2:25:32 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Solid-State Transmitters  SOLID-STATE TRANSMITTERS  11.216x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 11
FIGURE 11.14  Common microwave power-combining circuit topologies that are used to provide 
isolation among adjacent parallel amplifiers in a corporate combining structure
FIGURE 11.15  Contours of power lost to the isolation load resistor of an isolated power com -
biner for a range of amplitude and phase imbalances between two combined amplifiers. With an 
amplitude imbalance of 1 dB and a phase imbalance of 30 °, approximately 0.31 dB of power will 
be lost to the isolating termination of the power combiner.Contours of Vectoral Power Lost
5101520253035404550
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
Amplitude Imbalance (dB)Phase Imbalance (deg) 0.1dB1.1dB
1.0dB
0.9dB
0.8dB
0.7dB
0.5dB
0.4dB
0.3dB
0.2dB0.6dB1.2dB
ch11.indd   21 12/17/07   2:25:33 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Solid-State Transmitters 11.22  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 11
In general, the requirements for a power combiner are
● The combiner should have low insertion loss to maximize transmitter efficiency.
● The combiner should have RF isolation among ports, such that failed modules do not 
affect the load impedances or combining efficiency for the remaining functioning 
modules.
● The combiner should provide a controlled RF impedance to the amplifier modules, 
such that the amplifier characteristics are not degraded.
● The dissipated power capability of the power combiner terminations should be suf -
ficient to accommodate any combination of power amplifier failures.
● The mechanical packaging of the power combiner should allow modules to be 
repaired easily. The packaging should also provide short, equal phase and low-loss 
interconnections between the amplifier modules and the combiner.
Power combiners may be either isolative or reactive designs. In isolative designs, 
any imbalance or difference between the phase and amplitude of the voltages that 
are being combined is directed to a resistive termination. The net result is that a con -
stant load impedance is presented to the amplifier under all conditions even when an 
adjacent amplifier in a combining tier has failed. In a reactive combiner design, any 
imbalance in power or phase between two input signals results in reflected power and 
increased VSWR to the module driving it. Higher than desired frequency-dependent 
phase and amplitude ripple may result from improper use of this configuration.
A splitter and combiner network may also provide serial isolation among cas -
caded amplifier stages as well as parallel isolation. For example, when a Class-C 
biased transistor is pulsed, it passes through its cutoff, linear, and saturation regions. 
Consequently, the input and output impedances are dynamically varying, and the 
input impedance changes very dramatically. The dramatically changing input imped -
ance will present an undesirable load to the preceding amplifier stage supplying the 
RF drive power. This may very well send the previous stage into unwanted oscil -
lation. However, a quadrature splitter network, i.e., a power divider that provides a 
3 dB split as well as a 90 ° phase offset, can be used to provide a constant impedance 
at the input to the splitter regardless of the individual amplifier input impedances 
(Figure 11.16). This ensures that a driver amplifier stage is presented with a well-
matched load.
Typical RF transmission media that are used in the construction of high-power 
combiners include coaxial transmission lines, microstrip or stripline transmission 
lines, or waveguide. The choice of transmission medium is generally a function of 
many parameters, including peak and average power-handling capability, operat -
ing frequency and bandwidth, mechanical packaging constraints, and, of course, the 
overall loss that can be tolerated. More often than not, a combiner design utilizes a 
hierarchy of cascaded designs to sum the outputs of many modules; however, unique 
configurations that sum many ports to a single port have been built.
Amplitude and Phase Sensitivities . The phase and amplitude sensitivity of 
transistor amplifiers to power supply ripple may impact the MTI improvement factor 
that can be attained. In a multistage amplifier, the phase errors due to power supply 
sensitivity of serially cascaded stages will add. In addition, careful design must take 
into account interactions that can occur as a result of the many cascaded stages of 
solid-state amplification. These include the following:
ch11.indd   22 12/17/07   2:25:33 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Solid-State Transmitters  SOLID-STATE TRANSMITTERS  11.236x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 11
● Phase errors in cascaded stages simply add. However, it may also be possible to 
arrange them to cancel by proper phasing of power supply ripples for different 
stages. Similarly, in a stage with N modules in parallel, each with its own high-
frequency power-conditioned power supply, the overall phase ripple can usually be 
assumed to be reduced by a factor equal to the square root of N if the power supply 
clocks are purposely not synchronized.
● Because of saturation effects, amplitude errors in cascaded stages do not simply add. 
However, amplitude errors in driving stages will cause drive-induced phase varia -
tions in the following stages, as noted above, all of which must be counted.
● Time jitter in cascaded stages simply adds unless the stages are arranged to cancel or 
to be root-sum-squared. In addition, amplitude fluctuations in the RF drive will also 
cause drive-induced jitter, which may even exceed power-supply-ripple-induced jitter, 
so this factor must be carefully measured.
Spectral Emissions.  When a rectangular RF drive pulse is applied to a single 
module, the amplifier will typically show rise and fall times that are on the order 
of nanoseconds. The output signal spectrum of this pulse shape may not meet spec -
tral emissions requirements, and it may be necessary to slow the rise and fall times. 
However, the amplifier operating region of optimum efficiency occurs as the tran -
sistor is driven into saturation, and for a large transmitter, there may be numerous 
tiers of cascaded saturated amplifiers. With so many cascaded saturating amplifiers, it 
becomes very difficult to control the rise and fall times as a result of the nonlinearity 
that is introduced into the power transfer function for the transmitter. Consequently, 
an input pulse shape with very exaggerated slow rise and fall times may be necessary 
to achieve the desired output-pulse spectral composition.FIGURE 11.16  Power amplifier combining configurations that provide minimum input port 
reflected power: ( a) quadrature-coupled amplifier pair and ( b) split-T amplifier pair with a 90 ° offset.  
The amplifier input voltage reflection coefficient is given as Γ and the amplifier voltage gain as  
A. (Reprinted with permission from E. D. Ostroff et al ., Solid-State Transmitters, Norwood, MA: Artech 
House, 1985 .)
ch11.indd   23 12/17/07   2:25:34 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Solid-State Transmitters 11.24  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 11
11.5 DESIGNING FOR THE SOLID-STATE 
PHASED ARRAY TRANSMITTER
In contrast to the design of the solid-state bottle transmitter where significant losses can 
accrue in the combining circuitry, the solid-state phased array antenna uses individual 
transmit/receive (T/R) modules with internal phase shift capability. Each T/R module 
is located behind an associated radiating element in a two-dimensional array. In this 
fashion, the beam is more efficiently formed in space and one avoids the losses than 
can accumulate in corporate combining. The transmit/receive (T/R) module, regard -
less of complexity, has five fundamental functions: (1) to provide gain and power 
output in the transmit mode, (2) to provide gain and low-noise figure in the receive 
mode, (3) to switch between transmit and receive states, (4) to provide phase shift for 
beam steering for both transmit and receive paths, and (5) to provide self-protection 
for the low-noise amplifier.
The first T/R module was developed by Texas Instruments in the mid-1960s as 
part of the Molecular Electronics for Radar Applications (MERA) program initi -
ated by the U.S. Air Force to determine the feasibility of using X-band T/R modules 
in a solid-state phased array radar.29 As a result of continuous development, phased 
arrays are used in multiple military and communications systems. The advantages 
of a phased array transmitter include (1) the ability to have multiple independently 
steered beams from a single aperture, (2) the speed of electronic versus mechani -
cal beam locations, and (3) the efficiency of utilizing space combining instead of 
performing the power combining before the antenna. Block diagrams of represen -
tative T/R module functions are shown in Figure 11.17. Functionally, these are all 
equivalent, but the partitioning of circuit functions is dependent on the capability 
of the MMICs used, and different implementations may be required to address a 
key reliability requirement or a key performance parameter. For example, the use 
of a single high performance power amplifier may obviate the need for combin -
ing two lesser power amplifiers together to achieve the same performance. These 
represent cost, capability, and availability trades that might be exercised by the 
T/R module architect.
Microwave Monolithic Integrated Circuits (MMICs).  During the 1990s, it 
was the reduction-to-practice of the microwave monolithic integrated circuit (MMIC) 
that enabled most high frequency phased arrays to be realized. MMIC use in T/R 
module design has enabled bold new module configurations, and hence phased array 
systems, to be envisioned. Because some of the more complex functions in the generic 
T/R module block diagram can be fabricated by using MMIC technology, the com -
ponents that can be realized through the use of this technology can be employed to 
create system architectures that are difficult, if not impractical, to design with other, 
less integrated technologies. The MMIC design approach utilizes active and passive 
devices that have been manufactured by using a single process. Active and passive cir -
cuit elements are formed on a semi-insulating semiconductor substrate through vari -
ous deposition schemes. The monolithic approach to circuit design inherently offers 
several advantages:
● Low-cost circuitry  Component assembly is eliminated because complex circuit 
configurations using both active and passive components are batch processed on the 
same substrate.
ch11.indd   24 12/17/07   2:25:35 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Solid-State Transmitters  SOLID-STATE TRANSMITTERS  11.256x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 11
● Increased reliability  Batch-processed components lead to a reduced number of 
parts from the reliability standpoint and hence to increased operating lifetimes.
● Increased reproducibility  Circuitry that is batch-processed or circuits that origi -
nate from the same wafer exhibit consistent electrical characteristics from component 
to component.
● Small size and weight  Integration of active and passive components onto a 
single chip results in high-density circuitry with multiple functions on a single 
chip. Overall, the T/R module can be made much smaller than with discrete 
components.
The partitioning of T/R module circuit functions onto monolithic chips usually rep -
resents a tradeoff among several design issues, and the resultant circuit configurations 
represent a compromise among the goals of optimum RF performance, high levels of 
integration, and fabrication yields that are consistent with processing capabilities of 
GaAs MMICs. Among the single-chip circuit designs that have been reported from 
UHF through millimeter-wave frequencies are power amplifiers, low-noise amplifi -
ers, wideband amplifiers, phase shifters, attenuators, T/R switches, and other special 
function designs. Noteworthy design considerations for these MMIC functions are 
described next.FIGURE 11.17  Common T/R module configurations make use of power 
amplifiers, low-noise amplifiers, duplexers, switches, and controls to enable on-
face beam steering in a phased array antenna. Architecture variations may result 
from component capability differences as well as performance and packaging 
constraints.
ch11.indd   25 12/17/07   2:25:35 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Solid-State Transmitters 11.26  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 11
Power Amplifiers.  (1) The area consumed by combining in parallel the total num -
ber of gate fingers (i.e., total gate periphery) is usually at a premium. For high-power 
design, the load impedance presented to the final device must be carefully chosen 
such that power output and efficiency are maximized. Also, too much gate periphery 
may increase the chip area such that cost of the component becomes unattractive.  
(2) Losses in the output circuit of the final stage can significantly reduce power output 
and efficiency. Off-chip matching may be necessary to maximize power output for a 
given design. (3) GaAs is a poor thermal conductor. Power FET design that addresses 
thermal management is required. Adequate heat sinking of the chip is mandatory and 
may become a limiting factor in high performance designs. (4) Careful attention must 
be paid to unplanned voltage stresses on the power amplifier, either from transient 
induced effects or load impedance variations in order to maintain the desired reli -
ability. (5) For efficient multiple-stage designs, it is necessary that the final stage of 
the amplifier reach saturation before the preceding stages. This must be addressed in 
the circuit design.
Low-Noise Amplfiiers.  (1) Multiple stage linear designs require proper device 
sizing of successive stages in order to maintain low intermodulation distortion 
products. (2) Circuit losses on the input, before the first stage, degrade the noise 
figure of the design; therefore, some designs utilize off-chip matching. (3) The best 
noise-figure usually requires a 
bias condition that is closer to the 
pinch-off voltage of the FET than 
for a power amplifier. The pinch-
off voltage is the voltage that 
when applied to the gate terminal 
causes the current in the tran -
sistor channel to stop flowing. 
Thus, the transistor is “pinched-
off” and variability around this 
operating point can cause large 
circuit performance variability if 
designed poorly. Both gain and 
noise figures are highly depen -
dent on the pinch-off voltage 
when the FET is biased close to 
pinch-off. Because the pinch-off 
voltage can vary among devices 
from the same wafer, the bias 
condition must be chosen care -
fully. Gain and noise figures are 
usually traded off against repeat -
able performance. Examples of 
an L band two-stage low-noise 
amplifier GaAs MMIC and an 
X band power amplifier GaAs 
MMIC are shown in Figure 11.18 
and Figure. 11.19, respectively.FIGURE 11.18  L-band low-noise amplifier MMIC. Shown 
here are the spiral inductors, metal-nitride-metal capacitors, 
and via-hole connections to ground. ( Photograph courtesy of 
Raytheon Company )
ch11.indd   26 12/17/07   2:25:36 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Solid-State Transmitters  SOLID-STATE TRANSMITTERS  11.276x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 11
Transmit/Receive Switching.  (1) For switching applications, the FET design 
should be chosen such that the ratio of OFF-ON resistance of the FET is kept as high as 
possible. The channel length largely determines the ON resistance and hence the inser -
tion loss of the device. The tradeoff between short gate length (thus lower processing 
yield) and insertion loss must be examined. (2) The value of the parasitic drain-source 
capacitance will affect the OFF-state isolation of the device. This capacitance depends 
largely on the source-drain spacing of the FET geometry. Critical applications are 
usually only the front-end switching configurations in a T/R module, i.e., before the 
receive low-noise amplifier or after the transmit amplifier.
Phase Shifters.  (1) Digitally controlled phase-shifter designs generally uti -
lize either a switched-line or a loaded-line circuit configuration, using either 
distributed transmission-line components or lumped-element equivalent circuits, 
to achieve multiple-bit phase shifting. Switched-line configurations rely on FET 
switches to switch lengths of transmission line in and out of the circuit and are 
typically used for higher frequencies where less chip area is needed. Loaded-line 
configurations use the switched FET parasitics as circuit elements to introduce the 
necessary phase changes.
The typical processing and construction sequence for a MMIC chip is fairly similar 
among the GaAs foundries (Figure 11.20). In this figure, the active channel region FIGURE 11.19  X-band two-stage power amplifier MMIC showing paral -
lel combination of FET cells in the output stage. This example was fabri -
cated on 100 µm- thick GaAs substrate. The RF lines are microstrip-format  
TEM-mode transmission lines. ( Photograph courtesy of Raytheon Company )
ch11.indd   27 12/17/07   2:25:37 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Solid-State Transmitters 11.28  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 11
FIGURE 11.20   GaAs MMIC processing makes use of deposition and etching techniques 
to first define the active channel region of the transistor (1–4), followed by the deposition of 
metals, dielectric layers, and resistive layers forming the passive components (5–8). Then, 
thick metal interconnects (9) are introduced, followed by backside processing to connect RF 
ground to the topside components (10–11).(1)EPIT AXIAL  LAYERS
MESA  ETCH AND OXYGEN 
IMPLANT  FOR ISOLA TION
OHMIC MET AL PATTERNING 
DEPOSITION. AND ALLOY
E-BEAM (OR OPTICALL Y) 
DEFINE GA TE PA TTERN, 
GATE RECESS, AND GA TE 
METAL DEPOSITION
DEFINE CAP ACIT OR 
BOTT OM PLA TE MET AL
PLASMA  ETCH 
TANTALUM NITRIDE
PLASMA  ETCH 
SILICON NITRIDE
Resistor Capacitor
FETDEFINE AIRBRIDGE PILLOWS, 
PATTERN AND DEPOSIT 
THICK MET AL, REMOVE AIR 
BRIDGE PILLOWS, AND DO 
FINAL  FRONT  SIDE DC TEST
MOUNT  WAFER ON CARRIER 
GRIND/ETCH TO 100 µm 
MASK AND ETCH VIAS
PLATE UP  VIAS 
DEFINE GRID, DICE 
AND DISMOUNT
DEFINE AIRBRIDGES, 
THICK MET AL 
ELECTRICAL  TEST
WAX
SAPPHIRE100 µmDEPOSIT  Si3N4 PASSIVA TION, 
FOLLOWED BY  TaN THIN FILM 
RESIST ORS.(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(10)
(11)(9)
50 µmNITRIDE TANTALUM THICK MET AL CAP BOTT OMCAP BOTT OM GATE MET AL GaAs NITRIDE TANTALUMPHEMT  EPIT AXIAL  LAYERS GaAs SUBSTRA TE OHMIC MET AL
ch11.indd   28 12/17/07   2:25:38 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Solid-State Transmitters  SOLID-STATE TRANSMITTERS  11.296x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 11
of a FET is delineated by any of several patterning techniques on a semi-insulating 
GaAs substrate such as ion implantation or molecular beam epitaxy. Once the FET 
has been defined, a combination of deposited dielectric films and metal layers is used 
to form the passive components (such as metal-insulator-metal capacitors) and also 
to interconnect all the elements of the circuit. Standard libraries of circuit elements 
may include FETs (used as linear amplifiers, low-noise amplifiers, saturating power 
amplifiers, or switches), resistors, capacitors, inductors, diodes, transmission lines, 
interconnects, and plated ground vias.
Transmit/Receive Module Characteristics.  The impact of antenna array elec -
trical requirements on the packaging of MMIC components into a T/R module is fun -
damental. The periodic nature of digital phase shifting at each radiating element can 
create multiple distinct locations in space where parasitic beams (grating lobes) can 
occur. In array design, this is avoided if the radiating element spacing ( d) is less than 
that described by
 d < (l*(1 + sin(q))−1  (11.5)
Where d is the spacing between adjacent radiating elements, l is the wavelength of 
the highest operating frequency, and q  is the maximum scan angle of the array. For 
hemispherical phased array coverage, the maximum scan angle can be upwards of  
± 60°, depending on the number of array faces used in the system configuration. Thus, 
for an X-band array that requires scanning to large angles, the spacing between radiat -
ing elements, and by implication, the maximum spacing available for T/R modules 
when they are aligned behind the radiating elements must be on the order of 0.5 inches 
or less. Alleviations in packaging may be allowable if the scan volume is not required 
to extend to a full field of view. Values of element spacing that satisfy Eq. 11.5 are 
shown as a function of scan angle for some of the common radar frequency bands 
through mm-wave frequencies in Figure 11.21. The implication of this graph is that 
full T/R module functionality must be packaged into the space and volume behind the 
planar array, and this requirement can pose very difficult challenges to the T/R module  
FIGURE 11.21  Maximum operating frequency and worst-case scan 
angle define the maximum allowable distance among adjacent radiat -
ing elements; T/R modules fitting behind each element are constrained 
by these spacings.Element Spacing vs Max Scan Angle
0.11.010.0
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45
Frequency (GHz)Element Spacing (inch)10-deg
22-deg
35-deg
45-deg
60-deg
 
ch11.indd   29 12/17/07   2:25:39 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Solid-State Transmitters 11.30  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 11
designer in order to satisfy the RF electrical, dc electrical, thermal, and reliability 
requirements. Packaging of MMIC components into the T/R module must take into 
consideration30,31,32 multiple elements as they impact the electrical performance.
Power Conditioning Considerations.  Pulsed transmit amplifiers can consume 
very high dc currents and special design attention must be paid to parasitic induc -
tance that can generate very high voltage spikes and cause damage to MMIC power 
amplifiers. In addition, the dc power source must include appropriate energy storage, 
sometimes locally in the module, in order to support the minimum voltage pulse droop 
as a function of time.
Environmental Protection Considerations.  MMIC components utilize thin-film 
metal deposition techniques to delineate the very fine features that make up the micro -
wave circuitry. These features are susceptible to potential short-term failure due to 
corrosion, metal migration, and dendritic growth if there are voltages on the circuitry 
when exposed to an atmosphere that causes moisture to condense on the circuitry. 
Thus, a hermetic package with a dry, nitrogen-filled interior is usually employed to 
ensure long-term reliability. Hermetic packaging also brings with it the undesirable 
effect of trapping inside the housing any molecular content that outgases into the 
interior cavity. In particular, hydrogen can be present in the interior metal plating and 
has been known to cause long-term reliability concerns in some GaAs amplifiers. 
One solution involves the use of an internal hydrogen getter to counterbalance the 
reliability impact. A getter is a material included in the module housing to absorb 
residual hydrogen.
Mechanical Packaging Considerations.  The T/R module housing must be made 
of materials that provide for adequate thermal management and long-term reliabil -
ity. Materials that simultaneously support exposure to shock, vibration, temperature 
cycling, and adequate thermal management must be used. Materials that match very 
closely the coefficient of thermal expansion (CTE) of the semiconductor material must 
be used in the design of the housing such that cracking of the semiconductor devices 
does not occur during thermal cycling that happens during normal operation or during 
temperature changes during assembly and test.
Electrical Interconnection Considerations.  The interconnection of MMIC chips 
within the T/R module must utilize controlled impedance transmission lines with low 
insertion loss. Thus, some combination of high-quality microwave dielectric material 
must be integral to the microwave electrical and mechanical design of the module. 
Attention to the coefficient of thermal expansion and manufacturability issues will 
impact the choice of usable materials. T/R modules also generally require as many as 
6–12 control or bias connections in order to interface with amplifiers, control circuitry, 
and phase shifters. The interconnection density, especially at higher frequencies, can 
become a packaging design challenge. At frequencies above 20 GHz, the use of con -
ventional connectors is usually prohibitive due to the small width available in full 
field-of-view arrays.
Manufacturability Considerations  By definition, the use of MMIC components 
invokes a microelectronic assembly, test, and handling manufacturing infrastructure. 
The manufacturing of low-cost T/R modules is paramount to being able to effectively 
produce affordable arrays. Design methodologies, such as statistical performance 
ch11.indd   30 12/17/07   2:25:40 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Solid-State Transmitters  SOLID-STATE TRANSMITTERS  11.316x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 11
representation, are often exploited to maximize functional yield. The integration of 
design and manufacturing processes is a key component to successful execution of 
product manufacturing.
11.6 SOLID-STATE SYSTEM EXAMPLES
PAVE PAWS (UHF Early Warning Radar).  The PA VE PAWS (AN/FPS-115) 
system is a UHF solid-state active aperture phased array radar that was built for the 
Electronic Systems Division of the U.S. Air Force by the Equipment Division of the 
Raytheon Company during the late 1970s.33 The radar is a long-range system with a 
primary mission to detect and track sea-launched ballistic missiles. The two-faced 
radar uses 1792 active T/R modules per face, and each module interfaces with a dipole 
antenna element. Extra elements and a narrow beam are used on receive, and upgrade 
capability has been included for the future installation of up to 5354 T/R modules per 
array face. The peak power output from each face, when populated with 1792 modules 
is 600 kW, and the average power output is 150 kW.
Among the 1792 modules per face, groups of 32 T/R modules are operated as a 
subarray. In transmit, a high-power array predriver is used to drive 56 subarray driver 
amplifiers. Each of these power amplifiers provides enough RF drive for all 32 mod -
ules in one subarray. In receive, the signal from each of the 56 subarrays is fed into a 
receive beamforming network.
The T/R module contains predriver, driver, and final transmit amplifiers, transmit/
receive switching, low-noise amplifiers, limiter, phase shifters, and logic control. The 
T/R module block diagram is shown in Figure 11.22, and a photograph is shown in 
FIGURE 11.22  Block diagram of the PA VE PAWS transmit/receive module shows a 1-2-4 transistor 
driving configuration for the transmit amplifier and a quadrature splitter on the output to generate a polar -
ized feed to the radiating element.
ch11.indd   31 12/17/07   2:25:41 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Solid-State Transmitters 11.32  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 11
Figure 11.23. The transmitter portion of the T/R module contains seven silicon bipo -
lar power transistors, operated Class-C from a 31 V dc power supply. The transmit 
amplifier chain consists of a predriver transistor feeding two driver transistors, in turn 
feeding four final transistors, i.e., a 1-2-4 configuration. Each of the four final stages 
delivers 110 W peak for 16-ms pulse widths at duty cycles up to 25%. More than 
180,000 transistors have been built into more than 25,000 modules. Future upgrades of 
this design in the BMEWS arrays will use the more powerful and efficient Si LDMOS 
FET technology for enhanced performance capabilities.
AN/SPS-40 Shipboard Search Radar.  The AN/SPS-40 was an existing UHF, 
tube-type, long-range, 2D shipboard search radar system, for which a new solid-state 
transmitter was built during the 1980s to replace the tube. The solid-state transmitter 
was built for the Naval Sea Systems Command by the (then) Westinghouse Electric 
Corporation.34 The existing waveform from the original transmitter was not changed, 
and the solid-state unit was installed as a direct retrofit. This was not quite as difficult 
as usual, because the tube-type system already used long pulses and pulse compres -
sion with a duty cycle of nearly 2%, which is much higher than older 0.1% duty cycle 
systems. Although it may have been desirable to go to a higher duty cycle and lower 
peak power to make the solid-state retrofit easier, the Navy preferred not to have to 
modify the rest of the system.
The 250-kW peak power transmitter used a total of 128 high-power amplifier mod -
ules, which, along with power combining, predrivers, drivers, and control circuitry, 
were housed in three separate cabinets. There were 112 final power output modules 
arranged in two groups of 56. Each module (Figure 11.24) produced 2500 W peak and 
50 W average for a 60-µs pulse width at a 2% duty cycle. Drive power for the two FIGURE 11.23  PA VE PAWSUHF T/R module consists of transmit module and receive 
module in a nested configuration of cast aluminum housings ( Photograph courtesy of 
Raytheon Company )
ch11.indd   32 12/17/07   2:25:44 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Solid-State Transmitters  SOLID-STATE TRANSMITTERS  11.336x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 11
banks of final output modules, 17.5 kW, was provided from the combined outputs of 
12 more identical modules in the driver group. Predrivers and a redundant preamplifier 
were used as preceding drive stages.
The power amplifier module consisted of ten identical silicon bipolar power tran -
sistors arranged in a 2-driving-8 amplifier configuration to develop more than 2500 W 
peak power output over the 400 to 450 MHz frequency bandwidth. Each transistor was 
a 400 W peak-power device that was operated in a balanced push-pull circuit design. 
By using a push-pull configuration, the circuit designers alleviated some of the low 
impedance-matching problems normally associated with very high power transistors. 
The RF input drive to the module was 120 W peak and was used to drive two devices. 
A combined power level of greater than 600 W was split eight ways to drive the eight 
identical output stages. Losses in the output circulator, final power combining, and the 
fault detection circuitry reduced the combined power level to 2500 W. Output modules 
were liquid-cooled for normal operation, but an emergency backup forced-air cooling 
was provided in the event of a primary-cooling-system failure. The dissipated heat 
could be tolerated because the system operated at a low duty cycle.
The power combining for each output cabinet consisted of 56:1 combiners. The 
reactive power combiner consisted of seven groups of 8:1 combiners fabricated in 
air stripline using 0.5-in ground-plane spacing. The seven outputs were combined 
by using a single 7:1 air stripline combiner with 1.0-in ground-plane spacing. The 
130 kW outputs of the two 56:1 combiners were combined in a single 2:1 isolated 
hybrid that was manufactured by using a coaxial transmission line. The advertised 
losses of the 2:1 and 56:1 combiners were 0.1 dB and 0.25 dB, respectively .
RAMP (L-Band Air Traffic Control Transmitter).  The Radar Modernization 
Project (RAMP) radar system is an L band system built by the Raytheon Company dur -
ing the late 1980s to replace the earlier primary and secondary surveillance radars used 
for air traffic control by Canada’s Ministry of Transport.35,36 The primary surveillance 
radar consists of a rotating reflector, horn-fed by a solid-state transmitter, and interfac -
ing with redundant receive channels with receiver-exciters and signal processors. The 
primary surveillance radar operates between 1250 and 1350 MHz with a 25-kW peak FIGURE 11.24  AN/SPS-40 transmitter amplifier module ( Photograph courtesy of 
Westinghouse Electric Corporation )
ch11.indd   33 12/17/07   2:25:45 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Solid-State Transmitters 11.34  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 11
power output and provides radar coverage to 80 nmi and to an altitude of 23,000 ft with 
an 80% probability of detection for a 2 m2 target; with azimuth and range resolution to 
2.25° and 0.25 nmi, respectively. The receiver-exciter efficiently utilizes the transmit -
ter solid-state devices with a high duty-cycle waveform. A pair of pulses is used in the 
frequency-agile system, and target returns are processed by a moving-target detector. 
The pulse pair consists of a 1-µs single-tone pulse that provides coverage to 8 nmi and 
a 100-µs nonlinear chirp pulse that provides coverage to 80 nmi. The 100-µs pulse is 
compressed to 1 µs such that high duty cycle is achieved without compromising range 
resolution. The transmitter consists of 14 modules, each capable of 2000 W power out -
put (Figure 11.25), that are combined to produce the greater than 25 kW peak power 
level. Two modules and a 33 V dc power supply make up a single transmitting group. 
The module consists of a 2-driving-8-driving-32 transistor (2-8-32) amplifier configura -
tion of silicon bipolar power devices. The two final output devices and the eight driver 
devices are 100 W transistors capable of operating up to a 10% duty cycle over the  
100-MHz bandwidth at collector efficiencies greater than 52%. Each module is air-
cooled, and the measured efficiency is greater than 25% when the module is operating 
at an 8.2% average duty cycle. Module power gain is greater than 16 dB. A circulator is 
used on the output port to protect the 100 W devices from antenna-generated reflections, 
and control circuitry has been included to switch off modules in the event of cooling-  
system failure. A 14:1 high-power replicated combiner built by using a combination of 
reactive and resistive power-combining techniques in air-dielectric stripline, is employed 
to sum the module outputs to the 25 kW level.
REFERENCES
 1. M. Meth, “Industrial assessment of the microwave power tube industry,” Department of Defense 
Report, April 1997, p. 3.
 2. V . Granatstein, R. Parker, and C. Armstron, “Scanning the technology: Vacuum electronics at the 
dawn of the 21st century,” Proceedings of the IEEE , vol. 87, no. 5, pp. 702–716, May 1999.FIGURE 11.25  RAMP transmitter amplifier module ( Photograph courtesy of Raytheon 
Company )
ch11.indd   34 12/17/07   2:25:46 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Solid-State Transmitters  SOLID-STATE TRANSMITTERS  11.356x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 11
 3. V . Gregers-Hansen, “Radar systems trade-offs, vacuum electronics vs. solid-state,” in 5th 
International Vacuum Electronics Conference, April 27–29, 2004, pp. 12–13.
 4. R. Symons, “Modern microwave power sources,” IEEE AESS Systems Magazine , pp. 19–26, 
January 2002.
 5. T. Sertic, “Idiosyncrasies of TWT amplifiers,” presented at The Future of Electronic Devices 
Conference, Institute of Physics, March 22, 2003.
 6. M. Hanczor and M. Kumar, “12-kW S-band solid-state transmitter for modern radar SYSTEMS,” 
IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and Techniques , vol. 41, no. 12, pp 2237–2242, 
December 1993.
 7. D. Rutledge, N. Cheng, R. York, R. Weikle, and M. DeLisio, “Failures in power combining arrays,” 
IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and Techniques , vol. 47, no. 7, pp. 1077–1082, July 1999.
 8. L. B. Walker, High Power GaAs FET Amplifiers , Norwood, MA: Artech House, 1993, p. 5.
 9. Hewlett-Packard Application Notes, High Frequency Transistor Primer, Part 3, Thermal 
Properties, p. 6.
10. H. Cooke, “Microwave transistors: theory and design,” Proceedings of the IEEE , vol. 59, 
pp. 1163–1181, August 1971.
11. Vendor transistor datasheet, Integra Technologies, Inc , www.integratech.com.
12. Vendor transistor datasheet, Tyco Electronics, M/A-COM , www.macom.com.
13. Vendor transistor datasheet, STMicroelectronic, www.st.com.
14. Vendor transistor datasheet, Philips , www.datasheetcatalog.com.
15. N. Sakura, K. Matsunage, K. Ishikura, I. Takenake, K. Asano, N. Iwata, M. Kanamori, and 
M. Kuzuhara, “100W L-band GaAs power FP-HFET operated at 30V ,” in IEEE Microwave 
Theory and Techniques Symposium Digest , 2000, pp. 1715–1718.
16. T. Winslow, “Power dependent input impedance of field plate MESFETs,” Compound 
Semiconductor Integrated Circuit Digest , pp. 240–243, 2005.
17. J. Huang, G. Jackson, S. Shanfield, A. Platzker, P. Saledas, and C. Weichert, “An AlGaAs/
InGaAs pseudomorphic high electron mobility transistor with improved breakdown voltage for 
X- and Ku-band power applications,” IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and Techniques , 
vol. 41, no. 5, pp. 752–758, May 1993.
18. K. Alavi, S. Ogut, P. Lymna, and M. Borkowski, “A highly uniform and high throughput 
double selective PHEMT process using an all wet etch chemistry,” presented at GaAs MaTech 
Conference, 2002.
19. C. Snowden, “Recent development in compound semiconductor microwave power transistor 
technology,” IEE Proc-Circuits Devices Syst ., vol. 151, no. 3, pp. 259–264, June 2004.
20. D. Miller and M. Drinkwine, “High voltage microwave devices: An overview,” presented at 
International Conference on Compound Semiconductor Mfg., 2003.
21. J. Zolper, “Scanning the special issue, special issue on wide bandgap semiconductor devices,” 
Proceedings of the IEEE , vol. 90, no. 6, pp. 939–941, June 2002.
22. U. Mishra, P. Parikh, and Y . Wu, “AlGaN/GaN HEMTs—An overview of device operation and 
applications,” Proceedings of the IEEE , vol. 90, no. 6, pp. 1022–1031, June 2002.
23. R. Trew, “SiC and GaN transistors—Is there one winner for microwave power applications?” 
Proceedings of the IEEE , vol. 90, no. 6, pp. 1032–1047, June 2002.
24. S. Allen, R. Sadler, T. Alcorn, J. Palmour, and C. Carter, “Silicon carbide MESFETs for high 
power S-band applications,” in IEEE MTT-S International Microwave Symposium , June 1997, 
pp. 57–60.
25. Thomas Kazior (personal communication), Raytheon RF Components, August 2006.
26. Y . Wu and P. Parikh, “High-power GaN HEMTs battle for vacuum-tube territory,” Compound 
Semiconductor Magazine , January/February 2006.
27. Colin Whelan (personal communication), Raytheon RF Components, August 2006.
28. H. Howe, Stripline Circuit Design , Norwood, MA: Artech House, 1974, pp. 77–180.
29. D. McQuiddy, R. Gassner, P. Hull, P., J. Mason, and J. Bedinger, “Transmit/receive module 
technology for X-band active array radar,” Proceedings of the IEEE , vol. 79, no. 3, pp. 308–341, 
March 1991.
ch11.indd   35 12/17/07   2:25:46 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Solid-State Transmitters 11.36  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 11
30. G. Jerinic and M. Borkowski, “Microwave module packaging,” in IEEE Microwave Theory and 
Techniques Symposium Digest , 1992, pp. 1503–1506.
31. B. Kopp, M. Borkowski, and G. Jerinic, “Transmit/receive modules,” IEEE Transactions on 
Microwave Theory and Techniques , vol. 50, no. 3, pp. 827–834, March 2002.
32. B. Kopp, C. Moore, and R. Coffman, “Transmit/receive module packaging: Electrical design 
issues,” Johns Hopkins APL Technical Digest , vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 70–80, 1999.
33. D. Hoft, “Solid-state transmit/receive module for the PA VE PAWS phased array radar,” Microwave 
Journal , pp. 33–35, October 1978.
34. K. Lee, C. Corson, and G. Mols, “A 250 kW solid-state AN/SPS-40 radar transmitter,” Microwave 
Journal , vol. 26, pp. 93–96, July 1983.
35. J. Dyck and H. Ward, “RAMP’s new primary surveillance radar,” Microwave Journal , p. 105, 
December 1984.
36. H. Ward, “The RAMP PSR, a solid-state surveillance radar,” presented at IEE International 
Radar Conference, London, October 1987.
ch11.indd   36 12/17/07   2:25:47 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Solid-State Transmitters 