16.16x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 16
Ground Echo
Richard K. Moore
The University of Kansas
16.1 INTRODUCTION
Radar ground return is described by s 0, the differential scattering cross section, or 
scattering coefficient (scattering cross section per unit area), rather than by the total 
scattering cross section s  used for discrete targets.1 Since the total cross section s  of 
a patch of ground varies with the illuminated area that is determined by the geometric 
radar parameters (pulse width, beamwidth, etc.), s 0 was introduced to obtain a coef -
ficient independent of these parameters.
Use of a differential scattering cross section implies that the return from the ground 
is contributed by a large number of scattering elements whose phases are independent. 
This is primarily because of differences in distance that, although small fractions of 
total distance, are many wavelengths. Superposition of power is possible for the com -
putation of average returns. If this condition is not applicable to a particular ground 
target, the differential-scattering cross-section concept has no meaning for that target. 
For example, a very fine-resolution radar might be able to resolve a part of a car; the 
smooth surfaces on the car would not be properly represented by s 0. On the other 
hand, a coarser radar might look at many cars in a large parking lot, and a valid s 0 for 
the parking lot could be determined.
If a region illuminated at one time by a radar contains n scattering elements and the 
above criterion is satisfied so that power may be added, the radar equation for average 
power becomes
 PP G A
RP G A A
ri
i in
i i= = ∑titiri titiri/ σ
πσ
( )( )
42 2∆∆ ∆A
Ri
i in
( )42 2π∑  
Here, ∆Ai is an element of surface area; and Pti (power transmitted toward point i), 
Gti (gain in direction of point i), and Ari (receiving equivalent aperture in direction of 
point i) are values of Pt , Gt , and Ar appropriate for an element at the location of ∆ Ai. 
The factor in parentheses in the numerator of the right-hand expression is the incre -
mental scattering cross section for element i, but this concept is meaningful only in an 
average. Thus, the average power returned is given by
 PP G A A
Rri
i in
=∑titiriσ
π0
2 24∆
( )  Chapter 16
ch16.indd   1 12/19/07   4:54:16 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Source: RADAR HANDBOOK 16.2  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 16
Here, s 0 has been used to denote the average value of si /∆ Ai. In this formulation, 
we may pass in the limit from the finite sum to the integral given by
 PPGA d A
Rrt t r= ∫1
420
4( )πσ
Illuminated area (16.1)
This integral is not really correct, for there is a minimum size for real, independent 
scattering centers. Nevertheless, the concept is widely used and is applicable as long 
as the illuminated area is large enough to contain many such centers.
Figure 16.1 illustrates the geometry associated with Eq. 16.1. Note that for a rectan -
gular pulse, Pt is either zero or the peak transmitter power; but for other pulse shapes, 
the variation with t (or R) is significant. Actual pulses are often approximated by 
rectangular pulses with widths equal to their half-power widths. Real pulses cannot be 
rectangular after passing through real transmitter, antenna, and receiver bandwidths. 
The transmitting-antenna gain and receiving-antenna aperture are functions of the 
elevation and azimuth angles:
 Gt = Gt(q, f)   Ar = Ar(q, f) (16.2 a)
The differential scattering cross section itself is a function of both look angle  (q, f) 
and ground location:
 s 0 = s 0 (q, f, location ) (16.2 b)
The integral of Eq. 16.1 must be inverted when s 0 is measured. With narrow beams 
and short pulses, the inversion is relatively easy, but with the wider beams and lon -
ger pulses used in many measurements, the values obtained are sometimes poorly 
defined.
Some authors2 use a scattering cross section per unit projected area rather than 
per unit ground area. Figure 16.2 illustrates by using a side view  the difference 
FIGURE   16. 1 Geometry of the radar equation
ch16.indd   2 12/19/07   4:54:18 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Ground Echo  GROUND ECHO  16.36x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 16
between ground area and projected area. The ground area is proportional to ∆r, and 
the projected area is smaller. Thus,
or σ γ γ θ
σ γ θ0
0A d dA = =
=( cos
cosprojected area)
 (16.3)
Since both g  and s 0 are called scattering coefficients, readers of the literature must be 
especially careful to determine which is being used by a particular author .
Radar astronomers use a different s3:
 total returnpowerfrom entire surface
powerreturn nedfrom perfectisotropicsphereofsameradius (16.4)
The resulting value for s  is usually much smaller than s 0 for the planet at vertical 
incidence and is larger than the values of s 0 near grazing incidence (return from the 
limb of the planet).
Relative Importance of Theory and Empiricism.  The theory of radar ground 
return has been the subject of many publications.4,5 The various theories, insofar as 
they can be confirmed by experiment, provide bases for judging the effects of varia -
tions in the dielectric properties of the ground, of the roughness of the ground and 
nature of vegetative or snow cover, of radar wavelength, and of angle of incidence. 
Viewed as aids to insight, radar ground-return theories can be extremely useful.
The validity of any ground-return theory must depend on the mathematical model 
used to describe the surface, as well as on the approximations required to obtain 
answers. Even the simplest ground surface, the sea, is extremely difficult to describe 
accurately; it is homogeneous to beyond the skin depth, contains relatively modest 
slopes, and (except for spray) has no part above another part of the surface. At grazing 
angles, shadowing of one wave by another might occur. Land surfaces are much more 
difficult to describe: Imagine an adequate mathematical description of the shape of a 
forest (when every leaf and pine needle must be described). Furthermore, land surfaces 
are seldom homogeneous either horizontally or with depth.
Since a true mathematical description of the ground surface appears out of the ques -
tion, empirical measurements are necessary to describe the radar return from natural 
surfaces. The role of theory is to aid in interpreting these measurements and to suggest 
how they may be extrapolated.FIGURE   16. 2 Ground area and projected area
ch16.indd   3 12/19/07   4:54:22 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Ground Echo 16.4  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 16
Available Scattering Information.  Prior to 1972, the lack of coordinated 
research programs over the necessary long period resulted in only one really usable 
set of measurements, developed at Ohio State  University.2,6 Since that time, exten -
sive measurements have been made from trucks and helicopters by the University of 
Kansas,8,9 groups in the Netherlands,10,11 and several groups in France.12,13,14 These 
measurements concentrated especially on vegetation, with the Kansas measurements 
also including some work on snow and extensive work on sea ice. Most of these mea -
surements were in the 10° to 80° range of incidence angles. Measurements near verti -
cal are scarcer.15,16 Well-controlled experiments near grazing are also scarce except for 
a major Lincoln Laboratory program.17
Airborne measurements are necessary to make larger scattering areas accessible. 
Although airborne programs for special purposes have been legion, curves of scatter -
ing coefficient versus angle for a known homogeneous area are scarce. The work at 
the MIT Radiation Laboratory18 was early. Work by Philco Corporation,19 Goodyear 
Aerospace Corporation,20 General Precision Laboratory,21 and the U.S. Naval Research 
Laboratory (NRL)22–2 5 programs were important early on. The Canada Centre for 
Remote Sensing (CCRS) has made numerous airborne and ground-based scatterom -
eter measurements,26,27 especially over sea ice. The Environmental Research Institute 
of Michigan (ERIM),28 CCRS,29 the European Space Agency (ESA),30 and the  
Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL)31 used imaging synthetic aperture radars (SARs) for 
some scattering measurements, but most were not well calibrated. Since the advent 
of spaceborne SARs (SIR A, B, and C; ERS 1 and 2; Radarsat; Envisat; JERS-1; and 
others), hundreds of papers have appeared dealing with measurements of scattering 
and radar applications. Moreover, the JPL AIRSAR has flown around the world, 
and several other airborne SARs for remote sensing have appeared in various coun -
tries, with hundreds of resulting papers. The reader should search the literature for 
these results, which are far too numerous to reference here. Many of the more recent 
SARs32–36 also provide information on polarimetric responses.
Results of most of these measurements are summarized in Ulaby, Moore, and 
Fung37 and Ulaby and Dobson.38 More complete summaries of the earlier work and 
near-grazing studies are in Long22,39 and in the work of Billingsley.17 Many applica -
tion summaries are also in the Manual of Remote Sensing .40,41 Readers requiring more 
detailed information should consult these books .
16.2 PARAMETERS AFFECTING  
GROUND RETURN
Radar return depends upon a combination of system parameters and ground parameters:
Radar system parameters (Eqs. 16.1 and 16. 2a and b):
 Wavelength
 Power
 Illuminated area
 Direction of illumination (both azimuth and elevation)
 Polarization (including the full polarization matrix when available)
Ground parameters:
 Complex permittivity (conductivity and permittivity)
 Roughness of surface
  Inhomogeneity of subsurface or cover to depth where attenuation reduces 
waves to negligible amplitude
ch16.indd   4 12/19/07   4:54:22 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Ground Echo  GROUND ECHO  16.56x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 16
Different wavelengths are sensitive to different elements on the surface. One of the 
earliest known and most striking directional effects is the cardinal-point  effect in returns 
from cities: Radars looking in directions aligned with primary street grids observe stron -
ger regular returns than radars at other angles. Horizontally polarized waves are reflected 
better by horizontal wires, rails, etc., than are vertically polarized waves. Vertically 
polarized waves are reflected better from vertical structures such as tree trunks, at least 
when the wavelength is comparable or larger than the trunk diameter.
If the geometry of two radar targets were the same, the returns would be stronger 
from the target with higher complex permittivity because larger currents (displacement or 
conduction) would be induced in it. Because identical geometries with differing permit -
tivities do not occur in nature, this distinction is not easy to measure. Effective permittiv -
ity for ground targets is very strongly influenced by moisture content since the relative 
permittivity of liquid water is from about 60 at X band to about 80 at S band and longer 
wavelengths, whereas most dry solids have permittivities less than 8. Attenuation is also 
strongly influenced by moisture since wet materials usually have higher conductivity 
than the same materials dry. Figures 16.3 and 16.4 show the effect of moisture content on 
properties of plants and of soil. The high permittivity of plants with much moisture means 
that radar return from crops varies as the plants mature, even when growth is neglected.
FIGURE   16. 3 Measured moisture dependence of the dielectric  
constant of corn leaves at 1.5, 5.0, and 8.0 GHz. S is the salinity of water 
content in parts per thousand, ev = ev = jev″ is the complex dielectric 
constant in Fm−1, and mv is the volumetric moisture content in kgm−3. 
(after F . T. Ulaby, R. K. Moore, and A. K. Fung37)
ch16.indd   5 12/19/07   4:54:23 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Ground Echo 16.6  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 16
The roughness of surfaces (especially natural ones) is difficult to describe math -
ematically but easy to understand qualitatively. Thus it is easy to see that a freshly 
plowed field is rougher than the same field after rain and wind have been at work 
on it. A forest is inherently rougher than either a field or a city. It is harder to see the 
difference between the roughness of natural areas and the roughness of a city that has 
flat walls interspersed with window sills and with curbs, cars, and sidewalks.
Surfaces that are relatively smooth tend to reflect radio waves in accordance with 
the Fresnel-reflection direction, * so they give strong backscatter only when the look 
angle is nearly normal to the surfaces. Rough surfaces, on the other hand, tend to 
reradiate nearly uniformly in all directions, and so they give relatively strong radar 
returns in any direction.
The problem of radar scatter is complicated because waves penetrate significant 
distances into many surfaces and vegetation canopies, and internal reflection and scatter 
contribute to the return. Measurements of attenuation for field crops43,44 and grasses45 
show that most of the return is from the upper layers, with some contribution by the soil 
and lower layers if the vegetation is not very dense. At C band and higher frequencies, 
most of the signal returned from trees is usually from the upper and middle branches 
when the trees are in leaf,46–50 although in winter the surface is a major contributor to 
the signal. At L band, and especially at VHF, the signal penetrates farther, so trunks and 
the ground can be major contributors even when the trees are leafed out.51
Additional problems occur near grazing incidence.17,52 Because of the low angle 
with the surface, shadowing frequently occurs—some parts of the target are obscured 
by intervening projections such as hills and buildings. Parts of the area that are some -
what elevated have the signal modified by the effect of multipath interference between 
FIGURE   16. 4 Apparent relative dielectric constant versus 
moisture content (Richfield slit loam) ( after J. R. Lundien42)
*  Angle of reflection equals angle of incidence.
ch16.indd   6 12/19/07   4:54:24 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Ground Echo  GROUND ECHO  16.76x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 16
the direct ray and one reflected off the ground. Since the scattering from relatively 
level surfaces is very small, any projection may give a return much stronger than the 
background, thereby skewing the statistics so a Rayleigh distribution no longer applies 
to the average signal. Objects such as trees, buildings, fence posts, and power lines 
give localized echoes strong relative to their surroundings.
Moreover, the signal from surfaces without projections falls off very rapidly 
for depression angles within a few degrees of grazing. This means that the effect 
of small local slopes can be very significant in modulating the return signal, not 
just in shadowing.
16.3 THEORETICAL MODELS  
AND THEIR LIMITATIONS
Descriptions of a Surface.  Many theoretical models for radar return from the 
ground assume a rough boundary surface between air and an infinite homogeneous 
half space. Some include either vertical or horizontal homogeneities in the ground 
properties and in vegetative or snow covers.
Surface descriptions suitable for use in mathematical models are necessarily greatly 
idealized. Few natural grounds are truly homogeneous in composition over very wide 
areas. Descriptions of their detailed shape must be simplified if they are to be handled 
analytically, although computers permit the use of true descriptions. Very few sur -
faces have ever been measured to the precision appropriate for centimeter-wavelength 
radars; even for these, there is no assurance that scattering boundaries do not exist 
within a skin depth beneath the surface. Surfaces containing vegetation and conglom -
erate rocks almost completely defy description.
Statistical descriptions of surfaces are used for most theories, since a theory should 
be representative of some kind of surface class, rather than of a particular surface, 
and since exact description is so difficult. The statistical descriptions themselves must 
be oversimplified, however. Many theories assume isotropic statistics, certainly not 
appropriate for plowed fields or gridded cities. Most theories assume some kind of 
model involving only two or three parameters (standard deviation, mean slope, correla -
tion distance, etc.), whereas natural (or human-made) surfaces seldom are so simply 
described. The theories for vegetation and other volume scatters have more parameters. 
For near-grazing conditions, the models must account for shadowing.
Simplified Models.  Early radar theories for ground return assumed, as in optics, 
that many targets could be described by a Lambert-law variation of intensity; that is, 
the differential scattering coefficient varies as cos2q, with q  being the angle of inci -
dence. This “perfectly rough” assumption was soon found wanting, although it is a 
fair approximation for the return from many vegetated surfaces over the midrange of 
angles of incidence.
Clapp18 described three models involving assemblies of spheres, with different 
spacings and either with or without a reflecting ground plane. These models yield 
variations from s 0 independent of angle through s 0 ∝ cos q  to s 0 ∝ cos2 q. Since 
the sphere models are highly artificial, only the resulting scatter laws need be consid -
ered. Most targets give returns that vary more rapidly over part of the incidence-angle 
regime than these models, although forests and similar rough targets of some depth 
sometimes give such slowly varying returns.
ch16.indd   7 12/19/07   4:54:24 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Ground Echo 16.8  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 16
Since these rough-surface models usually fail to explain the rise in return near 
vertical incidence, other simplified models combine Lambert’s law and other rough-
surface scattering models with specular reflection at vertical incidence, and a smooth 
curve is drawn between the specular value and the rough-surface prediction.
Specular reflection is defined as reflection from a smooth plane and obeys the 
Fresnel reflection laws.53 At normal incidence, the specular-reflection coefficient is 
therefore
 ΓRg
g=−
+η η
η η0
0 
where h0 and hg are the intrinsic impedances of air and earth, respectively. The fraction 
of total incident power specularly reflected from a rough surface is7
 eh −2 22( )πσ λ/ 
where  sh = standard deviation of surface height variations, and
 l = wavelength
Since this proportion is down to 13.5% when sh = l/2p and to 1.8% when 
σ λ πh=/( ), 2 2  significant specular reflection is seldom found for the centimeter 
wavelengths generally used for radar. Nevertheless, a simplified model like this is 
convenient for some purposes.
Observation of reflected sunlight from rippled water, from roads, and from other 
smooth surfaces leads to the postulation of a facet theory.54,55 The only sunlight reach -
ing the observer from smooth surfaces such as water is that from facets for which angle 
of incidence equals angle of reflection. Thus, the observed light may be described by 
methods of geometric optics .
When geometric optics is used to describe radar scatter, the surface of the ground 
is represented by small flat-plane segments. Radar return is assumed to occur only for 
facets oriented normal to the radar (normal orientation is required for backscatter so that 
the reflected wave returns to the source). Thus, if the slope distribution of such facets is 
known, the fraction normal to a given diverging beam can be established, and from this 
the return can be obtained. Geometric optics assumes zero wavelength, and so the results 
of such a theory are wavelength-independent, clearly not in accord with observation.
The facet model for radar return is extremely useful for qualitative discussions, 
and so modification to make it fit better with observation is appropriate. Two kinds 
of modification may be used, separately or jointly: considering the actual reradiation 
pattern of finite-size facets at finite wavelengths55 and considering the effect of wave -
length on establishing the effective number of facets.56 Thus, the scatter from a facet 
may actually occur in directions other than that requiring that angle of incidence equal 
angle of reflection. Figure 16.5 illustrates this. For large facets (compared with wave -
length), most of the return occurs almost at normal incidence, whereas for small facets 
the orientation may be off normal by a considerable amount without great reduction 
in scatter. As the wavelength is increased, the category of a given facet changes from 
large  to small;  eventually the facet is smaller than a wavelength, and its reradiation 
pattern shape remains almost isotropic from that point. Many facets that would be 
separate at, say, a 1-cm wavelength are combined at a 1-m wavelength; the result may 
be a transition from rough- to smooth-surface behavior. Figure 16.6 a shows a number 
of facets of different sizes contributing to a radar return.
ch16.indd   8 12/19/07   4:54:31 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Ground Echo  GROUND ECHO  16.96x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 16
Physical Optics Models.  Theories based on applications of the Kirchhoff-
Huygens principle have been thoroughly developed.37,55,57–59 The Kirchhoff approxi -
mation is that the current flowing at each point in a locally curved (or rough) surface 
is the same as would flow in the same surface if it were flat and oriented tangent to the 
actual surface. This assumption permits construction of scattered fields by assuming 
that the current over a rough plane surface has the same magnitude as if the surface 
were smooth, but with phase perturbations set by the differing distances of individual 
FIGURE   16. 5 Normal-incidence reradiation patterns of facets
FIGURE   16. 6a Facet model of a radar return
ch16.indd   9 12/19/07   4:54:32 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Ground Echo 16.10  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 16
points from the mean plane. For surfaces assumed to be azimuthally isotropic, the 
usual approach yields integrals of the form
 1232 1
02
cos( c os)( c os) [ ( )]
θξ θ ξ ξσ θ ρ ξe Jk dkh − −∫ 
where  r(ξ) = spatial autocorrelation function of surface heights
 q = angle with vertical
 sh = standard deviation of surface heights
 k = 2p/l
 J0 = first-order, first-kind Bessel function
The autocorrelation function of height with distance is seldom known for terrain, 
although it can be determined on a large scale by analysis of contour maps,60 and it 
has been found for some areas by careful contouring at close intervals and subsequent 
analysis. Because of lack of knowledge of actual autocorrelations, most theory has 
been developed with artificial functions that are chosen more for their integrability 
than for their fit with nature; selection among them has been on the basis of which ones 
yield the best fit between theoretical and experimental scatter curves.
The correlation function first used61 was gaussian:
 r(ξ) = e −ξ2/L2 (16.5)
where L is the correlation length . Not only is this a function that makes the integral 
analytically tractable, but it also gives exactly the same results as geometric optics.62 
Since it fails, like geometric optics, to explain frequency variation, it cannot be a truly 
representative correlation function, although it gives a scattering curve that fits several 
experimental curves near the vertical. The next most frequently used function is the 
exponential:
 ρ ξξ( )| |/=−eL (16.6)
This has some basis in contour-map analysis;60 the results fit both Earth and lunar 
radar return over a wider range of angles than the gaussian 60,63 (but sometimes not 
as well near vertical). Furthermore, it has the merit that it exhibits frequency depen -
dence. Resulting expressions for power (scattering coefficient) variations appear in 
Table 16.1.
Correlation coefficient Power Expression Reference
eL −ξ2 2/ KeLhsin( / ) tan
θσ θ −2 2 22 Davies61
eL −| |/ξKAθ
θ θθ
θ cos s insin
cos/
22
43 2
1+

−V oronovich5TABLE   16.1  Scattering Coefficient Variation
ch16.indd   10 12/19/07   4:54:45 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Ground Echo  GROUND ECHO  16.116x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 16
Small-Perturbation and Two-Scale Models.  Recognition that existing models 
were inadequate for describing ocean scatter led to recognition that resonance of the 
signal with small structures on the surface has a powerful influence on the strength 
of the signal received.64,65 Thus a small-perturbation method originally proposed by 
Rice66 became the most popular way to describe ocean scatter. Its application to land 
scatter was not far behind.
The term Bragg scatter  is often used to describe the mechanism for the small-
perturbation model. The idea comes from the concept illustrated in Figure 16.6 b.
A single sinusoidal component of a complex surface is shown with an incoming 
radar wave at angle of incidence q. The radar wavelength is l, and the surface-
component wavelength is Λ. When the signal travels an extra distance l = 2∆R 
between the source and two successive wave crests, the phase difference between 
the echoes from successive crests is 360°; so the echo signals all add in phase. If 
this condition is satisfied for a particular Λ and q, it fails to be satisfied for others. 
Thus, this is a resonant selection for a given q  of a particular component of the 
surface Λ. The strength of the received signal is proportional to the height of this 
component and to the number of crests illuminated by the radar. If the surface has 
an underlying curvature, the number of illuminated crests satisfying the resonance 
criterion may be limited by the length of the essentially flat region; otherwise, it is 
limited by the radar resolution.
The theoretical expression for the scattering coefficient is67
 σ σ θ α θpq0
pq =8 2 04
12 4 2k Wk cos | | ( sin , ) (16.7)
where p, q = polarization indices (H or V  )
 k = 2p/l (the radar wavenumber)
 aHH = R1 (Fresnel reflection coefficient for horizontal polarization)
 α εθ ε θ
ε θ εVV= −− +
+ −( )sin ( sin )
[ cos ( s inrr
r r112 2
2θ θ) ]1 2 2/ 
where er is the relative permittivity e′ − je″ and aVH = aHV = 0. W(2k  sin q, 0) is the 
normalized roughness spectrum  (the Fourier transform of the surface autocorrelation 
function). It may be written as W(K, 0), where K is the wavenumber for the surface. 
In terms of the wavelength on the surface Λ,
 K = 2p/Λ 
FIGURE   16. 6b In-phase addition for Bragg scattering: ∆R = nl/2
ch16.indd   11 12/19/07   4:54:50 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Ground Echo 16.12  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 16
Thus, the component of the surface that satisfies the Bragg resonance condition is
 Λ = l/2 sin q (16.8)
This means that the most important contributor to a surface return is the component of 
surface roughness with wavelength Λ. Even though other components may be much  
larger, the Bragg resonance makes this component more important. On the ocean, this 
means that tiny ripples are more important than waves that are meters high; the same 
applies for land-surface scatter.
As originally developed, this theory was for perturbations to horizontal flat sur -
faces, but it was soon modified to handle surfaces with large-scale roughness. The 
large-scale roughness was assumed to cause a tilting  of the flat surface to which the 
small-perturbation theory could be applied. The principal problem with this approach 
is deciding where in the surface spectrum lies the boundary between the larger compo -
nents that do the tilting and smaller components that are Bragg-resonant. Many papers 
have been written to describe the evolution of this theory; for a complete summary, the 
reader is referred to Fung’s development.68
Other Models.  The theory for volume scatter has led to many papers and con -
tinues to evolve. For a review of some of the approaches, the reader should consult 
Fung’s summary69 and papers by Kong, Lang, Fung, and Tsang. These models have 
been used reasonably successfully to describe scatter from vegetation,70 snow,71 and 
sea ice.72 Models of straight vegetation such as wheat in terms of cylinders have had 
some success.2,73 Corner-reflector effects have been used to describe strong returns 
from buildings at non-normal incidence angles.74,75 Other specialized models have 
been used for particular purposes.
Later theoretical work for surfaces involves solving integral equations for the scat -
tered fields.76 This has been used both to validate other models and to better describe 
the true scattering from a known rough surface. This method tends to be computation -
ally extensive. Numerical scattering computations are also in vogue.77
Regardless of the model used and the approach applied to determining the field 
strength, theoretical work only guides understanding. Actual Earth surfaces are too com -
plex to be described adequately in any of the models, and the effects of signals that pen -
etrate the ground and are scattered therein are too little known to permit its evaluation.
16.4 FADING OF GROUND ECHOES
The amplitude of ground echoes received by radars on moving vehicles fluctuates 
widely because of variations in phase shift for return from different parts of the illumi -
nated area. In fact, even fixed radars frequently observe fluctuations in ground echoes 
because of motions of vegetation, wires blowing in the wind, etc. This fluctuation is 
referred to as fading .
Fading is significant for the radar engineer because one must account for the fact 
that a single sample of the radar return may vary widely from the mean described by 
s 0. Thus , the system must be able to handle the dynamic range of fading, which may 
exceed 20 dB.
Regardless of the model used to describe a ground surface, signals are, in fact, 
returned from different positions not on a plane. As a radar moves past a patch of ground 
ch16.indd   12 12/19/07   4:54:50 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Ground Echo  GROUND ECHO  16.136x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 16
while illuminating it, the look angle changes, and this changes the relative distances to 
different parts of the surface; the result is that relative phase shift is changed. This is the 
same kind of relative-phase-shift change with direction that is present for an antenna 
array and results in the antenna pattern. For ground echo, the distance is doubled, so the 
pattern of an echoing patch of length L has lobes of width l/2L. This compares with l/L 
for an antenna of the same cross-range length. Because the excitation of the elements of 
the scattering array is random, the scattering pattern in space is also random.
This fading phenomenon is usually described in terms of the doppler shift of the 
signal. Since different parts of the target are at slightly different angles, the signals 
from them experience slightly different doppler shifts. The doppler shift, of course, 
is simply the rate of change of phase due to motion. Thus, the total rate of change of 
phase for a given target is
 ω ω ωφω = + = = −ci
c id
dtd
dtt k Rdi ( ) 2 (16.9)
where wc = carrier angular frequency
 wdi = doppler angular frequency for ith target
 fi = phase for ith target
 Ri = range from radar to ith target
The doppler shift can be expressed in terms of the velocity vector v as
 ωdi= − = − ⋅ = − 2 2 2 kdR
dtkRkvi i
ii vRv Rcos ( , )  (16.10)
where bold-faced letters are vectors. Hence, the total field is given by
 E A j t kRdt kRi ci
iit
= − ⋅ −





∫expω 2 20
0vR
 

∑
i (16.11)
where Ai is the field amplitude of the ith scatterer and Ri0 is the range at time zero.
The only reason the scalar product varies for different scatterers is the different 
angle between the velocity vector and the direction to the scatterer. This results in a 
separate doppler frequency for each scatterer. If we assume the locations to be random, 
as most theories do, the received signal is the same as one coming from a set of oscil -
lators with random phases and unrelated frequencies. This same model of a group of 
randomly phased, different-frequency oscillators is used to describe noise; thus, the 
statistics of the fading signal and the statistics of random noise are the same .
This means that the envelope of the received signal is a random variable with its 
amplitude described by a Rayleigh distribution. Such distributions have been mea -
sured for many ground-target echoes.23 Although the actual distributions vary widely, 
no better description can be given for relatively homogeneous targets. With a Rayleigh 
distribution, the 90% range of fading is about 18 dB, so an individual pulse return may 
be anywhere in this range.
When a target is dominated by one large echo (such as a metal roof oriented to give 
a strong return), the distribution is better described by that for a sine wave in noise. 
If the large echo is considerably stronger than the mean of the remaining contributors 
to the return, this approaches a normal distribution about the value for the large echo. 
This situation is particularly common for near-grazing conditions.17
ch16.indd   13 12/19/07   4:54:58 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Ground Echo 16.14  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 16
For reference, the two distributions are given78:
 p v dvve d v
p v dvvv( ) ( )
( )/
/=
=−
ψ
ψψ
02
01 220 Rayleigh
e e Iavv a− + 

( ) /2 202
0
0ψ
ψ(sine w ave R ayl + e eigh) 
where v = envelope voltage
 y0 = mean square voltage
 A = sine-wave peak voltage
 I0(x) = Bessel function, first kind, zero order, imaginary argument
In practice, the distribution from large targets may be more complicated than either 
of the simple models described. Indeed, particularly near grazing incidence, the signal 
is often described by a K, a Weibull, or a log-normal distribution.79–81 These distribu -
tions are more often used to describe the variations between different returns from an 
area, rather than fading. They may be thought of as describing what happens when 
the area contains different s 0s, and the distribution for each is Rayleigh . Because 
of this, the range of variability may be even greater than the 18 dB for a Rayleigh 
distribution.
Fading-Rate Computations.  Doppler frequency calculation is the easiest way 
to find fading rates. To compute the signal amplitude returned with a particular range 
of doppler shifts, all signals having such shifts must be summed. This requires know -
ing the contours of constant doppler shift (isodops) on the scattering surface. These 
contours must be established for each particular geometric arrangement. A simple 
example is presented here: horizontal motion over a plane earth. This is typical of an 
aircraft in ordinary cruising flight.
Consider travel in the y direction, with z vertical and the altitude (fixed) z = h. 
Then
 v 1
R 1 1 1=
= + −y
x y zv
x y h 
where ( 1x, 1y, 1z) are unit vectors. Hence,
 
vRvy
x y hr= ⋅ =
+ +vR
2 2 2 
where vr is the relative speed. Curves of constant relative speed are also curves of 
constant doppler shift. The equation of such a curve is
 x yv v
vhr
r2 22 2
220 −−+ =  
This is a hyperbola. The limiting curve for zero relative speed is a straight line 
perpendicular to the velocity vector. Figure 16.7 shows such a set of constant-doppler-
shift contours.
ch16.indd   14 12/19/07   4:55:08 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Ground Echo  GROUND ECHO  16.156x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 16
The spectrum of fading can be calculated by a slight rearrangement of the radar 
equation (Eq. 16.1). Thus, if Wr(fd) is the power received between frequencies fd and 
fd + dfd, the radar equation becomes
 W f dfPGA d A
Rr d dt t r( )( )=1
420
4πσ
Illuminated area a
between and f f dfd t t r
d d ddf PGA
R +∫=( )420
4πσ− −

 ∫dA
dfd  
  (16.12)
This is an integral in which the area element between fd and fd + dfd is expressed 
in terms of coordinates along and normal to the isodops. Such coordinates must be 
established for each particular case.
Figure 16.8 shows the geometry for horizontal travel. The coordinate x  is along the 
isodop, and h  is normal to it. We can express Eq. 16.12 in terms of these coordinates as
 W fd
dfPG d
Rr d
dt=



η λ
πσ ξ2
32 0
44( ) strip p∫ (16.13)
Note that Pt, the transmitted power, is non -
zero in the integral only for the time it illu -
minates the ground. In pulse radars, only that 
part of the ground area providing signals back 
to the radar at a particular time can be con -
sidered to have finite Pt, and so the range of 
frequencies that can be present is limited by 
the pulse, as well as by the antennas and the 
maximum velocity.
Another example is shown in Figure 16.9. 
This is the small illuminated area for a narrow-
beam short-pulse system with the antenna 
pointed straight ahead. Here, we can make 
linear approximations without too much error.  
FIGURE   16. 7 Contours of constant doppler 
frequency shift on a plane earth due to horizontal 
motion
FIGURE   16. 8 Geometry of complex fading 
calculations ( after F . T. Ulaby, R. K. Moore, and 
A. K. Fung37)
ch16.indd   15 12/19/07   4:55:12 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Ground Echo 16.16  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 16
A pulse of length t  is transmitted from an antenna of beamwidth f0. We may simplify 
the problem by assuming a rectangular illuminated area, Rf0 ct/(2 sin q). Furthermore, 
the curvature of the isodops may be  neglected, so the doppler frequency is assumed to 
be the same for all maximum-range points and the same for all minimum-range points. 
With this assumption,
 fv
fvd
dmax max
min minsin
sin=
=2
2λθ
λθ 
Thus, the total width of the doppler spectrum is
 ∆fv
d= −2
λθ θ(sin sin )max min 
For short pulses and angles away from vertical, this is
 ∆ ∆fv
d≈2
λθ θcos 
In terms of pulse length, it becomes
 ∆fvc
hd=τ
λθ
θ 23cos
sin (16.14)
If the angular difference across the illuminated rectangle is small enough so that s 0 
is essentially constant, the doppler spectrum is a rectangle from fmin to fmax.FIGURE   16. 9 Geometry of doppler-shift calcula -
tions for an airborne search radar
ch16.indd   16 12/19/07   4:55:22 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Ground Echo  GROUND ECHO  16.176x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 16
In practice, antenna beams are not rectangular. The result is that the doppler spec -
trum for a side-looking radar like that shown in the example is not rectangular but 
rather has the shape of the antenna along-track pattern. Thus, if the antenna pattern in 
the along-track direction is G = G(b), with b  the angle off the beam center, we can 
express b  in terms of the doppler frequency fd as
 b = fd l/2v 
and the spectrum is
 W fP r
RGf
vdt x d( )( )=

λ σ
πλ3 0
3 32
2 4 2 
where rx is the horizontal resolution in the range direction. Of course, the half-power 
beamwidth may be used as an approximation, resulting in the bandwidth given by 
Eq. 16.13.
Effect of Detection.  The effect of detecting narrowband noise has been treated 
extensively in the literature. Here, it is necessary only to show the postdetection 
spectrum of the preceding example and to consider the number of independently 
fading samples per second. Figure 16.10 shows the spectrum before and after 
square-law detection. For square-law detection, the post-detection spectrum is the 
self-convolution of the predetection spectrum. Only the part that passes the low-pass 
filters in a detector is shown in the figure. The rectangular RF spectrum  has become 
a triangular video spectrum .
This spectrum describes the fading of the detector output for a CW radar. For a 
pulse radar, the spectrum is sampled by the pulse repetition frequency (PRF). If the 
PRF is high enough so that the entire spectrum can be reproduced (the PRF is higher 
than the Nyquist frequency, 2 ∆fd), the diagram indicated is that of the spectrum of the 
samples of a received pulse at a given range. Figure 16.11 shows a series of actual 
pulses from a moving radar, followed by a series of samples at range R1. The spectrum 
shown in Figure 16.10 is the spectrum of the envelope of samples at R1 (after low-pass 
filtering). The spectrum of fading at another range (or vertical angle) is different, in 
accord with Eq. 16.13.
For many purposes, the number of independent  samples is important because these 
may be treated by using the elementary statistics of uncorrelated samples. For continu -
ous integration, the effective number of independent sample is78
FIGURE   16. 10 Spectrum of fading from a homogeneous small patch  
(a) before and ( b) after detection
ch16.indd   17 12/19/07   4:55:24 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Ground Echo 16.18  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 16
FIGURE   16. 11 Fading for successive pulses 
of a moving radar with ground target
ch16.indd   18 12/19/07   4:55:25 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Ground Echo  GROUND ECHO  16.196x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 16
 NP T
x
TR x dxe
T=
−

 ∫2
02 1sf( ) (16.15)
where Pe is the mean envelope power, T is the integration (averaging) time, and Rsf (t) 
is the autocovariance function for the detected voltage. For many practical purposes, 
if N is large, it may be approximated by
 N ≈ BT (16.16)
where B is the effective IF bandwidth. For the effect of short integration time, see 
Ulaby et al.82
Fading samples can, of course, also be independent because motion of the vehicle 
causes the beam to illuminate a different patch of ground. Thus, in a particular case, the 
independent-sample rate may be determined either by the motion of the illuminated 
patch over the ground or by the doppler effect or by some combination of the two.
The number of independent samples determines the way in which the Rayleigh 
or other distributions may be applied. Thus, if 100 pulses give only 10 independent 
samples, the variance of the mean obtained by integrating these pulses is much greater 
than would be true if all 100 pulses were independent.
Doppler-based systems, such as doppler navigators, moving-target indicators, and 
synthetic-aperture radar systems, depend on the predetection spectrum for their opera -
tion, because they are coherent and do not use amplitude or square-law detection.
Moving-Target Surfaces.  Sometimes clutter has internal motion. This can occur 
when fixed radars are used to observe movement of the sea and the land. On land, 
clutter motion is usually due to moving vegetation, although moving animals and 
machines create similar effects. The radar return from an assembly of scatterers like 
those shown in Figure 16.8 can change because of motion of the individual scatterers 
just as it changes because of motion of the radar. Thus, if each scatterer is a tree, the 
waving of the trees as the wind blows causes relative phase shifts between the separate 
scatterers; the result is fading. For a fixed radar, this may be the only fading observed, 
except for very slow fading due to changes in refraction. If the surface elements are 
stiff, they may not move enough to get significant doppler spreading, and the fading 
distribution may not be close to Rayleigh. See Billingsley17 and other papers by him 
for more discussion of the situation for fixed radars observing ground targets. For a 
moving radar, this motion of the target changes the relative velocities between target 
element and radar so that the spectrum is different from that for a fixed surface. The 
width of the spectrum due to vehicle motion determines the ability of the radar to 
detect this target motion.
16.5 MEASUREMENT TECHNIQUES  
FOR GROUND RETURN
Special-purpose instrumentation radars and modified standard radars may be used to 
determine the ground return. Since the ground return is almost invariably due to scatter -
ing, these systems are termed scatterometers . Such systems may use CW signals with 
or without doppler processing, but they may also use both pulse and FM techniques. 
ch16.indd   19 12/19/07   4:55:28 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Ground Echo 16.20  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 16
Scatterometers capable of measuring response over a wide range of frequencies are 
called spectrometers .83 Various antenna patterns from pencil beams to fan beams may 
be used. Systems to measure the full polarization matrix must use very careful antenna 
designs so that the phases of the different transmitted and received polarizations are 
well controlled, and leakage between polarizations is thoroughly suppressed.
CW and FM-CW Systems.  The simplest scatterometer uses a stationary CW 
radar. Such systems are not very flexible, but they are discussed here in some detail to 
illustrate calibration techniques that also apply to the more complex systems.
The CW scatterometer is shown in block form in Figure 16.12. To evaluate s 0 the 
ratio of transmitted to received power is required. The system depicted in Figure 16.12 a 
measures transmitter power and receiver sensitivity separately. The transmitter feeds an 
antenna through a directional coupler so that a portion of the energy may be fed to a 
power meter. The receiver operates from a separate antenna (electrically isolated). The 
output of the receiver is detected, averaged, and digitally recorded. Its sensitivity must 
be checked by use of a calibration source. The calibrated signal may be fed through the 
receiver at a time when the transmitter is off. Figure 16.12 b shows a similar arrange -
ment in which the signal from the transmitter is attenuated a known amount and used to 
check the receiver gain. By comparing the output from the attenuated transmitter signal 
with that received from the ground, the scattering cross section may be determined 
without actually knowing the transmitted power and the receiver gain.
The calibrations shown in Figure 16.12 are incomplete without knowing the 
antenna patterns and absolute gains. Since accurate gain measurements are difficult, 
absolute calibrations may be made by comparing received signals (with proper rela -
tive calibration) from the target being measured and from a standard target . Standard 
targets may be metal spheres, Luneburg-lens reflectors, metal plates, corner reflectors, 
or active radar calibrators (ARCs—actually repeaters).84,85 Of the passive calibrators, 
the Luneburg-lens reflector is best because it has a large cross section for its volume 
and has a very wide pattern so that alignment is not critical. Luneburg-lens reflectors 
are used for making strong radar targets of small vessels, and they may be obtained 
FIGURE   16. 12 CW-scatterometer-system block diagram: ( a) separate transmitter and receiver  
calibration and ( b) calibration of the ratio of received to transmitted power
ch16.indd   20 12/19/07   4:55:29 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Ground Echo  GROUND ECHO  16.216x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 16
from companies that supply that market. For 
discussion of the relative merits of different 
passive calibration targets, see Ulaby et al.86
The ideal receiver would respond linearly 
to its input, so that a single calibration at 
one input level would suffice for all levels. 
The usual receiver, however, has some non -
linearities due to detector properties and to 
saturation of its amplifiers by large signals. 
Figure 16.13 shows a typical input-output 
curve for a receiver. Two equal increments 
in input signal ( ∆i), as shown, produce dif -
ferent increments in output because of the 
nonlinearity of this curve. For this reason, 
receiver calibration must be performed over 
a range of input levels, and the nonlineari -
ties must be compensated for in the data processing.
CW scatterometers depend on antenna beams to discriminate different angles of 
incidence and different targets. Usually assumptions are made that the antenna pat -
tern has constant gain within the actual 3 dB points and zero gain outside, but this 
clearly is not an accurate description. If large targets appear in the locations illumi -
nated by the side of the main beam or the minor lobes, their signals may contribute 
so much to the return that it is significantly changed. Since this changed signal is 
charged to the direction of the major lobe by the data reduction process, the resulting 
value for s 0 is in error. Responses at vertical incidence frequently cause trouble, for 
vertical-incidence signals are usually fairly strong. Thus the antenna pattern must be 
accurately known and taken into account in the data analysis. A pattern with strong 
minor lobes may be simply inadmissible.
The scattering coefficient is determined by applying
 PP G dA
Rrt t= ∫λ
πσ2
32 0
44( )Illuminated
area 
The integration is over whatever area is illuminated significantly, including the regions 
hit by the minor lobes. The usual assumption is that s 0 is constant over the illuminated 
area, so that
 PP GdA
Rrt t= ∫λ σ
π2 0
32
44( )Illuminated
area (16.17)
This assumption would be true only if the antenna confined the radiated energy to 
a very small spread of angles and to a fairly homogeneous region. The resulting 
expression is
 σπ
λ03
2 2 44=( ) ∫( )
/P
P G R d Ar
t t Illuminated
area (16.18)FIGURE   16. 13 Typical receiver input-output 
curve. Illustrated is the effect of nonlinearity.
ch16.indd   21 12/19/07   4:55:35 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Ground Echo 16.22  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 16
Note that only the ratio of transmitted to received power is required, so the tech -
nique shown in Figure 16.12 b is justified. Sometimes R, Gt, or both are assumed con -
stant over the illuminated area, but such an approximation to Eq. 16.18 should be 
attempted only after checking its validity for a particular problem.
If the result of applying the technique of Eq. 16.18 to a set of measurements indi -
cates that s 0 probably did vary across the significantly illuminated area, this variation 
may be used as a first approximation to determine a function f(q) describing the q 
variation of s 0, and a next-order approximation then becomes
 σπ
λ θ03
2 2 44=( )
( ) /P
P fG R dAr
t t Illuminated
are ea∫ (16.19)
Proper scattering measurements demand an accurate and complete measurement of 
antenna gain Gt. This can be a very time-consuming and expensive process, particu -
larly when the antenna is mounted on an aircraft or other metallic object. Nevertheless, 
complete patterns are a must for good scatter measurements.
Range-Measuring Systems.  Radar’s ability to separate returns from different 
ranges can be used advantageously along with directive antenna beams to simplify the 
scattering measurements. Most ranging scatterometers use either pulse modulation or 
FM, although more exotic modulations could also be used. The discussion here treats 
pulse systems, but since all other range-measuring systems can be reduced to equiva -
lent pulse systems, most results are general.
Figure 16.14 shows the way in which pulse measurement of range is used. 
Figure 16.14 a shows a circular pencil beam. At angles near grazing, the illumi -
nated patch set by the circular antenna pattern becomes rather long (the patch is an 
ellipse), and use of the pulse length to confine illumination to a part of the patch 
is helpful. Indeed, for angles very near grazing, this is the only satisfactory way to 
resolve small regions. Many systems that use beamwidth to set the measured area 
near vertical use range resolution for angles beyond, say, 60°.
FIGURE   16. 14 Range resolution applied to scatterometry: ( a) improving one dimension of a  
circular-beam illumination pattern and ( b) use with a fan beam
ch16.indd   22 12/19/07   4:55:38 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Ground Echo  GROUND ECHO  16.236x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 16
Figure 16.14 b shows an antenna pattern that takes better advantage of the possibili -
ties of range measurement. A fan beam is used to illuminate a narrow strip along the 
ground, and the range resolution permits separating the returns from different angles 
by the time they return. This technique is especially effective at angles away from the 
vertical, for the resolution near the vertical is much poorer than near grazing.
If we assume that s 0 is essentially constant, the gain is constant, the pulse is rectan -
gular, and the difference in range across a resolution element is negligible, the expres -
sion for s 0 becomes
 σπ θ
λ φ03 3
2
0 04=P R
P G rr
t R( ) sin (16.20)
where rR is the short-range resolution.
Janza has reported details of calibration problems with a range-measuring pulsed 
radar scatterometer.87,88
CW-Doppler Scatterometers.  A convenient way for an airborne measurement 
is to measure the scattering coefficient at many angles simultaneously with a CW sys -
tem in which the relative velocities corresponding to different angles are separated by 
separating their doppler frequencies. The use of a fan beam with such a system permits 
the simultaneous measurement of scattering coefficients at points ahead of and behind 
the aircraft carrying the radar. Figure 16.15 shows this. The pattern of the antenna illu -
mination on the ground is shown intersected by two isodops (lines of constant doppler 
frequency), with the width of the spectrum between them shown on the diagram. The 
distance between them can be seen to be
and ∆
∆ρ θ θ
λθ θ= −
= −R
fv
d(sin sin )
(sin sin )2 1
2 12  
Thus, the width of the element on the ground is related to the doppler frequency 
bandwidth by
 ∆ ∆ρλ=R
vfd2( ) 
FIGURE   16. 15 Resolution in a fan-beam CW-doppler scatterometer
ch16.indd   23 12/19/07   4:55:45 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Ground Echo 16.24  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 16
where this technique is applied to the radar equation and the following are assumed:
1. s 0 constant in the illuminated area
2. Antenna gain constant over its beamwidth Φ and zero elsewhere
3. Range variation across the small illuminated area negligible
 PP G d A
RP G f
vRrt t d= = ∫λ
πσ λ σ2
32 0
44 0
02
24 2 ( )Φ∆ (16.21)
and so
 σλ0
4
022=P
PvR
G fr
t dΦ∆ (16.22)
Doppler scatterometers need not use fore-and-aft beams. The Seasat89 and 
NSCATT90 spaceborne doppler scatterometers were designed with beams pointed 
(squinted) ahead and behind the normal to the ground track.
Independent Samples Required for Measurement Accuracy.  The Rayleigh 
distribution describes the fading signal fairly well. If we assume a Rayleigh distribution 
of fading, the number of independent samples required for a given accuracy is shown in 
Figure 16.16. The range  defined in this figure is the range of mean values lying between 
5 and 95% of points on the distribution. This accuracy range is independent of any accu -
racy problems associated with calibration and knowledge of the antenna pattern.
The precision of the measurement depends upon the number of independent  sam -
ples, not on the total number of samples. The number of independent samples can be 
found from Eq. 16.15 or Eq. 16.16 after suitable analysis. This analysis assumes that 
only doppler fading contributes to independence but motion from one cell to another 
also adds independent samples. Thus, the total number of such samples is approxi -
mately the product of the number calculated from Eq. 16.13 and the number of ground 
cells averaged. Figure 16.17 shows some examples of the effect of the angle of inci -
dence on the number of independent samples for a horizontally traveling scatterometer 
with a forward-pointed beam.
Study of the results obtained in this type of analysis indicates that, in regions 
where the scattering coefficient does not change rapidly with angle, the widest pos -
sible angular width (obtained by a longer pulse or a wider filter for a CW-doppler 
system) gives the maximum number of independent samples for a given distance 
traveled along the ground.
FIGURE   16. 16 Accuracy of averages for fading 
signals
ch16.indd   24 12/19/07   4:55:49 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Ground Echo  GROUND ECHO  16.256x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 16
Near-Vertical Problem.  Most published radar return data purporting to include 
vertical incidence give vertical-incidence scattering coefficients that are too small. 
This is a consequence of a fundamental problem in measuring near the vertical with 
a finite beamwidth or pulse length. Near-vertical radar returns from most targets drop 
off rapidly as the angle with the vertical is increased. Thus, the measuring beamwidth 
or pulsewidth usually encompasses signals from regions having values for s 0 many 
decibels apart. Since the scattering coefficient varies much more rapidly near the verti -
cal than at angles beyond 10 or 20° from the vertical, the problem is much more severe 
at the vertical. Furthermore, the problem is complicated at the vertical by the fact that 
the angular scale terminates there, so that a beam centered at the vertical illuminates 
weaker targets ( s 0) on both sides of its pattern, whereas a beam away from the vertical 
illuminates stronger signals on one side and weaker signals on the other .
Figure 16.18 shows what happens for a steeply descending curve of s 0 versus q. 
The radar return integral from Eq. 16.1 is a convolution integral; the figure shows the 
convolution of the beam pattern with the s 0 curve. Clearly, the average at the vertical 
is lower than it should be to indicate properly the variation of s 0 near the vertical.
Figure 16.19 shows an example91 based on the theoretical scattering coefficient for 
the sea derived from the spectra reported by the Stereo Wave Observation Project.92 
The effect of different beamwidths is clearly  shown.
With a pulse or other range-measuring system, reported values are always in error 
because, as indicated above, it is almost impossible to resolve a narrow range of angles 
near the vertical. For short ranges, one can configure the antenna so that a plane wave 
impinges on the surface. When this is done, the near-vertical scattering coefficient can 
have its angular variation properly described.93FIGURE   16. 17 Examples of the variation with angle of incidence 
of the number of independent samples for a scatterometer
ch16.indd   25 12/19/07   4:55:50 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Ground Echo 16.26  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 16
Ground and Helicopter Scatterometers and Spectrometers.  Many ground 
scattering measurements have been made with systems mounted on boom trucks 
and helicopters. Most of these are FM-CW systems94,95 that use wide bandwidth to 
obtain extra independent samples rather than for fine resolution. Some use very wide 
bandwidth to obtain fine range resolution to locate sources of scattering.96 Most have 
multiple-polarization capability, and some are capable of polarimetry because the 
phase of two received signals with orthogonal polarization can be measured.97
The basic elements of an FM-CW scatterometer are shown in Figure 16.20. The 
swept oscillator must produce a linear sweep; this is easy with yttrium-iron-garnet 
(YIG)–tuned oscillators but requires linearizing circuits if tuning uses a varactor. FIGURE   16. 18 How finite beamwidth causes a near-vertical error in measuring 
the scattering coefficient
ch16.indd   26 12/19/07   4:55:51 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Ground Echo  GROUND ECHO  16.276x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 16
Many systems use digital waveform synthesis to obtain the swept waveform. If 
dual antennas are used (as shown), the overlap of the beams must be considered.98 
Single-antenna systems are sometimes used, with a circulator isolating transmitter 
and receiver; their performance is somewhat poorer than that of dual-antenna systems 
because of internal reflections and leakage through the circulator.
Figure 16.21 shows the kind of system that may be used to measure scattering from 
within a volume. By determining the spectrum of the return, the user can establish the 
scattering from different ranges. This system has been used in determining the sources 
of scatter in vegetation43–45 and snow.
Ultrasonic waves in water can be used to simulate electromagnetic waves in air.99–101 
Because of the difference in velocity of propagation, an acoustic frequency of 1 MHz 
corresponds with a wavelength of 1.5 mm. Such a wavelength is of a convenient size 
for many modeling measurements, and, of course, equipment in the 1-MHz region is 
in many ways easier to operate than equipment in the microwave region; certainly it 
is much easier to operate and less expensive than microwave equipment operating at 
a 1.5-mm wavelength.
Acoustic plane waves and electromagnetic plane waves satisfy the same boundary 
conditions. When the scattering surfaces are not plane and when angles of incidence 
are rather oblique, the analogy between acoustic and electromagnetic waves is less 
valid. Of course, acoustic systems cannot simulate cross-polarization.
FIGURE   16.19  Effect of antenna beamwidth on 
the measured scattering coefficient as a function of 
angle of incidence
ch16.indd   27 12/19/07   4:55:51 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Ground Echo 16.28  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 16
Scattering Coefficients from Images.  Radar images produced by real or 
synthetic aperture radars can be used for scattering coefficient measurement. 
Unfortunately, most such systems are uncalibrated or poorly calibrated, so the results 
are somewhat dubious, even on a relative basis, when images are produced on dif -
ferent days. Relative calibration has been introduced into some systems.20,28,31,102–104 
Absolute calibration, which also serves as relative calibration in some cases, can be 
achieved by using strong reference targets, with the active radar calibrator (ARC) 
repeaters especially suitable.85,105 Another approach that has been used is to measure 
scattering from reference areas with a ground-based or helicopter system that is well 
calibrated and to compare the images to these measured values.102,106FIGURE   16. 20 Basic block diagram of an FM-CW scatterometer RF section
FIGURE   16. 21 Basic block diagram of an FM-CW range-discriminating scatterometer: control and 
data-handling system
ch16.indd   28 12/19/07   4:55:52 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Ground Echo  GROUND ECHO  16.296x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 16
Bistatic Measurements.  Measurements of ground return when the receiver and 
transmitter are separated are comparatively rare. These measurements are very difficult 
to make from aircraft because it is necessary that both transmitter and receiver anten -
nas look at the same ground point at the same time and that the signal be correlated 
with known antenna look angles. Furthermore, it is difficult to know the polarization, 
and the exact size and shape of the common area illuminated by the antenna beams 
are sometimes difficult to determine. For this reason, few bistatic measurements from 
aircraft have been reported in the literature.107
Laboratory bistatic measurements have been made by both the Waterways 
Experiment Station42 and The Ohio State University2,6 groups using electromagnetic 
waves and by the University of Kansas100 group using acoustic waves. Bistatic mea -
surements of laser radiation have been made at Bell Telephone Laboratories,108 and 
C-band measurements of buildings have been made at the University of Kansas.109 
Other surface-based measurements have also been reported.110,111
Bistatic measurements call for complications when made outside the laboratory 
because an absolute reference for both transmitter power and receiver sensitivity must 
be used. In the laboratory, however, it is possible to use techniques similar to those for 
monostatic measurements.
16.6 GENERAL MODELS FOR SCATTERING 
COEFFICIENT (CLUTTER MODELS)
Scatter measurements made during the 1970s allowed the generation of mod -
els for average backscatter from large areas. In particular, these included mea -
surements with the Skylab radiometer-scatterometer RADSCAT83,112 and with 
truck-mounted microwave active spectrometers (MAS)112,113 by the University 
of Kansas. Two different models were developed based on the same data, one a 
linear model and one a more complicated formulation. Here we present only the 
linear model. These models are for averages , and the models do not include varia -
tions about the average. However, analysis of Shuttle Imaging Radar (SIR) data 
permits some estimates to be made of the variability to be expected for different 
sizes of illuminated footprint.
The general characteristics of radar backscatter over the range of angles of inci -
dence have been known for decades. Figure 16.22 shows these. For like-polarized 
waves, one can break scatter into three angular regimes: near-vertical (the quasi-
specular region ), intermediate angles from 15 to about 80° (the plateau region ), and 
near-grazing (the shadow region ). Cross-polarized scatter does not have separate 
quasi-specular and plateau regions (the plateau extends to vertical), and too little is 
known to establish whether a shadow region exists.
For nearly every type of terrain, the measured data fits closely to the form
 σθ θ 0=−A eii/ (16.23 a)
or σ θθ010 43434dB= −log . ( / ) Ai i (16.23 b)
where Ai and qi are constants that differ for the near-vertical and midrange regions. 
Figure 16.23 shows an example of this variation. No theory gives exactly this result, 
ch16.indd   29 12/19/07   4:55:56 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Ground Echo 16.30  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 16
but nearly all measurements fit such a model closely, and the model approximates 
most theoretical curves well over the relevant regions. This simple result means that 
simple clutter models may be developed and used, although more complex models 
may be necessary for some remote-sensing applications.
FIGURE   16. 22 General characteristics of scattering coefficient variation 
with angle of incidence ( after F . T. Ulaby, R. K. Moore, and A. K. Fung37)
FIGURE   16. 23 Regression of average of all 13.8-GHz 
cropland data for two years obtained with a microwave 
active spectrometer ( after R. K. Moore, K. A. Soofi, and  
S. M. Purduski114 © IEEE 1980 )
ch16.indd   30 12/19/07   4:55:57 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Ground Echo  GROUND ECHO  16.316x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 16
The basis for the linear model114 is a combination of the Skylab results over North 
America115 and those from Kansas cropland measurements over three complete seasons 
with the microwave active spectrometer (MAS).116 The 13.9-GHz Skylab RADSCAT 
had a ground footprint of a 10-km circle at vertical to an ellipse of 20 by 30 km at 50°. 
The MAS had footprints at 50° ranging from 5.5 by 8.5 m at 1.1 GHz to 1.4 by 2.1 m 
at 17 GHz, but millions of measurements were averaged for the model. Because the 
Skylab data was at only one frequency and the responses for the two experiments were 
essentially the same at that frequency, the frequency response shown in the model 
depends entirely on the MAS measurements.
The summer Skylab observations included deserts, grassland, cropland, and forests, 
whereas the Kansas measurements were only of cropland. However, early and late in the 
growing season, the cropland was essentially bare, similar to the summer desert except 
for soil moisture content. During the height of the growing season, the crops were dense 
enough so that scatter was similar to that from forests. Thus, the overall model seems 
representative of summer conditions averaged over all of North America.
The model takes the form
 σ θ θ θ θdB020 70 ( ,)f A B C f D f = + + + ° ≤ ≤ °  (16.24 a)
where A, B, C, and D take on different values for different polarizations above and below 
6 GHz. The frequency response below 6 GHz is much more rapid than above 6 GHz. 
Moreover, at frequencies above 6 GHz the frequency response is independent of angle, 
so that D = 0. For lower frequencies, the frequency response is angle-dependent.
For angles less than 20°, only two points were available, 0° and 10°, so separate 
frequency regressions were run at each of these angles. The model for these angles is
 σ θ θ θ θdB00 10 ( ,) ( ) ( ) , f M N f = + = ° ° (16.24 b)
The frequency responses below 6 GHz differed for the two years, so the mod -
els have separate values of the constants for 1975 and 1976. The year 1976 was 
very dry in Kansas: therefore, the 1975 values are probably more representative, 
but both are given here. Values of the constants are in Table 16.2. Figure 16.24 
shows the clutter model for the midrange of angles as a function of frequency. 
Eq. PolarizationAngular 
Range, °Frequency 
Range, GHzConstant  
A or M, dBAngle 
Slope B 
or N, dBFrequency 
Slope C, 
dB/GHzSlope 
Correction D, 
dB/(° × GHz)
16.24 aV 20–60 1–6 (1975) −14.3 −0.16   1.12 0.0051
V 20–50 1–6 (1976)  −4.0 −0.35 −0.60 0.036
V 20–70 6–17  −9.5 −0.13   0.32 0.015
H 20–60 1–6 (1975) −15.0 −0.21   1.24 0.040
H 20–50 1–6 (1976)  −1.4 −0.36 −1.03
H 20–70 6–17  −9.1 −0.12   0.25
16.24 bV and H 0 1–6 (1975)  7.6   . . . −1.03
V and H 0 1–6 (1976)  6.4   . . . −0.73
V and H 0 6–17  0.9   . . .   0.10
V and H 10 1–6 (1975)  −9.1   . . .   0.51
V and H 10 1–6 (1976)  −3.6   . . . −0.41
V and H 10 6–17  −6.5   . . .   0.07
* After R. K. Moore, K. A. Soofi, and S. M. Purduski114 © IEEE 1980TABLE   16. 2 Constants for Linear Scattering Model (Summer)*
ch16.indd   31 12/19/07   4:56:02 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Ground Echo 16.32  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 16
FIGURE   16. 24 General land-scattering-clutter model (vertical 
polarization). Horizontal polarization is very similar. ( after R. K. 
Moore, K. A. Soofi, and S. M. Purduski114 © IEEE 1980 )
Time of  
Day PolarizationFrequency 
Range, GHzConstant  
A, dBAngle Slope 
B, dB/ °Frequency 
Slope C, 
dB/GHzSlope Correction 
D, dB/  
(° × GHz)
Day V 1–8 −10.0 −0.29   0.052  0.022
Day V 13–17  0.02 −0.37  −0.50  0.021
Day H 1–8 −11.9 −0.25   0.55  0.012
Day H 13–17  −6.6 −0.31   0.0011  0.013
Night V 1–8 −10.0 −0.33 −0.32  0.033
Night V 13–17 −10.9 −0.13   0.70  0.00050
Night H 1–8 −10.5 −0.30   0.20  0.027
Night H 13–17 −16.9 −0.024   1.036 –0.0069
* After R. K. Moore, K. A. Soofi, and S. M. Purduski114 © IEEE 1980
NOTE : q  = 20 to 70 °. Values of coefficients in this table are also considered those of the model.TABLE   16. 3 Regression Results for Ground-Based Measurements of Snow-Covered Ground*The figure is only for vertical polarization because results are so similar for 
vertical and horizontal.
Ulaby developed a different, more complex model from the Kansas vegetation 
data.117 This model fits curves rather than straight lines to the measured data. For most 
purposes, the straight-line model is adequate, and it is much easier to use.
A straight-line model for snow-covered grassland similar to that for vegetation 
depends on a more limited data set.118,119 The data was for only one season in Colorado 
when the snow was only about 50 cm deep. This means that the signal probably pene -
trated to the ground surface at frequencies below about 6 GHz. Nevertheless, the model 
indicates the kind of results to be expected for this important situation. Table 16.3 gives 
the resulting constants to use in Eq. 16.24 a.
ch16.indd   32 12/19/07   4:56:03 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Ground Echo  GROUND ECHO  16.336x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 16
Snow scatter depends strongly 
on the free-water content of the 
upper layer of snow, so scatter is 
much lower from the wet daytime 
snow (where solar melting has com -
menced) than for the dry nighttime 
snow. Hence, different models must 
be used for day and night; compare 
the day and night measurements 
shown in Figure 16.25. The differ -
ence between day and night scatter 
from snow is even more pronounced 
at 35 GHz, but the model does not 
include 35 GHz because no data 
exists between 17 and 35 GHz.
Although no specific clutter 
model has been developed for forests, 
results from the Skylab RADSCAT 
and Seasat scatterometer show 
that the Amazon rainforest scatters 
almost independently of the angle 
of incidence even near vertical.120 
The mean measured value at 33° was 
−5.9 ± 0.2 dB at 13.9 GHz. Similar 
results were found at C band.121 
Observations with SIR-B, SIR-C, 
and JERS-1 indicated that this lack 
of angular variation of s 0 also is 
present at 1.25 GHz.122,123
The models described above are 
based on averages over very large 
areas. For this situation, the vari -
ability from place to place is small, 
particularly in the midrange of angles. 
Figure 16.26 shows the mean and 
upper and lower decile values mea -
sured by the Skylab RADSCAT over 
North America. The large variation 
near vertical apparently results from 
the effect of nearly specular reflec -
tion from water bodies. When the 
footprint is smaller, more variability 
occurs. This is shown in Figure 16.27 
from a study of the variation of scat -
ter observed by SIR-B with averages 
over different-sized footprints. For 
small footprints, the scatter varies 
over a wide range, and system design -
ers must account for this.
FIGURE 16.2 5 Regressions for vertical-polarization 
clutter model for snow: ( a) day and ( b) night. Note the 
large differences. Horizontal polarization is similar. 
(after R. K. Moore, K. A. Soofi, and S. M. Purduski114 
© IEEE 1980 )
ch16.indd   33 12/19/07   4:56:04 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Ground Echo 16.34  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 16
FIGURE   16. 27 90% range of pixel amplitude versus resolution
FIGURE   16. 26 Angular patterns of the mean, upper decile, and lower decile of Skylab 
scatterometer observations over North America during the summer season ( from Moore et al., 
University of Kansas Remote Sensing Laboratory Technical Report 243-12, 1975 )
ch16.indd   34 12/19/07   4:56:05 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Ground Echo  GROUND ECHO  16.356x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 16
16.7 SCATTERING COEFFICIENT DATA
Numerous programs to gather scattering coefficient data existed prior to 1972, but 
sizable data collections with accompanying “ground truth” were rare. Since 1972, 
however, several major programs have changed the situation so that much information 
is now available. Indeed, this information is so widespread that an adequate summary 
of the literature is impossible. Hence, this section can only give highlights of the 
results and major programs. The reader should consult the three major compendia of 
such data for more information both on results and on bibliography37,38,40 (note that 
information is spread through many chapters of these volumes).
Some early scattering-coefficient-measurement programs worth mentioning include 
those of the Naval Research Laboratory,23,24 Goodyear Aerospace Corporation,20 Sandia 
Corporation (near-vertical data),124,125 and particularly The Ohio State University.2,6 
From 1972 to 1984, the largest program was at the University of Kansas.8,9,37,72,83,
98,126 Extensive programs were also in France (Centre National d’Etudes Spatiales, 
Centre National d’Etudes des Télécommunications, Université Paul Sabatier),12,127 the 
Netherlands,10,128 Canada Centre for Remote Sensing (CCRS; especially sea ice),26,129 
and Switzerland and Austria (snow).130,131 Many of the results from these programs 
appear in digests of the International Geoscience and Remote Sensing Symposia 
(IGARSS; IEEE Geoscience and Remote Sensing Society) and journals such as 
IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing  and on Ocean Engineering, 
International Journal of Remote Sensing, Remote Sensing of Environment , and 
Photogrammetric Engineering and Remote Sensing .
Although calibrations for some of the older data were doubtful, summary presen -
tations are not available for newer data. Accordingly, Figure 16.28 shows an earlier 
summary based mostly on X-band data. One should be cautious in using this data, but 
the figure gives a feel for the overall variations. Figure 16.29 is a similar presentation 
for near-vertical data.132 Calibration of the systems was good, but the antenna effect 
discussed in Section 16.5 makes the values from 0 to 5° low.
Effects of Roughness, Moisture Content, and Vegetation Cover.  Scattering 
falls off more rapidly with angles for smooth surfaces than for rough surfaces. Since 
the roughness that affects radar must be measured in wavelength units, a surface smooth 
at long wavelengths may be rough at shorter ones. This is illustrated in Figure 16.30,133 
which shows these effects with measurements from plowed fields. At 1.1 GHz, the 
signal changed 44 dB between 0 and 30° for the smoothest field and only 4 dB for the 
roughest. At 7.25 GHz the smoothest field was rough enough to reduce the variation 
to 18 dB.
For most surfaces, cross-polarized scatter is lower than like-polarized scatter, often 
by about 10 dB. Cross-polarized scatter from smooth surfaces is much less near verti -
cal than elsewhere. Figure 16.31134 shows this effect. Cross-polarized returns from 
volume scatterers with elements that are large compared with a wavelength are stron -
ger than for surfaces, sometimes being only 3 dB down.
Scatter depends on the dielectric constant, which depends on moisture content. Thus, 
scatter from wet soils at angles off vertical is usually much higher than from dry soils. 
Figure 16.32 shows this.12 The effect can be many decibels (9 dB in the figure).
Vegetation canopies over soil can contribute to scatter in the various ways shown 
in Figure 16.33.135 Figure 16.3443 shows an example. Most of the scatter from 
the entire plant came from the top leaves, with enough attenuation there to reduce  
ch16.indd   35 12/19/07   4:56:05 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Ground Echo 16.36  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 16
the scatter from stem, bottom leaves, and soil to measurable but negligible size. 
When those leaves were absent, the signals scattered from the soil and lower parts 
of the plant were about equal to each other and were much larger than when leaves 
were present.
FIGURE   16. 28 Boundaries of measured radar data: ( a) horizontal polar -
ization and ( b) vertical polarization ( Courtesy of I. Katz )
ch16.indd   36 12/19/07   4:56:06 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Ground Echo  GROUND ECHO  16.376x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 16
FIGURE   16. 29 Boundaries of measured radar return near vertical incidence, 
based on Sandia Corporation data ( from F . J. Janza, R. K. Moore, and B. D. 
Warner132)
FIGURE   16. 30 Angular response of the scattering coefficient for five moist fields with different roughness at 
(a) 1.1 GHz, ( b) 4.25 GHz, and ( c) 7.25 GHz ( after F . T. Ulaby, R. K. Moore, and A. K. Fung37)
ch16.indd   37 12/19/07   4:56:07 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Ground Echo 16.38  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 16
FIGURE   16. 31 Angular dependence of the depolarization ratio of a 
smooth surface ( after F . T. Ulaby, R. K. Moore, and A. K. Fung37)
FIGURE   16. 32 Measured scattering coefficient s ° (left scale) as a function 
of soil moisture content for three surface roughnesses. The solid curve is the 
reflectivity Γ (right scale) calculated on the basis of dielectric measurements. 
(after T. LeToan12 © IEEE 1982 )
ch16.indd   38 12/19/07   4:56:08 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Ground Echo  GROUND ECHO  16.396x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 16
FIGURE   16. 33 Contributions to backscatter from a vegetation canopy 
over a soil surface: (1) direct backscattering from plants, (2) direct backscat -
tering from soil (includes two-way attenuation by canopy), and (3) plant-soil 
multiple scattering ( after F . T. Ulaby, R. K. Moore, and A. K. Fung37)
FIGURE   16. 34 FM-CW probing scatterometer measurements of a 
corn plant at 30°. The solid curve is the full plant; the dot-dash curve, 
leaf 1 removed; the dotted curve, leaf 2 removed. ( after L. K. Wu  
et al.43)
ch16.indd   39 12/19/07   4:56:08 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Ground Echo 16.40  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 16
Because volume scatter dominates for dense vegetation, especially trees, s 0 is 
nearly independent of the angle of incidence. Figure 16.35136 shows this with results 
from X-band imaging of a forest. The figure is a plot of g  rather than s 0 (g = s 0/cos q).  
At low frequencies such as VHF, this condition changes because the attenuation through 
the leaves and branches is less.137
Soil Moisture.  Figure 16.32 shows the size of the effect of soil moisture on s 0. 
Soil moisture effects differ for different soils. Dobson and Ulaby138 showed that this 
use of moisture expressed in percent of field capacity  improved the fit between s 0 and 
moisture content. Field capacity is a measure of how tightly the soil particles bind the 
water; the unbound water affects e  more. An empirical expression for field capacity 
(FC) is139
 FC = 25.1 − 0.21 S + 0.22 C percent by weight 
where S and C are the percentages (by weight) of sand and clay in the soil. The soil 
moisture content in terms of field capacity is
 mf = 100mg/FC percent 
with mg the percent moisture in the soil by weight. When we use this measure, the rela -
tion between s 0 in dB and mf is linear even in the presence of moderate vegetation cover, 
as shown in Figure 16.36140 The slope of this curve is somewhat different with vegeta -
tion cover than it is without, however. Although mf is apparently at least as good as the 
volumetric moisture content for relating to s 0, its use has been questioned.141
Soil moisture can affect a radar image, as has been demonstrated in imagery 
obtained from the Seasat L-band SAR.142 A simulation experiment143 showed that one 
can estimate soil moisture within 20% for 90% of the pixels in an image. Moreover, 
it showed that resolutions between 100 and 1000 m were superior to finer resolutions 
FIGURE   16. 35 Measured scattering variation of a forest parcel of old beech 
trees. Note use of g  (with an arbitrary reference) instead of s 0 for the ordinate. 
(after D. H. Hoekman136)
ch16.indd   40 12/19/07   4:56:09 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Ground Echo  GROUND ECHO  16.416x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 16
for this purpose. Most of the spaceborne SARs that followed Seasat have been used in 
soil-moisture studies.144,145,146
Vegetation.  Backscatter from vegetation depends on many parameters and var -
ies widely. Thus, although we can develop average  models like those described in 
Section 16.6, details are much more complex. The s 0 varies with season, moisture 
content, state of growth, and time of day.
Figure 16.37147 shows the seasonal variation for corn compared with a model 
presented in the reference. The much larger variation at s 0 apparently results from 
the larger effect at vertical of the soil and consequently its moisture content. The 
rapid 12 dB swing between May 25 and June 1 results from drying of the soil. Even 
at 50°, where attenuation through the canopy masks the soil effect, the seasonal 
variation exceeds 8 dB. Diurnal variations are relatively small but finite. They 
result both from plant moisture changes and from morphological changes (a corn 
plant actually lifts its leaves “to meet the sun”; morning glories close their flowers 
at night).
Most crops are planted in rows. This causes an azimuthal variation of s 0, as shown 
in Figure 16.38.148 The modulation shown is the ratio of s 0 looking parallel to the rows 
(more vegetation) to that looking normal. This phenomenon is much more pronounced 
at the lower frequencies.
Some general properties of vegetation scatter are visible in Figure 16.39.149 At low 
frequencies, the decay with q  is rapid out to about 20° and then more gradual; most 
of the steep part results from surface echo. At higher frequencies, the plant attenu -
ation prevents a significant surface echo, so the angular variation is more uniform. 
FIGURE   16. 36 4.5-GHz scattering coefficient versus soil moisture (percent of field capacity) for 
vegetation-covered soil ( after F . T. Ulaby et al .140)
ch16.indd   41 12/19/07   4:56:10 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Ground Echo 16.42  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 16
Cross-polarized signals at vertical are negligible, so even at low frequencies, the 
cross-polarized s 0 varies uniformly. At both high and low frequencies, it is about 
10 dB below the like-polarized s 0.
Snow.  When snow covers the ground, much of the scatter is from the snow 
rather than the underlying ground. Snow is both a volume-scattering and an attenuat -
ing medium. When the snow is dry, scatter comes from a large volume; when it is 
wet, the scattering volume is much less because of higher attenuation. As a result,  FIGURE   16. 37 Time variation of scatter from ( a) corn and ( b) alfalfa at incidence angles of vertical 
and 50° ( after E. Attema and F . T. Ulaby147)
ch16.indd   42 12/19/07   4:56:10 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Ground Echo  GROUND ECHO  16.436x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 16
s 0 decreases rapidly as the sun melts the top layer. Figure 16.40150 illustrates how fast 
this can be and also shows that the effect is much greater at the higher frequencies 
where attenuation is greater. Figure 16.41151 shows the angular variation seen for 
snow-covered ground. Off-vertical scattering is much greater at higher frequencies. 
For the 58-cm depth shown, much of the scatter at 1.6 and 2.5 GHz is probably from 
the underlying surface.
Some reports state that there are radar hot  spots in snow cover, particularly at 
35 GHz. These reports result from improper interpretation of variations that are due 
to normal Rayleigh fading of the signal. Scatter from snow comes from many cen -
ters within the illuminated volume, so the conditions for Rayleigh fading are met. FIGURE   16. 38 Frequency response of the look-direction modulation 
ratio for a soybean field with horizontal polarization at incidence angles 
of 0, 30, and 60° ( after F . T. Ulaby, R. K. Moore, and A. K. Fung37)
ch16.indd   43 12/19/07   4:56:11 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Ground Echo 16.44  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 16
Measurements with suitable averaging in frequency or illumination angle demonstrate 
that snow-covered surfaces scatter essentially uniformly except for the effects of the 
multipath fading.
Sea Ice.  Sea ice is a very complex medium. Ice observers characterize it in 
many different categories that depend on thickness, age, and history of formation.152 
Hence, one cannot characterize its radar return in any simple way; in this sense, it is 
like vegetation. The most important ice types from a radar point of view are first-year 
(FY 1 to 2 m thick), multiyear (MY > 2 m thick), and a conglomeration of thinner 
types (< 1 m thick).
Like snow, sea ice influenced by solar melting and above freezing temperatures 
scatters microwaves very differently from the more normal cold-surface ice. In win -
ter, the cold MY ice scatters much more than cold FY ice. In summer, s 0 for MY ice 
decreases to about the same level as that of FY ice. Figure 16.42153 shows this and typi -
cal angular responses. These curves are for 13.3 GHz, but the results would be similar 
at any frequency down to S band. Figure 16.43126 shows the frequency variation of s 0 
for various kinds of ice. Shore-fast ice is grounded to the bottom at the shoreline; in 
this case, it is probably MY . Gray ice is one of the types thinner than FY .
Kim72 developed a theory that explains a wide range of sea-ice s 0 measurements. 
From this and extensive data from the literature on ice properties, Figure 16.4491 
shows the ranges of FY and MY scattering under winter conditions. Clearly 
higher frequencies are better for identifying ice types than lower frequencies, and  FIGURE   16.39  Comparison of model calculations with measurements at ( a) 1.1 GHz and  
(b) 4.25 GHz ( after H. Eom and A. K. Fung149)
ch16.indd   44 12/19/07   4:56:12 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Ground Echo  GROUND ECHO  16.456x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 16
discrimination is not possible below about 5 GHz. At L band and below, the differ -
ences between MY and FY ice are small even in winter. This means that imaging 
radars can easily distinguish ice types by intensity alone at the higher frequencies 
in winter but not in summer. This fact is the basis for operational ice-monitoring 
systems by the Soviet Union [using the Toros Ku-band side-looking airborne radar 
(SLAR)]154 and Canada155 (using a modified X-band APS-94 SLAR and the STAR-1  
X-band SAR). A prime motivation for the Canadian Radarsat SAR was monitor -
ing of sea ice, which the system has been doing successfully since 1995.156,157 The 
Russian X-band real-aperture radars in the Okean series have been used for similar 
purposes.158–160
Snow cover on ice can mask ice scatter itself as with snow on land. Since the arctic 
is relatively dry, most areas have little snow, but snow does make distinguishing ice 
types difficult at times. This is particularly true in the Antarctic, where snow is more 
prevalent on the sea ice.161
FIGURE   16. 40 Diurnal patterns of s 0 and liquid-water content 
for snow at several frequencies. Note the extreme variation of the 
Ka band as the sun starts to melt the surface. ( after W. H. Stiles and 
F . T. Ulaby150)
ch16.indd   45 12/19/07   4:56:12 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Ground Echo 16.46  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 16
Programs to learn microwave properties of sea ice have been numerous because 
of the importance of arctic operations and meteorology. Microwave remote sensing 
is necessary to monitor ice properties in the arctic owing to the long winter night, 
frequent cloud cover, and inaccessibility.
16.8  POLARIMETRY
Several synthetic-aperture imaging radars are capable of measuring the full com -
plex polarization matrix. Probably the first of these was an airborne system built by 
NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory. The first one in space was the Shuttle Imaging 
Radar–C (SIR-C). Although use of multiple polarizations dates from the early days of 
imaging radars, the measurement of phase between the received signal with different 
polarizations is more recent, dating from the late 1980s. Few, if any, full-polarimetric 
data sets exist of the type described above for single polarizations. For more complete 
discussions of radar polarimetry, consult references Ulaby and Elachi,162 Sletten and 
McLaughlin,163 and van Zyl and Kim.164
Since polarimetric radars use defined phases for both transmit and receive, the 
signals must be described in the form used for elliptical polarization. This is illustrated 
in Figure 16.45.
FIGURE   16. 41 Angular response of s 0 of dry snow at different 
frequencies. Rapid falloff at lower frequencies apparently results from 
penetration to the smooth ground surface. ( after W. H. Stiles et al .151)
ch16.indd   46 12/19/07   4:56:13 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Ground Echo  GROUND ECHO  16.476x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 16
When c = 0, the polarization is linear with the E vector in the direction given  
by y . When c = ±45°, the polarization is circular, with +45° for left-hand and −45°  
for right-hand. When 0 < | c | < 45 °, the polarization is elliptical.
Analytically, the electric field may be described as
 E = Eh1h + Ev1v (16.25)
where 1h and 1v are unit vectors in the h and v directions. The instantaneous fields are 
given by Eq. 16.26, where the δs show the different phases for the components of E 
and k is the wavenumber.
 e t E eh hj t kxh ( ) Re( )=− +ω δ   (16.26 a)
FIGURE   16. 42 Comparison of sea-ice scattering at 
13.9 GHz in summer and winter ( after A. L. Gray et al .153 
© IEEE 1982 )
ch16.indd   47 12/19/07   4:56:16 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Ground Echo 16.48  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 16
and
 e t Ev vj t kzv ( ) Re( )=− +ω δ (16.26 b)
In complex format
 E E eh hjh =0δ and E E ev vjv =0δ 
If we take d  = dv – dh and set dv = 0 as a reference, we can write
 E E e Ehj
v v = +−
0 01δ  
Thus, for a single wave, we need only have three independent parameters. In radar, we 
must consider both transmitted and received polarimetric signals, so the need for four 
magnitudes and two phases.
Another way to describe polarimetric signals is to use the matrix of Stokes 
parameters:
 F=







=+
−I
Q
U
VE E
E E
E Eh v
h v
h v022
22
2Re(*) )
Im( )2 E Eh v









 (16.27)
The individual Stokes parameters I0, Q, U, and V are defined as shown in Eq. 16.27.
FIGURE   16. 43 Example of frequency response of s 0 for different kinds of sea ice ( from Y. S. Kim72)
ch16.indd   48 12/19/07   4:56:28 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Ground Echo  GROUND ECHO  16.496x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 16
Some of the return signals from a resolution cell maintain their polarization charac -
teristics over time and space, whereas others have a random polarization. This occurs, as 
for sunlight, when the polarization ellipse changes its properties randomly and rapidly 
with time or with small differences in angle. When both the persistent and random parts 
FIGURE   16. 44 Measurement-based theoretical s 0 variations for first-year and 
multiyear sea ice. Ranges are determined by using known variations of ice charac -
teristics. ( after Y. S. Kim et al .126)
FIGURE   16. 45 Polarimetric ellipse: c is 
the ellipticity angle, and y  is the orientation 
angle. The ellipse is the locus of the end of 
the E vector throughout a cycle.V
Hχ
ψ
ch16.indd   49 12/19/07   4:56:29 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Ground Echo 16.50  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 16
are present, the target is said to be partially polarized; when no random component is 
present, the target is fully polarized. Radar signals are frequently only partially polarized, 
especially where multiple bounces occur within the target area.
For the nonrandom part, we must define a Stokes vector using an ensemble average 
of each component; the averaging may be over time or look angle. Thus we have
 F=+
−





E E
E E
E E
E Eh v
h v
h v
h v22
2 2
2Re( )
2Im( ) 




 (16.28)
when the wave is completely polarized,
 I02 = Q2 + U2 + V2 (16.29)
but when it is partially polarized,
 I02 > Q2 + U2 + V2 (16.30)
In fact, when the wave is completely unpolarized (sunlight, for example), Ev and Eh 
are uncorrelated, so U and V are both zero.
Waves of this type are used in polarimetric radar; however, to see how the scatter -
ing coefficient works, we need to consider both the incident and scattered wave.
At this point, we must introduce the scattering matrix S. The received field may 
be represented by
  E Er t e
RS =−jkR (16.31)
where
 Er vr
hrE
E=

 and Et vt
htE
E=

 
and
 SS S
S S=

vv vh
hv hh (16.32)
In the usual reciprocal media, Svh = Shv. Since the choice of a phase reference is 
arbitrary, there are then three independent magnitudes (| Svv|, |Shh|, |Shv|), but only two 
independent phases ( ∠Shh, ∠ Shv). These quantities can be used to describe the proper -
ties of the polarized part of the echo from a target.
We can also describe the scattering using the Mueller matrix that is related to the 
Stokes matrix. The reader is referred to the literature for further descriptions of the 
Mueller matrix.162,165
ch16.indd   50 12/19/07   4:56:44 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Ground Echo  GROUND ECHO  16.516x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 16
The usual way to obtain polarized responses is to transmit alternate vertically and 
horizontally polarized pulses. Presuming there is almost no change in the target dur -
ing the interpulse interval, the responses may be combined to produce the scattering 
matrix or Mueller matrix. By combining the signals in processing, this method permits 
synthesizing equivalent transmitted polarizations  with any ellipticity and orientation.
A commonly used way to describe the polarization characteristics of a target is the 
polarization signature .32 This consists of two three-dimensional graphs. For the first 
graph, called copolarized, one uses the components of the received signal that are the 
same  as the transmitted-signal polarization. The second graph uses components of the 
received signal that are orthogonal  to the transmitted signal.
Figure 16.46 gives a widely quoted example of this type of display for images of 
San Francisco.166 The axes in the horizontal plane are the orientation angle for the 
synthesized transmitted signal yt and its ellipticity angle ct. The vertical axis is relative 
power. Values of yt = 0° and 180 ° are horizontal polarization, whereas yt = 90° is ver -
tical polarization. Linear polarization occurs when ct = 0°, and right and left circular 
polarizations occur when ct = ±45°. When the minimum is above zero, the pedestal 
beneath it corresponds to the unpolarized signal.
The ocean image in Figure 16.46 a shows that the polarization is essentially lin -
ear, with the VV signal stronger than the HH. The cross-polarized response shows 
essentially no cross-polarized signal for linear transmission, but some for circularly 
polarized transmission.
For the park shown in Figure 16.46 b, the vertically polarized linear signal is slightly 
higher than the horizontally polarized one. There is some cross-polarized response for 
the linear signal and some unpolarized signal. For the urban area shown, the strongest 
responses are tilted in orientation in both the copolarized and cross-polarized cases. 
FIGURE   16. 46 Selection of polarization signatures from SAR image of 
San Francisco: ( a) an ocean area, ( b) a large park, and ( c) one of several 
urban areas ( after D. L. Evans32 © IEEE 1988 )
CO-POLARIZED CROSS-POLARIZED
Circular
Linear
OCEAN+45°0°
−45°180°90°0°01
PARKPedestal
(unpolarized)
URBAN 1(c)(b)(a)
Horizontal
Vertical
χtψtRelative
Power
ch16.indd   51 12/19/07   4:56:45 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Ground Echo 16.52  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 16
The actual numbers for the copolarized response for this case are c = 0° (VV) and 
y  = 20°.32 The reference presents similar plots showing separately the polarized and 
unpolarized responses.
Because of the complexity of this representation and others for polarimetric signals, 
one cannot as readily provide curves of response as for single-polarization images. 
Hence, we do not find many catalogs of polarimetric scattering responses.
Nevertheless, many authors have described the use of polarimetric images. Some of 
the papers using the term polarimetric  really refer to the use of just HH, VV , and HV 
polarizations without regard for the phase. In this sense, they are using these images in 
the way that like- and cross-polarized images have been used since the start of imaging 
radars.167 Others, however, take full advantage of the full polarization matrix.
One way to use the full matrix is to synthesize polarizations that either emphasize 
or suppress particular classes of targets. For example, in Figure 16.46 c, one could syn -
thesize a 20 ° orientation angle for a linear polarization to emphasize this class or use 
vertical polarization to suppress the dominant class in the image. Various authors168,169 
have shown that one can synthesize an elliptical polarization that increases the target-
to-clutter ratio where the target is, for example, a manmade object. Swartz et al.169 
found a polarization that gave a 9.4 dB target-to-clutter ratio where the target was an 
urban area and the clutter was represented by a park in the San Francisco image used 
to produce Figure 16.46. He found this was obtained with transmitter polarization 
having (ye, ct) = (–41.3º, –6.4º) and receiver polarization of ( ye, ct) = (60.3º, 3.5º). 
This compares with the best result using like- and cross-polarizations without phase 
coherence of 7.3 dB.
Others use the three independent magnitudes of the scattering matrix and the phase 
angle δ between the HH and VV responses. Research has shown there is little useful 
information in the phase angle relating HH to cross polarization. A common use of 
these data is in producing state vectors to employ in discrimination of target areas, 
with the components of the vectors being the three magnitudes and the phase angles 
for each frequency used. These vectors are then used in various statistical algorithms 
to identify different target classes.170,171,172 This approach has also been used in other 
forests,173,174 agricultural areas,175,176 sea ice,177 and snow,178 and to identify surface 
classes of geologic significance.
An example of the use of phase difference in discriminating surface classes in 
the Amazon basin is illustrated in Figure 16.47.179 Note the significant differences 
between C and X band for Macrophyte and Flooded forest. These differences could 
be used as discriminators to identify these classes, but normally they would simply be 
additional elements in the state vectors used in statistical algorithms.
16.9 SCATTERING COEFFICIENT  
DATA NEAR GRAZING
Conditions for backscatter near grazing incidence are sufficiently different from those at 
steeper incidence that they must be described separately. Here, we draw upon the work 
of Billingsley.17 They collected data over a wide range of terrain and unlike most pre -
vious near-grazing measurements, also collected extensive “ground-truth” information 
and accurately calibrated their radars. Moreover, these data were over a wide range of 
frequencies: VHF (167 MHz), UHF (435 MHz), L band (1.23 GHz), S band (3.24 GHz), 
and X band (9.2 GHz). They had 43 different target areas in different parts of the U.S. 
and western Canada.
ch16.indd   52 12/19/07   4:56:46 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Ground Echo  GROUND ECHO  16.536x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 16
The results were described in terms of s 0F4, which was called clutter strength . 
F is a propagation factor that accounts for multipath, attenuation, etc., but could not 
be measured separately.
Whereas angle of incidence  is used to describe results in studies where pointing 
is nearer vertical, depression or grazing angle is a more appropriate description when 
dealing with angles where incidence is closer to horizontal. Grazing angle is the com -
plement of incidence angle. The measurements were all at low depression  angles, with 
this term used in lieu of grazing  angle because it can be defined in terms of antenna 
pointing, whereas grazing angle also depends on local slope, which is both variable and, 
in general, unknown.
Images taken at near-grazing angles tend to be extremely “patchy” because any 
projections above the surface (trees, hills, buildings, fences, power lines, machinery, 
and vehicles) present surfaces more nearly normal to the beam. Thus nearby pixels 
may have clutter strength differing by tens of dB. Moreover, small slopes facing the 
radar increase the grazing angle, resulting in stronger echoes, whereas slopes away 
from the radar decrease the signal or may obliterate it by shadowing.
Because of this effect, the probability distributions of near-grazing echoes are very dif -
ferent from those at more moderate incidence angles. Although some small regions without 
significant projections or forward slopes may have Rayleigh distributions or (if only one 
large scatterer is present) Ricean distributions, most areas have other distributions—often 
Weibull or even log-normal. The result is that the mean estimated s 0F4 is often much 
higher than the median; a few targets 10 or 20 dB higher can raise the mean a lot; even 
though, the targets occupy only a tiny fraction of the area. Thus, one should be careful in 
using mean values for radar design; the median values are more representative.
Billingsley17 presented his results both in terms of mean values and median values. 
Here, we report only the median values because they tend to be more meaningful for 
radar design than the values distorted by occasional strong targets. For most areas, little 
difference was found between vertical and horizontal polarizations, so the results were 
reported for data groups including both polarizations. Figure 16.48 shows the results, 
grouped by target class.FIGURE   16. 47 Phase differences for different surface classes in the Amazon basin at C band and L band179
CHH-CVV Phase Differences
LHH-LVV Phase DifferencesWater Clearing Macrophyte Fores t Flooded forest
Water Clearing Macrophyte Fores t Flooded forest0
90 270
180 0.20
90 270
180 0.20
90 270
180 0.20
90 270
180 0.20
90 270
180 0.2
0
90 270
180 0.20
90 270
180 0.20
90 270
180 0.20
90 270
180 0.20
90 270
180 0.2
ch16.indd   53 12/19/07   4:56:47 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Ground Echo 16.54  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 16
FIGURE   16. 48 Median values of s 0F4 at low depression angles (based on  
Table 3.6 of Billingsley17)0.1 1 10
FrequencyMedian σ0F4 (dB)0
−10
−20
−30
−40
−50
−60
−70
Urban Mountains
Desert & Grass ≥1° Desert & Grass ≤0.3°URBAN, MOUNTAINS, GRASS & DESERT
VHF UHF L S X
0.1 1 10
FrequencyMedian σ0F4 (dB)0
−10
−20
−30
−40
−50
−60
−70FOREST
VHF UHF L S X
High Relief >1 ° High Relief ≤0.2°
Low Relief 0.4 °–2° Low Relief ≤0.3°Low Relief >1 °
0.1 1 10
FrequencyMedian σ0F4 (dB)0
−10
−20
−30
−40
−50
−60
−70AGRICULTURAL LAND
VHF UHF L S X
Slope >2 ° Slope 1°–2° Slope <1 °(a)
(b)
(c)
ch16.indd   54 12/19/07   4:56:48 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Ground Echo  GROUND ECHO  16.556x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 16
For Figure 16.48 a and b, the depression angle and type are the parameters, whereas 
for Figure 16.48 c, the terrain slope is the parameter. The lines are based on linear 
regression on the logarithmic frequency scale with the exception of desert and grass 
at very low depression angles where a quadratic regression was used. Note that urban, 
mountain, and forest tend to have relatively high values compared with agriculture and 
uncultivated land with moderate slopes.
16.10 IMAGING RADAR INTERPRETATION
Side-looking fine-resolution imaging radars with real or synthetic apertures pro -
duce images that closely resemble aerial photographs. Both shadows and differ -
ences in s 0 for different parts of the ground produce image-intensity variations like 
those in photographs. For this reason, photointerpreters can easily learn to interpret 
radar images. However, since the radar images are due to microwave reflectivity, 
not optical reflectivity, the interpreters must understand the differences and that 
the images at the different wavelengths are, in fact, complementary. Moreover, the 
geometrical distortions for radar images are those of a side-looking range measure -
ment system, whereas those of aerial photos are those of a down-looking angle 
measurement system—a difference that the interpreter must understand. At low 
grazing angles, the distortions are small for radar, but at low incidence angles, they 
are large. Moreover, the speckle in radar images is not present in photographs.
Modern imaging radars use digital recording and processing, and the images are 
produced on film or manipulated digitally. Because the side-looking configuration 
produces a strip image, the output films are usually in the form of long strips. Most 
cameras produce separate images that are approximately square. Strip film cameras 
and optical-infrared scanners produce strip images like those of radars, but with differ -
ent distortions because they are angle-, not range-, measuring devices.
Every pure and applied science that uses aerial photography can also use radar 
images. This is particularly useful in cloudy environments, but radar is also useful 
even in clear weather because performance is independent of time of day so sun angle 
does not matter. Moreover, radar ground signatures differ from those in the visible and 
infrared. Radar has been applied to agriculture, forestry, geology, hydrology, urban 
geography, regional studies, oceanography, and ice mapping.
Fading complicates the interpretation of images by producing speckle . This means 
that averaging of the speckled image usually is necessary. Sometimes the processor 
does the averaging, and sometimes the interpreter does it mentally; it must be done to 
interpret an image. The image intensity for individual pixels with a single-look SAR 
follows the Rayleigh distribution (actually the exponential distribution if square-law 
detection is used). Most SAR processors sacrifice some spatial resolution by aver -
aging, say, four pixels together after detection. Transmitting more bandwidth than 
needed for range resolution accomplishes this purpose without loss of needed spa -
tial resolution,180 but it takes more transmitter power. Suitable frequency agility can 
accomplish the same result.
Tradeoffs exist between spatial resolution and measurement precision. The latter 
can be used to define a gray-level resolution .181 One can then think of image resolution 
in terms of a volume:
 V = raryrg  (16.33)
ch16.indd   55 12/19/07   4:56:48 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Ground Echo 16.56  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 16
where ra is the along-track resolution, ry is the ground-range resolution, and rg is the 
gray-level resolution. The referenced study showed that interpretability depends on 
V; so tradeoffs between the three elements of V are possible. Best results for a human 
interpreter occur when three independent samples of the fading are averaged. Ignoring 
this fading (speckle) can lead to erroneous conclusions on the spatial resolution needed 
for a given application.
Single-frequency, single-polarization radar images are useful. However, use of 
multiple polarizations (particularly including cross polarization) and multiple frequen -
cies clearly increases their value. Different angles of incidence are most suitable for 
different applications. For example, soil moisture monitoring is best within 20° of ver -
tical at frequencies near 5 GHz. Vegetation discrimination is better, however, at higher 
frequencies and angles of incidence. For some applications, use of the full polarization 
matrix, including the phase, is useful. The phase information is particularly helpful in 
assessing scattering mechanisms, as in forests.32
Because the literature in this field is so massive, the radar engineer wishing to learn 
more about the subject should consult the Manual of Remote Sensing,40,41 Microwave 
Remote Sensing ,37 especially V ol. III and Chapter 11 of V ol. II, and the journals outlined 
early in Section 16.7.
REFERENCES
 1. H. Goldstein, “Sea Echo,” in Propagation of Short Radio Waves , D. E. Kerr (ed.), MIT Radiation 
Laboratory Series, Chap. 6, V ol. 13, New York: McGraw-Hill Book Company, 1951.
 2. R. L. Cosgriff, W. H. Peake, and R. C. Taylor, “Terrain scattering properties for sensor system 
design,” Terrain Handbook II , Columbus: The Ohio State University, Eng. Exp. Sta. Antenna 
Lab., 1959.
 3. R. K. Moore, “Radar scattering cross-section per unit area and radar astronomy,” IEEE Spectrum , 
p. 156, April 1966.
 4. A. K. Fung, Microwave Scattering and Emission Models and Their Applications . Boston: Artech 
House, 1994.
 5. A. G. V oronovich, Wave Scattering from Rough Surfaces . New York: Springer-Verlag, 1994.
 6. G. Ruck, D. Barrick, W. Stuart, and C. Krichbaum, Radar Cross Section Handbook , New York: 
Plenum Press, 1968.
 7. R. K. Moore, “Resolution of vertical incidence radar return into random and specular compo -
nents,” University of New Mexico, Eng. Exp. Sta., Albuquerque, 1957.
 8. J. M. Banhart (ed.) Remote Sensing Laboratory Publication List 1964–1980 , Lawrence: University 
of Kansas, Remote Sensing Lab., 1981.
 9. J. M. Banhart (ed.), Remote Sensing Laboratory Publication List 1981–1983 , V ol. TR-103, 
Lawrence: University of Kansas, Remote Sensing Lab., 1984.
10. G. P. de Loor, P. Hoogeboom, and E. P. W. Attema, “The Dutch ROVE program,” IEEE Trans. , 
vol. GE-20, pp. 3–11, 1982.
11. B. A. M. Bouman and H. W. J. vanKasteren, Ground-based X-band Radar Backscatter 
Measurements of Wheat, Barley and Oats , Wageningen Netherlands: Center for Agrobiological 
Research, 1989.
12. T. LeToan, “Active microwave signatures of soil and crops: significant results of three years of exper -
iments,” Dig. Int. Geosci. Remote Sensing Symp. (IGARSS ’82), IEEE  82CH14723-6, vol. 1, 1982.
13. Martinez, et al., “Measurements and Modeling of Vertical Backscatter Distribution in Forest 
Canopy,” IEEE Trans. on Geosc. and Remote Sensing , vol. 38, pp. 710–719, 2000.
14. R. Bernard and D. Vidal-Madjar, “C-band radar cross-section of the Guyana Rain Forest: possible use 
as a reference target for spaceborne radars,” Remote Sensing of Envir . , vol. 27, pp. 25–36, 1989.
ch16.indd   56 12/19/07   4:56:48 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Ground Echo  GROUND ECHO  16.576x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 16
15. A. R. Edison, R. K. Moore, and B. D. Warner, “Radar return measured at near-vertical incidence,” 
IEEE Trans. Ant. & Prop ., vol. AP-8, pp. 246–254, 1960.
16. S. P. Gogineni and K. Jezek, “Ultra-wideband radar measurements over bare and snow-covered 
saline ice,” Proc. IGARSS95 , vol. 2, pp. 859–861, 1995.
17. J. B. Billingsley, Low-Angle Radar Land Clutter: Measurements and Empirical Models . Norwich, 
NY: William Andrew Publishing, 2002.
18. R. E. Clapp, “A theoretical and experimental study of radar ground return,” MIT Radiat. Lab. 
Rept. 6024, Cambridge, MA, 1946.
19. T. S. George, “Fluctuations of ground clutter return in airborne radar equipment,” Proc. IEE 
(London) , vol. 99, pp. 92–99, 1952.
20. E. A. Reitz et al., “Radar terrain return study, final report: Measurements of terrain back-scattering  
coefficients with an airborne X-band radar,” Goodyear Aerospace Corporation, GERA -463, 
Phoenix, 1959.
21. J. P. Campbell, “Back-scattering characteristics of land and sea at X band,” in Proc. Natl. Conf. 
Aeronaut. Electron. , 1958.
22. F. C. MacDonald, “The correlation of radar sea clutter on vertical and horizontal polarization with 
wave height and slope,” in IRE. Conv. Rec. , vol. 4, 1956, pp. 29–32.
23. W. S. Ament, F. C. MacDonald, and R. Shewbridge, “Radar terrain reflections for several polar -
izations and frequencies,” in Proc. Symp. Radar Return, NOTS TP 2359 , U.S. Naval Ordnance 
Test Station, Test Station, China Lake, CA, 1959.
24. C. R. Grant and B. S. Yaplee, “Backscattering from water and land at centimeter and millimeter 
wavelengths,” Proc. IRE. , vol. 45, pp. 972–982, 1957.
25. Guinard et al., “Variation of the NRCS of the sea with increasing roughness,” J. Geophys. Res ., 
vol. 76, pp. 1525–1538, 1971.
26. C. E. K. Livingstone, P. Singh, and A. L. Gray, “Seasonal and regional variations of active/passive 
microwave signatures of sea ice,” IEEE Trans. , vol. GE-25, pp. 159–173, 1987.
27. H. McNairn et al., “Identification of agricultural tillage practices from C-band radar backscatter,” 
Canadian Journal of Remote Sensing , vol. 22, 1996, pp. 154–162.
28. R. W. Larson, R. E. Hamilton, and F. L. Smith, “Calibration of synthetic aperture radar, Dig. 
IGARSS  ’81, pp. 938–943, 1981.
29. C. E. K. Livingstone et al., “Springtime C-band SAR backscatter signatures of Labrador Sea 
marginal ice: measurements versus modeling predictions,” IEEE Trans. on Geosc. and Remote 
Sensing , vol. 29, pp. 29–41, 1991.
30. A. Haskell and B. M. Sorensen, “The European SAR-580 project,” Dig. IGARSS ’82, IEEE  
82CH14723-6, Sess. WA-5, pp. 1.1–1.5, 1982.
31. D. N. Held, “The NASA/JPL multipolarization SAR aircraft program,” Dig. IGARSS 85 , 
pp. 454–457, 1985.
32. D. L. Evans et al., “Radar polarimetry: analysis tools and applications,” IEEE Trans. Geosc. & 
Rem. Sens ., vol. 26, pp. 774–789, 1988.
33. Hoogeboom et al., “The PHARUS Project, Results of the Definition Study including the SAR 
Testbed PHARS,” IEEE Trans. on Geosc. and Remote Sensing , vol. 30, pp. 723–735, 1992.
34. Y.-L. Desnos et al., “The ENVISAT advanced synthetic aperture radar system,” Proc. 
IGARSS2000 , vol. 3, pp. 1171–1173, 2000.
35. P. Fox, A. P. Luscombe, and A. A. Thompson, “RADARSAT-2 SAR modes development and 
utilization,” Canadian Jour. of Rem. Sens. , vol. 30, pp. 258–264, 2004.
36. H. Wakabayashi et al., “Airborne L-band SAR system: Characteristics and initial calibration 
results,” Proc IGARSS’99 , vol. 1, pp. 464–466, 1999.
37. F. T. Ulaby, R. K. Moore, and A. K. Fung, Microwave Remote Sensing: Active and Passive , 
V ol. I and V ol. II, Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, 1981 and 1982; V ol. III, 
Norwood, MA: Artech House, 1986.
38. F. T. Ulaby and M. C. Dobson, Handbook of Radar Scattering Statistics for Terrain , Norwood, 
MA: Artech House, 1989.
ch16.indd   57 12/19/07   4:56:49 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Ground Echo 16.58  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 16
39. M. W. Long, Radar Reflectivity of Land and Sea , 2nd Ed., Norwood, MA: Artech House, 1983.
40. R. N. Colwell, D. S. Simonett, J. E. Estes, F. T. Ulaby, G. A. Thorley, et al., Manual of Remote  
Sensing , 2nd Ed., V ols. I and II, Falls Church, V A: American Society of Photogrammetry, 1983.
41. F. M. Henderson and A. J. Lewis, Manual of Remote Sensing, Principles and Applications of 
Imaging Radar , V ol. 2, 3rd Ed., New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1998.
42. J. R. Lundien, “Terrain analysis by electromagnetic means: radar responses to laboratory prepared 
soil samples,” U.S. Army Waterways Exp. Sta., TR  3-639 , Vicksburg, MS, 1966.
43. L. K. Wu, R. K. Moore, R. Zoughi, F. T. Ulaby, and A. Afifi, “Preliminary results on the deter -
mination of the sources of scattering from vegetation canopies at 10 GHz,” pts. I and II, Int. J. 
Remote Sensing , vol. 6, pp. 299–313, 1985.
44. L. K. Wu, R. K. Moore, and R. Zoughi, “Sources of scattering from vegetation canopies at  
10 GHz,” IEEE Trans. , vol. GE-23, pp. 737–745, 1985.
45. R. Zoughi, J. Bredow, and R. K. Moore, “Evaluation and comparison of dominant backscatter -
ing sources at 10 GHz in two treatments of tall-grass prairie,” Remote Sensing Environ. , vol. 22,  
pp. 395–412, 1987.
46. R. Zoughi, L. K. Wu, and R. K. Moore, “Identification of major backscattering sources in trees 
and shrubs at 10 GHz,” Remote Sensing Environ. , vol. 19, pp. 269–290, 1986.
47. J. F. Paris, “Probing thick vegetation canopies with a field microwave spectrometer,” IEEE Trans. , 
vol. GE-24, pp. 886–893, 1986.
48. S. T. Wu, “Preliminary report on measurements of forest canopies with C-Band radar scatterom -
eter at NASA/NSTL,” IEEE Trans ., vol. GE-24, November 1986.
49. D. E. Pitts, G. D. Badhwar, and E. Reyna, “The Use of a helicopter mounted ranging scat -
terometer for estimation of extinction and scattering properties of forest canopies,” IEEE 
Trans. , vol. GE-26, pp. 144–152, 1988.
50. R. Bernard, M. E. Frezal, D. Vidal-Madjar, D. Guyon, and J. Riom, “Nadir looking airborne radar 
and possible applications to forestry,” Remote Sensing Environ. , vol. 21, pp. 297–310, 1987.
51. S. L. Durden, J. D. Klein, and H. A. Zebker, “Polarimetric radar measurements of a forested area 
near Mt. Shasta,” IEEE Trans. on Geosc. and Remote Sensing , vol. 29, pp. 444–450, 1991.
52. D. K. Barton, “Land clutter models for radar design and analysis,” Proc. IEEE , vol. 73,  
pp. 198–204, 1985.
53. R. K. Moore, Traveling Wave Engineering , New York: McGraw-Hill Book Company, 1960.
54. A. H. Schooley, “Upwind-downwind ratio of radar return calculated from facet size statistics of 
wind disturbed water surface,”  Proc. IRE , vol. 50, pp. 456–461, 1962.
55. D. O. Muhleman, “Radar scattering from venus and the moon,” Astron. J. , vol. 69, pp. 34–41, 
1964.
56. A. K. Fung, “Theory of cross polarized power returned from a random surface,” Appl. Sci. Res. , 
vol. 18, pp. 50–60, 1967.
57. I. Katz and L. M. Spetner, “Two statistical models for radar return,” IRE Trans. , vol. AP-8,  
pp. 242–246, 1960.
58. P. Beckmann and A. Spizzichino, The Scattering of Electromagnetic Waves from Rough Surfaces , 
New York: Macmillan Company, 1963.
59. P. Beckmann, “Scattering by composite rough surfaces,” Proc. IEEE , vol. 53, pp. 1012–1015, 
1965.
60. A. K. Fung and H. J. Eom, “An approximate model for backscattering and emission from land 
and sea,” Dig. IGARSS ’81 , vol. I, pp. 620–628, 1981.
61. H. S. Hayre and R. K. Moore, “Theoretical scattering coefficients for near-vertical incidence from 
contour maps,” J. Res. Nat. Bur. Stand. , vol. 65D, pp. 427–432, 1961.
62. H. Davies, “The reflection of electromagnetic waves from a rough surface,” Proc. IEE (London) , 
pt. 4, vol. 101, pp. 209–214, 1954.
63. A. K. Fung and R. K. Moore, “The correlation function in Kirchoff’s method of solution of 
scattering of waves from statistically rough surfaces,” J. Geophys. Res. , vol. 71, pp. 2929–2943, 
1966.
ch16.indd   58 12/21/07   10:26:10 AMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Ground Echo  GROUND ECHO  16.596x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 16
64. J. V . Evans and G. H. Pettengill, “The scattering behavior of the moon at wavelengths of 3.6, 68, 
and 784 centimeters,” J. Geophys. Res. , vol. 68, pp. 423–447, 1963.
65. J. W. Wright, “A new model for sea clutter,” IEEE Trans ., vol. AP-16, pp. 217–223, 1968.
66. F. G. Bass, I. M. Fuks, A. I. Kalmykov, I. E. Ostrovsky, and A. D. Rosenberg, “Very high frequency 
radiowave scattering by a disturbed sea surface,” IEEE Trans. , vol. AP-16, pp. 554–568, 1968.
67. S. O. Rice, “Reflection of electromagnetic waves by slightly rough surfaces,” Commun. Pure 
Appl. Math. , vol. 4, pp. 351–378, 1951.
68. Ref. 37, vol. II, p. 961.
69. Ref. 37, vol. II, chap. 12.
70. Ref. 37, vol. III, chap. 13.
71. R. H. Lang and J. S. Sidhu, “Electromagnetic scattering from a layer of vegetation: a discrete 
approach,” IEEE Trans. , vol. GE-21, pp. 62–71, 1983.
72. A. K. Fung, “A review of volume scatter theories for modeling applications,” Radio Sci. , vol. 17, 
pp. 1007–1017, 1982.
73. Y . S. Kim, “Theoretical and experimental study of radar backscatter from sea ice,” Ph.D. disserta -
tion, University of Kansas, Lawrence, 1984.
74. J. M. Stiles and K. Sarabandi, “Electromagnetic scattering from grassland—Part I: A fully phase-
coherent scattering model,” IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing , vol. 38,  
pp. 339–348, 2000.
75. H. O. Rydstrom, “Interpreting local geology from radar imagery,” Bull. Geol. Soc. Am. , vol. 78, 
pp. 429–436, 1967.
76. W. K. Lee, “Analytical investigation of urban SAR features having a group of corner reflectors,” 
IGARSS 2001 , vol. 3, pp. 1262–1264, 2001.
77. M. F. Chen and A. K. Fung, “A study of the validity of the integral equation model by moment 
method simulation—cylindrical case,” Remote Sensing of Envir ., vol. 29, pp. 217–228, 1989.
78. A. K. Fung, M. R. Shah, and S. Tjuatja, “Numerical simulation of scattering from three-
dimensional randomly rough surfaces,” IEEE Trans. on Geosc. and Remote Sensing , vol. 32, 
pp. 986–994, 1994.
79. S. O. Rice, “Mathematical analysis of random noise,” pt. 1, Bell Syst. Tech. J. , vol. 23, pp. 282–332, 
1944; pt. II, vol. 24, pp. 46–156, 1945.
80. G. A. Shmidman, “Generalized radar clutter model,” IEEE Trans. on Aerosp. Elec. Sys. , vol. 35, 
pp. 857–865, 1999.
81. R. D. DeRoo et al., “MMW scattering characteristics of terrain at near-grazing incidence,” IEEE 
Trans. on Aerosp. Elec. Sys. , vol. 35, pp. 1010–1018, 1999.
82. J. B. Billingsley et al., “Statistical analyses of measured radar ground clutter data,” IEEE Trans. 
Aerosp. & Electron. Sys.  vol. 35, pp. 579–593, 1999.
83. Ref. 37, vol. II, pp. 487–492.
84. F. T. Ulaby, W. H. Stiles, D. Brunfeldt, and E. Wilson, “1-35 GHz microwave scatterometer,” in 
Proc. IEEE/MTT-S, Int. Microwave Symp ., IEEE 79 CH1439-9 MIT-S , 1979.
85. D. R. Brunfeldt and F. T. Ulaby, “An active radar calibration target,” Dig. IGARSS ’82 , IEEE 
82CH14723-6, 1982.
86. A. Freeman, Y . Shen, and C. L. Werner, “Polarimetric SAR calibration experiment using active 
radar calibrators,” IEEE Trans. on Geosc.  and Remote Sensing , vol. 28, pp. 224–240, 1990.
87. Ref. 37, vol. II, pp. 766–779.
88. F. J. Janza, “The analysis of a pulse radar acquisition system and a comparison of analytical mod -
els for describing land and water radar return phenomena,” Ph.D. dissertation, University of New 
Mexico, Albuquerque, 1963.
89. F. J. Janza, R. K. Moore, and R. E. West, “Accurate radar attenuation measurements achieved by 
inflight calibration,” IEEE Trans. , vol. PGI-4, pp. 23–30, 1955.
90. E. M. Bracalente, W. L. Jones, and J. W. Johnson, “The Seasat—a satellite scatterometer,” IEEE 
Trans. , vol. OE-2, pp. 200–206, 1977.
ch16.indd   59 12/19/07   4:56:49 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Ground Echo 16.60  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 16
 91. F. K. Li, D. Callahan, D. Lame, and C. Winn, “NASA scatterometer on NROSS—a system for 
global observations on ocean winds,” Dig. IGARSS ’84 , 1984.
 92. R. K. Moore and W. J. Pierson, “Measuring sea state and estimating surface winds from a polar 
orbiting satellite,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Electromagn. Sensing of Earth from Satellites , 1965,  
pp. R1–R26.
 93. L. J. Cote et al., “The directional spectrum of a wind-generated sea as determined from data 
obtained by the stereo wave observation project,” New York University Meterorol. Pap. , vol. 2, 
no. 66, 1960.
 94. S. P. Gogineni et al., “Application of plane waves for accurate measurement of microwave 
scattering from geophysical surfaces,” IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing ,  
vol. 33, pp. 627–633, 1995.
 95. T. F. Bush and F. T. Ulaby, “8–18 GHz radar spectrometer,” University of Kansas, Remote 
Sensing Lab., vol. TR 177-43, Lawrence, September 1973.
 96. Ref. 37, vol. II, pp. 779–791; vol. III, chap. 14.
 97. R. Zoughi, L. K. Wu, and R. K. Moore, “SOURCESCAT: A very fine resolution radar scatterom -
eter,” Microwave J. , vol. 28, pp. 183–196, 1985.
 98. S. P. Gogineni, F. A. Hoover, and J. W. Bredow, “High-performance, inexpensive polarimetric 
radar for in situ measurements,” Proc. IGARSS89 , vol. 28, pp. 450–455, 1990.
 99. R. K. Moore, “Effect of pointing errors and range on performance of dual-pencil-beam scat -
terometers,” IEEE Trans. , vol. GE-23, pp. 901–905, 1985.
100. A. R. Edison, “An acoustic simulator for modeling backscatter of electromagnetic waves,” Ph.D. 
dissertation, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, 1961.
101. B. E. Parkins and R. K. Moore, “Omnidirectional scattering of acoustic waves from rough sur -
faces of known statistics,” J. Acoust. Soc. Am. , vol. 50, pp. 170–175, 1966.
102. R. K. Moore, “Acoustic Simulation of radar returns,” Microwaves , vol. 1, no. 7, pp. 20–25, 
1962.
103. M. C. Dobson, F. T. Ulaby, D. R. Brunfeldt, and D. N. Held, “External calibration of SIR-B 
imagery with area-extended and point targets,” IEEE Trans. , vol. GE-24, pp. 453–461, 1986.
104. D. Vaillant and A. Wadsworth, “Preliminary results of some remote sensing campaigns of the 
French Airborne SAR V ARAN-S,” Dig. IGARSS ’86 , pp. 495–500, 1986.
105. H. Hirosawa and Y . Matsuzaka, “Calibration of cross-polarized SAR imagery using dihedral 
corner reflectors,” Dig. IGARSS ’86 , pp. 487–492, 1986.
106. D. R. Brunfeldt and F. T. Ulaby, “Active reflector for radar calibration,” IEEE Trans. , vol. GE-
22, pp. 165–169, 1984.
107. P. Hartl, M. Reich, and S. Bhagavathula, “An attempt to calibrate air-borne SAR image using 
active radar calibrators and ground-based scatterometers,” Dig. IGARSS 86 , pp. 501–508, 1986.
108. R. W. Larson et al., “Bistatic clutter measurements,” IEEE Trans. , vol. AP-26, pp. 801–804, 
1978.
109. J. Renau and J. A. Collinson, “Measurements of electromagnetic backscattering from known 
rough surfaces,” Bell Syst. Tech. J. , vol. 44, pp. 2203–2226, 1965.
110. D. Kieu, “Effect of tall structures on microwave communication systems,” M.S. thesis, University 
of Kansas, Lawrence, 1988.
111. F. T. Ulaby et al., “Millimeter-wave bistatic scattering from ground and vegetation targets,” 
IEEE Trans. Geosc. & Rem. Sens. , vol. GE-26, pp. 229–243, 1988.
112. T.-K. Chan et al., “Experimental studies of bistatic scattering from two-dimensional conducting 
random rough surfaces,” IEEE Trans. on Geosc. and Remote Sensing , vol. 34, pp. 674–680, 
1996.
113. W. H. Stiles, D. Brunfeldt, and F. T. Ulaby, “Performance analysis of the MAS (Microwave 
Active Spectrometer) systems: calibration, precision and accuracy,” University of Kansas, 
Remote Sensing Lab., vol. TR 360-4, Lawrence, 1979.
114. F. T. Ulaby et al., “1-35 GHz microwave scatterometer,” Proc. IEEE/MTT-S 1979 Intl. Microwave 
Symp. , vol. ‘79CH1439-9 MTT-S’, 1979.
ch16.indd   60 12/19/07   4:56:50 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Ground Echo  GROUND ECHO  16.616x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 16
115. R. K. Moore, K. A. Soofi, and S. M. Purduski, “A radar clutter model: average scattering coef -
ficients of land, snow, and ice,”  IEEE Trans. , vol. AES-16, pp. 783–799, 1980.
116. R. K. Moore et al., “Simultaneous active and passive microwave response of the Earth—the 
Skylab RADSCAT experiment,” in Proc. Ninth Int. Symp. Remote Sensing Environ. , University 
of Michigan, Ann Arbor, 1974, pp. 189–217.
117. Ref. 21. See summaries in vol. II, chap. 11, and vol. III, chap. 21.
118. F. T. Ulaby, “Vegetation clutter model,” IEEE Trans. , vol. AP-28, pp. 538–545, 1980.
119. W. H. Stiles and F. T. Ulaby, “The active and passive microwave response to snow parameters, 
part I: wetness,” J. Geophys. Res. , vol. 85, pp. 1037–1044, 1980.
120. F. T. Ulaby and W. H. Stiles, “The active and passive microwave response to snow parameters, 
part II: water equivalent of dry snow,” J. Geophys. Res. , vol. 85, pp. 1045–1049, 1980.
121. I. J. Birrer, E. M. Bracalante, G. J. Dome, J. Sweet, and G. Berthold, “Signature of the Amazon 
rain forest obtained with the Seasat scatterometer,” IEEE Trans. , vol. GE-20, pp. 11–17, 1982.
122. R. Bernard and D. Vidal-Madjar, “C-band radar cross-section of the Guyana rain forest: possible 
use as a reference target for spaceborne radars,” Remote Sensing of Envir ., vol. 27, pp. 25–36, 
1989.
123. R. K. Moore and M. Hemmat, “Determination of the vertical pattern of the SIR-B antenna,” Int’l 
Jour. Rem. Sens. , vol. 9, pp. 839–847, 1988.
124. M. Shimada, “Long-term stability of L-band normalized radar cross section of Amazon rainfor -
est using the JERS-1 SAR,” Canadian Jour. of Rem. Sens. , vol. 31, pp. 132–137, 2005.
125. A. R. Edison, R. K. Moore, and B. D. Warner, “Radar return measured at near-vertical inci -
dence,” IEEE Trans. , vol. AP-8, pp. 246–254, 1960.
126. C. H. Bidwell, D. M. Gragg, and C. S. Williams: “Radar return from the vertical for ground and 
water surface,” Sandia Corporation, Albuquerque, NM, 1960.
127. Y . S. Kim, R. K. Moore, R. G. Onstott, and S. P. Gogineni, “Towards identification of optimum 
radar parameters for sea-ice monitoring,” J. Glaciol. , vol. 31, pp. 214–219, 1985.
128. T. LeToan et al., “Multitemporal and dual-polarization observations of agricultural vegeta -
tion covers by X-band SAR images,” IEEE Trans. on Geosc. and Remote Sensing , vol. GE-27,  
pp. 709–718, 1989.
129. B. A. M. Bouman and H. W. J. vanKasteren, Ground-based X-band Radar Backscatter 
Measurements of Wheat, Barley and Oats , Wageningen NETHERLANDS: Center for 
Agrobiological Research, 1989.
130. B. Brisco, R. J. Brown, and G. J. Sofko, “The CCRS ground-based microwave facility,” 
IGARSS88 , vol. 1, pp. 575–576, 1988.
131. E. Stotzer, V . Wegmuller, R. Huppi, and C. Matzler, “Dielectric and surface parameters related 
to microwave scatter and emission properties,” Dig. IGARSS ’86 , pp. 599–609, 1986.
132. T. Nagler and H. Rott, “Retrieval of wet snow by means of multitemporal SAR data,” IEEE 
Trans. on Geosc. and Remote Sensing , vol. 38, pp. 754–765, 2000.
133. F. J. Janza, R. K. Moore, and B. D. Warner, “Radar cross-sections of terrain near vertical inci -
dence at 415 Mc, 3800 Mc, and extension of analysis to X band,” University of New Mexico, 
Eng. Exp. Sta., TR EE-21, Albuquerque, 1959.
134. Ref. 37, vol. III, Fig. 21.20, p. 1825.
135. Ref. 37, vol. III, Fig. 21.22, p. 1827.
136. Ref. 37, vol. III, Fig. 21.41, p. 1856.
137. D. H. Hoekman, “Radar backscattering of forest stands,” Int. J. Remote Sensing , vol. 6,  
pp. 325–343, 1985.
138. D. H. Hoekman et al., “Land cover type and biomass classification using AirSAR data for evalu -
ation of monitoring scenarios in the Columbian Amazon,” IEEE Trans. on Geosc. and Remote 
Sensing , vol. 38, pp. 685–696, 2000.
139. M. C. Dobson and F. T. Ulaby, “Microwave backscatter dependence on surface roughness, soil 
moisture and soil texture: Part III—soil tension,” IEEE Trans. , vol. GE-19, pp. 51–61, 1981.
ch16.indd   61 12/19/07   4:56:50 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Ground Echo 16.62  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 16
140. T. J. Schmugge, “Effect of texture on microwave emission from soils,” IEEE Trans. , vol. GE-18, 
pp. 353–361, 1980.
141. F. T. Ulaby, A. Aslam, and M. C. Dobson, “Effects of vegetation cover on the radar sensitivity to 
soil moisture,” University of Kansas, Remote Sensing Lab., TR 460-10, Lawrence, 1981.
142. M. C. Dobson, F. Kouyate, and F. T. Ulaby, “A reexamination of soil textural effects on micro -
wave emission and backscattering,” IEEE Trans. , vol. GE-22, pp. 530–535, 1984.
143. F. T. Ulaby, B. Brisco, and M. C. Dobson, “Improved spatial mapping of rainfall events with 
spaceborne SAR imagery,” IEEE Trans. , vol. GE-21, pp. 118–121, 1983.
144. F. T. Ulaby, M. C. Dobson, J. Stiles, R. K. Moore, and J. C. Holtzman, “A simulation study of soil 
moisture estimation by a space SAR,” Photogramm. Eng. Remote Sensing , vol. 48, pp. 645–660, 
1982.
145. Z. Li et al., “Soil moisture measurement and retrieval using envisat asar imagery,” Proc. 
IGARSS04 , vol. V , pp. 3539–3542, 2004.
146. J. Shi et al., “Estimation of soil moisture with L-band multipolarization radar,” Proc. 
IGARSS04 , vol. II, pp. 815–818, 2004.
147. Y . Kim and J. van Zyl, “Vegetation effects on soil moisture estimation,” Proc. IGARSS04 ,  
vol. II, pp. 800–802, 2004.
148. E. Attema and F. T. Ulaby, “Vegetation modeled as a water cloud,” Radio Sci. , vol. 13,  
pp. 357–364, 1978.
149. Ref. 37, vol. III, p. 1873.
150. H. Eom and A. K. Fung, “A scatter model for vegetation up to Ku-band,” Remote Sensing 
Environ ., vol. 15, pp. 185–200, 1984.
151. W. H. Stiles and F. T. Ulaby “The active and passive microwave response to snow parameters, 
Part I: Wetness,” J. Geophys. Res. , vol. 85, pp. 1037–1044, 1980.
152. W. H. Stiles, F. T. Ulaby, A. K. Fung, and A. Aslam, “Radar spectral observations of snow,” Dig. 
IGARSS ’81 , pp. 654–668, 1981.
153. A. V . Bushuyev, N. A. V olkov, and V . S. Loshchilov, Atlas of Ice Formations , Leningrad: 
Gidrometeoizdat, 1974. (In Russian with English annotations.)
154. A. L. Gray, R. K. Hawkins, C. E. Livingstone, L. D. Arsenault, and W. M. Johnstone, 
“Simultaneous scatterometer and radiometer measurements of sea ice microwave signatures,” 
IEEE J. , vol. OE-7, pp. 20–32, 1982.
155. V. S. Loshchilov and V. A. Voyevodin, “Determining elements of drift of the ice cover and 
movement of the ice edge by the aid of the ‘Toros’ side scanning radar station,” Probl. Arktiki 
Antarkt  (in Russian), vol. 40, pp. 23–30, 1972.
156.  S. Haykin et al., Remote Sensing of Sea Ice and Icebergs , New York: Wiley-IEEE, 1994.
157. R. K. Raney et al., “RADARSAT,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 79, pp. 839–849, 1991.
158. B. Ramsay et al., “ Use of RADARSAT data in the Canadian ice service,” Canadian Journal of 
Remote Sensing , vol. 24, pp. 36–42, 1998.
159. G. I. Belchansky and D. C. Douglas, “Seasonal comparisons of sea ice concentration estimates 
derived from SSM/I, OKEAN, and RADARSAT data,” Rem. Sens. Envir. , vol. 81, pp. 67–81, 
2002.
160. M. Nazirov, A. P. Pichugin, and Y. G. Spiridonov, Radiolokatsia Poverchnosti Zemli  
Iz-Kosmoca  (Radar Observation of the Earth from Space) , Leningrad: Hydrometeoizdat, 
1990. (In Russian.)
161. Mitnik et al., “Structure and dynamics of the Sea of Okhotsk marginal ice zone from ‘ocean’ 
satellite radar sensing data,” J. Geophys. Res ., vol. 97, pp. 7249–7445, 1992.
162. M. R. Drinkwater, R. Hosseinmostafa, and S. P. Gogineni, “C-band backscatter measurements 
of winter sea-ice in the Weddell Sea, Antarctica,” International  Journal of Remote Sensing ,  
vol. 16, pp. 3365, 1995.
163. F. T. Ulaby and C. Elachi, Radar Polarimetry for Geoscience Applications . Boston: Artech 
House, 1990.
ch16.indd   62 12/19/07   4:56:50 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Ground Echo  GROUND ECHO  16.636x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 16
164. M. A. Sletten and D. J. McLaughlin, “Radar polarimetry,” in Wiley Encyclopedia of Electrical 
and Electronics Engineering Online , J. Webster (ed.), New York: John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 
1999.
165. J. van Zyl and Y . Kim, “Remote sensing by radar,” in Wiley Encyclopedia of Electrical and 
Electronics Engineering Online , J. Webster (ed.), New York: John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 1999.
166. W. M. Boerner et al., “On the basic principles of radar polarimetry: the target characteristic 
polarization state theory of Kennaugh, Huynen’s polarization fork concept, and its extension to 
the partially polarized case,” Proc. IEEE , vol. 79, pp. 1538–1550, 1990.
167. J. J. van Zyl, H. Zebker, and D. N. Held, “Imaging radar polarization signatures: Theory and 
observation,” Radio Sci. , vol. 22, pp. 529–543, 1987.
168. S. A. Morain and D. S. Simonett, “K-band radar in vegetation mapping,” Photog. Eng. and Rem. 
Sens. , vol. 33, pp. 730–740, 1967.
169. P. C. Dubois and J. van Zyl, “Polarization filtering of SAR data,” Digest  IGARSS88 , vol. 3,  
pp. 1816–1819, 1989.
170. A. A. Swartz et al., “Optimal polarization for achieving maximum contrast in radar images,”  
J. Geophys. Res ., vol. 93, pp. 15252–15260, 1988.
171. S. R. Cloude and E. Pottier, “An entropy based classification scheme for land applications of 
polarimetric SAR,” IEEE Trans. on Geosc. and Remote Sensing , vol. 35, pp. 68–78, 1997.
172. J. van Zyl, “Unsupervised classification of scattering behavior using radar polarimetry data,” 
IEEE Trans. Geosc. Rem. Sens. , vol. 27, pp. 36–45, 1989.
173 Touzi et al., “Polarimetric discriminators for SAR images,” IEEE Trans. on Geosc. and Remote 
Sensing , vol. 30, pp. 973–980, 1992
174. S. L. Durden, J. D. Klein, and H. A. Zebker, “Polarimetric radar measurements of a forested area 
near Mt. Shasta,” IEEE Trans. on Geosc. and Remote Sensing , vol. 29, pp. 111–450, 1991.
175 Hoekman et al., “Biophysical forest type characterization in the Columbian Amazon by airborne 
polarimetric SAR,” IEEE Trans. on Geosc. and Remote Sensing , vol. 40, pp. 1288–1300, 2002.
176. P. Ferrazzoli et al., “The potential of multifrequency polarimetric SAR in assessing agricultural 
and arboreous biomass,” IEEE Trans. on Geosc. and Remote Sensing , vol. 35, pp. 5–17, 1997.
177. Inoue et al., “Season-long daily measurements of multifrequency (Ka, Ku, X, C, and L) and full-
polarization backscatter signatures over paddy rice field and their relationship with biological 
variables,”  Remote Sensing of Envir. , vol. 81, pp. 194–204, 2002.
178. S. V . Nghiem et al., “Polarimetric signatures of sea ice, 2, experimental observations,”  
J. Geophys. Res. , vol. 100, pp. 13681–13698, 1995.
179. A. Martini, L. Ferro-Famil, and E. Pottier, “Multi-frequency polarimetric snow discrimination 
in alpine areas,” Proc. IGARSS04 , vol. VI, pp. 3684–3687, 2004.
180. L. L. Hess et al., “Delineation of inundated area and vegetation along the Amazon floodplain 
with the SIR-C synthetic aperture radar,”  IEEE Trans. on Geosc. and Remote Sensing , vol. 33, 
pp. 896–904, 1995.
181. R. K. Moore, W. P. Waite, and J. W. Rouse, “Panchromatic and polypanchromatic radar,” Proc. 
IEEE , vol. 57, pp. 590–593, 1969.
182. R. K. Moore, “Tradeoff between picture element dimensions and noncoherent averaging in side-
looking airborne radar,” IEEE Trans. , vol. AES-15, pp. 696–708, 1979.
ch16.indd   63 12/19/07   4:56:51 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Ground Echo 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 16  
blind folio 16.64
ch16.indd   64 12/19/07   4:56:51 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Ground Echo 