3.16x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 3 Airborne MTI James K. 
Day Lockheed Martin Corporation Fred M. Staudaher* Naval Research Laboratory (retired) 3.1 SYSTEMS USING   AIRBORNE MTI TECHNIQUES Airborne search radars were initially developed for the detection of ships by long-range  patrol aircraft. During the latter part of World War II, airborne early-warning (AEW)  radars were developed by the U.S. 
Navy to detect low-flying aircraft approaching a  task force below the radar coverage of the ship’s antenna. The advantage of the air - borne platform in extending the maximum detection range for air and surface targets is  apparent when one considers that the radar horizon is 12 nmi for a 100-ft antenna mast  compared with approximately 195 nmi for a 25,000-ft aircraft altitude. The aircraft carrier–based E-2D aircraft (Figure 3.1) uses AEW radar as the primary   sensor in its airborne tactical data system. 
These radars with their extensive field of  view are required to detect small airborne targets against a background of sea and  land clutter. Because their primary mission is to detect low-flying aircraft, they cannot  elevate their antenna beam to eliminate the clutter. These considerations have led to  the development of airborne MTI (AMTI)1,2,3 radar systems similar to those used in  surface radars,1,4–6 discussed in the preceding chapter. 
The mission requirements for an AEW radar drive the need for 360° azimuthal cov - erage and long-range detection capability. The 360° azimuthal coverage requirement  is because the AEW radar system is generally required to provide the first detection of  airborne targets, without any a priori knowledge of the location of these targets. AEW  systems have generally been developed at lower frequencies—this can be understood  by reviewing the surveillance radar range equation:  RP A kTF L S Nta e t ns max( ) ( )=σ π40 0/Ω (3.1)Chapter 3 *  Sections 3.4 through 3.8 and 3.10 were taken primarily from the second edition of the Radar Handbook , Chapter 16,  authored by Fred Staudaher, with revisions made by James Day. 
The remaining sections of the chapter were  authored by James Day. ch03.indd   1 12/20/07   11:00:33 AMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. 
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Source: RADAR HANDBOOK. 3.2 RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 3 where ts is the scan time and Ω is the surveillance volume coverage requirement (prod - uct of the azimuth and elevation angles). As long as the beamwidths of the radar (in azimuth and elevation) are smaller than  the region to be surveilled, this equation is not directly dependent upon frequency. 
 However, key parameters in this equation are dependent upon frequency. Particularly,  propagation losses for low altitude targets and target RCS (for some target types) are  generally advantageous for lower frequencies. The result is that AEW systems have  been developed at UHF, L band, and S band frequencies. 
Airborne MTI radar systems have also been utilized to acquire and track targets in  interceptor fire control systems. In this application, the systems have to discriminate  against clutter only in the vicinity of a prescribed target. This allows the system to be  optimized at the range and angular sector where the target is located. 
MTI is also used  to detect moving ground vehicles by reconnaissance and tactical fighter aircraft. The environment of high platform altitude, mobility, and speed, coupled with  restrictions on size, weight, and power consumption, present a unique set of problems  to the designer of airborne MTI systems. This chapter will be devoted to consider - ations unique to the airborne environment. 
3.2 COVERAGE CONSIDERATIONS Search radars generally require 360 ° azimuthal coverage. This coverage is difficult  to obtain on an aircraft since mounting an antenna in the clear presents major drag,  stability, and structural problems. When extensive vertical coverage is required, the  aircraft’s planform and vertical stabilizer distort and shadow the antenna pattern. 
 Analysis of tactical requirements may show that only a limited coverage sector is  required. However, this sector usually has to be capable of being positioned over the  full 360 ° relative to the aircraft’s heading because of the requirements for coverage FIGURE 3.1  E-2D airborne early-warning (AEW) aircraft showing rotodome  housing the antenna ch03.indd   2 12/15/07   6:02:41 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. 
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Airborne MTI.  AIRBORNE MTI  3.36x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 3 while reversing course, large crab angles when high winds are encountered, the need  to position ground track in relation to wind, nontypical operating situations, and opera - tions requirements for coverage while proceeding to and from the station. However, in the 1990s and 2000s, a number of systems have been developed that pro - vide phased array performance in an airborne platform. 
The Multi-Role Electronically  Scanned Array (MESA) radar developed by Northrop Grumman on a Boeing 737-700  for the Australian Wedgetail program is an example (see Figure 3.2). An alternate solu - tion that combines mechanical scanning in conjunction with electronic scanning is in  development with the AN/APY-9 radar for the E-2D aircraft (follow-up to the U.S.  Navy’s E-2C aircraft). 
3.3 AIRBORNE MTI PERFORMANCE DRIVERS The performance of airborne MTI systems are primarily determined by motion effects  induced on the clutter echoes (platform motion, antenna scanning motion, and clutter inter - nal motion), the processing techniques used to enhance target detection and maximize clut - ter cancellation, and the hardware stability limitations of the radar. This chapter will discuss  the motion effects as well as the performance of various processing techniques. 3.4 PLATFORM MOTION AND ALTITUDE  EFFECTS ON MTI PERFORMANCE MTI discriminates between airborne moving targets and stationary land or sea clutter. 
 However, in the airborne case, the clutter moves with respect to the moving airborne  platform. It is possible to compensate for the mean clutter radial velocity by using  FIGURE 3. 2 Boeing 737-700 Wedgetail aircraft showing antennas mounted  above the fuselage ch03.indd   3 12/15/07   6:02:43 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Airborne MTI. 3.4 RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 3 techniques such as time-averaged-clutter coherent airborne radar (TACCAR). 
This  technique attempts to center the largest return from main-beam clutter at zero doppler  frequency such that a simple MTI filter, also centered at zero doppler frequency, will  cancel the main-beam clutter. As shown in Figure 3.3, the apparent radial velocity of the clutter is Vr = −Vg cos a,  where Vg is the ground speed of the platform and α is the angle subtended between the line- of-sight to a point on the Earth’s surface and the aircraft’s velocity vector. Figure 3.4 shows  the loci of constant radial velocity along the surface. 
In order to normalize the figure, a flat  earth is assumed, and the normalized radial velocity Vn = Vr/Vg is presented as a function of  azimuth angle y  and normalized ground range R/H, where H is the aircraft’s altitude. Instead of a single clutter doppler frequency corresponding to a constant radial  velocity ( VB in Figure 3.3) determined by the antenna pointing angle a 0, the radial  sees a continuum of velocities. This results in a frequency spectrum at a particular  range whose shape is determined by the antenna pattern that intersects the surface, the  reflectivity of the clutter, and the velocity distribution within the beam. 
Furthermore,  since Vr varies as a function of range at a particular azimuth y, the center frequency  and spectrum shape vary as a function of range and azimuth angle y0. When the antenna is pointing ahead, the predominant effect is the variation of the cen - ter frequency corresponding to the change in a 0 with range. When the antenna is pointing  FIGURE 3. 
3 Defining geometry: a�0 = antenna pointing angle; a = line-of-sight angle; q = angle  from antenna centerline; Vg = aircraft ground speed; Vr = radial velocity of point target; VB = radial  velocity along antenna centerline (boresight); y0 = antenna azimuth angle; y = azimuth angle; R =  ground range to point target; and H = aircraft height ch03.indd   4 12/15/07   6:02:44 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Airborne MTI. 
 AIRBORNE MTI  3.56x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 3 abeam, the predominant effect is the velocity spread across the antenna beamwidth. These  are classified as the slant-range effect and the platform-motion effect, respectively. Effect of Slant Range on Doppler Offset. 
 The antenna boresight velocity VB is  the ground-velocity component along the antenna centerline (boresight) and is given  as (– Vg cos a 0). If the clutter surface were coplanar with the aircraft, this component  would be equal to ( −Vg cos y0) and would be independent of range. The ratio of the  actual boresight velocity to the coplanar boresight velocity is defined as the normal - ized boresight-velocity ratio:  VBR = =cos coscosα ψφ0 00  (3.2) where f0 is the depression angle of the antenna centerline from the horizontal. 
Figure 3.5  shows the variation of the normalized boresight-velocity ratio as a function of slant range  for a curved earth and different aircraft altitudes. The variation is fairly rapid for slant  ranges less than 15 nmi. It is desirable to center the clutter spectrum in the notch (i.e., minimum-response  region) of the AMTI filter in order to obtain maximum clutter rejection. 
This can be  accomplished by offsetting the IF or RF frequency of the radar signal by an amount  equal to the average doppler frequency of the clutter spectrum. Because the clutter  center frequency varies with range and azimuth when the radar is moving, it is neces - sary for the filter notch to track the doppler-offset frequency, using an open- or closed- loop control system such as TACCAR, described below. An example of a received clutter spectrum given an antenna response is shown  in Figure 3.6 a. 
The TACCAR frequency offset then shifts main-beam clutter to zero  doppler, as shown in Figure 3.6 b. FIGURE 3. 4 Loci of constant normalized radial velocity Vr/Vg as a func - tion of aircraft range-to-height ratio R/H and azimuth angle y ch03.indd   5 12/15/07   6:02:46 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Airborne MTI. 3.6 RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 3 TACCAR. 
 The MIT Lincoln Laboratory originally developed TACCAR to solve  the AMTI radar problem. The requirements and thus the implementation of TACCAR  change depending upon the type of clutter cancellation processing employed. After  many other approaches, it was recognized that if one used the clutter return rather than  the transmit pulse to phase-lock the radar to the clutter filter, one could center the clut - ter in the filter stopband. 
The clutter phase varies from range cell to range cell owing  to the distribution of the location of the scatterers in azimuth. Hence, it is necessary  to average the return for as long an interval as possible. TACCAR is used to describe  the centering of the returned clutter spectrum to the zero filter frequency. 
Since the  technique compensates for drift in the various system elements and biases in the mean  doppler frequency due to ocean currents, chaff, or weather clutter, it is used in ship - board and land-based radars as well as airborne radar. A functional block diagram of an airborne radar employing TACCAR is shown in  Figure 3.7. The clutter error signal is obtained by measuring the pulse-to-pulse phase  shift wdTp of the clutter return. 
This provides a very sensitive error signal. The aver - aged error signal controls a voltage-controlled coherent master oscillator (COMO),  which determines the transmitted frequency of the radar. The COMO is slaved to  FIGURE 3. 
5 Normalized boresight-velocity ratio VBR as a function of the difference between slant range  Rs and aircraft altitude H for different aircraft altitudes FIGURE 3. 6 Clutter Power Spectral Density (PSD) response through antenna pattern: a) without  TACCAR frequency offset and b) with TACCAR frequency offset(a)60 40 20 0 −20 −40 −750−500−250 0 250 500 Doppler (Hz) (b)−750 −500 −250 0 250 500 Doppler (Hz)Clutter PSD (dB/x Hz)60 40 20 0 −20 −40Clutter PSD (dB/x Hz) ch03.indd   6 12/15/07   6:02:47 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. 
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Airborne MTI.  AIRBORNE MTI  3.76x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 3 the system reference oscillator frequency via the automatic frequency control (AFC)  loop shown in Figure 3.7. This provides a stable reference in the absence of clutter. 
 An input from the aircraft inertial navigation system and the antenna servo provide a  predicted doppler offset. These inputs allow the TACCAR system to provide a narrow- bandwidth correction signal. Because of the noisy nature of the clutter signal, the need to have the control system  bridge regions of weak clutter return, and the requirement not to respond to the dop - pler shift of a true target, the control system usually tracks the azimuth variation of  a specific radar range interval. 
The maximum range of this interval is chosen so that  clutter will be the dominant signal within the interval. The minimum range is chosen  to exclude signals whose average frequency differs substantially from the frequency  in the region of interest. Alternate approaches to providing this frequency offset can be implemented with  digital exciters or on receive. 
For some applications, it may be necessary to use multiple  control loops, each one covering a specific range interval, or to vary the offset fre - quency in range. This is possible if the frequency offset is implemented on receive (but  not on transmit). At any particular range, the filter notch is effectively at one frequency  and the center frequency of the clutter spectrum at another. 
The difference between  these frequencies results in a doppler-offset error, as shown in Figure 3.8. The clutter  spectrum will extend into more of the filter passband, and the clutter improvement  factor will be degraded. The required accuracy for the TACCAR control loop can be  relaxed if the MTI filter is an adaptive filter, such as with space-time adaptive process - ing (discussed later in this chapter). 
This is because the adaptive filter will adjust to the  received signals and optimize clutter cancellation. Without adaptive adjustment, Figure 3.9 shows the improvement factor for single-  and double-delay cancelers as a function of the ratio of the notch-offset error to the  pulse repetition frequency (PRF) for different clutter spectral widths. Fortunately, the  platform-motion spectrum is narrow in the forward sector of coverage where offset  error is maximum. 
An offset error of one-hundredth of the PRF would yield a 26 dB  improvement factor for a double canceler with an input clutter spectrum whose width  FIGURE 3. 7 Block diagram of a radar illustrating the signal flow path of the TACCAR control loop ch03.indd   7 12/15/07   6:02:47 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. 
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Airborne MTI. 3.8 RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 3 was 3% of the PRF. If the radar frequency were 10 GHz, PRF 1 kHz, and ground speed  580 kt, the notch would have to be held within 0.29 kt or 0.005 Vg. 
Because of these requirements and the width of the platform-motion spectrum, stag - ger PRF systems must be chosen primarily on the basis of maintaining the stopband  rather than flattening the passband. Similarly, higher-order delay-line filters (with or  without feedback) are synthesized on the basis of stopband rejection. The limiting case  is the narrowband filter bank where each individual filter consists of a small passband,  the balance being stopband. 
Improvement factor is an important metric, but in addition to this average metric  defined across all doppler frequencies, it is often important to characterize the perfor - mance as a function of doppler frequency, particularly with coherent doppler filtering  imbedded in the processing chain. With performance characterized versus doppler  FIGURE 3. 9 Improvement factor I versus normalized doppler offset s�e as a function of clutter  spectrum width s c FIGURE 3. 
8 Effect of doppler-offset error; fr = PRF ch03.indd   8 12/15/07   6:02:48 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Airborne MTI. 
 AIRBORNE MTI  3.96x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 3 frequency, the radar design can then be evaluated through the complete detection chain  and optimized in conjunction with any multiple PRF stagger waveforms utilized to  bridge MTI blind regions. Platform-Motion Effect.  To an airborne radar, a clutter scatterer appears to have a  radial velocity that differs from the antenna-boresight radial velocity at the same range by  V V V V V Ve r B g g g= − = − = − +cos c os [cos cos( )]α α α α θ0 0 0 = = +V Vx y sin s in θθ222  (3.3) for small values of q  and depression angle f0, where Vx is the horizontal component  of velocity perpendicular to the antenna boresight and Vy is the component along the  antenna boresight. 
q  is the azimuthal angle from the antenna boresight, or the intersec - tion of the vertical plane containing the boresight with the ground. The corresponding  doppler frequency, when a 0 is a few beamwidths from ground track, is  fV V dx x= ≈2 2 λθλθ sin (3.4) This phenomenon results in a platform-motion clutter power spectrum that is weighted  by the antenna’s two-way power pattern in azimuth. The true spectrum may be approx - imated by a gaussian spectrum,  H f e e Gf Vd x ( ) ( = = ≈−  −  1 2242 2 σθ λσpm pmθ θ) (3.5) G4(q ), the two-way power pattern of the antenna, is 0.25 when q  = qa /2, where qa is  the half-power beamwidth, which can be approximated by l/a, a being the effective  horizontal aperture width. 
Thus,  eV ax −  =1 22 0 25σpm.  or  σpm=0 6.V ax  (3.6) where Vx and a are in consistent units. This value is lower than ones derived by other  authors.4,5 However, it agrees with more exact analysis of antenna radiation patterns  and experimental data analyzed by F. 
Staudaher. A more exact value of the parameter spm may be obtained by matching a two-way  power pattern of interest with the gaussian approximation at a specific point on the pat - tern, determining the standard deviation of q  by using statistical techniques or fitting  ch03.indd   9 12/15/07   6:02:54 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. 
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Airborne MTI. 3.10  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 3 the pattern and using numerical methods. The calculation of the improvement factor  can be performed by averaging the resultant residue power, obtained by summing the  signal phasors at specific values of q, from null to null of the antenna pattern. 
Figure 3.10 shows the effect of platform motion on the MTI improvement factor as  a function of the aperture displaced in the plane of the aperture per interpulse period Tp.  A 5.4% displacement reduces the double-delay improvement factor to 30 dB. This cor - responds to a speed of 325 kt if the system has a PRF of 1000 Hz and a 10-ft antenna  aperture. 
For a single-delay system, the displacement has to be held to 1.1% for a   30 dB performance limit. 3.5 PLATFORM-MOTION   COMPENSATION ABEAM The deleterious effects of platform motion can be reduced by physically or electroni - cally displacing the antenna phase center along the plane of the aperture. This is referred  to as the displaced phase center antenna (DPCA) technique .7–11 In addition, some forms  of space-time adaptive processing are expressly developed to improve clutter cancella - tion with an adaptive filter, electronically displacing the antenna phase center. 
Electronically Displaced Phase Center Antenna.  Figure 3.11 a shows the  pulse-to-pulse phase advance of an elemental scatterer as seen by the radar receiver.  FIGURE 3.10  Effect of platform motion on the MTI improvement factor  as a function of the fraction of the horizontal antenna aperture displaced per  interpulse period, VxTp/a ch03.indd   10 12/15/07   6:02:54 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Airborne MTI.  AIRBORNE MTI  3.116x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 3 The amplitude E1 of the received signal is proportional to the two-way antenna field  intensity. 
The phase advance is  2 24η ππ θ λ= = f TV T d px psin  (3.7) where fd = doppler shift of scatterer (Eq. 3.4)  Tp = interpulse period Figure 3.11 b shows a method of correcting for the phase advance h. An idealized  correction signal Ec is applied, leading the received signal by 90 ° and lagging the next  received signal by 90 °. 
For exact compensation, the following relation would hold:  E EV T cx p= = ∑122tan ( )tansinη θπ θ λ  (3.8) This assumes a two-lobe antenna pattern similar to that in a monopulse tracking  radar. Two receivers are used, one supplying a sum signal, Σ(q ), and the other a  difference signal, ∆(q ). The difference signal is used to compensate for the effects  of platform motion. 
If the system is designed to transmit the sum pattern Σ(q ) and receive both Σ(q ) and  a difference pattern ∆(q ), then at the design speed the received signal Σ(q )∆(q ) can be  applied as the correction signal. The actual correction signal used to approximate Ec is  k Σ(q )∆(q ), where k is the ratio of the amplification in the sum and difference channels  of the receiver. A uniformly illuminated monopulse array12 has the difference signal ∆ in quadra - ture with the sum and has the amplitude relationship  ∆( ) ( )tan s in θ θπ λθ = ∑  W  (3.9) where W is the distance between the phase centers of the two halves of the antenna. 
 Hence, a choice of W = 2VxTp and k = 1 would ideally result in perfect cancellation. In practice, a sum pattern is chosen based on the desired beamwidth, gain, and  sidelobes for the detection system requirements. Then the difference pattern ∆(q ) is  synthesized independently, based on the relationship required at design radar platform  FIGURE 3.11  Phasor diagram showing the return from a point scatterer due to platform  motion ch03.indd   11 12/15/07   6:02:58 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Airborne MTI. 3.12  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 3 speed and allowable sidelobes. 
The two patterns may be realized by combining the  elements in separate corporate-feed structures. Figure 3.12 shows the idealized improvement factor as a function of normalized  aperture movement for a double-delay canceler. The improvement factor shown is  the improvement factor for a point scatterer averaged over the null-to-null antenna  beamwidth. 
In one case, the gain ratio k is optimized at each value of pulse-to-pulse  displacement. In the other compensated case, the optimum gain ratio k is approximated  by the linear function of interpulse platform motion kVx. A block diagram of the double-delay system is shown in Figure 3.13. 
A single-delay  system would not have the second delay line and subtractor. The normally required  circuitry for maintaining coherence, gain and phase balance, and timing is not shown.  The speed control Vx is bipolar and must be capable of reversing the sign of the ∆(q )  signal in each channel when the antenna pointing angle changes from the port to the  starboard side of the aircraft. 
FIGURE 3.12  MTI improvement factor for DPCA compensation as a  function of the fraction of the horizontal phase center separation W that  the horizontal antenna aperture is displaced per interpulse period, VxTp/W.  W = 0.172 a, where a is the horizontal aperture length. ch03.indd   12 12/15/07   6:02:59 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Airborne MTI.  AIRBORNE MTI  3.136x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 3 The hybrid amplifier shown has two input terminals that receive Σ(q ) and j∆(q )  and amplify the ∆(q ) channel by kVx relative to the Σ(q ) channel. 
The output ter - minals produce the sum and difference of the two amplified input signals. Because  DPCA compensates for the complex signal, both amplitude and phase information  must be retained. Therefore, these operations usually occur at RF or IF. 
Digital  compensation can be used if synchronous detection and analog to digital (A/D)  conversion are performed and the components are treated as complex phasors.  Furthermore, the operations must be linear until the sum signal and difference sig - nals have been processed by the hybrid amplifier. After this single-pulse combina - tion, the actual double cancellation can be performed by any conventional MTI  processing techniques. 
Power in the Antenna Sidelobes.  Airborne systems are limited in their ability  to reject clutter due to the power returned by the antenna sidelobes. The full 360 °  azimuthal pattern sees velocities from −Vg to +Vg. 
The compensation circuits offset  the velocity by an amount corresponding to the antenna boresight velocity VB, but the  total range of doppler frequencies corresponding to 2 Vg is obtained because of echoes  received via the sidelobes. For airborne systems with low PRFs, these doppler fre - quencies can cover several multiples of the PRF so that the sidelobe power is folded  into the filter. This limitation is a function of the antenna pointing angle, the MTI filter  response, and the sidelobe pattern. 
If the sidelobes are relatively well distributed in  azimuth, a measure of performance can be obtained by averaging the power returned  by the sidelobes. The limiting improvement factor due to sidelobes is  IK G d G dsllimit4 sl=−∫ ∫4( ) ( )θ θ θ θππ  (3.10) where the lower integral is taken outside the main-beam region. Main-beam effects  would be included in the platform-motion improvement factor. 
The constant K is the  noise normalization factor for the MTI filter ( K = 2 for single delay and 6 for double  delay.) G4(q ) is the two-way power of the antenna in the plane of the ground surface. The DPCA performance described in the preceding subsection can be analyzed on  the basis of radiation patterns or the equivalent aperture distribution function.8 If the  radiation pattern is used, the composite performance may be obtained either by apply - ing the pattern functions over the entire 360 ° pattern or by combining the improvement FIGURE 3.13  Simplified double-delay DPCA mechanizationTransmitter A R R A YHybr id Amplifier Delay Line Delay Line Vx− − Σ(q) + jkVx∆(q)Σ(q) − jkVx∆(q) Σ(q) j∆(q) ch03.indd   13 12/15/07   6:03:01 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. 
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Airborne MTI. 3.14  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 3 factors for the DPCA main-beam and the sidelobe regions in the same manner as paral - lel impedances are combined:  1 1 1 I I Isl total DPCA= +  (3.11) If the aperture distribution is used, the sidelobe effects are inherent in the analysis.  Care must be taken, however—if the array or reflector function is used without con - sidering the weighting of the elemental pattern or the feed distribution, the inherent  sidelobe pattern can obscure the main-beam compensation results. 
Again, the performance versus doppler frequency is important for evaluating  overall radar detection performance. Antenna sidelobe limited performance can be  approximated by performing the lower integral of Eq. 3.10 over those angles that map  into a given doppler filter’s passband. 
The noise normalization term, k, must also be  modified to reflect the cascaded noise gain of the MTI and doppler filter bank as N k W W W k N Wg i iN i i iN ( ) cos( ) = − + =+ =− ∑ ∑6 8 2 22 11 11 π/i i i iN W k N k N+ =− ∑ = −2 12 4 0 1 cos( ); , π/   (3.12) for three-pulse MTI and cascaded N-pulse doppler filter bank, where Wi are the dop - pler filter weights, or  N k W W W k N kg i iN i i iN ( ) cos( ); = − = =+ =− ∑ ∑2 2 02 11 11 π/ , ,N−1  (3.13) for two-pulse MTI and cascaded N-pulse doppler filter bank. 3.6 SCANNING-MOTION COMPENSATION Figure 3.14 a shows a typical antenna main-beam radiation pattern and the response of  a point scatterer for two successive pulses when the antenna is scanning. It is seen that  the signals returned would differ by ∆G2(q ). 
This results in imperfect cancellation due  to scanning. The average effect on the improvement factor can be obtained by integrat - ing this differential effect ∆G2(q ) over the main beams:  IG d G T Gpscan= + −− −∫ ∫2 00 002| ( ) | | ( ) ( )θθ θθθ θ θ θ θ| |2dθforsingle-delaycancellatio n  (3.14 a)  IG d G T Gpscan= + −− −∫ ∫6 200 002| ( ) | | ( ) (θθ θθθ θ θ θ θ) ) ( ) | + −G T dp θ θ θ2fordoubl e-delaycancellatio n n      (3.14 b) where q0 = null of main beam  G (q ) = two-way voltage pattern ch03.indd   14 12/15/07   6:03:07 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. 
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Airborne MTI.  AIRBORNE MTI  3.156x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 3 In order to treat scanning motion in the frequency domain, the apparent clutter  velocity seen by the scanning antenna is examined to determine the doppler frequency.  Each element of an array or incremental section of a continuous aperture can be con - sidered as receiving a doppler-shifted signal due to the relative motion of the clutter. 
 The power received by the element is proportional to the two-way aperture power  distribution function F2(x) at the element. In addition to the velocity seen by all elements because of the motion of the plat - form, each element sees an apparent clutter velocity due to its rotational motion, as  illustrated in Figure 3.14 b. The apparent velocity varies linearly along the aperture. 
 Hence, the two-way aperture distribution is mapped into the frequency domain. The  resulting power spectrum due to the antenna scanning is  H f Fffa( )=   ≤ ≤220λ θθ λ   (3.15) where θ = antenna rotation rate  a = horizontal antenna aperture This spectrum can be approximated by a gaussian distribution with standard deviation  σθ θθ λcr af na= = ≈ 0265 0265 0265 . . 
.   (3.16) where l and a are in the same units, qa is the one-way half-power beamwidth, and n  is the number of hits per beamwidth. The approximation qa ≈ l/a is representative of  an antenna distribution yielding acceptable sidelobe levels. It can be seen that the antenna pattern pulse-to-pulse differential gain is  ∆ ∆ GdG ddG dTp22 2 ( )( ) ( )θθ θθθ θθ = =  (3.17) FIGURE 3.14  Antenna scanning effects: ( a) as seen by the antenna radiation pattern, due to the apparent  change in azimuth of the scatterer, θ θ θ2 1− =Tp; (b) as seen by the aperture illumination function, due  to the apparent motion, v x1=θ, of the scatterer relative to the antenna at position x; and ( c) step-scan  compensation of two received phasors ch03.indd   15 12/15/07   6:03:13 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Airborne MTI. 3.16  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 3 This suggests7,13 that a correction signal in the reverse sense to ∆G2(q ) be applied,  as shown in Figure 3.14 c. 
Half the correction is added to one pulse and half subtracted  from the other, so that  Correction signal= =∑ =∆G Td dp2 2 2 2( ) ( ) θ θ θ θ θ θ θθ θTd dp∑∑( )( )  (3.18) where Σ2(q ) was substituted for G2(q ). The radar transmits a sum pattern Σ(q ) and  receives on the difference pattern ∆(q ), so that the received signal is proportional to  the product of the two. If the signal received on the difference pattern is used as the  correction, we have  Ec = ∆(q )Σ(q ) (3.19) By comparing Eqs. 
3.18 and 3.19, we see that for Ec to approximate the correction  signal, the difference patterns should be  ∆( )( )θ θθ θ=∑Td dp (3.20) The derivative of the sum pattern is similar to a difference pattern in that it is positive  at the main-beam null, −q0, decreases to zero on the antenna centerline, and then goes  negative until q0. Referring to Figure 3.13, one observes that the mechanization for scan compensa - tion is fundamentally similar to the DPCA mechanization except that the difference  signal is applied in phase with the sum signal and amplified by an amount determined  by the antenna rotation per interpulse period. The signals required, if the transmission signal Σ(q ) that appears in each channel  is neglected, are Σ ∆( ) ( ) θ θ θ ±l Tp, where l is the ratio of the amplification in the two  channels chosen to maximize the clutter rejection. 
The required difference-pattern  slope is determined by the derivative of the scan pattern, which differs from the DPCA  criterion. This technique is known as step-scan compensation  because the system elec - tronically points the antenna slightly ahead of and behind of boresight each pulse so  that a leading and lagging pair are taken from successive returns to obtain the effect of  the antenna remaining stationary. Figure 3.15 shows the improvement obtained by Dickey and Santa7 for single- delay cancellation. 
Compensation-Pattern Selection . Selection of the compensation pattern  depends on the level of system performance required, the type of MTI filtering used, the  platform velocity, scan rate, and the characteristics required by normal radar parameters  such as resolution, distortion, gain, sidelobes, etc. For instance, an exponential pattern  and its corresponding difference pattern are excellent for single-delay-cancellation  DPCA but are unsatisfactory when double-delay cancellation is used. 
This is because  the single-delay canceler requires the best match between the actual pattern and the  required pattern near boresight, whereas double cancellation requires the best match  ch03.indd   16 12/15/07   6:03:17 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Airborne MTI. 
 AIRBORNE MTI  3.176x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 3 on the beam shoulder. Step-scan compensation usually requires the difference-pattern  peaks to be near the nulls of the sum pattern to match. Grissetti et al.13 have shown that for step-scan compensation the improvement factor  for single-delay cancellation increases as a function of the number of hits at 20 dB/ decade; for the first-derivative∗-type step-scan compensation, at the rate of 40 dB/ decade; and with first- and second-derivative compensation, at the rate of 60 dB/decade. 
 Hence, for a ground-based system that is limited by scan rate, one should improve the  compensation pattern rather than use a higher-order MTI canceler. However, airborne  systems are primarily limited by platform motion and require both better cancelers and  compensation for operation in a land-clutter environment. In the sea-clutter environ - ment, the system is usually dominated by the spectral width of the velocity spectrum or  platform motion rather than scanning. 
The applicability of DPCA or step-scan compen - sation in the latter case is dependent on the particular system parameters. FIGURE 3.15  MTI improvement factor for a  step-scan compensation of a single-delay canceler  as a function of the number of hits per beamwidth.  The antenna pattern is (sin x)/x. 
*  The compensation required by ∆G2(q )/2 can be determined from a Taylor’s series expansion of G2(q ). In the pre - ceding discussion, we used the first derivative. Using higher-order terms gives an improved correction signal. 
ch03.indd   17 12/15/07   6:03:18 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Airborne MTI. 
3.18  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 3 3.7 SIMULTANEOUS PLATFORM MOTION   AND SCAN COMPENSATION In AMTI systems having many hits per scan, scanning is a secondary limitation for  an uncompensated double canceler. However, the performance of a DPCA system is  significantly reduced when it is scanned. This is due to the scanning modulation on the  difference pattern used for platform-motion compensation. 
Since the DPCA applies the difference pattern in quadrature to the sum pattern to  compensate for phase error and step scan applies the difference pattern in phase to com - pensate for amplitude error, it is possible to combine the two techniques by properly  scaling and applying the difference pattern both in phase and in quadrature. The scaling  factors are chosen to maximize the improvement factor under conditions of scanning  and platform motion. The relationships for a double-delay (three-pulse) AMTI are shown in the phasor  diagram in Figure 3.16. 
The phase advance between the first pair of pulses (first and  second pulse for the three-pulse MTI) received by the sum pattern Σ is  24 21ηπ λθω ω= −  +TVTVp xr p yrsin s in cos2T Tp 2−      cos2θ  (3.21) and the phase advance between the second pair of pulses (second and third pulse for  the three-pulse MTI) is  24 22ηπ λθω ω= +  +TVTVp xr p yrsin s in cos2T Tp 2−      cos2θ  (3.22) FIGURE 3.16  Phasor diagram for simultaneous scanning and motion   compensation ch03.indd   18 12/15/07   6:03:20 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Airborne MTI. 
 AIRBORNE MTI  3.196x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 3 where q2 is the direction of the clutter cell with respect to the antenna pointing angle  when the second pulse is received and wr is the antenna scan rate. The subscripts on  the received signals Σi and ∆i indicate the pulse reception sequence. The difference pattern ∆ is used to generate an in-phase correction for scan - ning motion and a quadrature correction for platform motion. 
This process yields  the set of resultant signals Rij, where the subscript i denotes the pulse pair and the  subscript j denotes the component of the pair. Because h1 does not equal h2, dif- ferent weighting constants are required for each pulse pair. The values of k1 for the  quadrature correction of the first pulse pair, k2 for the quadrature correction for   the second pulse pair, l1 for the in-phase correction for the first pulse pair, and l2  for the second pulse pair are optimized by minimizing the integrated residue power  over the significant portion of the antenna pattern, usually chosen between the first  nulls of the main beam. 
Figure 3.17 shows the sum and difference main-beam patterns for an aperture  20 wavelengths long. Figure 3.18 shows the residue for the case when the fraction  of the horizontal aperture width a traveled per interpulse period Tp, Vn = VxTp/a, is  equal to 0.04 and when the number of wavelengths that the aperture tip rotates per  interpulse period, Wn = awrTp/2l, is equal to 0.04. The corresponding improvement  factor is 52 dB. 
The improvement factor is shown in Figure 3.19 for a range of normalized platform  motion Vn as a function of normalized scanning displacements Wn. The nonscanning  case is shown as Wn = 0. The improvement factors were computed for the 20-wave - length aperture patterns shown in Figure 3.17. 
Andrews14 has developed an optimization procedure for platform-motion compen - sation that rotates the phasors directly rather than by using a quadrature correction. The  procedure determines the antenna feed coefficients for two compensation patterns, one  of which, C1(q ), is added to the sum pattern Σ(q ) and fed to the undelayed canceler  FIGURE 3.17  Sum and difference patterns used to determine DPCA performance ch03.indd   19 12/15/07   6:03:21 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. 
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Airborne MTI. 3.20  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 3 FIGURE 3.18  DPCA clutter residue versus angle for normalized displacement, Vn = 0.04,   and normalized scanning motion, Wn = 0.04 FIGURE 3.19  DPCA improvement factor versus normalized platform motion, Vn, as a function of normal - ized scanning motion, Wnpath, and the other, C2(q ), which is added to the sum pattern and fed to the delayed path  as shown in Figure 3.20. The procedure was developed for a single-delay canceler and   a nonscanning antenna. 
Andrews used the procedure to minimize the residue power  over the full antenna pattern, which includes the main-beam and sidelobe regions. ch03.indd   20 12/15/07   6:03:22 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. 
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Airborne MTI.  AIRBORNE MTI  3.216x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 3 3.8 PLATFORM-MOTION COMPENSATION,  FORWARD DIRECTION The previous sections discussed the compensation for the component of platform  motion parallel to the antenna aperture. TACCAR removes the average component  of platform motion perpendicular to the aperture. 
The former Wheeler Laboratories  developed the Coincident Phase Center Technique (CPCT)15 to remove the spectral  spread due to the velocity component perpendicular to the aperture and due to the  component parallel to the aperture. Removal of the component parallel to the aperture  uses the DPCA pattern synthesis technique described in Anderson,8 which creates two  similarly shaped illumination functions whose phase centers are physically displaced.  Removal of the component perpendicular to the aperture is accomplished by a novel  extension of this concept. 
The first term of Eq. 3.3 for spectral width due to platform motion approaches zero as  the antenna points ahead. However the second term of Eq. 
3.3 dominates as the antenna  approaches within a few beamwidths of the aircraft’s ground track. In this region  fV V dy y≈ ≈42 λθ θ λsin 22  (3.23) which yields a single-sided spectrum that is significantly narrower than the spectrum  abeam. For moderate platform speeds and lower-frequency (UHF) radars, this effect  is negligible, and compensation is not required. 
FIGURE 3. 20 Optimized DPCA phase compensation ch03.indd   21 12/15/07   6:03:23 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. 
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Airborne MTI. 3.22  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 3 When it is necessary to compensate for this effect, the phase center of the antenna  must be displaced ahead of the aperture and behind the aperture for alternate receive  pulses so that the phase centers are coincident for a moving platform. This technique  can be extended to more than two pulses by using the necessary phase-center dis - placements for each pulse. 
In order to maintain the effective PRF, the displacement  must compensate for the two-way transmission path. To accomplish this displacement,  near-field antenna principles are utilized. A desired aperture distribution function is  specified. 
The near-field amplitude and phase are calculated at a given distance from  the origin. If this field is used as the actual illumination function, a virtual aperture is  created with the desired distribution function at the same distance behind the physical  antenna. Figure 3.21 a15 shows the phase and amplitude distribution required to form  a uniform virtual distribution displaced behind the physical aperture. 
It can be shown  that if the phase of the illumination function is reversed f′ = −f, the desired virtual  distribution function is displaced ahead of the aperture, as shown in Figure 3.21 b. In practice, performance is limited by the ability to produce the required illumina - tion function. As the displacement increases, a larger physical aperture size is required  to produce the desired virtual aperture size owing to beam spreading. 
This can be seen  in Figure 3.21. The effectiveness of the correction varies with elevation angle since the  FIGURE 3.21  CPCT concept showing displacement of the phase cen - ter: ( a) behind the physical aperture and ( b) ahead of the physical aper - ture ( Courtesy of Hazeltine Inc.15) ch03.indd   22 12/15/07   6:03:24 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. 
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Airborne MTI.  AIRBORNE MTI  3.236x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 3 actual displacement along the line-of-slight varies with elevation angle. This effect is  more pronounced at higher aircraft speeds and higher radar frequencies. 
A change in  the magnitude of the correction factor or even the compensation pattern with range,  height, and velocity could be utilized to retain performance. Figure 3.22 illustrates the theoretical MTI performance of a CPCT system as a  function of beam-pointing direction and interpulse motion normalized to the interpulse  motion used to design the compensation pattern. ( Cancellation ratio  is defined as the  ratio of input clutter power to output clutter residue power.) The peak on the 90° axis  is typical of the optimized DPCA performance illustrated in Figure 3.12. 
3.9 SPACE-TIME ADAPTIVE   MOTION COMPENSATION Introduction.  Several methods have been described to compensate for antenna  motion. All these techniques are applied in the radar design phase for a specific set of  operational parameters. 
Controls (usually automatic) are provided to adjust weights  for operational conditions around the design value. The development of digital radar technology and economical high-speed processors  allows the use of dynamic space-time adaptive array processing (STAP),16 whereby  a set of antenna patterns that displace the phase center of the array both along and  orthogonal to the array are continually synthesized to maximize the signal-to-clutter  ratio. Spatial adaptive array  processing combines an array of signals received at the  same instant of time that are sampled at the different spatial locations corresponding  FIGURE 3. 
22 CPCT cancellation ratio, in decibels, as a function of relative interpulse  motion and beam-pointing direction ( Courtesy of Hazeltine Inc .15) ch03.indd   23 12/15/07   6:03:24 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Airborne MTI. 
3.24  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 3 to the antenna elements. Temporal adaptive array  processing combines an array of  signals received at the same spatial location (e.g., the output of a reflector antenna)  that are sampled at different instances of time, such as several interpulse periods for  an adaptive MTI. Space-time adaptive array processing combines a two-dimensional  array of signals sampled at different instances of time and at different spatial locations. 
 STAP is a fairly broad topic that has applicability beyond this chapter on airborne  MTI radar. The primary motivation for STAP is to improve clutter cancellation perfor - mance and to better integrate a radar’s spatial processing (antenna sidelobe control and   sidelobe jamming cancellation) with its temporal clutter cancellation processing. The applicability of STAP to improving clutter cancellation must be assessed spe - cifically in the context of the key performance limiters to airborne MTI radar clut - ter cancellation as described at the start of this chapter. 
STAP can improve a radar’s  motion compensation performance and is more robust than nonadaptive techniques  in addressing generally non-dispersive errors in the radar front-end. STAP will not  directly address clutter internal motion effects, antenna scanning motion effects, or  other hardware stability impacts to clutter cancellation performance. Radar designers  need to assess the key limitations in a specific application before jumping to the con - clusion that STAP will improve performance. 
STAP’s ability to integrate clutter cancellation (temporal) and spatial interference  cancellation can be quite important to many radar systems whether they typically have to  deal with intentional jamming interference or unintentional (or casual) electromagnetic  interference (EMI). STAP gets away from cascaded solutions such as analog sidelobe  cancellers followed by digital DPCA and/or MTI filters—that do not generally create an  optimum interference cancellation solution. Optimal Adaptive Weights (McGuffin17). 
The optimal linear estimate is deter - mined by requiring the adapted estimation error be orthogonal to the observed vec - tor, r. Steady-state conditions are assumed in this derivation, thus the condition for  orthogonality is  E{r e∗} = 0 (3.24) where E{} is the expectation, e is the estimation error, and * is the complex conjugate.  The adaptively weighted estimate is obtained by weighting the received signal vector  by the estimate of the adaptive weights:  ˆ ˆ ' s w r = (3.25) With d defined as the desired signal (a main-beam target), the estimation error is  obtained from the following equation. 
Then, substituting Eq. 3.25 into 3.26 and solv - ing for the adaptive weight estimate yields the desired condition for optimal adaptive  weighting:  ε= − = − ˆ ˆ ' s d w r d (3.26)  E rd r w E r d R wr { ( 'ˆ)} { } ˆ∗ ∗− = = −0   or  ˆ { } w R E rdr=− ∗ 1  (3.27) ch03.indd   24 12/15/07   6:03:29 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. 
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Airborne MTI.  AIRBORNE MTI  3.256x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 3 where Rr = E{r r'}. The desired signal, d, can be expressed in terms of s, the signal  vector of a target located in the main beam, and b, the unadapted beam weight vector:  d = b' s. 
This is then substituted into Eq. 3.27:  ˆw R R br s=−1  (3.28) Equation 3.28 is equivalent to the minimum mean square error weight equation  given by Widrow,18 which has been shown19,20 to be the optimum set that maximizes  the signal-to-interference ratio. However, complex variables are employed here rather  than real variables. 
The interference covariance matrix is further described in terms of  the individual noise, jamming, clutter, and signal contributions:  Rr = N I + KZ + RS (3.29) where N is receiver noise power, KZ is the covariance matrix for clutter (temporally cor - related) plus jamming (spatially correlated), and Rs is the signal covariance matrix. Taxonomy of STAP Architectures (Ward21). The application of the adaptive  weight equation from Eq. 
3.28 in a radar system provides numerous options and com - plications. The options range from a fully adaptive solution across all available antenna  elements and all pulses in a coherent processing interval (CPI), to reduced degrees of  freedom solutions in order to be practical. The fully adaptive solution also encounters  problems in the real-world where the interference environment is not well behaved  (e.g., homogenous clutter). 
In addition, Brennan’s rule22 indicates that to achieve an  adaptive solution within 3dB of the optimum answer requires 2 N (N is the number of  degrees of freedom) independent interference samples contributing to the adaptive  weight estimate. With antenna array sizes in tens to hundreds of elements and CPI  lengths of tens to hundreds of pulses, the number of degrees of freedom can quickly  get quite large, resulting in not only fairly complex adaptive weight processing but  also the more difficult problem of obtaining adequate sample support from clutter and  jamming interference for a given adaptive weight solution. As such, it is important to explore various STAP architecture options imbedded in a  radar design solution. 
To begin, a fully adaptive array architecture is shown in Figure 3.23.  This is for a linear array antenna with a distributed transmitter and digital receivers con - nected to each antenna element. The adaptive weight solution is developed based on at  least 2 × N × M vector samples ( r) of length M (antenna elements) by N (pulses). 
The  adaptive weight solution is developed and applied to the received signals from the same  antenna elements and pulses of data. The adaptive weighted response is typically pro - cessed through doppler filtering (coherent integration) prior to detection processing. Ward21 describes the possible STAP architectures in the context of a generalized  transformation matrix followed by the associated STAP processing. 
The four categories  of STAP architectures are organized in Figure 3.24. The trades for an appropriate STAP  design solution must be made in the context of the type and size of the antenna aperture  under consideration, the waveforms under consideration—particularly the number of  pulses per CPI—and most importantly, the interference to be cancelled (clutter and jam - ming). In general, for the transformation and degrees of freedom reduction to be useful,  the resultant degrees of freedom must be greater than the interference rank. 
Pre-Doppler, Elemental Antenna STAP.  Conceptually, the simplest reduction  in degrees of freedom is obtained by reducing the number of temporal degrees of  ch03.indd   25 12/15/07   6:03:30 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. 
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Airborne MTI. 3.26  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 3 T2Transmit Module (1) Transmit Module (m) D1… DmDigital Receiv er (1) Digital Receiv er (m)… T1 TN−1 Digital Beamformer …T2T1 TN−1… Adaptiv e Weight Generator …Waveform Generator Automatic Detector Ti; i = 1 − N − 1; PRI delays FIGURE 3. 23 STAP radar block diagram PRIElementDoppler ElementTemporal Filtering (DFT) PRIBeam (or Subarray) Doppler Beam (or Subarray)Temporal Filtering (DFT)Spatial FilteringSpatial FilteringSpace/Time FilteringElement Space Pre-DopplerElement Space Post-Doppler Beam Space Post-DopplerBeam Space Pre-Doppler FIGURE 3. 
24 Reduced dimension STAP architectures ch03.indd   26 12/15/07   6:03:31 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Airborne MTI. 
 AIRBORNE MTI  3.276x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 3 freedom in STAP while still processing the full aperture spatially. This is similar to  a conventional MTI (or DPCA) architecture cascaded with doppler filtering. We call  this architecture a pre-doppler, elemental-level STAP architecture. 
For a three-pulse  version of this architecture, there are 3M degrees of freedom. In this architecture,  platform motion compensation takes the general form of adjusting the antenna’s phase  center over the three temporally separated beams. A basic block diagram of a radar incorporating pre-doppler, elemental-level space- time adaptive array processing is shown in Figure 3.25. 
An individual duplexer is  placed between each transmitter’s channelized output and its corresponding antenna  element. Provision could be included for electronic beam steering using high-power  phase shifters or transmit modules with low-power beam steering. On receive, each duplexer output is sent to its own digital receiver. 
The digital  receiver outputs are passed through PRI delays to yield temporally displaced data  samples. A full complement of elements and time-delayed signals are sampled and  used to generate the adaptive weights. Various algorithms are possible to generate the  estimate of the adaptive weights from Eq. 
3.28. The fairly simple Least Mean Squared  algorithm generally yields fairly slow convergence rates. Other algorithms19,23 can  speed up the adaptation rate, but a more complex mechanization is required. 
Examples  include a Recursive Least Squared algorithm, Q-R decomposition with Gram-Schmidt  orthogonalization, or a Householder Transformation. The adaptive weights are then  applied to the received signals and beamformed to generate three sum channel detec - tion beams: undelayed, one-PRI delayed, and two-PRI delayed beams. These beams  are, in turn, added together to form the final STAP weighted detection beam. 
A simplistic view of how these three beams perform motion compensation is illus - trated in Figure 3.26 for the case where the aperture is parallel with the radar’s platform  velocity vector. The first pulse return’s phase center is advanced by aperture weight - ing, the second pulse return’s phase center is essentially unchanged from the quiescent  weights, and the third pulse return’s phase center is retarded by aperture weighting.  Given ideal antenna patterns, and an aperture large enough to adjust the phase centers  T2Transmit Module (1) Transmit Module (m) D1 DmDigital Receiv er (1) Digital Receiv er (m)… T1 Digital BeamformerT2T1 Adaptiv e Weight Generator …Waveform Generator Doppler Filter BankAutomatic Detector T1, T2; PRI dela ys FIGURE 3. 
25 STAP block diagram: element space pre-doppler element space architecture ch03.indd   27 12/15/07   6:03:32 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Airborne MTI. 
3.28  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 3 for the given platform motion, these three apertures appear as if they are stationary  with respect to each other. Clutter cancellation across these three pulses is no longer  limited by platform motion effects—the primary goal of platform motion compensation  techniques. Of course, this simplest condition is only illustrative, as generally the antenna ele - ments do not behave exactly the same, and the platform motion compensation must deal  with motion not only in the plane of the aperture but also orthogonal to the aperture. 
Pre-Doppler, Beam-Space STAP.  The first type of transformation to be consid - ered is spatially oriented, resulting in beam-space STAP architectures. This transfor - mation is typically required for many large apertures. 
The transformations can range  from simple column beamforming to overlapped subarrays to beam-space transfor - mations such as a Butler matrix. The general goal is to reduce the spatial degrees of  freedom, while still providing access to array responses that allow for adequate clutter  cancellation and beams that can be used to cancel directional interference as well. The  resulting beam responses must span the clutter and jamming interference spatially in  order for this type of transformation to be effective. 
For example, if a radar’s clut - ter cancellation performance is driven by main-beam clutter residue due to platform  motion effects, the beam responses must span the radar’s main-beam and provide  degrees of freedom to allow for motion compensation in the array main-beam. In addi - tion, to cancel direction interference (jamming or casual EMI), the beam responses Tx Aper ture (1) Rx Aper ture (1) Shut OffTime Tx Aper ture (2) Rx Aper ture (2) Tx Aper ture (3) Rx Aper ture (3) Shut OffTransmit/Receiv e effective  phase centers aligned  across multiple PRIsVelocity Vector VT 2VT FIGURE 3. 26 Aperture control for platform motion compensation ch03.indd   28 12/15/07   6:03:33 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Airborne MTI.  AIRBORNE MTI  3.296x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 3 must also span the spatial directions of that interference. 
An example of a simple  transformation of this type would be sidelobe canceler architecture where the beam  transformation would generate a sum channel main beam and select elements from the  aperture as sidelobe cancellers. Post-Doppler, Element Antenna STAP.  The second type of transformation  leads to what are called post-doppler STAP architectures. 
As the name implies, the  antenna element signals are first doppler filtered and then processed through STAP.  The motivation for this type of architecture is that the resultant STAP solutions can  independently address a subset of the clutter interference problem isolated to clutter  that remains in a single doppler filter. This technique may be more effective for radar  systems where the clutter environment and waveform selection lead to unambiguous  clutter returns within the radar’s PRF. 
Two example conditions, the first with ambigu - ous doppler clutter and the second with unambiguous doppler clutter, are shown in  Figure 3.27. The figure shows those antenna angles where the clutter doppler response  remains after filtering through a single doppler filter. Figure 3.27 a shows the response  for an ambiguous PRF of 300 Hz, and Figure 3.27 b shows the response for an unam - biguous PRF of 2000 Hz for a UHF radar. 
This figure highlights that even with dop - pler processing, a given doppler filter may still include clutter returns from a number  of discontiguous angular intervals. The advantages of this transformation from PRI  to doppler space on overall STAP performance versus a pre-doppler architecture are  more dramatic in the unambiguous doppler clutter case. PRI-staggered doppler filter outputs are required to maintain a set of temporal degrees  of freedom in this architecture. 
The block diagram is modified to that shown in Figure 3.28,  with multiple doppler filter banks on each antenna element and PRI delay. Post-Doppler, Beam Space STAP.  The final category results from implement - ing both doppler and spatial transformations prior to STAP processing. 
The appropriate architecture solution depends upon the radar design constraints.  The number of antenna elements and beamforming requirements are key drivers in the  (a) UHF, low PRF (300 Hz) (b) UHF, higher PRF (2000 Hz)  FIGURE 3. 27 Antenna pointing angles where clutter doppler map to a single doppler filter’s passband ch03.indd   29 12/15/07   6:03:33 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Airborne MTI. 3.30  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 3 decision whether to transform from elements to beams or subarrays. 
The waveforms  and clutter cancellation requirements are key drivers in the decision whether to per - form STAP on signals before or after doppler filtering. In addition, the overall trans - formation decisions to reduce degrees of freedom are driven by the interference rank  for the radar problem. One caution in the design process is that if the transformation  is fixed in the radar design, it is important to have excess degrees of freedom beyond  the total interference rank. 
Implementation Considerations.  As discussed above, transformations and tech - niques to reduce the number of degrees of freedom in the STAP solution are important  not only due to processing requirements but also because of the need for sample sup - port on the order of two times the number of degrees of freedom for adequate STAP  performance. The basic hardware requirements for good clutter cancellation remain unchanged  from conventional clutter cancellation architectures—low phase noise, low pulse  jitter, etc. 
The requirements on the hardware may become more stringent because  the STAP architecture allows the radar designer to achieve higher theoretical clutter  cancellation performance levels. In addition to the above temporally based hardware  requirements, there are also second-order spatially based hardware requirements. As  illustrated in Figure 3.26, platform motion compensation results in different aperture  weighting for successive pulses in a STAP solution. 
Although generally speaking,  well-matched spatial channels (antenna and receiver) are driven by jamming cancella - tion and antenna sidelobe levels, a second-order requirement results from the need for Transmit Module (1) Transmit Module (m) D1Digital Receiv er (1) Digital  Receiv er (m)… Digital BeamformerT2T1 Adaptiv e  Weight  Generator …Waveform Generator Automatic DetectorDoppler Filter Doppler Filter Doppler Filter T2T1Doppler Filter Doppler Filter Doppler Filter T1, T2;  PRI delaysDm FIGURE 3. 28 Element space post-doppler STAP architecture ch03.indd   30 12/15/07   6:03:34 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. 
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Airborne MTI.  AIRBORNE MTI  3.316x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 3 platform motion compensation. If antenna and receiver channels are not well matched,  the resultant sum channel beams formed from different aperture illumination functions  (Figure 3.26) will not be matched well enough to provide main-beam and sidelobe  clutter cancellation. 
Performance Comparisons.  Given the number of STAP architectures and cor - responding radar system design solutions, general STAP performance comparisons are  difficult to come by. In general, STAP provides a robust solution to deal with clutter  and jamming interference and helps alleviate hardware mismatch effects within rea - son (amplitude and phase adjustments are applied to antenna element and time dis - placed returns). 
Generally to address time-delay adaptive weighting, more complexity  is required with a third dimension for adaptive weights—“fast-time” or returns from  adjacent sampled range cells. This extension can be extremely computationally inten - sive and further burden the sample support problem alluded to previously . When evaluating a radar design and trading off various waveforms and STAP pro - cessing techniques, it is important to include in the analysis key drivers such as signal  bandwidth, clutter internal motion, platform motion, antenna scanning motion, the  amount of sample support available from nonhomogenous and nonstationary clutter  environments, and other effects such as large target samples effecting the adaptive  weight solution. 
3.10 EFFECT OF MULTIPLE SPECTRA An airborne search-radar system may be operated at an altitude so that the radar hori - zon is approximately at the maximum range of interest. This results in sea or ground  clutter being present at all ranges of interest. Other clutter sources such as rain and  chaff may coexist with the surface clutter. 
In most instances, these sources are mov - ing at a speed determined by the mean wind aloft and have a mean doppler frequency  significantly different from that of the surface clutter. If the MTI filter is tracking the  surface clutter, the spectra of the sources with a different mean doppler frequency lie  in the passband of the MTI filter. A 20-kt differential in a UHF system corresponds  to 30 Hz, which would generally be outside of the traditional AMTI notch filter in a  300 Hz PRF system. 
A single-delay secondary canceler can be cascaded with either  a single-delay or a double-delay primary canceler. The primary canceler tracks the  mean surface velocity and rejects surface clutter. The single-delay canceler tracks the  secondary source and rejects it. 
Since the pass and rejection bands of the two cancel - ers overlap, the MTI improvement factor for each clutter source is a function of their  spectral separation. Figure 3.29 shows the improvement factor for a double canceler, which consists of  two single cancelers, each tracking one of the spectra. It can be seen that as the separa - tion varies from 0 to 1/2 of the PRF, the performance degrades from that equivalent to  a double canceler to the performance of a single canceler at half of the PRF . 
The triple canceler has a double-delay canceler tracking the primary spectra and a  single-delay canceler tracking the secondary spectra. The performance of the primary  system varies from that of a triple canceler to a level less than that of a double canceler.  The secondary-system performance varies from that of a triple canceler to a perfor - mance level lower than that of a single canceler. 
ch03.indd   31 12/15/07   6:03:34 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Airborne MTI. 
3.32  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 3 3.11 EXAMPLE AMTI RADAR SYSTEM The AN/APY-9 radar, developed by Lockheed Martin for the U.S. Navy, is an example  of an AMTI radar system utilized for an airborne early warning radar mission. Key  features of this system include a solid-state distributed transmitter, a mechanically and  electronically scanned rotating antenna, digital receivers, space-time adaptive pro - cessing, digital pulse compression, and coherent integration and auxiliary processing  aimed at supporting the STAP sample selection process. 
The AN/APY-9 radar addresses the AEW radar surveillance coverage requirements  discussed at the beginning of this chapter, utilizing a mechanically and electronically  steerable antenna located in a rotodome. There are three scanning modes of operation:  FIGURE 3.29  MTI improvement factor for a double-notch canceler  tracking two spectra as a function of the normalized spectra separation  ∆f/fr. Normalized spectral width sc /fr = 0.01. 
ch03.indd   32 12/15/07   6:03:35 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Airborne MTI. 
 AIRBORNE MTI  3.336x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 3 (1) mechanically scanned with an operator-selectable scan rate, (2) azimuth electroni - cally scanned with the mechanical boresite provided as an input to the radar, and (3)  mechanically scanned with additional electronic scanning within an operator-select - able azimuth region. The transmit waveform includes TACCAR modulation to center mainbeam clutter  at zero doppler frequency. However, because the radar implements adaptive clutter  cancellation (STAP), the requirements on TACCAR are significantly less complex  than for legacy radar systems. 
There is no need to include closed loop adjustments to  the TACCAR modulation frequency. The optimization of the AMTI clutter cancella - tion filter is achieved in the STAP processing as opposed to adjusting the location of  main-beam clutter to fit a fixed AMTI filter. In order to implement STAP and electronic scanning in this radar, all 18 elements  of the phased array antenna are processed on transmit and receive. 
The solid-state  transmitter provides low-power phase shift control for electronic steering followed by  power amplification in each of 18 channels. These are connected to the 18 elements  of the phased array through an 18-channel rotary coupler. The transmit/receive isola - tion on all 18 channels is provided through circulators. 
The 18 channels are processed  separately through 18 receivers, finally feeding the STAP subsystem with 18-digital  baseband signals. The radar performs platform motion compensation electronically as part of the  STAP architecture. The radar implements an element-space pre-doppler STAP archi - tecture. 
Adaptive weights are generated and applied to the 18 receive channels, form - ing three beams (Sum, Deltaaz, and Omni) by weighting and summing the 18 receive  channels over three pulses to provide simultaneous clutter and jamming cancellation.  The adaptive weight algorithm is matched to the radar’s operating parameters and is  augmented with adaptive knowledge–aided sampling schemes to maximize perfor - mance in a complex, heterogeneous clutter and jamming interference environment.  Doppler filtering is performed after digital beamforming. 
Other functions discussed in this chapter are not required for this radar application  because they do not limit performance. Examples include scanning motion compensa - tion and multiple spectra AMTI clutter cancellation. REFERENCES  1. 
R. C. Emerson, “Some pulsed doppler MTI and AMTI techniques,” Rand Corporation Rept. 
  R-274, DDC Doc. AD 65881, March 1, 1954. (Reprinted in Reference 6.)  2. 
T. S. George, “Fluctuations of ground clutter return in airborne radar equipment,” Proc. 
IEE   (London), vol. 99, pt. IV , pp. 
92–99, April 1952.  3. F. 
R. Dickey, Jr., “Theoretical performance of airborne moving target indicators,” IRE Trans .,   vol. PGAE-8, pp. 
12–23, June 1953.  4. R. 
S. Berkowitz (ed.), Modern Radar: Analysis, Evaluation and System Design , New York:   John Wiley & Sons, 1966.  5. 
D. K. Barton, Radar Systems Analysis , Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1964. 
 6. D. C. 
Schlerer (ed.), MTI Radar , Norwood, MA: Artech House, Inc., 1978.  7. F. 
R. Dickey, Jr. and M. 
M. Santa “Final report on anticlutter techniques,” General Electric  Company Rept. R65EMH37, March 1, 1953. 
 8. D. B. 
Anderson, “A microwave technique to reduce platform motion and scanning noise in   airborne moving target radar,” IRE WESCON Conv. Rec ., vol. 2, pt. 
1, 1958, pp. 202–211. ch03.indd   33 12/15/07   6:03:35 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Airborne MTI. 3.34  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 3  9. 
“Final engineering report on displaced phase center antenna,” vol. 1, March 26, 1956; vols. 2   and 3, April 18, 1957, General Electric Company, Schenectady, NY . 
10. H. Urkowitz, “The effect of antenna patterns on performance of dual antenna radar moving target  indicators,” IEEE Trans ., vol. 
ANE-11, pp. 218–223, December 1964. 11. 
G. N. Tsandoulis, “Tolerance control in an array antenna,” Microwave J ., pp. 
24–35,   October 1977. 12. K. 
G. Shroeder, “Beam patterns for phase monopulse arrays,” Microwaves , pp. 18–27,   March 1963. 
13. R. S. 
Grissetti, M. M. Santa, and G. 
M. Kirkpatrick, “Effect of internal fluctuations and scanning  on clutter attenuation in MTI Radar,” IRE Trans ., vol. ANE-2, pp. 
37–41, March 1955. 14. G. 
A. Andrews, “Airborne radar motion compensation techniques: Optimum array correction   patterns,” Naval Res. Lab. 
Rept. 7977, March 16, 1976. 15. 
A. R. Lopez and W. 
W. Ganz, “CPCT antennas for AMTI radar, vol. 2: Theoretical study,” Air  Force Avionics Lab. 
Rept. WL1630.22, AD 51858, June 1970. (Not readily available.) 16. 
L. E. Brennan., J. 
D. Mallett, and I. S. 
Reed, “Adaptive arrays in airborne MTI radar,” IEEE  Trans ., vol. AP-24, pp. 607–615, September 1976. 
17. A. L. 
McGuffin, “A brief assessment of adaptive antennas with emphasis on airborne radar,”  General Electric Company, Aircraft Equipment Division, August 1981. 18. B. 
Widrow and S. D. Stearns. 
Adaptive Signal Processing,  New Jersey: Prentice-Hall,   Inc., 1985. 19. S. 
P. Applebaum, “Adaptive arrays,” IEEE Trans ., vol. AP-24, pp. 
585–598, September 1976. 20. L. 
E. Brennan, E. L. 
Pugh, and I. S. Reed, “Control loop noise in adaptive array antennas,” IEEE  Trans ., vol. 
AES-7, March 1971. 21. J. 
Ward, “Space time adaptive processing for airborne radar,” MIT Lincoln Laboratory  Technical Report #1015, December. 13, 1994. 22. 
L. E. Brennan and F. 
M. Staudaher, “Subclutter visibility demonstration,” Technical Report   RL-TR-92-21, Adaptive Sensors Incorporated, March 1992. 23. 
R. A. Monzingo and T. 
W. Miller, Introduction to Adaptive Arrays , New York: John Wiley &  Sons, 1980. ch03.indd   34 12/15/07   6:03:35 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Airborne MTI. 
