23.16x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 23 Bistatic Radar Nicholas J. Willis Technology Service Corporation (retired) 23.1 CONCEPT AND DEFINITIONS A bistatic radar uses antennas at separate sites for transmission and reception. 
The  transmitter and receiver can be, and usually are, located at those sites to minimize  transmission line losses. In nearly all cases of bistatic operation, antenna separation  is selected to achieve some operational, technical, or cost benefit, and is usually a  significant fraction of the target range.1 Bistatic radars have been designed, devel - oped, tested, and in some cases, deployed for military, commercial, and scientific  applications. Typical military applications include air and space surveillance and range  instrumentation. 
Commercial applications include wind field measurements and traf - fic surveillance. Scientific applications include measurement of planetary surfaces and  atmospheres and study of ionospheric turbulence. Examples are given in Section 23.4. 
 While these examples are both credible and useful, they are niche applications when  compared to the ubiquitous capabilities of monostatic radars, which remain the prin - cipal method for radio detection and ranging . Bistatic radars can operate with dedicated transmitters , which are designed  for bistatic operation and controlled by the bistatic radar, or with transmitters-of-   opportunity , which are designed for other purposes but found suitable for bistatic oper - ation even when not controlled by the bistatic radar. When the transmitter of oppor - tunity is from a monostatic radar, the bistatic radar is often called a hitchhiker . 
When  the transmitter of opportunity is from a broadcast station or communications link,  sources other than a radar, the bistatic radar has been called many things including  passive radar, passive bistatic radar, passive coherent location, parasitic radar, and  piggy-back radar.2 Transmitters-of-opportunity in military scenarios can be designated  either cooperative  or noncooperative , where cooperative denotes an allied or friendly  transmitter and noncooperative denotes a hostile or neutral transmitter . Bistatic target detection uses a process similar to that of a monostatic radar,  where the target is illuminated by a transmitter and target echoes are received,  detected, and processed by a receiver. When operating with transmitters using CW  or high-duty cycle waveforms, a bistatic receiver may need to augment its spa - tial isolation with spatial and/or spectral cancellation to reduce the transmitter’s  direct-path  feed-through to acceptable levels. 
The bistatic radar can also use a  portion of the residual or uncancelled direct-path transmit signal as a reference in  a correlation  receiver , which cross-correlates the received and transmitted signals,  emulating matched filter operation.Chapter 23 ch23.indd   1 12/20/07   2:21:03 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Source: RADAR HANDBOOK. 
23.2  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 23 Bistatic target location uses a process different from that of a monostatic radar. In a  typical implementation, the bistatic radar measures (a) the transmitter-to-target-to-receiver  propagation time, converted to a transmitter-to-target plus target-to-receiver range-sum ;  (b) the target direction-of-arrival (DOA) from the receiver; and (c) the transmitter-to- receiver distance, or baseline , to solve the transmitter-target-receiver triangle, called the  bistatic triangle . This triangle locates the target, usually in terms of a range and angle  referenced to the receive site. 
Other location schemes are given in Section 23.6. When separate transmit and receive antennas are at a single site, as is common in  CW radars, the radar has characteristics of a monostatic radar, and the term bistatic   is not used to describe such a system. In special cases, the antennas can be at sepa - rate sites, and the radar is still considered to operate monostatically. 
For example,  an over-the-horizon (OTH) radar can have a site separation of 100 km or more to  achieve adequate transmit signal isolation. But that separation is small compared to  the target range of thousands of kilometers, and the radar again operates with mono - static characteristics. A variation of the bistatic radar is the multistatic radar , which uses multiple anten - nas at separate locations, one antenna for transmission and multiple antennas—each  at a different location—for reception, or vice versa. 
Again, transmitters or receivers  are usually sited with the antennas. Target detection is done bistatically, with each  transmit-receive pair performing independent detections within a surveillance region  common to all such pairs. Target location typically measures the baseline and takes  simultaneous range-sum measurements from multiple transmitter-receiver pairs, which  are plotted as ellipses with a transmitter-receiver pair at each ellipse foci. 
The intersec - tion of these ellipses, or constant range-sum contours , locate the target. It is similar to  multilateration  because only range measurements are used to locate the target. * A multistatic radar can also use triangulation  for target location by taking simul - taneous target DOA measurements from multiple receive sites at known locations. 
 It is used by SPASUR12 as a brute-force, satellite location technique. However,  because of the large aperture sizes (or array lengths) required for sufficiently accu - rate DOA measurements at useful ranges, triangulation is seldom considered for  other applications. Concepts, data, and expressions developed for bistatic radars often apply to multi - static radars, for example, the range equation, target doppler, target radar cross section,  and surface clutter. 
Thus, the remainder of this chapter will concentrate on the bistatic  radar topic, developing multistatic excursions and deviations only when necessary . Passive receiving systems, or electronic support measure  (ESM ) systems, often  use two or more receiving sites. Their purpose is typically to detect, identify, and  locate transmitters such as those from monostatic radars. 
They are also called emitter  locators . Target location is by means of combined angle measurements from each site  (e.g., triangulation) or time-difference-of-arrival and/or differential doppler measure - ments between sites (e.g., multilateration). These systems usually are not designed to  detect and process the echoes from targets illuminated by the transmitter. 
They can,  however, be used by a bistatic hitchhiker to identify and locate a suitable transmitter.  Thus, although they have many requirements and characteristics common to multi - static radars, they are not radars and will not be considered here. *  The foregoing describes multistatic operation that combines data noncoherently. 
Coherent data combining is also  possible where for example in-phase and quadrature data from each receive site is combined to form a large receive  aperture. Examples include thinned, random, distorted, and distributed arrays,3–7 interferometric radars,8,9 and the  radio camera.10,11 This subject is treated further in Willis.1 ch23.indd   2 12/20/07   2:21:04 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. 
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Bistatic Radar.  BISTATIC RADAR  23.36x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 23 The foregoing definitions are broad and traditional13–16 but are by no means uni - formly established in the literature. Terms such as quasi-bistatic , quasi-monostatic ,  pseudo-monostatic , tristatic , polystatic , real multistatic , multi-bistatic , and netted  bistatic  have also been used.17–20 They are usually special cases of the broad defini - tions given above. 
The term pseudo-monostatic  will be used to characterize bistatic  geometries that approximate monostatic operation. 23.2 COORDINATE SYSTEMS A two-dimensional north-referenced coordinate system21 is used throughout this chapter.  Figure 23.1 shows the coordinate system and parameters defining bistatic radar opera - tion in the ( x, y) plane, also called the bistatic plane .22 The bistatic triangle lies in the  bistatic plane. 
The distance L between the transmitter and the receiver is called the base- line range  or simply the baseline ; RT is the range between transmitter and target; and RR  is the range between receiver and target. The angles qT and qR are, respectively, the trans - mitter and receiver look angles , which are taken as positive when measured clockwise  from north. They are also called direction-of-arrival (DOA), angle-of-arrival (AOA), or  line-of-sight (LOS). 
The bistatic angle , b = qT − qR, is the angle between the transmitter  and receiver with the vertex at the target. It is also called the cut angle  or the scattering  angle . It is convenient to use b in calculations of target-related parameters and qT and qR  in calculations of transmitter- and receiver-related parameters. 
The transmitter-to-target-to-receiver range measured by a bistatic radar is the range  sum ( RT + RR). Methods for measuring this sum are given in Section 23.6. The range  sum locates the target somewhere on the surface of an ellipsoid whose foci are the  transmitter and receiver sites. 
The intersection of the bistatic plane and this ellipsoid  FIGURE 23.1  Bistatic radar north coordinate system for two dimensions,  establishing the bistatic plane. The bistatic triangle lies in the bistatic plane. ch23.indd   3 12/20/07   2:21:05 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Bistatic Radar. 23.4  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 23 produces the familiar ellipses of constant range sum, or isorange contours . 
A useful  relationship is that the bisector of the bistatic angle is orthogonal to the tangent of that  ellipse at the target. The tangent is often a good approximation to an isorange contour  within the area common to the transmit and receive beams. When the bistatic radar’s receiving antenna is a phased array, and the array normal  is also normal to the baseline, qR is measured directly by the antenna in any bistatic  plane. 
This fortuitous situation is caused by conic distortion , which is inherent in any  phased array antenna. However, when the array normal is not normal to the baseline,  or when the receiving antenna is mechanically steered or scanned, qR is not measured  directly. Often DOA measurements are taken in—or converted to—azimuth and eleva - tion angles referenced to an x-y-z  coordinate system centered at the receive site, where  z is co-linear with the local vertical. 
Conversion between a north coordinate system  and an x-y-z  coordinate system is given in Section 5.3 of Willis.1 Other coordinate systems, including three-dimensional systems, have been used  to define bistatic radar operation.14,23–29 A polar coordinate system is also shown in  Figure 23.1. The ( r, q ) coordinates are located on the bistatic plane with origin at the  midpoint of the baseline. It is useful for plotting ovals of  Cassini  (see Section. 
23.3)  and is detailed in Willis.1 On occasion, the included angles qT' and qR' are used to  define transmitter and receiver look angles in the bistatic triangle, such that qT' + qR' +  b = 180º. In this case, qT' = 90º – qT and qR' = 90º + qR can be used to transform north- referenced equations into included-angle equations. Plots of bistatic clutter data use a  separate and quite arcane coordinate system, which is defined in Section 23.8. 
Geometry is a principal factor distinguishing bistatic from monostatic radar opera - tion. In evaluating bistatic radar operation, it is useful to start with a geometry-invariant  performance measure, which is obtained by setting L = 0 (or RT = RR and b = 0º). The  result is defined as an equivalent monostatic range , or benchmark range , and is detailed  in Section 23.3. 
It is also useful as a sanity check ; because at these limits, all bistatic  radar equations must reduce to an equivalent monostatic equation. 23.3 BISTATIC RADAR EQUATION Benchmark Range Concept.  Unlike a monostatic radar, the range performance  of a bistatic radar is a function of the geometry, specifically the baseline range L and  an antenna look angle, either qT or qR. 
When factors such a diffraction, refraction,  multipath, and masking are absent or can be ignored, bistatic range as a function  of these variables can be plotted on the bistatic plane using an oval of Cassini. An  oval of Cassini is the locus of the vertex of a triangle when the product of the sides  adjacent to the vertex is constant and the length of the opposite side is fixed. When  applied to the bistatic triangle shown in Figure 23.1, the vertex is at the target; RT and  RR are the sides adjacent to the vertex; and the baseline L is the length of the fixed,  opposite side. 
Traditionally, ovals of Cassini are drawn as contours of a constant received signal  power or a received signal-to-noise ratio around a fixed baseline range, L. Although  these signal-dependent contours provide a sense of bistatic radar performance, they  do not show maximum/minimum detection ranges and coverage for variable base - lines, all parameters of operational interest. To remedy this problem, the concept of a  bistatic benchmark range,  or more simply benchmark,  is introduced. 
It is established  as follows.2 First, the bistatic radar range equation is derived in a manner completely  ch23.indd   4 12/20/07   2:21:06 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Bistatic Radar. 
 BISTATIC RADAR  23.56x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 23 analogous to that for a monostatic radar. The equation is then solved for the bistatic  maximum range product , (RT RR)max. Next, an equivalent monostatic maximum range,   (RM)max, is defined omitting the max subscript for convenience, as shown here:  RM = (RT RR)1/2 (23.1) This equivalent monostatic maximum range, also known as the geometric mean  range,  represents performance of the bistatic radar when transmitter and receiver are  co-located; i.e., when L = 0. 
It is defined as the bistatic radar’s benchmark range .  Since this benchmark is geometry-invariant, it becomes useful when comparing  bistatic to monostatic range performance. Finally, an oval of Cassini is established  as a function of the baseline range, L, normalized to the benchmark range, RM. 
Based  on this oval, maximum and minimum detection ranges and the coverage area are  calculated, all as a function of RM. This procedure is also used to define bistatic  operating regions. Range Equation. 
 The radar range equation for CW or coherent pulse radars30  is modified for bistatic operation and then solved for the bistatic maximum range  product, ( RT RR)max:  ( )( ) ( /max R RP tG G F F kTF E NT Ro T R B T R o n=av λ2 2 2 34s πo o T RL L)/  1 2  (23.2) where  RT = Transmitter-to-target range (m)  RR = Receiver-to-target range (m)  Pav = Transmitted average power (W)  to = Signal observation (or integration) time  GT = Transmitting antenna power gain  GR = Receiving antenna power gain  l = Wavelength (m)  sB = Bistatic radar cross section (m2)  FT = Pattern propagation factor for transmitter-to-target path  FR = Pattern propagation factor for receiver-to-target path  k = Boltzmann’s constant [1.38 × 10–23 J/K]  To = Standard temperature [290 K]  Fn = Receiver noise figure  E/No = Received energy to receiver noise spectral density required for detection  LT = Transmitting system losses ( >1)  LR = Receiving system losses ( >1) Equation 23.2 assumes that a matched filter, or an equivalent matched filter such as  a cross-correlator, is used on reception. Equation 23.2 is related to the corresponding  monostatic maximum range equation by RT RR = RM2 and sM = sB, where sM is the  monostatic radar cross section.  For pulsed radar operation, to = n / fp, where n is the  number of pulses integrated and fp is the pulse repetition frequency. 
Also, the signal-to- noise ratio required for detection, ( S/N)req = E/No when Bt  ≈ 1, where B is the receiver  bandwidth and t  is the pulse width. The signal processing time, to, is sometimes set by the amount of doppler spread - ing or velocity-walk, ∆fd generated by a moving target. Specifically, ∆fd = (to)−1 = Bn,  ch23.indd   5 12/20/07   2:21:08 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Bistatic Radar. 23.6  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 23 where Bn is the noise bandwidth of receiver’s predetection filter. 
In the monostatic  case, doppler spreading is  (∆fd)m = [2ar / l]1/2 (23.3) where ar is the radial component of target acceleration. Equation 23.3 also applies  to the bistatic case at small bistatic angles, b, particularly in an over-the-shoulder   operation, where the target lies near the baseline extended beyond either the receiver  or the transmitter (called the extended baseline ).* However, for larger b—the general  case—the radial component, which is aligned with the bisector of the bistatic angle,  will be reduced. A rule of thumb for these large b conditions is  (∆fd)b = [ar / l]1/2 (23.4) Equation 23.4 is used to set to and hence the noise bandwidth of receiver’s predetec - tion filter Bn. 
Since ( ∆fd)b > (∆fd)m, the constraint on bistatic signal processing time is  slightly less than the equivalent monostatic time. As in the monostatic equation, the transmitting and receiving pattern propagation  factors, FT and FR, each consist of two terms: the propagation factors, F'T and F'R,  and the antenna pattern factors, fT and fR, respectively. The antenna pattern factors are  the relative strength of the free-space field radiated by the transmitting and receiving  antennas as a function of their pointing angles. 
These factors are applied whenever the  target is not at the peak of a beam. Propagation factors customarily include the effects of multipath, diffraction, and  refraction, with atmospheric absorption effects included in the loss terms. As with a  monostatic radar, bistatic radar propagation requires a suitable path from the transmit - ter to the target and the target to the receiver. 
In contrast to a monostatic radar, however,  propagation effects can be significantly different over the two bistatic paths and must  be treated separately. Multipath is the primary example, where the target can be in a  multipath lobe on one path and a multipath null on the other, depending on antenna  and target altitude and terrain conditions. When a correlation receiver uses the demodulated direct path RF signal as its refer - ence, that signal is subjected to interference (multipath and RFI), which is different  from interference affecting the target echo path. 
If the correlator operates in its linear  region, the echo plus its interference convolved with the reference plus its interference  produces the desired echo with full matched-filter gain plus interference with gain  reduced by mismatch. These signals add vectorially to modify the pattern-propagation  factor. However, if the correlator operates in its nonlinear region, which can frequently  happen, cross-products are generated, which reduce the echo’s matched-filter gain. 
 The amount of loss depends on the magnitude of the interference and is accounted for  in the signal-processing loss term.31 Ovals of Cassini.  The free space, maximum detection contour of a bistatic  radar’s benchmark range is a circle of radius RM, just as in the monostatic case. Such  a circle assumes constant radar cross-section and pattern propagation factors, which  are scenario- and geometry-dependent. 
For the general bistatic case, where L > 0, the  free-space maximum detection contour becomes the familiar oval of Cassini, again   *  In the first case, the transmitter illuminates the target over the receiver’s shoulder; in the second case, the receiver  views the target over the transmitter’s shoulder. ch23.indd   6 12/20/07   2:21:09 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. 
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Bistatic Radar.  BISTATIC RADAR  23.76x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 23 with the monostatic caveats cited above. Thus, this oval (or ovals) provides a   convenient—but at times over-simplified—view of bistatic range coverage and  must be used with care. 
An additional bistatic caveat is necessary. When the target is on or near the base - line, i.e., located between receiver and transmitter where the bistatic angle b → 180º,  a completely different environment is generated: forward scatter  from both target and  clutter. In this case, the target radar cross section (RCS) and clutter scattering coef - ficient (so) are greatly enhanced, whereas range and doppler measurements are greatly  degraded. 
Often normal  bistatic operation excludes this region, so that a 10—20°  wedge with the apex at the receiver and directed at the transmitter is excised from the  oval. Details are given in Willis.1 Figure 23.2 shows four cases of ovals of Cassini normalized to the benchmark  range: ( a) benchmark: L = 0; (b) one-oval: L < 2RM; (c) lemniscate: L = 2RM; and   (d) two-ovals: L > 2RM. In all cases, the transmitter is located at the left oval focus (0). 
 The receiver is located at the right oval focus (0,1,2,3). Other terms and symbols are  defined in the key shown with Figure 23.2. Table 23.1 lists expressions for calculating oval area and maximum/minimum  receiver detection ranges for these four cases, again referenced to the benchmark range,  RM.* For Figure 23.2 d when L > 3RM, the ovals can conveniently be approximated as  circles with radius RR(av)  ~ RM2/L and corresponding area p RM4/L2. 
Expressions for  *  The one-oval area formula is derived from  Eq. (D.7a) in Willis.1 It is also used for calculating the lemniscate area.  Formulas for the two-oval area are derived from Eq. 
(D.11a) in Willis.1 More terms in these series can be used if  greater accuracy is required.FIGURE 23.2  Normalized ovals of Cassini, lying in the bistatic plane, the plane containing  transmitter, receiver, and target2 (Courtesy SciTech Inc .)KEY: Tx =  Transmitter (left focus)  Rx =  Receiver (right focus) Tgt =  Target (lying on oval)  L  =  Baseline (Tx - to - Rx distance)  RM     =  Equivalent monostatic range   (benchmark case where L = 0)  RR(max)  =  Maximum Rx - to - Tgt range   permitted on oval*  RR(min)   =  Minimum Rx - to - Tgt range   available on oval**  RR(av) =  Radius of a circle with area   equal to area of one oval in   the two-oval case when L > 3RM  _______  * When the Tgt lies on the baseline  extended beyond the Tx ** When the Tgt lies on the baseline  extended beyond the Rxa. b. c. 
0 1 2 3 L/RMd. ch23.indd   7 12/20/07   2:21:10 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. 
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Bistatic Radar. 23.8  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 23 receiver (and transmitter) ranges on the opposite oval are readily calculated through  mirror-image symmetry. Also note that the area of every bistatic oval is always less  than the monostatic circle. 
The expressions in Table 23.1 can also be used to assess first-order bistatic radar  line-of-sight (LOS) constraints, where the LOS is defined as a line between transmit  and receive antennas tangent to the Earth’s surface. Specifically, for a given target,  transmitter and receiver altitudes, the target must simultaneously be within LOS to  both the transmitter and receiver sites. For a smooth, 4/3 Earth model, the LOS range  rR between a receive antenna of altitude hR and target of altitude ht is  rR = 130 ( √hR + √ht) (23.5) where all units are in kilometers. 
Similarly, the LOS range rT between a transmit  antenna of altitude hT and target of altitude ht is  rT = 130 ( √hT + √ht) (23.6) Thus, to prevent LOS truncation of the ovals, rR ≥ RR(max) and rT ≥ RT(max). These  expressions ignore both diffraction and multipath, which can significantly alter these  ranges, so they must be considered first-order approximations. A typical task for bistatic air surveillance is to select a baseline  L so that a receiver  with antenna altitude hR will match existing LOS coverage of a transmitter with antenna  altitude hT. 
For the worst case, over-the-shoulder geometry, the requirement would be  to match LOS coverage on the extended baseline, rT = rR + L, so that  L = 130 ( √hT - √hR) (23.7) For example, when hT = 0.1 km and hR = 0.01 km, L = 28 km, which from Eq. 23.5  and 23.6 will provide LOS to an 8.5 m altitude target flying above the extended  baseline, 25 km from the receiver and 53 km from the transmitter. Baselines greater  than 100 km can pose severe target LOS problems. 
For example, if L = 120 km and  hT = 0.3 km, then from Eq. 23.6, the transmitter would only illuminate a target flying  directly above the receiver at an altitude ht > 0.14 km. Thus, the target could readily  under-fly the illumination, and low-altitude air surveillance capability is lost. 
As a  consequence, the bistatic radar must either employ a greatly elevated ( ∼1 km) trans - mitter at these long baselines or operate with shorter baselines to achieve acceptable  low altitude surveillance coverage. Note that the two-oval case can also require a very  high altitude for the site located in the oval not under surveillance—so high that the  site must often become airborne. Finally, the transmit antenna will be in direct LOS of the receive antenna when L ≤  rT + rR with ht = 0, so that, again with all units in kilometers  L ≤ 130 ( √hT + √hR) (23.8)Case L Area (of one oval) RR(max) (on Rx oval) RR(min)  (on Rx oval) Circle (Benchmark) 0p RM2RM RM One Oval <2RM~p [RM2 − L4/ (64 RM2)](RM2 + L2/4)½ + L/2(RM2 + L2/4) ½ − L /2 Two Ovals >2RM >3RM~p RM2 [RM2/L2] ~p RM2 [RM2/L2] L/2 − (L2/4 − RM2)½ ~RM2/ L(RM2 + L2/4)½ − L /2 ~RM2/ LTABLE 23.1  Area and Detection Ranges for General Ovals of Cassini2 (Courtesy SciTech, Inc. 
) ch23.indd   8 12/20/07   2:21:10 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Bistatic Radar. 
 BISTATIC RADAR  23.96x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 23 If Eq. 23.8 is satisfied, extraordinary measures are usually required to suppress the  direct path signal to a level where targets can be detected, as outlined in Section 23.9. 23.4 APPLICATIONS Ovals of Cassini can be used to define three operating regions for a bistatic radar, co- site, receiver-centered , and transmitter-centered .1 Co-site corresponds to Figure 23.2 b;  receiver-centered to the right oval in Figure 23.2 d; and transmitter-centered to the   left oval in Figure 23.2 d. 
The type of transmitter— dedicated , cooperative , or non-  cooperative —completes the taxonomy. A dedicated transmitter is designed and   controlled by the bistatic or multistatic radar, analogous to a monostatic radar.   Both cooperative and noncooperative transmitters are transmitters-of-opportunity— designed for other functions, including radar and communications, but found suitable  for bistatic operation. 
The cooperative transmitter is controlled by allied or friendly  forces; the noncooperative transmitter, by hostile or neutral forces. Table 23.2 sum - marizes bistatic radar applications in these operating regions. * Entries in the dedicated transmitter/co-site category represent a complete bistatic  radar suite—radars with all components including the transmitter designed for  bistatic operation. 
Many of these systems were developed, tested, or deployed prior  to 1980. Examples are the French, USSR, and Japanese forward scatter fences used  in WWII,2 the AN/FPS-23  for air-defense gap filling,2 PARADOP  and MIDOP  range- instrumentation trackers,9 SPASUR  for space surveillance,12,32 and Sanctuary  for  air defense.33,34 The BRWL  for artillery, mortar, and rocket location,35 the Russian  Struna-1  forward scatter fence,36–38 and the French Graves  for space surveillance39  were later developments. Omitted entries in the dedicated transmitter column for operation in the receiver-  and transmitter-centered ovals at large baseline ranges are dictated by operations  and cost: both cooperative and noncooperative transmitters-of-opportunity are often  present and capable of supporting bistatic operation in these small areas of interest. 
 *  A multistatic radar with its requirement for common spatial coverage nearly always operates in the co-site region.Receiver  Operating  RegionsRange  RelationshipDedicated Transmitter Cooperative Transmitter Noncooperative Transmitter Co-site L < 2 RM • Air surveillance • Range instrumentation • Satellite tracking • Intrusion detection • Air surveillance • Range instrumentation • Ionospheric measurement • Wind measurement• Air surveillance Receiver- centeredL > 2 RM RT  RR• Short-range air surveillance • Silent air-to-ground attack • Planetary exploration• Short range surveillance Transmitter- centeredL > 2 RM RR  RT• Planetary exploration • Air threat monitoring • Missile launch alertTABLE 23.2  Bistatic Radar Applications ch23.indd   9 12/20/07   2:21:11 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Bistatic Radar. 
23.10  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 23 Furthermore, this approach is less costly and when exploiting noncooperative trans - mitters, more covert and less risky than using a dedicated transmitter. Consequently,  dedicated transmitters are not usually considered for these applications. Entries in the cooperative and noncooperative transmitter columns are called  hitchhikers when the transmitter is a monostatic radar. 
When the transmitter is from  a communications or broadcast system, i.e., not from a radar, entries are called a  passive bistatic radar (PBR). Examples of a hitchhiker operating with a cooperative transmitter in the co-site  region are the Multistatic Measurement System  operating with TRADEX  for increas - ing ballistic missile reentry measurement accuracy40,41 and the commercial, Binet Inc.,  bistatic receiver operating with monostatic doppler weather radars to measure three- dimensional vector wind fields.2,42,43 Figure 23.3 is a block diagram of the Binet Inc.- developed prototype. Examples of hitchhikers operating with a cooperative transmitter in the receiver- centered region are the  Covin Rest  program, operating with the space-shuttle radar for  synthetic aperture radar (SAR) ground mapping44; the TBIRD  program operating with  Joint STARS for silent air-to-ground attack via forward-looking bistatic SAR2,45; and  the BAC  program operating with AWACS  for alerting and cueing short range, mobile  air-defense systems.46,47 FIGURE 23.3  Simplified block diagram of the Binet Inc.-developed bistatic wind measurement prototype  system. 
A modified CP-2 monostatic weather radar transmits and receives on a narrow beam antenna, while  one or more bistatic receive sites 10–20 km from the CP-2 receive bistatically scattered energy from the  same illuminated weather volume over a broad antenna beam. A transmit/receive tube is used to protect the  receiver, just as in a monostatic radar. All generated frequencies are locked to the master 10-MHz VCXO,  which is, in turn, locked to GPS timing signals. 
Synchronization and other housekeeping data are sent over  telephone lines. Signal and data processing is PC-based. ( after J. 
Wurman43 © IEEE 1994 )Modified CP-2 Transmitter/ ReceiverBistatic ReceiverGlobal Positioning Satellites Slotted Waveguide Antenna2809 MHz 2809 MHz + Doppler Antenna Pointing AnglesPulse Polarization Transmit Pulse Trigger 15 MHz for Radar Range Counter/Timer Control Voltage10 MHz VCXO10 MHz VCXO GPS SignalPolling Request Polling Request2809 MHz + Doppler 15 MH z For Range Gating TriggersTriggers For Test Pulse Control VoltageI QGPS Antenna GPS Signal Housekeeping InformationHousekeeping InformationGPS Antenna ch23.indd   10 12/20/07   2:21:18 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Bistatic Radar. 
 BISTATIC RADAR  23.116x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 23 Hitchhikers using cooperative monostatic radar transmitters also have the inher - ent capability to counter retro-directive jammers operating against their host radar.  Because the jammer uses a high-gain antenna to retro-direct the transmitter’s signal  back to the transmitter (and thus its monostatic receiver), the spatially separated hitch - hiker can be positioned in the sidelobes of that antenna, thus reducing the effectiveness  of the jammer. A rule of thumb is to anticipate enhanced hitchhiker performance when - ever the bistatic angle is greater than the estimated 3-dB width of the retro-directed  main beam. 
Examples of PBRs operating with cooperative broadcast transmitters in the co-site  region are the Manastash Ridge Radar  operating with an FM broadcast transmitter for  tropospheric soundings,2,48 Silent Sentry  operating with FM and TV broadcast trans - mitters,49,50 and the HDTV-Based Passive Radar  operating with a high definition-TV  broadcast transmitter,51 the latter two configured for air surveillance. Examples of  PBRs operating with cooperative communications transmitters in the receiver- and  transmitter-centered regions are bistatic radars for planetary exploration. They use  a data link transmitter on the probe vehicle in the transmitter-centered region and an  Earth-based command transmitter in the receiver-centered region.2,52 The term cooperative transmitter is somewhat of a misnomer. 
For example, a coop - erative TV or FM station operator would not be inclined to “cooperate” with a PBR by  altering antenna coverage or modifying broadcast material with special waveforms.  Furthermore, there is always the possibility of a transmitter failure in the course of  normal operations or from an enemy attack. This event will degrade performance of a  PBR that operates with multiple transmitters and eliminate performance of a PBR that  operates only with that transmitter. 
As a result, the PBR is free to exploit cooperative  (or noncooperative) transmissions if they are suitable; however, commerce controls  their operation with the PBR remaining a user of opportunity, specifically suffering  nonoptimum waveforms (Section 23.9), limited elevation coverage, and occasionally  reduced or denied performance. Constraints also apply when a hitchhiker attempts to exploit a cooperative or non - cooperative monostatic radar, specifically with the hitchhiker suffering antenna scan- on-scan problems (Section 23.9). However, the potential for enhancing performance  of a cooperative monostatic radar against retro-directive-type jammers when using a  suitably positioned hitchhiker necessitates distinguishing cooperative from noncoop - erative transmitters. 
In the noncooperative transmitter column, if a noncooperative transmitter and a  hitchhiker were located in or near a battle area, a hitchhiker could use that transmitter  in the co-site region just as it would for a cooperative transmitter. The German Klein  Heidelberg  hitchhiking off the British Chain Home  radars to conduct air surveillance  during WWII is an example.53,54 A hitchhiker implanted in or flying over hostile areas  could use any high-powered satellite transmitter illuminating that area to conduct  short-range surveillance in the receiver-centered oval. The most significant system to use a dedicated transmitter is the Space Surveillance   (SPASUR ) 217 MHz multistatic radar fence. 
It was deployed starting in 1958 at seven  sites spanning the continental United States to detect and track noncooperative satel - lites.12,32 Transmitters are located at three sites, the largest of which transmits 1 MW  CW from a linear array about 3 km long, generating a fixed fan beam. The six receive  sites consist of seven or eight linear arrays with dimensions on the order of 1 km, also  generating fixed fan beams collinear with the transmit beam. Figure 23.4 shows the  data flow in a typical receiving station.12 ch23.indd   11 12/20/07   2:21:23 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Bistatic Radar. 23.12  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 23 Target location is established by triangulation, i.e., the intersection of zenith angle  (DOA) measurements from two or more receive sites. 
Subsequently a three-site fence  in South Texas was deployed to evaluate the use of bistatic range measurements to  improve location accuracy,55 but it never entered continuous operation.FIGURE 23.4.  Real-time data flow in a NAVSPASUR receiving station. “ Transmitter  energy reflected by the satellite is received by various collinear arrays of dipoles at  the receiver station… [Signals] from four in-line arrays feeds the alert receiver which  detects the presence of radio energy in excess of preset threshold levels. 
The reflected  energy is also simultaneously received on other arrays that are separated in the east-  west direction by various distances (baseline). Signals from any two can be added   to form a baseline pair. The baseline receivers employ triple frequency conversion  where the phase difference of the signals received by the antenna pair is preserved in  a 1000-hertz difference frequency [called a 1 kHz phase signal in the figure]…  There  is a radio receiver and consequently a 1000-hertz phase [signal] for each baseline pair   (12 east west and 3 north south). 
This phase signal is compared with a 1000-hertz refer - ence signal and encoded (digitized) by the ADDAS encoding equipment. The digital  combiner, contained within the ADDAS encoder, receives the 1 KHz phase data and  generates an unambiguous zenith angle solution. The combiner outputs along with digi - tized phase information and control bits, foremost of which is ‘alert,’ are applied to the  telephone lines via a digital data transmitter.”( from Handbook for NAVSPASUR System  Orientation,12  courtesy U.S. 
Navy )OSCILLATORSBASELINE SIGNAL RECEPTION DETECTIONALERT SIGNAL RECEPTION AND THRESHOLD DETECTION I kHz REFERENCE PHASE CONDITIONING I kHz BASELINE PHASE ADDAS ENCODER DIGITAL DATA  SET  TELEPHONE LINES TO NAVSPASUR HQLOGICAL COMBINERACTUATIONI kHz PHASE SIGNAL (one for each bseline) COMMAND CONTROLS 2 PILOT, RESYNCHRONIZATION CALIBRATION COMMAND21 COMBINER SOLUTION,BASELINE PHASE DATA,ALERT, CALIBRATION1 ch23.indd   12 12/20/07   2:21:24 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Bistatic Radar. 
 BISTATIC RADAR  23.136x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 23 According to Easton,32 the SPASUR  design was driven by cost: a 15,000 nmi detec - tion range required very high average power, which was satisfied by the lowest cost  CW operation. But this solution, in turn, required separate sites for isolation—hence,  multistatic operation. The stationary beam linear arrays also minimized cost when  compared to scanning arrays or reflector antennas. 
In short, fix the beams and let the  satellites fly through them. It has been in continuous use since 1958. A hitchhiker using a cooperative radar transmitter in the co-site region was the  Multistatic Measurement System  (MMS ). 
It was installed at the U.S. Kwajalein Missile  Range in 1980 as an adjunct to the TRADEX  L band monostatic radar.40 TRADEX   operated in its normal monostatic mode, acquiring, tracking, and illuminating ballistic  missile reentry vehicles (RVs). Two unmanned, slaved receive stations, located about  40 km from TRADEX , received echoes bistatically scattered off the RV and recorded  bistatic range, doppler, and signature data from RVs. 
This data was used to calculate  RV position and dynamics near the atmospheric pierce point or start of re-entry. The  system was projected to measure three-dimensional position and velocity with accura - cies better than 4 m and 0.1 m/s, respectively, throughout re-entry.43 Field tests showed that MMS range data combined with TRADEX ’s monostatic  range data in a trilateration net provided the most accurate estimate of exo-atmospheric  RV positions obtained by any of the range radars. MMS operations were concluded in  199356 after the metric accuracy of monostatic radars was improved.57 In the mid-1990s, a PBR using a cooperative FM broadcast transmitter in  the co-site region was developed by the University of Washington. 
Called the  Manastash Ridge Radar  (MRR ), it is designed to study turbulence in the iono - sphere, specifically auroral E-region irregularities, using range, doppler, and DOA  (via interferometry) measurements.2,48 Motivation for MRR development included  lower cost, increased safety, spectrum availability, and pedagogical opportunity.  MRR provides range-time intensity and range-doppler plots to the World Wide  Web every half-hour. Although it is not subject to the stringent air-defense require - ments for accurate location of multiple targets in real time, it has detected meteors  and aircraft in the course of normal operations. 
A second PBR, called the HDTV-Based Passive Radar ,51 exploits a cooperative  high-definition TV transmitter for air surveillance in the co-site region. It uses range  multilateration from four receivers located within 10 km of the transmitter to track  low-flying aircraft and helicopters as a gap-filler for monostatic air surveillance  radars. Predicted detection and tracking ranges of 30 km on a 1 m2 target have been  demonstrated in real time with 2D tracking errors generally less than 50 m. 
Coarse  target elevation has also been measured. Doppler data has been used to resolve ghosts ,  i.e., false detections that inevitably arise when using multilateration on unaugmented  targets.2 PBRs have used satellite communication transmitters to measure characteristics  of moon and planetary surfaces and atmospheres in both the transmitter- and receiver- centered regions. The first successful piggyback operation in 1967 exploited data link  signals transmitted from the Luna-11  probe, scattered off the moon’s surface, and  then received by an Earth-based station, in a down-link mode characterized by the  transmitter-centered oval of Cassini. 
Such stations include the Arecibo Observatory  and the NASA Deep Space Network. Subsequent measurements were made using  Lunar Orbiter-1 , Explorer-35 , and Apollo 14–16 . Mars bistatic radar measurements  were made using Mariner-6 , -7, Viking-1 , -2, Mars Global Surveyor , and Mars  Express . 
Venus measurements were made by Veneras-9 , -10, Magellan , and Venus  Express .2,52 Figure 23.5 is a simplified schematic of an Earth-based receiver.2 ch23.indd   13 12/20/07   2:21:24 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Bistatic Radar. 
23.14  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 23 A reciprocal but more complex and costly uplink mode uses a bistatic receiver  carried by the probe, collecting high power, Earth-transmitted command signals first  scattered off the planet’s surface and characterized by the receiver-centered oval of  Cassini. It has an ~30 dB greater link margin, which was first used for Mars Odyssey  and is planned for future probes. In both configurations, even though two legs of the  bistatic triangle are extraordinarily long ( >105 miles), the third leg is sufficiently short  (~10 miles) to produce strong echoes at the receiver.2 These piggyback bistatic radars have provided useful data in simple, inexpensive  surveys of planetary surface properties as a prelude to robotic or human exploration,  specifically centimeter- to meter-scale roughness and material densities in the top  few centimeters of regolith. 
Special geometries, such as near-backscatter to identify  deposits of clean water ice, are also a unique advantage of bistatic radar. The ability to  observe forward scattering at latitudes away from planetary equators is also advanta - geous for probing surface characteristics. 23.5 BISTATIC DOPPLER Figure 23.6 defines the geometry for bistatic doppler when the target, transmitter,  and receiver are moving. 
The target has a velocity vector of magnitude V and aspect  angle d  referenced to the bistatic bisector. The transmitter and receiver have velocity  vectors of magnitude VT and VR and aspect angles d T and d R, respectively, referenced  to the north coordinate system of Figure 23.1. All vectors are projections of the three- dimension vectors onto the bistatic plane. 
Target Doppler.  When the transmitter and receiver are stationary ( VT = VR = 0),  the target’s bistatic doppler at the receive site fB is  fB = (2V/l ) cos d cos (b /2) (23.9)FIGURE 23.5.  Block diagram of a typical Earth-based system used for downlink bistatic radar. 
The low- noise amplifier (LNA) is either a cooled maser or a field effect transistor and may be switched between the  antenna and an ambient load, allowing amplitude calibration of the input. During bistatic operations, a signal  from the low-level noise diode, previously calibrated against the ambient load, may be injected to monitor  real-time performance of the system. Microwave inputs (1–10 GHz) are mixed to a 300 MHz intermediate  frequency (IF) for amplification. 
A programmable oscillator, which can correct for first-order doppler effects,  then mixes the IF signal to baseband, and digital samples are stored for later processing. Although an analog- to-digital conversion is shown at the output, the ADC may actually take place at any point in the system.2  (Courtesy SciTech )ANTENNA 1-10 GHz 300 MHz IF LNA NOISE DIODEAMBIENT LOAD FIXED LOCAL OSCILLATORPROGRAMMABLE OSCILLATORADC100 kHzDIGITAL STORAGE ch23.indd   14 12/20/07   2:21:25 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. 
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Bistatic Radar.  BISTATIC RADAR  23.156x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 23 The term fB also defines the doppler beat frequency , which is produced by mix - ing the target’s doppler with the direct path signal in the receiver. Willis1 provides an  expression for fB when all three sites are in motion. 
Equation 23.9 shows that ● When b = 0°, fB reduces to the monostatic case for a monostatic radar located on the  bistatic bisector. The magnitude of the bistatic doppler is never greater than that of  this monostatic doppler. ● When b = 180°, fB = 0 for any d, which is the forward-scatter case. 
● When d = ± 90° the bistatic doppler is zero. Since these velocity vectors are also  tangent to a range-sum ellipse at this point, all such ellipses (including the baseline)  become contours of zero target doppler. ● When d = 0°, the bistatic doppler is a maximum. 
Since this velocity vector is also  tangent to a hyperbola orthogonal to the range-sum ellipse at this point, all such  hyperbolas become contours of maximum target doppler. ● When d = ± b /2°, the velocity vector is pointed at the transmitter or receiver and  fB = (2V/l) cos2(b /2), which occasionally appears in the literature as a special case  of Eq. 23.9. 
If a monostatic radar is located at the transmit site and a bistatic hitchhiker is  located at the receive site, both measuring target doppler, fM and fB, respectively, the  two measurements can be combined to estimate the target velocity vector ( V, d ) in the  bistatic plane. One such estimate is  d = tan−1{[ fM / fB sin(b /2)] − cot(b /2)} (23.10)  V = l fB / 2cosd = l fM  / 2cos(d − b /2) (23.11) where b is obtained by solving the bistatic triangle, for example, by using mono - static range, monostatic LOS, and an estimate of the baseline. A third hitchhiking  site allows the target velocity vector to be measured in three dimensions. 
This pro - cess is called dual-doppler  for two measurements and multiple-doppler  for three or  more measurements, and has been used to measure three-dimensional vector wind  fields.2,42,43,58FIGURE 23.6  Geometry for bistatic doppler in the  bistatic plane ch23.indd   15 12/20/07   2:21:26 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Bistatic Radar. 
23.16  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 23 Isodoppler Contours.  When the target is stationary and the transmitter and  receiver are moving (e.g., on airborne platforms), the bistatic doppler shift at the  receiver site fTR is  f TR = (VT /l) cos (d T  − q T) + (VR /l) cos (d R − q R) (23.12) where terms are defined in Figure 23.6. The locus of points for constant doppler shift on the Earth’s surface is called an  isodoppler contour , or isodop . 
Clutter returns are characterized by these isodops,  which are called clutter doppler shift . In the monostatic case and a flat Earth, these  isodops are conic sections in three dimensions and radial lines emanating from the  radar in two dimensions. Because these isodops are aligned with the radar’s look  angle, the clutter is called stationary . 
In the bistatic case, the isodops are skewed  away from the look angle, depending upon the geometry and platform motion, and  the clutter is called nonstationary . Bistatic isodops are developed analytically for  two dimensions and a flat earth by setting fTR = constant in Eq. 23.12 and solving  for qR (or q T, if appropriate). 
Figure 23.7 is a plot of bistatic isodops in a two-dimensional bistatic plane, i.e.,  where the transmitter and receiver are at zero or near-zero altitude, for the following  conditions: VT = VR = 250 m/s, d T = 0°, d R = 45°, and  l = 0.03 m. Dimension of the grid on the bistatic plane is arbitrary; that is, the isodops are invari - ant with scale. On the left and right sides of Figure 23.7, the isodops are approximately  stationary, which are pseudo-monostatic operating points. 
Elsewhere, the isodops are  nonstationary. In these nonstationary regions, the quality of bistatic SAR imagery is  limited and moving target indication (MTI) performance is degraded when using stan - dard monostatic radar processing techniques. FIGURE 23.7  Bistatic isodoppler contours for two dimensions and a flat  earth ( Courtesy Lee R. 
Moyer, Technology Service Corp .) ch23.indd   16 12/20/07   2:21:28 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Bistatic Radar. 
 BISTATIC RADAR  23.176x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 23 Research was started in the 1990s to improve the quality of bistatic SAR images,  which were constrained to coherent integration times of a few seconds1 and conse - quently were of limited tactical interest. Specifically, local oscillator phase instabilities  were reduced and bistatic automatic focusing ( autofocus ) algorithms were developed  to improve range measurement accuracy from the antenna phase center to the imaged  scene. Bistatic autofocus requires that the position of both transmit and receive plat - forms must be tracked with subwavelength relative accuracy to correct time-varying  phase errors as part of the image formation process. 
The result allowed an increase  in coherent integration times comparable to monostatic SAR, typically >10 seconds.  Consequently, bistatic SAR image quality was greatly improved, as reported by B.  Rigling in Chapter 10 of Willis and Griffiths.2 Bistatic space-time adaptive processing (STAP) was also developed to improve  MTI performance of separately moving transmit and receive platforms. 
Since bistatic  clutter exhibits nonstationary space-time characteristics, bistatic STAP methods are  not simple applications of monostatic approaches, but a new class of algorithms.  Specifically, they apply a data-dependent weighting to voltages collected over mul - tiple receive antenna channels and pulses. This weighting dynamically tailors a filter  response in angle and bistatic doppler to suppress ground clutter reflections. 
Digital  beamforming59,60 is required for this operation. Other necessary elements include a  means to estimate the spatio-temporal clutter covariance matrix (the data-dependent  element of the filter weighting) and hypothesis of the target steering vector. In general,  auxiliary data taken from range bins other than the cell under test is used to estimate  the unknown, but critical, clutter covariance matrix. 
With compensation for nonsta - tionary behavior, bistatic clutter suppression has been greatly improved, as reported by  W. Melvin in Chapter 11 of Willis and Griffiths.2 23.6 TARGET LOCATION Bistatic Location.  A bistatic receiver typically uses range sum ( RT + RR) for tar - get location, which can be estimated by two methods. 
In the direct method, the receiver  measures the time interval ∆Trt between reception of the transmitted signal and recep - tion of the target echo. It then calculates the range sum as ( RT + RR) = c∆Trt + L. This  method can be used with any suitable modulated transmission and any type of trans - mitter (dedicated, cooperative, or noncooperative), given an adequate LOS between  transmitter and receiver. 
In the indirect method, presynchronized stable clocks are  used by the receiver and a dedicated transmitter. The receiver measures the time inter - val ∆Ttt between the transmission of a signal and reception of the target echo. It then  calculates the range sum as ( RT + RR) = c∆Ttt. 
A transmitter-to-receiver LOS is not  required unless periodic clock synchronization is implemented over the direct path. The traditional method for converting target range sum into target range from the  receiver, RR, is13  RR R L R R LRT R T R R=+ − + +( ) ( s in )2 2 2 q (23.13) The baseline L can be determined using GPS or other methods such as an emitter loca - tor for noncooperative transmitters. As outlined in Section 23.2, the receiver look angle,  qR, can be measured directly with a phased array antenna that scans in two dimensions,  ch23.indd   17 12/20/07   2:21:30 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Bistatic Radar. 23.18  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 23 or target azimuth and elevation measurements can be converted to qR.1 Beam-splitting  techniques can be used to reduce the measurement error. 
Even with beam-splitting, qR is  the critical parameter establishing accuracy of the RR estimate, since, as in the monostatic  case, its error is proportional to target range. A full error analysis of Eq. 23.13 is given  in Section 5.2 of Willis.1  No bistatic radar operating autonomously has been shown to  provide adequate location of air or space targets without employing receive apertures  comparable in size to monostatic receive apertures used for those purposes. 
In the special case of a bistatic radar using the direct range sum estimation method,  when RT + RR ≈ L Eq. 23.13 can be approximated as1  Rc T R R=∆rt 1 +sinq (23.14) Two examples are a receiver operating in an over-the-shoulder geometry and the  transmitter operating on a satellite with the receiver and target near the earth. The error  in Eq. 
23.14 is less than 10 percent for 0 °< qR < 90° and L > 0.82 ( RT + RR) or 4.6 c∆Trt.  The error grows rapidly for qR < 0°. Other target location techniques are possible.13,14,18,29,61–64 For example, when a  bistatic hitchhiker exploits the transmitter of a monostatic radar, the radar’s look angle  qT can be used in place of or in conjunction with qR. 
An example of the latter is the  theta-theta  location technique, where  RR = L cosq T / sin (qT − qR ) (23.15) and qT  − qR = b . A dedicated or cooperative monostatic radar can provide values of  q T directly to the hitchhiker. Otherwise, the hitchhiker must estimate the value, for  example, via an emitter locator measuring the radar’s antenna scan rate when it is pre - dictable. 
In this case, target location accuracy is often set by the q T estimation error. Multistatic Location.9,14,65 Multistatic location typically uses multiple transmitters  operating with one receiver or multiple receivers operating with one transmitter. Ellipses  of constant range-sum, i.e., isorange contours, from each transmitter-receiver pair are cal - culated and combined at a central site to produce intersecting contours, which locate the  target. 
* Multistatic cross-range location can be more accurate than monostatic or bistatic  cross-range location since angle data, with its range-dependent accuracy, is not used. The  multistatic radar must, however, use multiple, properly located sites with both overlap - ping coverage and simultaneous measurements, which, in turn, require broad transmit and  receive beams to achieve this accuracy. These requirements usually combine to restrict  multistatic air surveillance performance to short or medium ranges. 
Geometric dilution of precision  (GDOP ) establishes multistatic location accuracy  (and resolution) and is developed by D. Barton in Chapter 6 of Willis and Griffiths.2  GDOP is a function of the angle of intersection, a, between isorange contours. Because  the bisector of a bistatic angle is orthogonal to an isorange contour, GDOP can readily  be determined by the angle of intersection, also a, of these bistatic bisectors. 
In the  simplest case, the down-range error sdr is proportional to [ √2 cos (a /2)] −1 and cross- range error scr is proportional to [ √2 sin (a /2)] −1. *  Isorange contours intersect at other locations as well. These nontarget locations are called ghosts,  which must be  excised. 
This subject is treated in Chapter 6 of Willis and Griffiths.2 ch23.indd   18 12/20/07   2:21:33 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Bistatic Radar. 
 BISTATIC RADAR  23.196x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 23 For example, when the target is surrounded on three sides by a receive site, a  transmit site, and another receive site such that a = 90º, sdr = scr = 1. This geometry  represents the optimum case of a unity GDOP factor, yielding a circular error ellipse  with radius equal to the range error of one transmit-receive pair. In contrast, when the  target is located some distance from the three sites, a is reduced. 
For example, when   a = 5º, sdr = 0.71, and scr = 16.2. Thus, the down-range error is slightly reduced but  the cross-range error is greatly increased, not unlike that of a radar using angle data to  establish cross-range accuracy. These examples also apply when ground-based multistatic sites attempt to mea - sure target altitude. 
When the sites surround the target, for example, when positioned  around the launch site of a ballistic missile, a remains relatively large during the  missile’s launch phase, yielding precise altitude estimates. When the sites are some  distance from the target, for example, when conducting air or missile surveillance, a  is  small, yielding poor altitude estimates. Both bistatic and multistatic radars can potentially achieve even better location  accuracy by using narrow-band doppler tracking under the following conditions:  (1) When integrating doppler data, initial conditions (the pesky constant of integra - tion) can be established with sufficient accuracy. 
(2) When taking sequential doppler  measurements, the target’s velocity vector remains constant64 or predictable.62 For  example, many doppler-only, precision range instrumentation systems were developed  in the U.S. after WWII.9 Both beacon-aided and skin-track systems were developed.  All required initialization of the track data, which was conveniently provided by the  target’s launch coordinates. 
However, if the target return momentarily faded or the  transponder signal was interrupted during flight so that track was lost, there was no  way to reinitialize new track data and subsequent location estimates became biased or  were lost. These systems were subsequently replaced with precision monostatic radars  and optical trackers. 23.7 TARGET CROSS SECTION14,15,30,66 –87 The bistatic radar cross section (RCS) of a target sB is a measure, as is the monostatic  radar cross section sM, of the energy scattered from the target in the direction of the  receiver. 
Bistatic cross sections are more complex than monostatic cross sections in  the optical region since sB is a function of aspect angle and bistatic angle b.* Three  bistatic RCS regions are of interest in the optical region: pseudo-monostatic, bistatic,  and forward scatter. Each region is defined by the bistatic angle. The extent of each  region is set primarily by the target’s physical characteristics. 
Pseudo-Monostatic RCS Region.  The Crispin and Siegal monostatic-bistatic  equivalence theorem applies in the pseudo-monostatic region69: for vanishingly small  wavelengths, the bistatic RCS of a sufficiently smooth, perfectly conducting target is  equal to the monostatic RCS measured on the bisector of the bistatic angle. Sufficiently  smooth targets include spheres, elliptic cylinders, cones, and ogives, allowing the  region to extend out to b = 40° and occasionally out to b = 90°.1,76–79 *  However in the resonance region, typically at VHF and low UHF for many air targets, variations in b < ∼90° have  little effect on sB, such that sB ≈ sM.2 ch23.indd   19 12/20/07   2:21:33 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Bistatic Radar. 23.20  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 23 For targets of more complex structure, the extent of the pseudo-monostatic region  is reduced. 
A variation of the equivalence theorem developed by Kell74 applies to small  bistatic angles, in some cases as small as 5 °: the bistatic RCS of a complex target is  equal to the monostatic RCS measured on the bisector of the bistatic angle at a fre - quency lower by a factor of cos ( b /2). Kell’s complex targets are defined as an assembly of discrete scattering centers  (simple centers such as flat plates, reflex centers such as corner reflectors, skewed  reflex centers such as a dihedral with corner ≠ 90°, and stationary phase regions for  creeping waves). When the wavelength is small compared to target dimensions, these  complex target models approximate conventional aircraft, ships, ground vehicles, and  some missiles. 
The targets can be composed of conducting and dielectric materials. At small bistatic angles, the cos ( b /2) frequency reduction term has little effect in  Kell’s pseudo-monostatic region. For example, a 10 ° bistatic angle corresponds to a  0.4% shift in wavelength and usually can be ignored. 
Both versions of the equivalence  theorem are valid when the positions of the transmitter and receiver are interchanged,  given that the target-scattering media are reciprocal. Most media are reciprocal.  Exceptions are gyrotropic media, such as ferrite materials and the ionosphere. 
Bistatic RCS Region.  The bistatic angle at which the equivalence theorem fails  to predict the bistatic RCS identifies the start of the second bistatic region. In this  region, the bistatic RCS diverges from the monostatic RCS. 
Kell74 identified three  sources of this divergence for complex targets and for a target aspect angle fixed with  respect to the bistatic bisector. These sources are (1) changes in relative phase between  discrete scattering centers, (2) changes in radiation from discrete scattering centers,  and (3) changes in the existence of centers—appearance of new centers or disappear - ance of those previously present. The first source is analogous to fluctuations in monostatic RCS as the target aspect  angle changes, but now the effect is caused by a change in bistatic angle.87 The second  source occurs when, for example, the discrete scattering center, including flat plates,  retro-reflects energy toward the transmitter, and the receiver is positioned outside the  retro-reflected beamwidth; thus, the received energy is reduced. 
The third source is  typically caused by shadowing, for example, by an aircraft fuselage blocking one of  the bistatic paths—transmitter or receiver LOS to a scattering center . In general, this divergence results in a bistatic RCS lower than the monostatic RCS  for complex targets. For example, Ewell and Zehner81 measured the monostatic and  bistatic RCS of coastal freighters at X band when both the transmitter and the receiver  were near grazing incidence. 
The data was plotted as a ratio of bistatic to monostatic  RCS, sB/sM. The measurements generally match Kell’s model: of the 27 data points,  24 show bistatic RCS lower than monostatic RCS. The reduction in bistatic RCS starts  between b = 5° and b = 10° and trends downward to sB/sM = −15 dB at b = 50°. 
This rather severe loss was measured under special conditions: low grazing angles  for targets with vertical surfaces, and dihedrals and trihedrals, which generate a large  monostatic RCS. Thus, the bistatic RCS becomes significantly lower as the bistatic  angle increases due to shadowing and loss of these speculars and retro-reflectors.  Bistatic losses should not be as severe for targets with blended surfaces and a less  complex structure, such as combat aircraft. 
Glint Reduction in the Bistatic RCS Region.  A second effect can occur in the  bistatic region. When the bistatic RCS reduction is caused by a loss or attenuation of  ch23.indd   20 12/20/07   2:21:34 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Bistatic Radar.  BISTATIC RADAR  23.216x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 23 large discrete scattering centers, for example, through shadowing, target glint is often  reduced. 
Target glint is the angular displacement in apparent phase center of a target  return and is caused by the phase interference between two or more dominant scatters  within a radar resolution cell. As the target aspect angle changes, this phase interfer - ence changes, shifting the apparent phase center, often with excursions beyond the  physical extent of the target. These excursions can significantly increase the errors in  angle tracking or measurement systems. 
When the returns from dominant scatterers  are reduced in the bistatic region, the source and hence the magnitude of glint excur - sions is reduced. Measurements with tactical aircraft showed that for a 30 ° bistatic  angle, peak glint excursions could be reduced by a factor of 2 or more, with most of  the excursions contained within the physical extent of the target.88 This reduction can  be exploited in a semi-active homing missile by modifying its trajectory to maintain  b  > 20–30 ° during endgame. Forward-Scatter RCS Region. 
 The third bistatic RCS region, forward scatter,  occurs when the bistatic angle approaches 180 °. When b = 180 ° Siegel66 showed,  based on physical optics, that the forward-scatter RCS, sF, of a target with silhouette  (or shadow) area A is  sF = 4p A2/l2 (23.16) where l, the wavelength, is small compared with the target dimensions. The targets  can be either smooth or complex structures and, from the application of Babinet’s  principle, can be totally absorbing.70,75 For b < 180°, the forward-scatter RCS rolls off from sF. 
The rolloff is approxi - mated by treating the shadow area A as a uniformly illuminated antenna aperture. The  radiation pattern of this shadow aperture  is equal to the forward-scatter RCS rolloff  when (p − b ) is substituted for the angle off the aperture normal. A sphere of radius  a will roll off 3 dB at ( p − b ) ≈ l /p a, when a/l 1. 
The roll-off continues approxi - mating J0(x)/x down to b ≈ 130°, where J0 is a Bessel function of zero order. A linear  aperture of length D, with aspect angle orthogonal to the transmitter LOS, will roll off  3 dB at (p − b ) = l /2D, when D/l 1. The forward-scatter RCS rolloff continues,  with sidelobes approximating sin x/x over the forward-scatter quadrant ( b > 90°).30  For other aspect angles and targets with complex shadow apertures, calculation of the  forward-scatter RCS rolloff usually requires simulation. 
The forward-scatter RCS of more complex bodies has been simulated and mea - sured; the bodies were both reflecting and absorbing.67,70,71,76,82,84–86 Figure 23.8 shows a  method-of-moments simulation of a 16- by 1.85-cm cylinder with 992 facets at 35 GHz,  for three fixed transmitter-to-target geometries: ( a) near end on, ( b) 45° aspect angle,  and ( c) broadside.84 All three bistatic regions are shown in the figure. In the broadside  geometry, the pseudo-monostatic region occurs at b < 20°, bistatic at 20 ° < b < 140°,  and forward scatter at b > 140°. The other two geometries show a similar but broader  forward-scatter lobe, as is expected since the silhouette area and hence the shadowing  aperture are smaller. 
The 45 ° aspect geometry is of interest because the RCS in the  bistatic regions is larger than the monostatic RCS for most bistatic angles. The large  spike at b = 90° is the bistatic specular lobe, analogous to the monostatic specular lobe  in the broadside geometry. While Figure 23.8 shows the clear dependency of bistatic  RCS on both aspect and bistatic angles, it also serves to caution against attempts to use  oversimplified bistatic RCS models, especially in the bistatic region. 
ch23.indd   21 12/20/07   2:21:34 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Bistatic Radar. 
23.22  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 23 23.8 SURFACE CLUTTER The bistatic radar cross section of surface clutter, sc, is a measure, as is the monostatic  radar clutter cross section, of the energy scattered from a clutter cell area, Ac, in the direc - tion of the receiver. It is defined as σ σc B cA =0, where σB0 is the scattering coefficient,  or the clutter cross section per unit area of the illuminated surface. The clutter cell area  Ac has been developed for beam- and range-limited cases and is reported elsewhere.1,2  Doppler-limited cases are a function of platform motion, which, in turn, depend on a  specific scenario. 
Consequently, they are modeled on a case-by-case basis. Bistatic Scattering Coefficient.  Values of the scattering coefficient σB0 vary as a  function of the surface composition, frequency, and geometry and are obtained through  field measurement programs. 
In 1981, M. M. Weiner89 documented and evaluated all  unclassified measurements of σB0; however, its use was restricted to U.S. 
government  agencies. In 1990, Willis used Weiner’s references to reconstruct and evaluate typical  data from Weiner’s work,89 which became available for public use in Willis.1,16 In 2003,  Weiner’s work89 was cleared for public release, making available in one document all  unclassified σB0 data and analysis through 1980. Weiner then updated his work with data  available through 2005 and republished it in Chapter 9 of Advances in Bistatic Radar.2  This section summarizes and comments on essential elements of Weiner’s work. 
FIGURE 23.8  Simulated bistatic RCS, replotted as a function of bistatic angle for a conducting cylinder,  16 by 1.85 cm at 35 GHz, HH polarization ( after R. C. Paddison et al.84): (a) near end on, ( b) 45° aspect  angle, and ( c) broadside ch23.indd   22 12/20/07   2:21:39 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Bistatic Radar.  BISTATIC RADAR  23.236x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 23 The available database for terrain  and sea clutter at microwave frequen - cies consists of nine measurement  programs, which are summarized in  Table 23.4. 
The measurement angles  shown in Table 23.3 are defined in  Figure 23.9, which is a clutter-centered  coordinate system similar to those  used in all the measurement programs.  Because terrain and sea are reciprocal  media, qi and qs are interchangeable in  the subsequent data. Two measurement sets are of inter - est: in plane, where f = 180°, and out of  plane, where f < 180°. 
When f = 180°,  b = |qs − qi|. In the monostatic case,   f  = 180°, b = 0, and qs = qi. In-plane  data is shown in bold type on the table. 
 Out-of-plane data is often used in scatter jamming ( hot clutter ) calculations. The bistatic angle is calculated from the angles in Figure 23.9 by the use of  direction cosines:  b = cos−1 (cos qi cos qs − sin qi sin qs cos f) (23.17) Trends in this bistatic scattering coefficient database are summarized from Willis,1  Weiner,89 and Chapter 9 in Willis and Griffiths2 as follows: ● Most of the sB0 database is at X band, with 439 out of 650 data curves for both terrain  and sea clutter taken by 7 of the 9 organizations. The remaining database consists   of 172 data curves at L band (terrain only), 15 at S band (terrain only), 7 at C band (sea  only), and 17 at Ka band (terrain only), each provided by one organization. 
No data  is available at VHF or UHF. Thus only X band allows choices in selecting data. The  Cost/Peake90,91 and Domville94–96 in-plane data show good correlation.1,108 ● Attempts to model sB0 data have been made using geometrical, statistical, and semi- empirical techniques, including variations of those used to model monostatic data. 
 Meaningful results have only been achieved over a narrow range of in-plane data   (f = 180°). ● Values of sB0 for f > ∼ 140° are not appreciably different (within ∼ 5 dB) from the  monostatic case. ● Values of sB0 in a broad angular region centered on f = 90° are significantly lower  than elsewhere and typically 10 to 20 dB below the monostatic value; conse - quently, bistatic radar surveillance can be enhanced and hot clutter can be reduced  in these regions. 
● Values of sB0 are significantly larger near the forward-scattered, specular direction  (f = 0°, qi = qs) than elsewhere and may, in some cases, reduce advantages of the  enhanced, forward-scattered target RCS, particularly at frequencies > 300 MHz. ● The bistatic-monostatic equivalence theorem used to model the RCS of some targets  is not generally useful for clutter modeling, except to indicate an upper limit to sB0  in some regions.FIGURE 23.9  Coordinate system for bistatic clutter   measurements: qi = incident angle (in xz plane);   qs = scattering angle (in plane containing z axis); and   f = out-of-plane angle (in xy plane)Rx x CLUTTER PATCH yTxz qiqs b f ch23.indd   23 12/20/07   2:21:40 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. 
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Bistatic Radar. 23.24  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 23 Year  reportedRef Organization Author Surface Composition# Data  Curves /  FiguresFrequency  (GHz)Measurement Angles (degrees) Polarization      qi      qs     f 196590 196891 The Ohio State  University  Antenna Lab.Cost, Peake Smooth sand Loam Foliage, soybean Rough sand Loam with stubble Grass179 / 32          10     10 VV HH HV       VV HH HV60 – 85   20 – 80     20 – 8560 – 85   0 – 85       0 – 850 – 145 0, 180    0 – 180 196692   196793 Johns Hopkins  Univ. (APL)Pidgeon Sea (sea states 1, 2, 3)   Sea (Beaufort wind 5)7 / 1 1 / 1C band     X bandVV VH     HH87 – 89.9     82 – 89  0 – 80     45 – 78180    180 196794      196895   196996 GEC  Electronics  Ltd., EnglandDomville Rural land Urban land Forest Sea  Semi-desert, wet77 / 4X band       X band   X bandVV      VV HH   VV HH  0 – 90         0 – 90     0 – 90  0 – 90        0 – 90     0 – 900, 165, 180      0, 165, 180  0, 165, 180 TABLE 23.3  Summary of Measurement Programs for Bistatic Scattering Coef ficient, σB0 (In-plane data is shown in bold type—see subsequent text.)   (after M. 
M. Weiner, Chapter 9,2 courtesy SciTech ) ch23.indd   24 12/20/07   2:21:42 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. 
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Bistatic Radar.  BISTATIC RADAR  23.256x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 23Year  reportedRef Organization Author Surface Composition# Data  Curves /  FiguresFrequency  (GHz)Measurement Angles (degrees) Polarization      qi      qs     f 197797  197898  197999 The University  of Michigan  (ERIM)Larson,  Heimiller,  et al. Grass with cement  taxiway     Weeds and scrub trees Orchard, weeds, scrub   trees w/ snow cover16 / 8       10 / 5   146 / 1461.3, 9.4       1.3, 9.4   1.3, 9.4HH HV       HH HV   HH HV50 – 80   70,75, 80   70, 75, 80   50 – 80   60, 70, 80   60 – 8085  80  70  85  60 – 84   60 – 800 – 105   0 – 180  0 – 105   0 – 105   0 – 180  0 – 180 1979100 Raytheon Co. 
 Wayland, MACornwell,  Lancaster Beach and sand dunes Sea (sea state 2)None 9.1 VV Low graz.  angleLow graz.  angle0 (b ≅ 180°) 1982101 1984102 Georgia Inst. 
 of Tech. EESEwell,  Zehner Sea (0.9-m, 1.2–1.8-m  wave heights)7 / 7 9.38 VV HH Low graz.  angleLow graz. 
 angle95 – 157 1988103 The University  of Michigan   EE / CS Dept.Ulaby et al. Visually smooth sand   Rough sand Gravel17 / 10 35  VV HH   VH HV   VH HV66 60 6066 60 10 – 800 – 170   0 – 170   0 – 90 1992104 MIT Lincoln  Lab., MAKochanski Sea (sea state 1) 3 / 3 10 VH VV 89.7 50 – 85 180 1994105 1995106 2002107 Northeastern  Univ., MA Northeastern  Univ., MA Univ. of MAMcLaughlin  et al. 
Forested hills 15 / 15 S band S band 2.71VV HH VH HV Fully polarLow graz.  angleLow graz.  angle20 – 70 20 – 70 28 – 66TABLE 23.3  Summary of Measurement Programs for Bistatic Scattering Coef ficient, σB0 (In-plane data is shown in bold type—see subsequent text.)   (after M. 
M. Weiner, Chapter 9,2 courtesy SciTech ) (Continued ) ch23.indd   25 12/21/07   10:50:26 AMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. 
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Bistatic Radar. 23.26  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 23 In addition to this database, bistatic reflectivity measurements have been made at  optical109 and sonic110 wavelengths and of buildings,111 airport structures,112 and plan - etary surfaces.2,52 In each of these measurements, the reflectivity data is expressed in  terms of reflected power, not sB0. 23.9 UNIQUE PROBLEMS AND REQUIREMENTS In the previous edition of this book, this section covered such hardware problems  as time and phase synchronization between transmitter and receiver constrained by  technology available in the 1980s. 
Phase stability was also an issue. Since then  massive advances in digital signal correlation and processing, coupled with great  reductions in the cost of hardware to execute such processing, have mitigated these  problems. Many recent bistatic radar programs have demonstrated quite adequate  synchronization and stability—as well as detection performance—using off-the- shelf, commercial hardware. 
Notable examples are the NATO air defense trials2,113,114  and the University of Washington’s Manastash Ridge Radar  measuring ionosphere  turbulence2,48—both passive bistatic radars exploiting FM broadcast transmitters;  the HDTV-Based Passive Radar  exploiting a high definition-TV broadcast transmit - ter for air surveillance2,51; the inexpensive, commercial bistatic receiver hitchhiking  off weather radars to measure full vector wind fields 2,42; and the bistatic radar for  weapons location.35 Furthermore, major progress has been made in developing signal and data process - ing algorithms, including bistatic SAR autofocus and image formation and space-time  adaptive processing for bistatic airborne MTI (see Section 23.5). However, two prob - lems continue to plague bistatic and multistatic radars and have become the topics  of this section: (1) beam scan-on-scan for bistatic radars and radar hitchhikers and   (2) noncooperative RF environments for passive bistatic radars. These problems and  their potential remedies are detailed next. 
Beam Scan-on-Scan.  When high-gain, narrow-beam scanning antennas are  used by both transmitter and receiver in a bistatic surveillance radar, inefficient use  is made of the radar energy because only the volume common to both beams can be  observed by the receiver at any given time. Outside this common beam volume, targets  are lost to the receiver. 
Figure 23.10 shows the geometry. This problem commonly  arises when attempting to hitchhike off monostatic surveillance radars. Four remedies  are available to mitigate the beam scan-on-scan problem: (1) step scanning, (2) flood - light beams, (3) multiple beams, and (4) time-multiplexed beams, which in the limit  is called pulse chasing . 
Step Scanning . For hitchhiking, the step scanning remedy consists of fixing  the receive beam and waiting for the transmit beam to scan through the surveillance  sector. The receive beam is then stepped one beamwidth for the next transmit beam  scan and so on, until the receive beam has stepped across the full surveillance sec - tor. 
For a dedicated transmitter, the process can be reversed: fix the transmit beam  and scan the receive beam. This remedy increases the surveillance frame time by the  number of required beam steps and is usually not acceptable for large area surveil - lance. It can be considered in an over-the-shoulder geometry or when the baseline is  small. 
In these cases, transmit and receive beams become more closely aligned in a  ch23.indd   26 12/20/07   2:21:43 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Bistatic Radar. 
 BISTATIC RADAR  23.276x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 23 pseudo-monostatic geometry, which reduces the number of required beam steps. The  Bistatic Radar for Weapons Location  test program35 is an example. Floodlight Beams . 
A floodlight beam can be used with either transmitter or  receiver. The floodlight transmitter remedy requires a dedicated transmit antenna that  is designed to flood the surveillance sector continuously. The receiver then scans the  sector with a high-gain antenna. 
This remedy restores the surveillance frame time  lost by step scanning while simultaneously servicing multiple receivers. However, it  incurs a detection range penalty by the reduced transmit antenna gain and also suf - fers increased sidelobe clutter levels. The floodlight receiver remedy can be used by  a hitchhiker to flood a sector scanned by the transmit beam, again restoring the sur - veillance frame time. 
In addition to the range penalty, the receiver will also suffer  increased clutter levels and angle measurement errors. Despite these limitations, the  Binet  floodlight receiver was found quite adequate for measuring three dimensional  vector wind fields.2,42 Multiple Beams.  A bistatic receiver can use multiple simultaneous fixed receive  beams to cover the surveillance sector, which again restores the surveillance frame  time. 
If the gain of each receive antenna is made equal to the gain of the initial single  receive antenna, range performance is also restored. However, this remedy increases  the cost and complexity of the receiver since a special beamforming network is  required, along with a receiver and signal processor (RSP) for each beam. The multi - beam receiver can be used with any type of transmitter, including a floodlight transmit - ter where the loss in range performance might be offset by an increase in dwell time  on target, as detailed subsequently. 
Time-multiplexing.  If the transmitter’s beam scanning schedule is known, the  number of receive beams (and RSPs) can be reduced in some geometries by time- multiplexing them to cover only the currently illuminated surveillance sector.   FIGURE 23.10  Beam scan-on-scan coverage problem shown in  two dimensions in the bistatic plane2 (Courtesy SciTech ) ch23.indd   27 12/20/07   2:21:44 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Bistatic Radar. 23.28  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 23 For example, in an over-the-shoulder geometry, the receiver might use a set of beams to  cover the north side of the baseline; then, as the transmit beam scans past the receiver,  it switches the set to the south side, thus halving the total number required. 
The Bistatic  Alerting and Cueing  test program used time-multiplexed beams when hitchhiking off  the AWACS transmitter for short-range air surveillance.46,47 Pulse Chasing.  If the transmitter’s beam scanning and pulse transmission sched - ule are known, pulse chasing can be considered to reduce the multibeam cost pen - alty further.1,21,115 –118 This was successfully demonstrated in the Bistatic Radar for  Weapons Location  test program.35 The simplest pulse-chasing concept uses a single  beam and RSP that rapidly scans the volume covered by the transmit beam, chasing  the pulse as it propagates from the transmitter. The receive beam-scanning rate must  be at the transmitter’s pulse propagation rate, modified by the usual geometric condi - tions. 
This rate, qR, was initially identified by Jackson21 and subsequently verified by  Moyer and Morgan119:  q bR R c R=tan( )/ /2  (23.18) For operation in the co-site region (see Table 23.2),qRcan vary from 1 °/µs near the  baseline to 0.01 °/µs when RT + RR > L. Typical qRcontours are shown in Jackson.21  These rates and rate changes require an inertialess antenna, for example, a phased  array with diode phase shifters. Normally, a phased array antenna used for surveillance  is programmed to switch beams in increments of a beamwidth. 
Fractional shifts of a  beamwidth can be achieved by changing the phase of a few (symmetric) pairs of phase  shifters in the array. In this way, a pseudo-continuous beam scan can be generated with  the required rates and rate changes.120 Because of pulse propagation delays from the target to the receiver, the pointing  angle of the receive beam qR must lag the actual pulse position. For an instantaneous  pulse position that generates a bistatic angle b /2, qR = qT − b. 
In terms of the bistatic  triangle, the required receive beam-pointing angle is21  q qq qR TT T R TL R R L= −+ −  −21tancos sin (23.19) The minimum receive beamwidth ( ∆qR)m required to capture all returns from a  range cell intersecting the common beam area is approximated by21  ( ) ( t an( ) ) ∆ ∆ q t b qR m u TT R c RR ≈ +/ /2  (23.20) where tu is the uncompressed pulse width and ∆qT is the transmit beamwidth. The  approximation assumes that respective rays from the transmit and receive beams are  parallel. The approximation is reasonable when ( RT + RR)  L or when L  ctu. 
 Equation 23.20 shows that ( ∆qR)m changes as the receive beam scans out the transmit  beam. Phased array antennas operating with a digital beamformer59,60 can accommo - date this change. Otherwise, use of a fixed beamwidth incurs a small beam mismatch  loss. 
An example is given in Willis.1 Even though one pulse must be chased at a time, a hitchhiker operating in the  co-site region has time to capture all pulses from a monostatic radar that uses range- unambiguous PRFs. Furthermore, when operating in the transmit- or receive-centered  ovals (refer to Table 23.2) a hitchhiker can operate with range-ambiguous PRFs, for  example, when transmitted from an airborne radar. Examples are given in Willis.1 ch23.indd   28 12/20/07   2:21:52 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Bistatic Radar.  BISTATIC RADAR  23.296x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 23 Other implementations of pulse chasing are possible. 
In one concept, the fixed  multibeam receive antenna is used and two RSPs are time-multiplexed across the  multibeams. One RSP steps across the even-numbered beams, and the other RSP steps  across the odd-numbered beams, so that returns in beam pairs are processed simultane - ously: (1,2), (2,3), (3,4), etc. This leapfrog  sequence is required to capture all returns  in the common-beam area. 
A second concept uses two beams and two RSPs step-scanning over the volume cov - ered by the multibeam antenna. It uses an identical leapfrog sequence. Both concepts  relax the fractional beam scan requirements by either sampling or stepping the beams  in units of a beamwidth. 
Since they both process returns across two beamwidths before  switching, the beam dwell time Tb is approximately 2( ∆qR)m RR / c and the stepping rate  is Tb−1. The approximation assumes negligible phase-shift delays and settling times. Moving Target Indication (MTI) can be used with any of these pulse chasing imple - mentations, as long as the receive beam precisely retraces its scan pattern on succes - sive sweeps to capture the same clutter samples over the MTI processing time. 
Combinations.   Combinations of these remedies can be considered. For exam - ple, a fixed multibeam receive antenna can be used with a fixed floodlight transmit  antenna. 
This configuration allows the receiver to integrate longer, subject to target/ cell migration limits, which, in turn, can recover some of the lost range performance of  the floodlight antenna. It also has the benefits of increasing data rates and simultane - ously servicing multiple receivers. It incurs increased sidelobe clutter levels, as well as  complexity and cost. 
Some passive bistatic radars operate in this configuration, where  the floodlight transmitter is provided by a TV or FM broadcast station.49,50 A single receive beam can be used with a transmit antenna that is adaptively tapered  to flood only the angular region covered by the receive beam at a given look angle,  with the tapering such that the signal-to-noise ratio at the receiver is held constant at  all positions along the receive beam. This scheme is analogous to the monostatic air  surveillance radar using a cosecant-squared antenna pattern, where the echo is inde - pendent of range for a constant altitude target.15 It has the potential of restoring much  of the frame time and range performance, but incurs increased sidelobe clutter levels  and increased transmitter cost and complexity. An example is given in Willis.1 Noncooperative RF Environment. 
 Most passive bistatic radar (PBR) concepts  and developments exploit commercial broadcast transmitters as their source of radar  illumination. FM and High Definition (HD) TV terrestrial broadcast transmitters are  particularly attractive due to their high-power, noise-like waveforms, and relatively  wide bandwidths.49–51 When these broadcast transmitters are appropriately sited and  operating, they can support many types of surveillance, particularly air surveillance,  which is often restricted for monostatic radars operating at VHF/UHF. The surveillance  can be covert because even the transmitter is unaware it is being exploited and can be  counter-stealth due to unavoidable aircraft resonances in the VHF/UHF region. 
Other  attractive features are lower prime power requirements and lower costs for the PBR.2 While a PBR can exploit both cooperative and noncooperative broadcast trans - mitters, the PBR has no control over their transmission or waveform properties,  specifically the transmission schedule, effective radiated power, spatial coverage,  modulation type, modulation content, and resulting autocorrelation function, as out - lined earlier. Furthermore, interference from the host emitter and other emitters, espe - cially in urban and suburban areas, can significantly degrade PBR performance. This  section summarizes the problems and remedies encountered by a PBR exploiting  these broadcast transmitters. 
ch23.indd   29 12/20/07   2:21:53 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Bistatic Radar. 
23.30  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 23 Waveforms.  The effective radiated power (ERP) of broadcast transmitters  can vary  from a maximum of ~1 MW for TV transmitters to a minimum of ~10 W for cell-phone  tower transmitters. The former can yield equivalent monostatic detection ranges of air  targets of 100–150 km; the latter, 1–5 km, which is of the order of the cell-phone wave - form resolution, typically 2 km.2 Consequently when these low-powered transmitters  are evaluated for short-range ground or air target location.121 only doppler (and coarse  DOA) data are available, which severely restricts location capability, as outlined in  Section 23.6. 
Thus, the low ERP of these transmitters constrained by the available  bandwidth conspire to significantly reduce their utility for PBR surveillance. The type of modulation used by a broadcast transmitter is particularly important. For  example, the 1985 Crystal Palace TV transmitter trials in London122 attempted range  measurements with analog TV waveforms but found that they generated high range side-   lobes (~5 dB), range ambiguities every 9.6 km, and modest range resolution (~4 km),  and concluded that such waveforms were more suitable for doppler measurements. 
 This finding established the precedence for subsequent PBR developments: doppler  exploitation of stable, narrow-band carrier lines in TV transmissions and range/doppler  exploitation of the wider band, noise-like spectrum of FM transmissions. The modulation content of many broadcast transmitters changes as a function of  time, thereby complicating matched filtering by the PBR’s receiver. Specifically, the  receiver must sample and store a segment of the direct path waveform and then cross- correlate it with the returned echo, all in real time. 
Since cross-correlation must be  performed over the range of expected target echo time delays and/or doppler shifts,  correlation receiver complexity is increased with respect to a matched-filter receiver  typically used by monostatic radar.123 Such cross-correlation is now feasible to imple - ment, but complicates an otherwise well-developed operation in the stable, more pre - dictable monostatic world. A related modulation content problem is dead air , where no information is broad - cast; thus, the broadcast transmitter modulation goes to zero and range measurement  errors increase without limit. This condition can occur when broadcasting a talk show  or classical music, but occurs less often with popular or rock music.124 The frequency  of this type of outage is not insignificant, occurring roughly once per second for talk  broadcasts.125 Consequently, once a track has been established a nonlinear tracking filter  may be needed to edit out large error spikes (see Chapter 6 of Willis and Griffiths.2) Radio Frequency Interference. 
 Passive bistatic radar performance is subject to  degradation by radio frequency interference (RFI) from both the exploited broadcast  transmitter and other emitters in spatial or frequency proximity. These emitters can  include broadcast, communications, and navigation transmitters, as well as power  tools, fluorescent lights, cooling fans, and (old) automobile ignitions, which typically  generate impulsive noise. * RFI can arrive via a direct path or multipath and includes  scattering from terrain or sea surfaces, also called clutter. 
However, the signal from an  exploited transmitter arriving over the direct transmitter-to-receiver path, called the  direct-path , is nearly always the dominant RFI source. Multipath signals from that  transmitter are less severe but can also contribute to RFI. RFI over the direct-path from the exploited transmitter, also called direct-path  breakthrough , is common to all but the simplest, low-power CW radar. 
It becomes  *  Sky noise consisting of sun, galactic, and atmospheric noise is another source of RFI, which can increase the  receiver’s noise temperature by a factor of 2–4 at frequencies below ~400 MHz.30 However, this increase is usually  orders of magnitude smaller than RFI from other sources and can be ignored. ch23.indd   30 12/20/07   2:21:53 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. 
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Bistatic Radar.  BISTATIC RADAR  23.316x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 23 particularly severe when the receiver is located in direct LOS of the transmitter, which  must occur when surveillance of low-altitude air targets is required (Eqs. 23.5–23.8). 
 If this direct path signal is not attenuated, the received signal becomes masked in range  and often masked in doppler by sidelobes of the correlated direct path signal. Direct-path breakthrough effects are similar to those of a spot noise jammer and  can be characterized by an increase in the system noise temperature, Ts = Fn To, where  Fn is the receiver noise figure and To = 290 K. Specifically, the amount of increase in  Ts, and hence the amount of attenuation Cdp required to reduce the direct path signal  to the level of Ts, is  Cdp = PT GT (GR)T l 2 / (4p )2 B L2 (kTs) (23.21) where PT, GT, l, and k are defined with Eq. 
23.2; ( GR)T is the receiving antenna power  gain in the direction of the transmitter; B is the input RF bandwidth; and L is the  baseline range. For example, if the PBR exploits a typical FM broadcast transmitter located at a  50 km LOS from the receiver, PT GT = 250 kW, l = 3 m, B = 50 kHz, and L = 50 km.  Assuming a fixed receiving antenna beam tailored in elevation and covering a wide  azimuth sector, which includes the transmitter site, ( GR)T might be 8 dBi. 
Also, assum - ing the ambient RFI environment described below, the noise spectral density kTs =  −179 dBW/Hz; thus, Cdp = 88 dB. Combinations of earth masking, antenna shielding, spatial cancellation, and spec - tral cancellation can be used to achieve the required direct-path attenuation. A brute- force remedy is to physically block the transmit signal from the receiver with a shroud  or structure, or if coverage allows, over-the-horizon separation. 
While many orders of  magnitude attenuation are possible with these masking and shielding techniques, addi - tional reduction is nearly always necessary. Howland reported a two-stage, spatial noise  canceller with an adaptive M-stage lattice predictor ( M = 50) as the first stage and an  adaptive tapped delay line as the second stage, which achieved ~75 dB cancellation  of the narrow-band stationary direct path signal.113,114 This cancellation combined with  masking achieved >90 dB attenuation, which satisfies the Cdp requirement in the above  example. Howland also observed that receiver dynamic range ultimately limits the avail - able cancellation, which, in turn, is set by the receiver’s analog-to-digital converter. 
Nearby emitters can significantly raise the system noise level, simply through spec - tral spillover from adjacent or nearby bands. In the U.S. the FCC mandates a gauss - ian spectral roll-off for many broadcast transmitters, which is sufficient to prevent  interference in one-way home receivers from adjacent transmissions. 
However, it is  not sufficient for two-way radar receivers, which necessarily must work much farther  into the receiver noise.126 The severity of this problem was quantified by in situ measurements of several  VHF and UHF bands in a dense urban environment.127 Ambient VHF noise levels  were found to be typically 45 dB greater than thermal noise and direct path illuminator  signals some 45 dB greater still. Even with robust cancellation techniques, the residue  of this unsuppressed RFI will increase the PBR’s system noise figure by many tens  of decibels: a 25 dB noise figure at VHF in urban and semi-rural areas is not uncom - mon.126 This value translates into a noise spectral density of –179 dBW/Hz. Similar  measurements have been made at UHF, with 20–25 dB noise figures being obtained  using spectral cancellation by a least-squares channel estimator.51 These noise figures  are significantly higher than those obtained in the U.S. 
radar-designated VHF/UHF  channels and are a penalty for exploiting broadcast transmitters of opportunity . ch23.indd   31 12/20/07   2:21:54 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. 
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Bistatic Radar. 23.32  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 23 REFERENCES  1. N. 
J. Willis, Bistatic Radar,  2nd Ed., Silver Spring, MD: Technology Service Corp., 1995.  Corrected and republished by Raleigh, NC: SciTech Publishing, Inc., 2005. 
 2. N. J. 
Willis and H. D. Griffiths, (eds.), Advances in Bistatic Radar , Raleigh NC: SciTech  Publishing Inc., 2007. 
 3. R. C. 
Heimiller, J. E. Belyea, and P. 
G. Tomlinson, “Distributed array radar,” IEEE Trans .,  vol. AES- 19, pp. 
831–839, 1983.  4. B. 
D. Steinberg, Principles of Aperture and Array System Design—Including Random and  Adaptive Arrays , New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1976.  5. 
B. D. Steinberg and E. 
Yadin, “Distributed airborne array concepts,” IEEE Trans ., vol. AES-18,  pp. 219–226, 1982. 
 6. B. D. 
Steinberg, “High angular microwave resolution from distorted arrays,” Proc. Int. Comput. 
 Conf ., vol. 23, 1980.  7. 
T. C. Cheston and J. 
Frank, “Phased array antennas,” Chapter 7 in Radar Handbook , M. I. Skolnik,  (ed.), 2nd Ed., New York: McGraw-Hill, 1990. 
 8. L. E. 
Merters and R. H. Tabeling, “Tracking instrumentation and accuracy on the Eastern Test  Range,” IEEE Trans ., vol. 
SET-11, pp. 14–23, March 1965.  9. 
J. J. Scavullo and F. 
J. Paul, Aerospace Ranges: Instrumentation , Princeton, NJ: D. Van Nostrand  Company, 1965. 
10. B. D. 
Steinberg, et al., “First experimental results for the Valley Forge radio camera program,”  Proc. IEEE , vol. 67, pp. 
1370–1371, September 1979. 11. B. 
D. Steinberg, “Radar imaging from a distributed array: The radio camera algorithm and experi - ments,” IEEE Trans ., vol. AP-29, pp. 
740–748, September 1981. 12. “Handbook for NA VSPASUR System Orientation,” vol. 
1, Naval Space Surveillance System,  Dahlgren, V A, July 1, 1976. 13. M. 
I. Skolnik, “An analysis of bistatic radar,” IRE Trans ., vol. ANE-8, pp. 
19–27, March 1961. 14. J. 
M. Caspers, “Bistatic and multistatic radar,” Chapter 36 in Radar Handbook , M. I. 
Skolnik,  (ed.), New York: McGraw-Hill Book Company, 1970. 15. M. 
I. Skolnik, Introduction to Radar Systems , New York: McGraw-Hill Book Company, 1980. 16. 
N. J. Willis, “Bistatic radar,” Chapter 25, in Radar Handbook , M. 
I. Skolnik (ed.), 2nd Ed.,   New York: McGraw-Hill, 1990. 17. 
E. F. Ewing, “The applicability of bistatic radar to short range surveillance,” in IEE Conf. 
 Radar 77, Publ . 155, London, 1977, pp. 53–58. 
18. E. F. 
Ewing and L. W. Dicken, “Some Applications of Bistatic and Multi-Bistatic Radars,” in Int. 
 Radar Conf ., Paris, 1978, pp. 222–231. 19. 
A. Farina and E. Hanle, “Position accuracy in netted monostatic and bistatic radar,” IEEE Trans .,  vol. 
AES-19, pp. 513–520, July 1983. 20. 
E. Hanle, “Survey of bistatic and multistatic radar,” Proc. IEE , vol. 
133, pt. F, pp. 587–595,  December 1986. 
21. M. C. 
Jackson, “The geometry of bistatic radar systems,” IEE Proc ., vol. 133, pt. F, pp. 
604–612,  December 1986. 22. D. 
E. N. Davies, “Use of bistatic radar techniques to improve resolution in the vertical plane,”  IEE Electron. 
Lett ., vol. 4, pp. 170–171, May 3, 1968. 
23. J. R. 
Forrest and J. G. Schoenenberger. 
“Totally independent bistatic radar receiver with real- time microprocessor scan correction,” IEEE Int. Radar Conf ., 1980, pp. 380–386. 
24. J. G. 
Schoenenberger and J. R. Forrest, “Principles of independent receivers for use with   co-operative radar transmitters,” Radio Electron. 
Eng ., vol. 52, pp. 93–101, February 1982. 
25. E. G. 
McCall, “Bistatic clutter in a moving receiver system,” RCA Rev ., pp. 518–540,  September 1969. ch23.indd   32 12/20/07   2:21:54 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Bistatic Radar.  BISTATIC RADAR  23.336x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 23 26. 
H. A. Crowder, “Ground clutter isodops for coherent bistatic radar,” IRE Nat. 
Conv. Rec ., pt. 5,  New York, 1959, pp. 
88–94. 27. L. 
J. Cantafio (ed.), Space-Based Radar Handbook , Chapter 5, Norwood, MA: Artech House, 1989. 28. 
A. Farina and F. A. 
Studer, Radar Data Processing , V ol. 2, Advanced Topics and Applications ,  UK: Research Studies Press Ltd., 1986. 29. 
I. Stein, “Bistatic radar applications in passive systems,” Journal of Electronic Defense , 13(3),  pp. 55–61, March 1990. 
30. D. K. 
Barton, Modern Radar System Analysis , Norwood, MA: Artech House, 1988. 31. D. 
K. Barton, private communication, June 2006. 32. 
R. L. Easton and J. 
J. Fleming, “The Navy space surveillance system,” Proc. IRE , vol. 
48,  pp. 663– 669, 1960. 33. 
R. J. Lefevre, “Bistatic radar: New application for an old technique,” WESCON Conf. 
Rec ., San  Francisco, 1979, pp. 1–20. 34. 
F. L. Fleming and N. 
J. Willis, “Sanctuary radar,” Proc. Mil. 
Microwaves Conf ., London,  October 22–24, 1980, pp. 103–108. 35. 
L. Bovino, “Bistatic radar for weapons location ,” U.S. Army Communications Electronics  Command, Fort Monmouth, NJ, 1994. 
36. Russia’s Arms Catalog, vol. 5, Air Defense, Moscow: Military Parade Ltd., 1997. 
37. “Barrier,” Bistatical low flying target detection system, Nizhny Novgorod Scientific-Research  Radiotechnical Institute, Moscow, 2000. 38. 
A. G. Blyakhman et al., “Forward scattering radar moving object coordinate measurement,”  IEEE International Radar Conference , 2000. 
39. A. Thomson, A GRAVES Sourcebook,  version of 2006-10-27, thomsona@flash.net. 
40. J. E. 
Salah and J. E. Morriello, “Development of a multistatic measurement system,” in IEEE   International Radar Conference , 1980, pp. 
88–93. 41. “Multistatic mode raises radar accuracy,” Aviation Week and Space Technology , pp. 
62–69,  July 14, 1980. 42. J. 
Wurman, S. Heckman, and D. Boccippio, “A bistatic multiple-doppler radar network,” Journal  of Applied Meterology , vol. 
32, pp. 1802–1814, December 1993. 43. 
J. Wurman, M. Randall, C. 
L. Frush, E. Loew, and C. 
L. Holloway, “Design of a bistatic dual- doppler radar for retrieving vector winds using one transmitter and a remote low-gain passive  receiver,” invited paper, Proc. of the IEEE , vol. 
82, no. 12, December 1994, pp. 1861–1872. 
44. F. Johnson, Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR) Heritage: An Air Force Perspective , Ohio: Air Force  Avionics Laboratory, Wright Patterson AFB, June 2003. 
45. D. C. 
Lorti and M. Balser, “Simulated performance of a tactical bistatic radar system,” IEEE  EASCON 77 Rec. Publ . 
77 CH1255-9, Arlington, V A, 1977, pp. 4-4A–4-40. 46. 
“Bistatic Radars Hold Promise for Future System,” Microwave Systems News , pp. 119–136,  October 1984. 47. 
E. C. Thompson, “Bistatic radar noncooperative illuminator synchronization techniques,” in  Proc. 
of the 1989 IEEE National Radar Conference , Dallas, TX, March 29–30, 1989. 48. J. 
D. Sahr, “Remote sensing with passive radar at the University of Washington,” IEEE Geoscience  and Remote Sensing Society Newsletter , pp. 16–21, December 2005. 
49. “Passive system hints at stealth detection silent sentry—A new type of radar,” Aviation Week and  Space Technology , November 30, 1998, pp. 70–71. 
50. J. Baniak, G. 
Baker, A. M. Cunningham, and L. 
Martin, “Silent SentryTM Passive Surveillance,”  Aviation Week and Space Technology , June 7, 1999. 51. A. 
Andrews, “HDTV-based passive radar,” presented at AOC 4th Multinational PCR Conference,  Syracuse, NY , October 6, 2005. 52. R. 
A. Simpson, “Spacecraft studies of planetary surfaces using bistatic radar,” IEEE Trans.   Geoscience and Remote Sensing , vol. 
31 no. 2, March 1993. ch23.indd   33 12/20/07   2:21:55 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Bistatic Radar. 23.34  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 23 53. 
D. Prichard, The Radar War: The German Achievement , 1904–1945 , Cambridge, UK: Patrick  Stephens Ltd., 1989. 54. 
A. Price, Instruments of Darkness: The History of Electronic Warfare , New York: Charles  Scribner’s Sons, 1978. 55. 
P. J. Klass, “Navy improves accuracy, detection range,” Aviation Week and Space Technology ,  pp. 
56–61, August 16, 1965. 56. Technology in the National Interest , Lexington, MA: MIT Lincoln Laboratory, 1995. 
57. A. Bernard, private communication, MIT Lincoln Laboratory, July 24, 2006. 
58. S. Satoh and J. 
Wurman, “Accuracy of wind fields observed by a bistatic doppler radar network,”  Journal Ocean. Atmos. Tech. 
 vol. 20, pp. 1077–1091, 2003. 
59. A. E. 
Ruvin and L. Weinberg, “Digital multiple beamforming techniques for radars,” in IEEE  Eascon ’78 Rec. , pp. 
152–163. 60. E. 
E. Swartzlander and J. M. 
McKay, “A digital beamforming processor,” Real Time Signal   Processing III, SPIE Proc ., vol. 241, pp. 232–237, 1980. 
61. A. Farina, “Tracking function in bistatic and multistatic radar systems,” Proc. 
IEE , vol. 133,   pt. F, pp. 
630–637, December 1986. 62. R. 
B. Patton, Jr., “Orbit determination from single pass doppler observations,” IRE Transactions  on Military Electronics , pp. 336–344, April–July, 1960. 
63. A. Farina, “Tracking function in bistatic and multistatic radar systems,” IEE Proc ., 133(7),   pt. 
F, pp. 630–637, December 1986. 64. 
M. I. Skolnik, Introduction to Radar Systems , New York: McGraw Hill Book Co., 1962. 
65. D. K. 
Barton, Radar System Analysis , Dedham, MA: Artech House, Inc., 1976. 66. K. 
M. Siegel, et al., “Bistatic radar cross sections of surfaces of revolution,” J. Appl. 
Phys .,  vol. 26, pp. 297–305, March 1955. 
67. K. M. 
Siegel, “Bistatic radars and forward scattering,” in Proc. Nat. Conf. 
Aeronaut. Electron .,  May 12–14, 1958, pp. 286–290. 
68. F. V . 
Schultz et al., “Measurement of the radar cross-section of a man,” Proc. IRE , vol. 46,  pp. 
476–481, February 1958. 69. J. 
W. Crispin, Jr. et al., “A theoretical method for the calculation of radar cross section of aircraft  and missies,” University of Michigan, Radiation Lab. 
Rept. 2591-1-H, July 1959. 70. 
R. E. Hiatt et al., “Forward scattering by coated objects illuminated by short wavelength radar,”  Proc. 
IRE , vol. 48, pp. 1630–1635, September 1960. 
71. R. J. 
Garbacz and D. L. Moffett, “An experimental study of bistatic scattering from some small,  absorber-coated, metal shapes,” Proc. 
IRE , vol.49, pp. 1184–1192, July 1961. 72. 
M. G. Andreasen, “Scattering from bodies of revolution,” IEEE Trans ., vol. 
AP-13, pp. 303–310,  March 1965. 73. 
C. R. Mullin et al., “A numerical technique for the determination of the scattering cross sections  of infinite cylinders of arbitrary geometric cross section,” IEEE Trans ., vol. 
AP-13, pp. 141–149,  January 1965. 74. 
R. E. Kell, “On the derivation of bistatic RCS from monostatic measurements,” Proc. 
IEEE ,  vol. 53, pp. 983–988, August 1965. 
75. W. I. 
Kock, “Related experiments with sound waves and electromagnetic waves,” Proc. IRE ,  vol. 47, pp. 
1200–1201, July 1959. 76. K. 
M. Siegel et al., “RCS calculation of simple shapes—bistatic,” Chapter 5 in Methods of Radar  Cross-Section Analysis , New York: Academic Press, 1968. 77. 
H. Weil et al., “Scattering of electromagnetic waves by spheres,” University of Michigan, Radiat.  Lab. 
Stud. Radar Cross Sections X, Rept. 2255-20-T, contract AF 30(602)-1070, July 1956. 
78. R. W. 
P. King and T. T. 
Wu, The Scattering and Diffraction of Waves , Cambridge, MA: Harvard  Universities Press, 1959. 79. R. 
F. Goodrich et al., “Diffraction and scattering by regular bodies—I: The sphere,” University of  Michigan, Dept. Electr. 
Eng. Rept. 3648-1-T, 1961. 
ch23.indd   34 12/20/07   2:21:55 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Bistatic Radar. 
 BISTATIC RADAR  23.356x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 23  80. M. Matsuo et al., “Bistatic radar cross section measurements by pendulum method,” IEEE  Trans ., vol. 
AP-18, pp. 83–88, January 1970.  81. 
G. W. Ewell and S. 
P. Zehner, “Bistatic radar cross section of ship targets,” IEEE J. Ocean. 
Eng .,  vol. OE-5, pp. 211–215, October 1980. 
 82. “Radar cross-section measurements,” General Motors Corporation, Delco Electron. Div. 
Rept.  R81-152, Santa Barbara, CA, 1981.  83. 
C. G. Bachman, Radar Targets , Lexington, MA: Lexington Books, 1982, p. 
29.  84. F. 
C. Paddison et al., “Large bistatic angle radar cross section of a right circular cylinder,”  Electromagnetics , vol. 5, pp. 
63–77, 1985.  85. J. 
I. Glaser, “Bistatic RCS of complex objects near forward scatter,” IEEE Trans ., vol. AES-21,  pp. 
70–78, January 1985.  86. C.-C. 
Cha et al., “An RCS analysis of generic airborne vehicles’ dependence on frequency and  bistatic angle,” in IEEE Nat. Radar Conf ., Ann Arbor, MI, April 20, 1988, pp. 214–219. 
 87. W. A. 
Pierson et al., “The effect of coupling on monostatic-bistatic equivalence,” Proc. IEEE ,  pp. 84–86, January 1971. 
 88. “Bistatic radars hold promise for future systems,” Microwave Syst. News , pp. 
119–136,  October 1984.  89. M. 
M. Weiner, “Multistatic radar phenomenology terrain & sea scatter,” RADC-TR-81-75,  vol. 1, May 1981, now unlimited distribution. 
 90. S. T. 
Cost, “Measurements of the bistatic echo area of terrain at X-band,” The Ohio State  University, Antenna Laboratory, Report No. 1822-2, May 1965.  91. 
W. H. Peake and S.T. 
Cost, “The bistatic echo area of terrain at 10 GHz,” in IEEE WESCON   1968, Session 22/2, pp. 1–10.  92. 
V . W. Pidgeon, “Bistatic cross section of the sea,” IEEE Trans . 
AP-14(3), pp. 405–406,  May 1966.  93. 
V . W. Pidgeon, “Bistatic cross section of the sea for Beauford 5 sea,” in Science and Technology ,  vol. 
17 “Use of space systems for planetary geology and geophysics,” San Diego: American  Astronautical Society, 1968, pp. 447–448.  94. 
A. R. Domville, “The bistatic reflection from land and sea of X-band radio waves, Part I,” GEC  (Electronics) Ltd., Stanmore, England, Memorandum SLM1802, July 1967. 
 95. A. R. 
Domville, “The bistatic reflection from land and sea of X-band radio waves, Part II,” GEC  (Electronics) Ltd., Stanmore, England, Memorandum SLM2116, July 1968.  96. A. 
R. Domville, ”The bistatic reflection from land and sea of X-band radio waves, Part II-   supplement,” GEC (Electronics) Ltd., Stanmore, England, Memorandum SLM2116  (Supplement), July 1969.  97. 
R. W. Larsen and R. 
C. Heimiller, “Bistatic clutter data measurement program,” Environmental  Research Institute of Michigan, RADC-TR-77-389, November 1977, AD-A049037.  98. 
R. W. Larsen, A. 
L. Maffett, R. C. 
Heimiller, A. F. Fromm, E. 
L. Johansen, R. F. 
Rawson, and F. L.  Smith, “Bistatic clutter measurements,” IEEE Trans. 
AP-26(6), pp. 801–804, November 1978.  99. 
R. W. Larsen, A. 
Maffett, F. Smith, R.C. Heimiller, and A. 
Fromm, “Measurements of bistatic  clutter cross section,” Environmental Research Institute of Michigan, Final Technical Report  RADC-TR-79-15, May 1979, AD-A071193. 100. P. 
E. Cornwell and J. Lancaster, “Low-altitude tracking over rough surfaces II: Experimental and  model comparisons,” in IEEE EASCON-79 Record , October 1979, pp. 
235–248. 101. G. 
W. Ewell and S. P. 
Zehner, “Bistatic sea clutter return near grazing incidence,” in IEE Int.  Conf. Radar 82 , Publication No. 
216, London, October 1982, pp. 188–192. 102. 
G. W. Ewell, “Techniques of radar reflectivity measurement,” Chapter 7 in Bistatic Radar Cross- Section Measurements , 2nd Ed., N. 
C. Currie (ed.), Norwood, MA: Artech House,1984. 103. 
F. T. Ulaby, T. 
E. Van Deventer, J. R. 
East, T. F. Haddock, and M. 
E. Coluzzi, “Millimeter-wave  bistatic scattering from ground and vegetation targets,” IEEE Trans . GRS-26(3), pp. 
229–243,  May 1988. ch23.indd   35 12/20/07   2:21:55 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. 
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Bistatic Radar. 23.36  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 23 104. T. 
P. Kochanski, M. J. 
Vanderhill, J.V . Zolotarevsky, and T. Fariss, “Low illumination angle  bistatic sea clutter measurements at X-band,” in IEEE Int. 
Conf. Oceans-92: Mastering the  Oceans Through Technology, Proc ., vol. 1, October 26–29, 1992, pp. 
518–523. 105. D. 
J. McLaughlin, E. Boltniew, Y . 
Wu, and R. S. Raghavan, “Low grazing angle bistatic NCRS  of forested clutter,” Electronics Letters -30(18), pp. 
1532–1533, September 1, 1994. 106. D. 
J. McLaughlin, E. Boltniew, R. 
S. Raghavan, and M. J. 
Sowa, “Cross-polarized bistatic clutter  measurements,” Electronics Letters -31(6), pp. 490–491, March 16, 1995. 107. 
D. J. McLaughlin, Y . 
Wu, W. G. Stevens, X. 
Zhang, M. J. Sowa, and B. 
Weijers, “Fully polari - metric bistatic radar scattering behavior of forested hills,” IEEE Trans . AP-5O(2), pp. 101–110,  February 2002. 
108. R. E. 
Vander Schurr and P. G. Tomlinson, “Bistatic clutter analysis,” Decision-Sciences  Applications, Inc., RADC-TR-79-70, April 1979. 
109. G. O. 
Sauermann and P. C. Waterman, “Scattering modeling: Investigation of scattering by rough  surfaces,” MITRE Corporation, Rept. 
MTR-2762, AFAL -TR-73-334, January 1974. 110. J. 
G. Zornig et al., “Bistatic surface scattering strength at short wavelengths,” Yale University,  Dept. Eng. 
Appl. Sci. Rept. 
CS-9, AD-A041316, June 1977. 111. E. 
N. Bramley and S. M. 
Cherry, “Investigation of microwave scattering by tall buildings,” Proc.  IEE, vol. 120, pp. 
833–842, August 1973. 112. A. 
E. Brindly et al., “A Joint Army/Air Force investigation of reflection coefficient at C and Ku  bands for vertical, horizontal and circular system polarizations,” IIT Research Institute, Final  Rept., TR-76-67, AD-A031403, Chicago, IL, July 1976. 113. 
P. E. Howland, D. 
Maksimiuk, and G. Reitsma, “FM radio based bistatic radar,” IEE Proc.- Radar Sonar Navig ., vol. 152, no. 
3, pp. 107–115, June 2005. 114. 
P. E. Howland, “FM-radio based bistatic radar,” presented at AOC 4th Multinational PCR  Conference, Syracuse, NY , October 6, 2005. 
115. T. A. 
Soame and D. M. Gould, “Description of an experimental bistatic radar system,” in IEE  Int. 
Radar Conf. Publ . 281, 1987, pp. 
12–16. 116. E. 
Hanle, “Pulse chasing with bistatic radar-combined space-time filtering,” in Signal Processing  II: Theories and Applications , H. W. Schussler (ed.), North Holland: Elsevier Science Publishers  B. 
V ., pp. 665–668. 117. 
J. G. Schoenenberger and J. 
R. Forrest, “Principles of independent receivers for use with co- operative radar transmitters,” Radio Electron. Eng ., vol. 
52, pp. 93–101, February 1982. 118. 
N. Freedman, “Bistatic radar system configuration and evaluation,” Raytheon Company,  Independ. Dev. 
Proj. 76 D-220, Final Rept . ER76-4414, December 30, 1976. 
119. L. R. 
Moyer, “Comments on ‘Receiver antenna scan rate requirements needed to implement  pulse chasing in a bistatic radar receiver,’” IEEE Trans. on Aerospace and Electronic Systems ,  vol. 38, no. 
1, p. 300, January 2002, correspondence. 120. 
J. Frank and J. Ruze, “Beam steering increments for a phased array,” IEEE Trans. 
, vol. AP-15,  pp. 820–821, November 1967. 
121. D. K. 
P. Tan, H. Sun, Y . 
Lu, M. Lesturgie, and H. L. 
Chan, “Passive radar using global system for  mobile communication signal: Theory, implementation and measurements,” IEE Proc.-Radar  Sonar Navig ., vol. 152, no. 3, June 2005. 
122. H. D. 
Griffiths and N. R. W. 
Long, “Television-based bistatic radar,” IEE Proc ., 133(7), Pt. F,  pp. 649–657, December 1986. 
123. M. I. 
Skolnik, Introduction to Radar Systems , 3rd Ed., New York: McGraw-Hill, 2001. 124. H. 
D. Griffiths et al., “Measurement and analysis of ambiguity functions of off-air signals for  passive coherent location,” Electronics Letters , vol. 39, no. 
13, June 26, 2003. 125. M. 
A. Ringer and G. J. 
Glazer, “Waveform analysis of transmissions of opportunity for passive  radar,” in Fifth International Symposium on Signal Processing and its Applications , Brisbane,  Australia, August 1999, pp. 511–514. 126. 
Richard Lodwig, private communication, Lockheed Martin Mission Systems, 2003. 127. H. 
D. Griffiths and C. J. 
Baker, “Passive coherent location radar systems. Part 1: Performance  prediction,” IEE Proc.-Radar Sonar Navig ., vol. 152, no. 
3, pp. 153–159, June 2005. ch23.indd   36 12/20/07   2:21:56 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Bistatic Radar. 