22.16x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 22 Civil Marine Radar Andy Norris 22.1 INTRODUCTION In terms of the number of systems in worldwide use, civil marine radar (CMR) is the  largest radar market of all time.
The number of vessels of all types currently fitted  with radar probably amounts to around 3 million, but there are no official records to  verify this estimate.
CMR breaks down into two main application areas.
The vast majority are used at  sea and on navigable waterways by ships and smaller craft; the others are used by port  and coastal authorities for vessel surveillance from land-based sites.
The latter group  are normally known as vessel tracking service (VTS†) radars.
Radars are available for  leisure craft, fishing vessels and merchant ships, and all operate either in the 3 GHz  or 9 GHz bands.
Many navies also use standard or specially modified CMR for navi - gational purposes.
Not only does it provide a suitable navigational tool but also its  transmissions are identical to conventional commercial traffic, allowing safe naviga - tion without necessarily highlighting a vessel’s military purpose.
The biggest influence on the requirements of shipborne CMR comes from the  International Maritime Organization1 (IMO).
A United Nations agency based in  London, IMO is concerned with international maritime safety and the protection of  the marine environment.
In particular, IMO issues requirements and guidelines on the  installation and use of radar equipment on commercial ships.
These are vigorously  enforced by the laws of individual maritime states.
The purpose of shipborne radar, as  defined by IMO, is to “assist in safe navigation and in avoiding collision by providing  an indication, in relation to own ship, of the position of other surface craft, obstruc - tions and hazards, navigation objects and shorelines.”2 The International Association  of Marine Aids to Navigation and Lighthouse Authorities3 (IALA) recommends oper - ational and technical requirements for VTS radars.
This chapter explains the special requirements of CMR, both from a practical and  a regulatory point of view, and looks at the technology and system concepts that are  being used to meet these requirements.
Until the first decade of the present century,  CMR shipborne technology had been solely based on magnetrons as the basic source  of transmitted power.
Since 2004, IMO has encouraged the use of coherent radar solu - tions in an attempt to improve the detection of targets in heavy sea clutter conditions.
 Chapter 22 †  A list of all used maritime abbreviations is included at the end of the chapter.
ch22.indd   1 12/17/07   3:02:29 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Source: RADAR HANDBOOK 22.2  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 22 In the marine world, these have been called New Technology Radars .
They are per - mitted to transmit any waveform at 3 GHz, providing the spectrum limitations on  marine radar are not exceeded.4 The limits have been agreed within the International  Telecommunication Union5 (ITU), a United Nations agency based in Geneva.
This chapter concentrates on the requirements and design of radars for commer - cial ships normally in excess of 300 gt (gross metric tonnage), where radar fitment  is compulsory and highly regulated.
Worldwide, there are about 50,000 of these ves - sels, and many are required to carry more than one radar.
Three or even more radars  are sometimes carried voluntarily by large ships.
Radar forms an important part of a  vessel’s total navigation equipment fit.
Increasingly, the bridge of a ship is designed  as an integrated concept, covering navigation, communications, engine control, and  cargo monitoring facilities.
Figure 22.1 illustrates a modern integrated bridge system   (IBS) as fitted on a cruise ship.
The radar displays are seen to form a prominent part of  the system.
Radars fitted on smaller fishing vessels and leisure craft share many of the  features of radars designed for ships but are necessarily more compact; a typical small  boat radar is shown in Figure 22.2.
Specific requirements for these radars, where they  differ to any extent from the design of shipborne radars, are discussed within relevant  parts of the chapter.
Radar for VTS is separately covered in Section 22.10.
The challenges facing designers of shipborne radar are detailed within Section 22.2.
 These radars have to meet certain international standards, which are discussed in  Section 22.3.
Section 22.4 concentrates on the technology, and Section 22.5 looks at  target tracking.
Radar targets are being increasingly displayed with electronic chart  data as an underlay.
This is outlined in Section 22.6, together with other user interface  issues.
Section 22.7 looks at the links between radar and the relatively new Automatic  Identification System  (AIS), which replicates some functions previously provided solely  by radar.
Marine radar beacons, including racons, Search and Rescue Transponders   (SARTs), and Radar Target Enhancers  (RTEs), are described in Section 22.8.
There is  a short discussion in Section 22.9 on shipborne radar performance validation testing.
 FIGURE 22.1  Ship’s integrated bridge system ( Courtesy of SAM-Electronics GmbH )  ch22.indd   2 12/17/07   3:02:29 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Civil Marine Radar  CIVIL MARINE RADAR  22.36x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 22 Shipborne radar has had a remarkably long history.
Its conception in the period from  1945 to 1948 was remarkably prophetic and still reverberates into the present century.
 For this reason, a short Appendix to this chapter outlines the early steps in the evolu - tion of global standards for shipborne radar.
22.2 THE CHALLENGES Environmental.
 Civil marine radar, particularly shipborne navigation radar, is a  surprisingly demanding application.
The radar head on a CMR comprises the antenna  and turning gear, the receiver down to IF or to digital format and often the transmitter.
 It has to operate in extreme environmental conditions over an extended temperature  range (down to −40°C in some parts of the world); in high levels of wind, vibration,  and shock; and also in heavy precipitation and salt water spray.
Even within the nor - mally benign conditions on the bridge of a large modern ship, the display and radar  processor can be subject to high levels of shock and vibration and must meet high  variations in temperature ( −15°C to +55°C).
On small craft, the display and radar pro - cessor are often fitted in minimally enclosed areas and are subject to very damp and  salty conditions.
In these environments, the radar has to detect targets that can have  echoing areas ranging from less than one square meter to many tens of thousands of  square meters; important targets can have relative speeds ranging from stationary to  100 knots or more; the targets can be situated in extreme precipitation and sea clutter  conditions; and the radar antenna is not mounted on a static nor a stable platform.
The  radar is used to prevent collisions and groundings at sea and is, therefore, an important  safety related system, requiring integrity and reliability.
For most commercial ships,  the radar needs to meet stringent, internationally agreed performance criteria.
Despite  these requirements, systems are sold in a highly competitive market and prices are,  therefore, kept keen.
Prices range from around $10,000 for a complete but basic 9 GHz  system to $40,000 and above for a fully featured 3 GHz system.
Radar systems suit - able for the leisure market can sell for less than $1,500.
FIGURE 22.2  Small boat radar ( Courtesy Furuno USA, Inc.
) ch22.indd   3 12/17/07   3:02:29 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Civil Marine Radar 22.4  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 22 Detection Performance.
 In-the-clear detection requirements for such radars are  not particularly demanding.
An 80% probability of detection and a probability of false  alarm of 10–4 is specified by IMO, as shown in Table 22.1.2 Taking into account all performance requirements, typical compliant systems for  commercial vessels have peak transmit powers of 4 – 60 kW, the lower powers being  confined to 9 GHz systems.
Antenna gains from 28 to 33 dB are typical, with associ - ated horizontal beamwidths ranging from about 2.5° to less than 1°.
Pulse lengths are  switchable, generally in the range from 50 ns to 1 µs, with PRFs ranging from 350 to  3,000 Hz or more.
Pleasure craft systems typically have peak powers of 2 – 4 kW and  utilize antennas with horizontal apertures as small as 450 mm and gains of about 24 dB.
 These all operate at 9 GHz.
The greatest technical challenge in designing marine radars  is to maintain good target detection in high levels of sea and precipitation clutter.
Precipitation Clutter.
 It is well known that circular polarization (CP) can be a  counter to rain clutter because its reflection is predominately cross-polarized to inci - dent circular polarization.
However, very few shipborne navigational radars use CP,  even though 10–20 dB improvement in rain clutter rejection is typically achieved  from its application.
Two important factors have contributed to this.
First, it makes  the antenna more expensive, exacerbated by IMO’s requirements that 9 GHz radars  must be at least switchable to horizontal polarization when searching for survival craft  fitted with Search and Rescue Transponders (see Section 22.8).
Second, by use of  small range cells and by implementing conventional signal differentiation techniques,  modern radars, particularly at 3 GHz, give reasonable performance in most commonly  experienced precipitation clutter.
Therefore, users and maritime authorities are gener - ally satisfied with the performance of linearly polarized systems in precipitation.Target DescriptionTarget  FeatureDetection Range in NM (for specified target size) Target TypeHeight Above  Sea Level  (meters) 9 GHz NM 3 GHz NM Shorelines Rising to 60 20 20 Distributed Shorelines Rising to 6  8  8 Shorelines Rising to 3  6  6 SOLAS ships † (> 5,000 gt) 10 11 11 Complex SOLAS ships † (> 500 gt)  5.0  8  8 Small vessel with radar  reflector meeting IMO  performance standards 4.0  5.0 (7.5 m2) 3.7 (0.5 m2)Point Small vessel of length 10 m  with no radar reflector 2.0  3.4 (2.5 m2) 3.0 (1.4 m2)Complex Typical navigation buoy  3.5  4.6 (5.0 m2) 3.0 (0.5 m2)Not specified, point  target assumed Navigation buoy with  corner reflector 3.5  4.9 (10 m2) 3.
6 (1.0 m2)Point Typical channel marker  1.0  2.0 (1.0 m2) 1.0 (0.1 m2)Not specified, point  target assumed † Ships conforming to the IMO Safety of Life at Sea (SOLAS9) regulationsTABLE 22.1  IMO Required Detection Performance in Clear Conditions ( Courtesy of IMO ) ch22.indd   4 12/17/07   3:02:30 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Civil Marine Radar  CIVIL MARINE RADAR  22.56x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 22 Because precipitation clutter is distributed in a relatively uniform manner, passing  the received waveform through a differentiator gives prominence to targets embedded  within the clutter by ensuring that the average clutter level is kept well below satura - tion.
The differentiator has minimal effect on normal targets because of their small  extent in the time domain.
This means that target visibility is improved.
It should be  noted that this technique does not give subclutter visibility.
This process is convention - ally named Fast Time Constant  (FTC).
The time constant of the differentiator is opera - tor-adjustable with a so-called rain clutter control, which allows the target-to-clutter  ratio to be optimized for the particular precipitation scenario.
The vertical pattern of a shipborne navigational radar antenna needs to be rela - tively wide to cope with the ship’s pitch and roll, which is assumed to be a maximum  of ±10°.
(Use of a stabilized platform would not meet the market’s price demands.)  This limits the vertical beam-shaping that can be used to reduce both precipitation  clutter and vertical lobing effects.
However, the relatively short range of most targets  of real interest means that the volume of the radar-illuminated precipitation is rela - tively low, helping to make the clutter rejection of the differentiator adequate for its  purpose.
Such clutter varies approximately with the fourth power of frequency, and  so a 3 GHz system inherently experiences 19 dB less clutter than a 9 GHz system,  assuming identically sized clutter cells.
For this reason, on ships fitted with both  3 and 9 GHz radars, the 3 GHz radar is often preferable, except when maneuvering  in close situations, for example, in harbors when the normally superior azimuth  resolution of a 9 GHz radar is preferred.
Sea Clutter.
 The reduction of sea clutter to levels acceptable to the user is a  far more difficult problem, and as yet, commercial radars do not meet all the ideal  demands of users.
Small craft and buoys can easily be obscured in sea clutter.
In  the days before precise Global Navigation Satellite Systems  (GNSS), such as GPS,  the safe navigation of a ship in coastal waters in poor visibility was dominated   by the radar being able to discern navigation markers, such as buoys.
Passive markers,   including those supplemented by radar reflectors, can be notoriously difficult to  detect in higher sea-states, and therefore, some markers are supplemented by radar  beacons (called racons—see Section 22.8).
Racons are relatively expensive and  need maintenance in often difficult to access locations, so their use is restricted.
 While GNSS, enhanced by the growing use of electronic charts, has helped greatly  in informing mariners of the precise position of their vessel, radar is still used as an  important secondary source of position.
Reliance on GNSS alone has been at the  root of many marine accidents.
The main use of marine radar is to assist collision avoidance.
Visual observa - tion and radar remain the primary methods for determining the risk of collision with  other vessels and also with floating debris and ice.
Automatic Identification Systems  (AIS—see Section 22.7) offer potential to assist with collision avoidance of coopera - tive targets, but it cannot be assumed that all vessels are fitted with AIS, particularly  small craft, or that a target vessel’s AIS is operational.
The traditional way for mariners to optimize their radar for detection of targets in sea  clutter is by careful adjustment of the “gain” and “sea-clutter” controls.
The gain con - trol effectively alters the detection threshold.
On a modern marine radar, the sea-clutter  control is best described as a method for adjusting the shape of the radar’s sensitivity  time control  (STC) in order to match it with the present level of clutter returns.
STC is  often also called swept gain .
The STC law, and the way it varies by use of the manual  control, can be complex.
It is attempting to reduce the dynamic range of the received  waveform and to provide, in association with the gain settings, optimized thresholds.
 ch22.indd   5 12/17/07   3:02:30 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Civil Marine Radar 22.6  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 22 Nowadays, it normally involves sophisticated adaptive thresholding techniques, which  are discussed in Section 22.4.
Although this helps to set the threshold to appropriate levels, it does not remove  the intrusive “spiky” component of sea clutter that can make wanted targets difficult to  observe.
However, over a typical antenna scan time of a marine radar (2–3 seconds), the  spikes are normally decorrelated, whereas returns from targets are generally correlated— therefore, the application of scan-to-scan correlation can improve the target-to-clutter  ratio, but it will also remove weak and fast-moving targets.
Many years ago, Croney6  showed that significant improvements in detecting small targets in sea clutter could be  obtained by ensuring that integration was performed at intervals longer than the decor - relation time period of the sea clutter.
He used an antenna rotating at up to 600 rpm and  a PRF of 5 KHz.
This gave two correlated pulses per beamwidth, but the pulses from the  next scan, 0.1 s later, were decorrelated from the former.
Crony noted that the rapid scanning of the antenna allowed the eye/brain func - tions of the operator to perform scan-to-scan correlation.
Although it is easy for mod - ern systems to perform this correlation digitally, the difficulties in having an antenna  rotating at this speed (mainly now a cost issue) have prevented this from becoming  established practice.
However, more recent work in Canada has resurrected this idea  for detecting floating ice hazards, where antenna rotation rates of 500 rpm and PRFs  of 12 KHz have been proposed.7 Terma A/S, a Danish company involved in supplying  high performance marine radars, mainly in the noncommercial market, produces the  ScanterTM radar, which has an option that simultaneously transmits on two frequen - cies from a squinting slotted waveguide array.
This produces two beams separated by  a few degrees in azimuth.
The temporal beam separation is such that sea clutter can be  decorrelated between the beams, further enhancing the detection of targets in clutter.
 This technique could potentially be used by solid-state CMRs.
(Section 22.4).
On a conventional shipborne radar, an experienced operator can manually set the  detection threshold to give the best setting over any given area, but this is often only  effective over a small proportion of the total radar image.
The use of automatic thresh - olding is able to give better detection over a complete scan but often cannot compete  with a skilled operator optimizing detection over a restricted area.
In some conditions,  no existing radar gives the performance that a user ideally needs, despite the use of  50 ns pulses and sophisticated clutter processing technology.
Sub-clutter visibility is potentially obtainable from coherent CMRs, which have  been made affordable by the continued reduction in cost of microwave power semicon - ductors (for instance, using Gallium Nitride technology), precision digitally controlled  signal generators, and fast digital signal processors.
Coherent CMRs are discussed  under “Solid-state CMR” in Section 22.4.
Vertical Lobing.
 Clutter is not the only cause of detrimental performance of  marine radar.
Direct reflections from a target arrive at the radar antenna and combine  vectorially with target reflections that have also been reflected by the sea’s surface.
 This effect produces a summed signal at the radar antenna that is a function of both the  target height and the radar antenna height above the sea, as these affect the path length  difference of the direct and reflected radiation.
Obviously, the effect is reciprocal for  both transmit and receive paths.
For a point target and a sea of defined roughness, the  calculation to determine the resultant effect is relatively straightforward and results  in the classic lobing pattern (see, for example, Briggs8).
For a target with reasonable  vertical extent, such as a ship, the lobing structure becomes very complex and is less  likely to produce troublesome nulls.
However, the detection of a small target, such as  ch22.indd   6 12/17/07   3:02:31 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Civil Marine Radar  CIVIL MARINE RADAR  22.76x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 22 a buoy or a pleasure craft, enhanced by a radar reflector can create significant vertical  lobing effects that can be a problem to the user.
In particular, in very calm seas pro - nounced nulls can be experienced, and for users, it can be disconcerting when a target  clearly evident from the bridge window is not visible on the radar display, despite the  apparently good conditions.
Since smooth seas can also be associated with mist and fog, vertical lobing effects  can become a significant problem because the reduced visibility means that radar often  becomes the sole method of detecting other vessels.
The absence of sea clutter gives  the user a false sense of security that all targets will be easily visible.
On ships fitted  with both 3 and 9 GHz radars, frequency diversity becomes very useful as the spatial  frequencies of the vertical lobes for the radar are different.
Surprisingly, even though  some radar companies provide the option, very few ships have facilities that allow  the 3- and 9 GHz signals to be combined into a single radar display in an automatic  process, maximizing the benefits of frequency diversity.
Some large ships have an  additional 9 GHz radar mounted on the bow at deck level.
This has two advantages.
 First, the vertical lobing will have a different (lower) angular frequency to the main,  high-mounted 9 GHz radar.
Second, its performance in sea clutter will be enhanced, as  the grazing angle to the sea will be closer to horizontal, thereby lessening the reflection  coefficient of the clutter.
The long range performance of the auxiliary system is, of  course, compromised by its low position.
Moving Platform.
 A particular complication of shipborne radar arises because  the antenna is mounted on an unstable moving platform.
This movement has six  components—three translational and three rotational, all of which are typically varying.
 The motions are complex; the translational components are surge, sway, and heave, and  the rotational are roll, pitch, and yaw.
Components can be quasi-harmonic when caused  by wave motion.
In practice, the ship is navigated on notions based on course, heading,  and speed in Earth and sea-fixed coordinate systems.
The additional wave-induced  motions can produce uncompensated errors in radar-derived information, which add  to any measurement errors in the course, heading, and speed of the vessel.
This affects  the precision obtained when displaying radar-derived data, which can differ when  switching between the various radar stabilization modes used on CMR.
For instance,  in order to facilitate both collision avoidance and position fixing activities, shipborne  radar displays have always had two particular stabilization modes: Head-up and North- up.
The “up” direction refers to the vertical ( y-axis) direction of the radar display;  “Head” refers to the ship’s heading.
Head-up maximizes the relationship to the visual  scene, and North-up aids comparison with paper charts.
Nowadays, Course-up is also  provided, as this eliminates small oscillations in the radar image due to the ship’s yaw  that occur when the display is set to Head-up.
Each of these directional modes can be  set with target tracking vectors shown as relative to the motion of the ship, the ground,  or the average sea motion.
22.3 INTERNATIONAL STANDARDS Spectrum use aspects of all radars, including frequency band of use and RF emission  constraints, are controlled by the ITU.5 Following ITU requirements, marine radars  are permitted to operate in the 9.3 to 9.5 GHz band (X band) and in the 2.9 to 3.1 GHz  band (S band).
ch22.indd   7 12/17/07   3:02:31 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Civil Marine Radar 22.8  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 22 The IMO International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea (SOLAS)9 is an  established and accepted set of principles and rules aimed at ensuring that ships meet  certain requirements to enhance both safety and protection of the environment.
The  member governments (flag States) of IMO have agreed that SOLAS requirements  are embodied within their national maritime laws and regulations.
Within Chapter V  of SOLAS - Safety of Navigation , the requirements for the carriage of navigation  equipment are defined.
These vary according to the size and purpose of a ship.
All  passenger ships and all ships above 300 gt need to carry at least one radar with  tracking facilities.
Footnotes within Chapter V of SOLAS identify the recommended IMO perfor - mance standards with which the equipment should conform.
IMO has had recom - mended radar performance standards2 since 1971, published as annexes to IMO  Resolutions.
However, by 1980, radar manufacturers were reporting difficulties  because differing interpretations by national maritime administrations meant that  radars had to be specifically designed to meet individual flag State requirements.
 The level of technical detail required to remedy this was outside the remit of IMO,  and it was agreed that a Technical Committee (TC80) within the International  Electrotechnical Commission10 (IEC) would determine technically based interpreta - tions of IMO radar performance standards.
In addition, it was agreed that the IEC  standards would include test procedures, which could be used by national maritime  administrations (such as the Coast Guard in the United States of America) to test for  conformance of specific designs by manufacturers to IMO and ITU requirements.
 Today, virtually all national administrations use IEC standards to assess radar and  most other IMO-defined navigational and radiocommunications equipment.
IMO performance standards and the SOLAS Convention are regularly revised, so it  is important to check the current status of the standards.
IEC 6238811 defines the tech - nical and test standards based on the IMO radar performance standards.
IEC standards  also undergo regular revision.
An average radar installation has a life normally exceed - ing 10 years, so radars designed and approved to previous standards will continue to be  used for some years after new standards have been put in place.
Retrofitted equipment  must meet the latest standards.
IMO radar performance standards previous to those in force on 1 July 2008  require compatibility with existing racons (radar beacons) and at 9 GHz, Search  and Rescue Transponders.
This implies the continued use of short pulse radars.
 However, for the 2008 standards, IMO has encouraged improvements in sea clut - ter performance by dropping the need for racon compatibility at 3 GHz, thereby  allowing other forms of modulation that would enable affordable coherent pro - cessing techniques.
Because all ships above 300 gt need to carry at least a single  9 GHz radar, it means that racon (and SART) detection capability is maintained.
 This approach gives IMO an indefinite period to assess the impact of the new regu - lations on the detection of targets in sea clutter before deciding what should happen  with radar, racons, and SARTs at 9 GHz.
Another major change in the requirements of older standards is that all new radars  must include provision to display Automatic Identification System (AIS) targets and  that their related information can be accessed on the radar display.
The requirements  for target tracking has also had a major revision, with automatic tracking facilities  being required for all radars.
The integration of electronic chart data as a background  to radar images is also embodied within IMO standards.
Radars with this optional  facility are known as Chart Radars .
ch22.indd   8 12/17/07   3:02:31 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Civil Marine Radar  CIVIL MARINE RADAR  22.96x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 22 The minimum detection performance required in clear conditions is tabulated in  Table 22.1.
Measurements of range have to be within 30 meters accuracy (or within  1% of the maximum range scale in use) and within 1° bearing (azimuth angle).
 Navigational buoys with the characteristics given in Table 22.1 have to be detectable  at a minimum range of 40 meters.
Two “point” targets on the same bearing have to  appear as two distinct targets if they are separated by more than 40 meters in range.
A  2.5° azimuth resolution is also required.
All these performance figures are considered  to be peak errors, which can be assumed to mean 95% values, measured with stan - dardized point targets.
The IMO performance standards recognize that the detection  performance of radars working within conditions of clutter will not necessarily give  the performance defined for clear conditions.
Manufacturers are required to provide  effective manual and automatic anti-clutter functions and must specify the expected  degradation in rain at 4 mm and 16 mm per hour and for sea states 2 and 5, including  combinations of sea and rain clutter.
Radars designed for conventional vessels need to operate with relative speeds  up to 100 kt.
For high-speed craft, such as multi-hull fast ferries, the radars need to  operate with relative target speeds up to 140 kt.
Older standards required a minimum  antenna rotation rate of 20 rpm, but this explicit requirement has been omitted from  the new standards as other dependent requirements are adequately specified, such  as the maximum relative speed of targets and tracking accuracies.
The IMO perfor - mance standards specify that radar equipment should meet the environmental require - ments and test procedures defined within IEC 60945.12 This is a comprehensive set of  requirements that are applicable to all ships’ navigational and radio communications  equipment.
They cover such aspects as temperature, shock, vibration, corrosion, and  resistance to water and oil ingress.
Detailed requirements on electromagnetic emis - sions and immunity to the electromagnetic environment are mandated.
IEC 60945 also  specifies general requirements on ergonomics, software development, and safety.
A  further set of IEC standards contained within the IEC 61162 series,13 define the mes - sages used for navigation and radiocommunications equipment to interchange digital  data.
A shipborne radar is likely to be receiving messages from many items of naviga - tion equipment, such as AIS, GPS, gyrocompass, log, and echo sounder, and is also  likely to be communicating track information to electronic chart systems and possibly  other radar displays.
A number of manufacturers produce radars specifically designed to be used on  vessels using the world’s major inland waterways.
These are known as river radars .
 They are epitomized by their superior short-range performance and by having a dis - play in “portrait” format in order to get maximum look-ahead along the waterway.
 The maximum display range on the shortest scale is typically 150 meters.
These  radars are normally designed to meet requirements for radars on vessels navigating  the River Rhine.14 Radars for the fishing and leisure markets are not covered by SOLAS.
Until 2004,  such radars did not have an internationally recognized standard for manufacturers to  follow.
IEC 6225215 is now the agreed international radar standard for “craft not in  compliance with IMO SOLAS Chapter V” and was initially issued at the instigation  of manufacturers.
Now an increasing number of national maritime administrations  are insisting that all new small craft radars sold in their jurisdiction conform to this  standard.
IEC 62252 recognizes three classes of radar.
Class A is intended for com - mercial craft under 150 gt; Class B is for recreational craft; and Class C is for small  recreational craft.
The main performance requirements are detailed in Table 22.2.
ch22.indd   9 12/17/07   3:02:32 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Civil Marine Radar 22.10  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 22 22.4 TECHNOLOGY Antennas.
 Antenna maximum sidelobes are specified for SOLAS and non- SOLAS radars in IEC 6238811 and IEC 62252,15 respectively.
These are summarized  in Table 22.3.
On non-SOLAS radars, the antenna rotation rate is specified to be not less than 20 rpm  but is not directly specified for SOLAS-approved radars.
In practice, antennas for existing  shipborne radars normally rotate at 25–30 rpm; on high-speed craft, the rotation rate is  typically 40–45 rpm.
For SOLAS vessels, the antenna must be able to start and operate in  relative wind speeds up to 100 kt; other environmental requirements for the antenna system  are detailed in IEC 60945,12 where there are specific tests for “exposed” equipment.
There are no explicit requirements on other antenna parameters for SOLAS- approved systems, such as beamwidths and gain, but these obviously need to be com - patible with the total radar performance requirement.
For instance, azimuth resolution  has to be better than 2.5°; target bearing has to be determined to within 1°; and the  system must operate in conditions when the ship is rolling and pitching ±10°.
Typical  antenna gains and beamwidths have been outlined in Section 22.2.
From the 1960s onwards, the use of a slotted waveguide linear array, mounted in  a linear flared horn has been the most common antenna solution for shipborne radars.
 Because at least horizontal polarization has to be provided on 9 GHz SOLAS radars,  slotted array solutions generally have their slots cut into the narrow wall of the horizon - tally mounted waveguide.
A vertical slot (perpendicular to the waveguide edge) couples  no power, but as the slot is increasingly angled, more power is coupled out.
The slots  are normally of a resonant length (half-wavelength) to couple out sufficient power.
This  extends the slot into the broad wall of the waveguide, but it also makes them easier to  construct—conceptually by a sawing action into the narrow wall.
Residual power at the  end of the array (typically less than 5%) is dissipated into a matched load.
Conventionally,  the array is end-fed, although center-fed alternatives are sometimes used.Class BeamwidthMinimum  Display SizeCoast-Line  Detection Range Point Target Detection Range Rising   to 60 mRising   to 6 m400 m2 7.5 m ht10 m2 3.5 m ht5 m2 3.5 m ht A ≤ 4.0° ≥ 150 mm 9 nm 5 nm 5 nm 2 nm 1 nm B ≤ 5.5°  ≥ 85 mm 5 nm 3 nm 3 nm 1 nm N/A C ≤ 7.5°  ≥ 75 mm 5 nm 3 nm 3 nm 1 nm N/ATABLE 22.2  Radar Performance Requirements for Small Craft ( Courtesy of IEC )* Radar ClassMaximum Sidelobe Level (dB) Within ±10° Within ±10° SOLAS –23 –30 Non-SOLAS Class A –20 –23 Non-SOLAS Classes B & C –18 –19TABLE 22.3  Antenna Sidelobe Performance Requirements ( Courtesy of IEC ) *  IEC 62252 ed.1.0 Copyright © 2004 IEC, Geneva, Switzerland.
www.iec.ch.
ch22.indd   10 12/17/07   3:02:32 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Civil Marine Radar  CIVIL MARINE RADAR  22.116x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 22 If slots were spaced at the guide wavelength in an attempt to get an equi-phase  wavefront at the antenna face, then large grating lobes would be generated in the far- field pattern.
This would occur because they would be spaced at a free-space distance  of more than one wavelength.
To overcome this, slots are spaced at nominally half  the guide wavelength but are angled alternately to the vertical in order to induce the  necessary phase reversals.
In practice, the slots are placed slightly away from half  the guide wavelength spacing to avoid slot-generated mismatches in the waveguide  becoming resonant.
This creates a tilted phase front across the array, which causes the  beam to squint to an angle that is frequency dependent.
Individual manufacturers pro - duce radar systems operating over a restricted band, much less than the overall radar  band, which removes any need for individual squint compensation when magnetrons  are replaced.
The required sidelobe performance is not demanding (Table 22.3), and  so simple aperture distributions, such as pedestal-based cosine squared, are common.
 The small vertically polarized fields produced by each slanted slot need to be sup - pressed as they can otherwise lead to high cross-polarized sidelobes from the array,  exacerbated by the phase reversal of the cross-polar component from slot to slot, caus - ing cross-polar grating lobes.
This can be achieved with a printed polarization filter in  front of the array or by effectively creating, as part of the structure, a short length of  open-ended waveguide in front of each slot, with dimensions that make it below cutoff  for vertical polarization.
Slot characterization is normally performed by measurement, rather than by  detailed electromagnetic analysis.
This allows all construction details, including those  required for polarization filtering, to be incorporated into the slot characterization;  sufficient accuracy is difficult to achieve using numerical analysis.
Provided the char - acterization is done carefully and good manufacturing techniques can guarantee toler - ances, it is reasonably straightforward to produce affordable antennas that meet IMO  requirements.
The required vertical beamwidth is normally obtained by a linear flare.
 The flare angle is chosen such that it creates a reasonably phase-constant vertical dis - tribution at its aperture.
The vertical amplitude distribution approximates to a cosine  because of the horizontally polarized field.
Vertical beamwidths are typically about  25° wide at the 3 dB points.
Not unnaturally, cost, for a given performance, is the prime driver in the system  designer’s choice of antenna.
While the conventional slotted linear array is widely  used, there are examples where different cost tradeoffs have been made.
For instance,  the use of a dielectric block mounted directly in front of the slotted waveguide array,  in place of the flared section, has been used as an alternative.
The leaking energy from  the top and bottom faces of the dielectric block adds with energy emerging from its  front face, giving forward gain.
It is the depth dimension of the dielectric block that  determines the gain, somewhat analogous to the length of a Yagi antenna.
This effect  reduces the height of the antenna compared to a conventional design by about a factor  of three, typically from about 300 mm to 100 mm at 3 GHz.
This means that there is  considerably less wind-loading.
The dielectric constant of the block can be quite low,  which, with the reduced wind-loading, results in a very lightweight structure.
This  saves costs in the antenna turning gear and makes the installation easier.
An example  of this type of antenna, produced by Kelvin Hughes, is illustrated in Figure 22.3.
Small craft radars have used printed arrays for some years, as well as slotted  waveguide arrays.
Small, horn-fed parabolic reflector systems have also been used.
 Antennas for small craft are normally housed within a radome, which protects the  antenna and up-mast electronics of the radar environmentally and prevents the  antenna from snagging the rigging.
In particular, it assures that there is no danger to  ch22.indd   11 12/17/07   3:02:33 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Civil Marine Radar 22.12  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 22 users from rotating mechanisms, since the radar head can be mounted in areas open  to human access.
Antennas using printed arrays use integral-printed power dividers.
 The arrays are usually two-dimensional, dispensing with the need for a flared sec - tion, and normally consist of radiating patches, rather than printed dipoles.
Horizontal  apertures of 450 and 600 mm are common.
Printed technology is not generally used  for shipborne antennas; slotted waveguide arrays remain the cost-effective solution  for larger arrays, particularly as the higher power creates additional complications for  printed power dividers.
Poor antenna siting is a common cause of radar performance degradation on ships  as well as on smaller craft.
Particularly on ships, it is surprising that installations are  still being implemented that create significant blockage to the radar.
Blind arcs are  common from funnels and other superstructure, and there can be significant sidelobe  degradation due to smaller structures, such as VHF antennas, causing blockage close  to the radar antenna aperture.
RF Head.
 The RF head normally comprises the transmitter and the receiver  down to IF or digital baseband, as well as the antenna and turning gear.
Its design  for both magnetron-based SOLAS and non-SOLAS radars follows conventional prin - ciples.
The magnetron is connected to the antenna via a duplexer and a rotating joint.
 The magnetron has a typical operational life of about 10,000 hours and is by far the  lowest lifed component in the whole system.
The duplexer is nowadays a three- or  four-port ferrite circulator.
Use of a four-port device is preferred as it presents a bet - ter matched load to the magnetron and, therefore, gives a cleaner RF spectrum.
The  low-noise front-end  (LNFE) subsystem is connected to the circulator via a PIN diode  limiter, which protects the LNFE during pulse transmission.
The modulator to the magnetron is typically a pulse forming network  (PFN), basi - cally comprised of capacitors and inductors.
Operator control of the pulse length effec - tively switches in different choices of reactive components.
The discharge of the PFN  is controlled by a high voltage switch, which is often a silicon-controlled rectifier;  thyristors and FETs are also used.
FET modulators are sometimes driven directly by  a pulse input rather than a PFN.
Finally, a pulse transformer matches the PFN to the  impedance seen at the magnetron cathode.
A pulse of around 10 kV is required to fire  the magnetron.
In order to get good performance over a wide range of pulse lengths,  designs utilize a great deal of empirically derived knowledge, and actual circuits can  be surprisingly complex.
A 50 ns pulse hardly achieves any period of stability—rise  times are normally restricted to about 10 ns in order to limit out-of-band interference,  FIGURE 22.3  Low-profile 3.9 meter S-band shipborne radar antenna ( Courtesy of Kelvin Hughes L td.) ch22.indd   12 12/17/07   3:02:33 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Civil Marine Radar  CIVIL MARINE RADAR  22.136x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 22 and fall times are usually longer.
The extra high voltages involved can lead to poor  reliability if the design does not adequately address the associated problems.
Careful  physical layout is essential and consideration must be given to the effects of operating  in a potentially damp environment.
Pulse timing can be purposely jittered on a pulse- to-pulse basis.
Pulse-to-pulse correlation in the radar processor then very effectively  blocks interference from other radars, albeit with a small but generally acceptable  degradation in detection performance.
After the limiter, the LNFE is preceded by a bandpass filter to reduce the effects  of out-of-band interfering signals.
The LNFE consists of an RF amplifier (typically  giving about 10 dB gain) and a balanced mixer, local oscillator, and IF head amplifier.
 These are normally supplied to the radar manufacturer by specialist companies as a  complete subunit.
The overall system noise figure is typically 4 to 5 dB, but lower  figures are achievable.
The frequency of the local oscillator is generally driven by a  control signal, derived from within the IF amplifier.
It includes facilities for manual  frequency control by the operator.
The latter can be useful, for instance, when look - ing for SARTs in heavy sea clutter, as it allows returns from own transmissions to be  desensitized.
The local oscillator uses a Gunn diode or an FET, giving a typical inter - mediate frequency of 60 MHz.
Detection and Processing.
 After the LNFE, a logarithmic amplifier reduces the  dynamic range of the received signal to prevent limiting.
A dynamic range of around  100 dB is typically achieved in perhaps an eight-stage amplifier.
Filtering, consis - tent with the transmitted pulse length, is applied within the IF amplifier.
The output  from the log amplifier enters a diode-based envelope detector, converting the signal  to baseband for subsequent threshold processing.
Setting the threshold has become  intimately connected with the sensitivity time control (STC) of the radar.
The fun - damental use of STC is to take out the distance-related dynamic range of received  signals.
At close range, STC classically follows an inverse fourth power law, merging  to an inverse cubic law in the region where sea clutter dominates, in accordance with  basic theory.
Because transition range is a function of antenna height, a setting for  this may be needed when the system is originally installed.
The operator’s manual  sea-clutter control is used to adjust the transition range.
Nowadays, the form of the  STC curve and the effects of the manual control are based on the practical experience  of individual manufacturers, which contributes greatly to the actual effectiveness of  a particular radar in sea clutter.
Even under manual control, the detailed shape of the  STC curve may have a complex adaptive element to it, in order to optimize thresholds  over a broader range.
Under automatic settings, thresholding becomes increasingly sophisticated but  often still allows some manual optimization.
The curve may adapt to internal calcula - tions made on returns from the last pulse or from a succession of pulses.
It may also  include more complex clutter-mapping processes.
All of this is attempting to create  a constant false alarm rate across the radar display.
Since the radar is sited on a mov - ing platform, subject to complex dynamics, difficulties arise with clutter mapping.
 However, modern processors permit affordable thresholding algorithms of consider - able complexity.
Manufacturers keep their own processes highly confidential because  of the effort that has gone into their empirical optimization.
Theoretical clutter models  have been generally found unsuitable to be used for optimization.
Even optimizing for  sea conditions found in one particular area can create suboptimal solutions in other  areas, and therefore, data from a number of regions need to be used to design a glob - ally effective product.
ch22.indd   13 12/20/07   11:10:33 AMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Civil Marine Radar 22.14  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 22 STC and thresholding is a process that is controlled in the digital domain but often  applies analog gain processes at RF and IF (at both pre- and post-log amplification) as  well as processes in the digital domain.
Intimately connected with thresholding strate - gies are signal processing, such as FTC, pulse integration, and correlation processes,  both pulse-to-pulse and scan-to-scan.
Modern digital technology, with its processing  speed, available word length, and large memory capability, allows the radar designer  to have great flexibility in the strategy applied, and what are entirely separate pro - cesses in the analog world increasingly become an integrated digital process.
Simple  thresholding ideas are being replaced by complex logical processes, making a detailed  evaluation of whether a potential target is present or not, even potentially merging into  plot extraction and tracking processes.
More complex processing can also yield additional information that is useful to  marine operators.
For instance, by applying spectrum analysis techniques, it is pos - sible to extract accurate sea-state information, including significant wave height and  period, direction, and speed.16 The Miros A/S WavexTM system determines directional  wave spectra scaled in m2/Hz and parameters such as significant wave height and  average wave period.
An FFT is performed on data collected on a scan-by-scan basis;  32 scans of data are typically used in the analysis.
The resultant information can be  highly useful for large high-speed craft, perhaps traveling at up to 60 knots or more.
 It is also potentially useful for vulnerable vessels such as chemical carriers to ensure  that appropriate action in heavy weather can be taken, particularly at night or in poor  visibility.
Ocean oil rig operations can also benefit from such systems.
Information  can be displayed to the user in the form of digital readouts of the primary parameters,  as well as graphically displayed data.
Installed systems normally extract the raw data  from the existing 9 GHz radar and perform wave processing and display functions on  a separate processor/display system.
Spectrum analysis of this type can also detect oil  slicks17 because they reduce the amplitude of sea surface capillary waves.
Such sys - tems can be valuable on vessels assisting with clean-up operations and also for early  detection of spills from oil rig operations.
It has been proposed18 that additional processing of the cross-polar content of the  received radar signal may be of benefit to marine operations where sea ice is a hazard.
 Due to structural changes that occur in older ice that affect the reflection of radar  energy, it is possible to differentiate between potentially dangerous old ice, including  glacial ice (icebergs), and single-season sea ice, which is normally less dangerous to  navigation.
This is because the cross-polar component of the reflection is significantly  higher for old ice compared to new ice.
The problem is how to affordably determine  the cross-polar component.
In practice, it has been found that excellent ice detection can be made by optimized  processing of conventional marine radar signals.7 Because of the slow-moving nature  of the targets of interest, averaging the radar image over many antenna scans using  an optimized infinite impulse response (IIR) filter can give a very detailed image that  allows the user to differentiate between ice and water areas.
In particular, small ice  features such as bergy bits (icebergs with dimensions above the waterline of less than  5 meters in breadth and greater than 1 meter in height) and growlers (less than 2 meters  in breadth and less than 1 meter showing above the water line) are readily detected  by such systems.
Integration over 128 seconds has been found to be suitable, with the  antenna rotating at 120 rpm.
The increased capability of (ice) target detection in sea  clutter with higher antenna rotation rates has also been demonstrated.
Dramatic images  of ice hazards can be produced by such radars, such as that illustrated in Figure 22.4.
ch22.indd   14 12/17/07   3:02:34 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Civil Marine Radar  CIVIL MARINE RADAR  22.156x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 22 FIGURE 22.4  Ice feature detection using IIR filtering on Rutter Sigma 6 radar processor ( Courtesy of Transport Canada ) ch22.indd   15 12/17/07   3:02:34 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Civil Marine Radar 22.16  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 22 Solid-state CMR.
 Several factors have come together to promote the introduc - tion of civil marine radars with solid-state transmitters.
The most important of these  is that affordable magnetron-based radars do not meet user demands when operating  in heavy sea and precipitation clutter.
Small craft and buoys become invisible on the  display, creating danger to life.
IMO recognized this problem and, in order not to con - strain opportunities for innovative radar design, removed the requirement that 3 GHz  radars be compatible with existing racons.
Gallium Nitride and other microwave power semiconductors,19 developed primar - ily for broadband communications links, have enabled CMR manufacturers to use  these in the radar transmitter to replace magnetron-based designs.
Pulse compres - sion techniques are used to reduce the required peak power.
Even single Gallium  Nitride devices can generate hundreds of watts of peak power, at mean powers easily  sufficient for CMR applications.
Also, advances in digitally controlled waveform  generators have given designers the ability to create pulse-compressed waveforms  with high precision and at low cost.
These waveforms enable coherent processing of  the received signal, giving additional doppler information that can be used to help  separate targets from clutter.
The use of frequency diversity techniques to give added  target detection possibilities becomes potentially affordable, because of the flexibility  of the signal generation technology.
Cost has precluded the use of dual-magnetron  transmitters for this purpose.
Demands from other services for more bandwidth, particularly from mobile com - munications operators, continue to put pressure on the ITU-determined marine radar  spectrum limits (see, for example, Williams20).
Since the peak transmitted power from  solid-state CMRs is very low compared to magnetron-based radars, for example 200 W  compared to 30 kW, the spectrum interference levels are much reduced and, therefore,  extended use of this technology could result in better use of the RF spectrum.
Also,  the highly controlled waveforms are expected to create less spectral noise than typical  magnetron-based CMR transmitters.
An example of a solid-state coherent radar is the Kelvin Hughes SharpEyeTM—the  first introduction of such an IMO-compliant system to the CMR market.
It has a peak  output power of 170 W and a duty cycle of 10%.
Figure 22.5 shows a photograph of  the transmitter electronics.
In order to obtain the required short-range performance,  it transmits a frame of pulses with differing lengths.
Each pulse within the frame is  optimized to cover a specified range bracket.
Overall, the pulse sequence completely  covers the instrumented range and ensures that the IMO specified minimum range  requirement is met.
In the receiver, frames are grouped into blocks called bursts.
The duration of a  burst is approximately equal to the time taken for the 3 dB points of the antenna  azimuth beam to sweep past a point target; consequently, the number of pulses in  a burst is directly related to the instrumented range and the antenna rotation rate.
 The echoes received during a burst are processed by a filter bank to extract the  radial velocities of targets and clutter.
Within the digital signal processor, detection  thresholds for each of the filters within the bank are calculated adaptively, aiming at  providing optimum control of false alarms while maximizing clutter suppression and  target detection.
Manual control of the thresholds is also provided to be compliant  with IMO requirements.
Modern, fully solid-state radars need little analog circuitry within their designs;  they operate on low voltages and have no time-lifed components such as magne - trons.
This potentially makes them extremely stable and reliable, with a resultant  low cost of ownership, therefore, meeting the increasing demands of ship operators.
 ch22.indd   16 12/17/07   3:02:35 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Civil Marine Radar  CIVIL MARINE RADAR  22.176x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 22 In previous years, ships were required to have a radio officer, who could carry out  radar repairs at sea.
This is no longer the case.
Reliability is a prime concern, as a non - operating radar can force the delay of the ship in port, at great cost to the operator.
22.5 TARGET TRACKING The target tracking function of a shipborne navigation radar has historically been  called an Automatic Radar Plotting Aid (ARPA) .
This term is becoming obsolete.
 IMO now defines this process as Target Tracking (TT) , which includes target data  obtained from AIS.
The basic requirement calls for a minimum radar tracking capac - ity of 20 targets on ships less than 500 gt; 30 targets on ships between 500 and  10,000 gt; and 40 targets on ships over 10,000 gt.
In addition, ships over 10,000 gt  must have an automatic target acquisition capability.
Actual systems commonly  exceed these minimum requirements.
Targets with a maximum relative speed of  100 kt must be trackable; this requirement is increased to 140 kt for radars on vessels  capable of more than 30 kt.
On the bridge, the navigator’s requirements to aid colli - sion avoidance include the need to know a target’s closest point of approach  (CPA)  and time to closest point of approach  (TCPA), both of which must be available for  all tracked targets.
The required tracked target accuracy at 95% levels is given in  Table 22.4.
FIGURE   22.5 Kelvin Hughes SharpEyeTM CMR S-band solid-state transmitter ( Courtesy of Kelvin  Hughes Ltd.
) ch22.indd   17 12/17/07   3:02:35 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Civil Marine Radar 22.18  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 22 The tracking problem is complicated by the fact that basic radar measurements  are made relative to the ship’s motion, but the display may be set to relative or true  motion.
In addition, true motion can be ground or sea stabilized.
Target vectors and  associated data boxes can be shown in true or relative motion, whatever the frame  reference of the radar display.
A ship’s orientation to north is given by a gyrocom - pass or “transmitting” magnetic compass—a compass with a digital interface.
A log  gives speed through the water  (STW).
This can be either a conventional rotating  transducer driven by the movement through water or else an acoustic transducer  measuring the doppler of the reflected signal.
The latter can be set to assess speed  either relative to the surrounding water (STW) or relative to the seabed, i.e., speed  over ground  (SOG).
Mandatory carriage of a dual axis log (which measures speed in  the forward and transverse directions) is required on ships above 50,000 gt.
This is  typically a doppler log.
On smaller ships, GNSS is used to provide SOG and is often  the user-preferred ground stabilization source for radar, even for a ship fitted with a  doppler log.
Doppler logs do not always give good speed readings on some types of  seabed, for example, soft mud.
Facilities must also be provided to allow the use of  stationary tracked targets, such as radar conspicuous navigation marks, to provide  the ground reference.
According to the design, the basic tracking function can be carried out in ship or  ground/sea referenced frames, using conventional algorithms.
The tracking process  can be initiated manually or automatically.
Automatic initiation is by a conventional  plot extraction process confined within a user-defined area, which, at its simplest,  could be a chosen range encircling the vessel.
The defined area may also have user- defined exclusion zones.
Algorithms for preventing plots from being formed on typi - cally encountered wave features, perhaps lasting a few scans such as a traveling wave  crest, need to be employed.
Manual selection is effectively a plot extraction process  operating over a small area surrounding the cursor.
An alpha-beta tracker or other  filtering technique is used to smooth measurement noise.
The characteristics of this  filter need to adapt to the quality of the received target signal.
If tracking is carried  out in ground referenced coordinates, the process automatically takes into account  own-ship movements.
In relative motion-based tracking systems, the filter needs to be  aided with own-ship data.
Depending on the user-set mode, the data has to be converted to the correct refer - ence frame and displayed appropriately.
CPA and TCPA are continually calculated   for all tracked targets, such that if limits preset by the user are breached, an alarm TABLE 22.4  Requirements for radar tracked target accuracy (95% levels)11 (Courtesy of IMO ) Time of Steady  State (minutes)Relative  Course  (degrees)Relative  Speed (kn) CPA (NM)TCPA  (minutes)True  Course  (degrees)True Speed  (kn) 1 min: trend † 11 1.5 or 10%  (whichever  is greater)1.0 − − − 3 min: motion ‡  3 0.8 or 1%  (whichever  is greater)0.3 0.5 5 0.5 or 1%  (whichever  is greater) † Trend is an early indication (after 1 minute) of the target’s speed and direction.
‡ Motion is the established assessment (after 3 minutes) of the tar get’s speed and direction.
ch22.indd   18 12/17/07   3:02:35 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Civil Marine Radar  CIVIL MARINE RADAR  22.196x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 22 can be initiated.
All tracked targets are displayed on the screen with their associated  velocity vectors.
Tracked targets may be selected by the user such that all information  concerning that target, including CPA and TCPA, is displayed on the data panel of the  radar screen.
Lost targets create a visual and an audible alarm.
Normal termination of  tracking occurs when a target leaves the acquisition zone or when manually cancelled.
 A guard zone may also be set up by the operator.
This may be identical to the acquisi - tion zone but is there to provide an alarm if any tracked target passes into the zone.
In common with other radar trackers, strategies have to be evolved to cope with  the target being potentially invisible in some scans.
IMO requires that the specified  performance is maintained when the target is invisible in up to 50% of scans.
Also, for  an effective system, strategies have to be evolved to reduce the possibilities of target  identities being swapped, which can happen when targets move close together and  subsequently diverge.
In particular, tracking algorithms have to attempt to cope with  the potentially large and fast change in the radar centroid as a target vessel turns.
In the  worst case, this can amount to almost the length of the vessel, 300 meters or so, for a  large ship.
It is an art to get a good tracker optimized for all situations, over a variety of  vessel speeds, and to maintain an appropriate indication of change in heading without  excess latency.
Over-damped systems may give an apparently stable indication of the  track of a target but can be very inaccurate when a target changes heading.
From the  point of view of safety of navigation, the change in heading is often the more impor - tant parameter.
Target trackers from individual manufacturers can have quite different  design and optimization strategies and can, therefore, differ in performance.
Within  IEC 62388,11 there are defined test scenarios that all SOLAS-approved tracking sys - tems must meet.
IMO requires that the trend in a target’s change of direction is shown  within one minute and the prediction of the target’s motion should be available within  three minutes, as given in Table 22.4.
In principle, target tracking could be aided by data from AIS (Section 22.7).
 However, AIS data is best left out of the radar tracking process in order to keep them  entirely independent.
Once radar tracks have been formed, they can then be auto - matically compared to AIS data and associated into a single track, if desired by the  operator.
This gives complete independence to radar- and AIS-derived data, therefore,  enhancing integrity checking.
22.6 USER INTERFACE From the user’s point of view, the most visible and important change in marine radar  from its early days has been the development of processor-based display technology.
 In particular, modern well-designed displays are viewable over a wide variation of  ambient lighting; they make effective use of color and give easy and clear access to the  radar image and associated data.
The days when the radar screen was only viewable  in daylight on dim long-persistence monochrome CRTs through the aperture of a hood  are long gone.
More recently, high brightness color CRTs are being replaced by Liquid  Crystal Display flat panel technology, which is helping to make the display more  user accessible—large stand-alone radar consoles are no longer necessary, allowing  improvements to the ergonomic layout of a ship’s bridge.
User input devices vary by manufacturer.
Some solutions rely on little more than  a tracker ball and three control buttons.
Others have a number of dedicated switches  and rotary controls, as well as a cursor control such as a tracker ball or joystick.
 ch22.indd   19 12/17/07   3:02:36 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Civil Marine Radar 22.20  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 22 Touchscreen technology is sometimes employed.
Increasingly, systems also include  a full alphanumeric keyboard to allow easy input of user-supplied data, especially for  chart radars  (radars utilizing an electronic chart-based underlay) and radars integrated  with AIS.
Radars designed for smaller vessels tend to have a completely waterproofed  user interface as they are often used in more exposed areas and by operators with wet,  salty hands.
In general, tracker balls, although they give more precise control and are  common on shipborne radars, have been found to be unsatisfactory in the environmen - tal conditions found on small craft.
Instead, mini joysticks or simple four-way rocker  switches are typically used.
The operational area of a radar display is normally circular, although this is no  longer a mandatory requirement.
It originates from the historical use of conical display  tubes but is retained by most manufacturers as it gives additional space outside of the  operational area for the display of data and menus (see Figure 22.6).
The minimum  operational display area is defined as a diameter: 180 mm for ships less than 500 gt;  250 mm for ships from 500 to 10,000 gt; and 320 mm for ships above 10,000 gt.
The  minimum recommended display areas for small craft radar are given in Table 22.2.
 The color of radar targets and background is not mandated.
The target trails that used  to be provided by the designed-in persistence of original radar monochrome CRTs  have to be provided electronically.
The trail length is required to be user selectable in  units of time.
When True Motion is selected, trails can be chosen by the operator to  be shown in either true or ship-relative reference frames.
The position of the display  cursor is always available in a data box in terms of range and bearing from own ship  and/or latitude and longitude coordinates.
It is this cursor that is used to select and de- select targets within the operational display area and to draw user-defined maps.
It is  also commonly used to set range and bearing markers.
A consistent common reference point  (CCRP) to which all radar and other naviga - tional data need to be referenced is identified on the ship.
This point clearly becomes  of major importance when close-in navigational calculations are being made.
Having  a defined CCRP also allows a scaled own-ship’s symbol to be shown on the radar  display when appropriately short-range scales are selected.
The symbology of this  graphic, together with all other symbols and abbreviations on the display, should meet  IMO requirements.21 This ensures that operators are familiar with the radar presenta - tion when working on different ships.
The radar display should also comply with  IMO’s performance standards for navigational displays.22 Certain range scales (maximum displayed ranges) are mandatory, covering 0.25 to  24 nm.
In practice, range scales above 24 nm are normally provided, typically up to  96 nm.
Range rings may be optionally switched in by the operator to help estimate dis - tances.
Precise range measurements are made with the use of a variable range marker   (VRM).
At least two VRMs are needed, each with numerical readout in the data area  of the display.
An accuracy of 1% is required (but not better than 30 meters).
A bearing  scale around the periphery of the operational display must be visible.
This scale can  help users determine the ship’s direction from viewing the heading line  (HL), which  has to be shown on the display; only temporary extinguishing of the HL is permitted.
 In addition, a ship’s heading is normally available within a data box outside of the  operational area.
The radar origin can be offset from the center of the operational area  by the user; the bearing scale adjusts accordingly.
Two or more electronic bearing lines  (EBLs) have to be provided with continuous  numerical readout.
Although these are normally centered on the ship (at the CCRP), they  can also be offset to any position.
Readouts relative to own ship’s heading or true north  can be set.
The EBL origin can also be set such that it follows own-ship movement or is  ch22.indd   20 12/17/07   3:02:36 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Civil Marine Radar  CIVIL MARINE RADAR  22.216x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 22 FIGURE 22.6  A ship’s radar display ( Courtesy of Northrop Grumman Sperry Marine BV ) ch22.indd   21 12/17/07   3:02:36 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Civil Marine Radar 22.22  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 22 geographically fixed.
The distance and bearing of one point to another on the display can  be determined, normally by use of a specific menu item and appropriate control of the  display cursor.
The actual implementation of EBLs, VRMs, and offset measurements is  often effected by a common graphical tool, which is used to position and drag lines and  circles across the display by means of the cursor.
Many mariners find the use of ship- referenced parallel index (PI) lines to be highly useful.
A PI is a straight line on the radar  display that is user-set to a fixed “compass” bearing and a fixed perpendicular distance  from the radar origin.
At least four of these have to be provided.
These can be individu - ally switched into use and set by bearing, beam range, and length.
PIs are typically used  to ensure that a ship is maintaining a safe ground track, with reference to a ground-fixed  conspicuous radar target.
Chart Radars.
 The capability and relatively low cost of modern processing and  display systems allow great flexibility in the presentation of information to users.
For  many years, SOLAS-compliant radars have had the capability to employ user-defined  maps as an underlay to the radar image.
Many maps can be created and stored for  future use.
Although this facility is still widely used, the use of vectorized electronic  chart data as a radar underlay is becoming more common.
In IMO terms, they are  known as chart radars .
All approved chart radars have to be capable of displaying  officially recognized vector data.
This data is known as the Electronic Navigational  Chart  (ENC).
It is issued on national authority and complies with an International  Hydrographic Organization23 (IHO) standard known as S57.24 ENC data is normally  displayed on approved electronic chart systems called Electronic Chart Display and  Information Systems  (ECDIS),25 and may be used by ships in place of paper charts.
 ENC data is kept up-to-date by hydrographic offices that issue update files on a regular  basis.
An IMO-approved chart radar must also be able to accept these updates.
Charts  and their updates are loaded by CD-ROM or via a satellite communications link.
On  some systems, the chart radar may have access to a server on the ship that centralizes  the distribution of such data to all equipment needing chart information.
The user has the ability to choose the ENC vector layers shown on the display  of a chart radar.
For instance, this may just include the coastline, navigation marks,  and a single depth contour, considered safe for the draught of the ship.
If the ship is  navigating on ECDIS, rather than a paper chart, it is likely that both the radar and  the ECDIS will be commonly set to Course-up or Head-up modes.
North-up is no  longer a particular advantage when the chart is not confined to such a presentation,  such as paper charts.
Most ECDIS equipment can optionally show radar-derived data,  normally as tracked target vectors but sometimes as the radar image itself.
This data  is obtained from the radar processor via a digital interface, giving an apparent conver - gence of ECDIS and radar displays.
Certainly, this is true at a basic design level, but  IMO is keen to differentiate between the two.
An ECDIS is used to plan and monitor  passages; a radar is used primarily as a collision avoidance tool but also to aid posi - tion fixing, particularly by identifying ground-fixed radar conspicuous objects includ - ing coastlines.
This results in many differences in the detailed requirements of radar  and ECDIS displays.
However, from a design point of view, the display processing  requirements are very similar and can therefore use virtually identical hardware.
As  well as saving design costs, this enables an easy transition to multifunction displays   (MFDs).
An MFD can be instantly switched between radar and ECDIS, as well as  other functions, enabling dynamic reconfiguration on a ship to optimize display use  for particular circumstances.
Clear indication of the selected mode becomes necessary  for safety and statutory reasons.
ch22.indd   22 12/17/07   3:02:37 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Civil Marine Radar  CIVIL MARINE RADAR  22.236x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 22 Most small craft radars now being sold include the option of a chart underlay facility  as a relatively low-cost option.
In general, these use unofficial vector chart data, issued  by specialist private companies.
This data is more affordable than ENCs and is directed  to this particular market.
Because of cost and space constraints, a single display nor - mally acts as both radar and electronic chart.
Theses displays are all effectively MFDs  and can, therefore, also be used as an electronic chart system without radar input.
22.7 INTEGRATION WITH AIS The maritime Automatic Identification System26 (AIS) is a target information system  that performs similar functions to airborne Secondary Surveillance Radar (SSR), such  as Air Traffic Control Beacon System (ATCRBS) and Identification Friend or Foe  (IFF).
However, the vast majority of transmissions are not the result of any interroga - tion, as it mainly operates as a broadcast system, based around a Self Organizing Time  Domain Multiple Access  (SOTDMA) communications protocol.
The communications  link, including the SOTDMA definition, is defined by the ITU.27 Ships automatically  transmit current navigational data and other information on VHF marine-band chan - nels assigned for AIS use.
The transmitted information is received by other ships and  also by shore stations, such as coastal authorities and VTS facilities.
Shore stations  and ships also have the ability to specifically interrogate shipborne AIS transponders  to initiate the sending of particular data.
AIS has three major uses: to enhance the  bridge team’s situational awareness, to aid VTS activities, and to provide data to assist  national security.
The intention of IMO is that ships will normally display AIS data on  the radar screen as it complements radar-derived data, adding to the integrity of the  presence, position, and velocity of targets and also giving increased target information.
 In principle, a conventional secondary radar solution could have been adopted but  international consensus favored the SOTDMA approach, as it was capable of provid - ing higher levels of data exchange, particularly to aid VTS and security activities.
An  important advantage of the chosen AIS solution is its radio frequency.
It is sufficiently  low so that reasonable communications are maintained in situations where there is no  visual or radar line-of-sight.
This can be important in harbor, river, island, and estuary  regions, where shielding by the terrain or buildings can affect radar range.
A shipborne AIS station broadcasts information divided into a number of sets.
 These comprise static data, such as the ship’s name, type, length, and beam; dynamic  data, including position, SOG, COG, and heading; and voyage-related data, such as  destination port and ETA, depth under keel, and hazardous cargo type.
The dynamic  data is broadcast at a rate consistent with the vessel’s velocity and whether it is chang - ing course, as shown in Table 22.5.
Static and voyage-related data is normally broad - cast every 6 minutes.
To provide sufficient bandwidth, two specific VHF 25 KHz  channels are used, with stations alternating between channels at each message.
There  are 2,240 message slots per channel every minute.
Minutes are aligned to Universal  Time Coordinated (UTC), which is obtained from an integral GNSS receiver.
The  SOTDMA algorithm effectively reserves future slots for stations that are in reception  range of each other, preventing mutual interference.
AIS for SOLAS use is known as AIS Class A .
There is a Class B system that is  designed for non-SOLAS use.28 This system uses the same VHF channels as Class A,  and the transmissions are necessarily compatible, but to avoid overloading the VHF  data link (VDL), Class B uses Carrier Sensing TDMA.
This is aimed at confining  ch22.indd   23 12/17/07   3:02:37 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Civil Marine Radar 22.24  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 22 Class B systems to use only slots unallocated to Class A users.
Class B systems will  delay their own transmissions if slots are not available.
(There is an additional option  of an SOTDMA-based Class B system.) Importantly, Class A and B systems receive  each others’ transmissions.
The combination of AIS and radar-derived data gives benefits to navigation because  of the complementary nature of the two systems.
The relative range and bearings of  a target derived from AIS data are entirely independent of the radar measurements  of these parameters.
Clearly, any observed differences in radar and AIS positions  will then indicate an error in some process, provided the differences are outside the  expected noise in the measurements.
This can be highlighted for the user.
A high posi - tional correlation increases the integrity of the observation, particularly as speed and  course measurements can also be used in the comparison.
Lack of any correlation can  also give the user information that may be helpful.
If only radar data is received, it may  be that the target is not fitted with AIS, which means it could be a small craft, floating  debris, or ice.
It could also mean that a vessel’s AIS is not operating or is transmitting  erroneous positional information.
If only AIS data is received, the radar image may  be obscured by clutter, a headland, or even a poorly setup or faulty radar installation.
 Normally, just a few targets will be uncorrelated, highlighting that these few should  be given additional caution if they are significant to own-ship navigation, at least until  they can be positively identified, perhaps visually.
If no targets are correlated, it sug - gests that own ship has a significant problem, perhaps with its radar, GNSS position,  or more commonly, a gyrocompass offset.
If there is good positional tie-up or even an understanding of why radar informa - tion may be lacking, for example, due to heavy sea clutter, the additional information  transmitted on AIS can be extremely useful.
For instance, a target’s heading is trans - mitted by AIS.
This information is not available from radar (only the course can be  determined), and yet heading is used as the basis for determining collision avoidance  action.
The AIS transmitted heading should align with the target’s visual aspect and,  therefore, the navigational lights on a vessel.
Vessel names can be added automatically  to target tracks on the radar/AIS display, and if there is a need to communicate on VHF  with a particular target, the radio call sign is also available from the AIS data.
The  destination port and ETA can sometimes be useful in determining the likely intentions  of targets, although such assumptions must be treated warily.
A significant advantage of radar is that it does not need cooperative targets.
It  attempts to detect all objects of potential interest.
Its inherent Relative Motion mode  of operation makes it ideally suited for collision avoidance use—particularly as in this  mode it has no requirement to need own ship’s geographical position.
However, radar  is basically confined to line-of-sight operation; its performance can be significantly Ship Dynamics Reporting Interval (seconds) At anchor or moored and not moving faster than 3 knots 180 With a speed of between 0–14 knots  10 With a speed of between 0–14 knots and changing course    3.33 With a speed of between 14–23 knots   6 With a speed of between 14–23 knots and changing course   2 With a speed of greater than 23 knots   2  With a speed of greater than 23 knots and changing course   2TABLE 22.5  AIS Position Reporting Intervals ( Courtesy of IMO ) ch22.indd   24 12/17/07   3:02:37 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Civil Marine Radar  CIVIL MARINE RADAR  22.256x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 22 degraded by clutter, and its tracking capability is compromised when targets are chang - ing course or passing close to other targets.
AIS has reasonably good capability in  non-line-of-sight situations because of its lower frequency.
It quickly reports a target’s  change in heading or course, including rate of turn data, if it is available on the target  vessel.
AIS is not affected by sea clutter and can report absolute position accurately—to  normally better than 10 meters or even a meter or two, if reporting differential GNSS- derived positional data.
However, AIS relies on cooperative targets; is prone to gross  errors in data accuracy, mainly caused by setup errors; and totally relies on reasonably  accurate GNSS data being available.
A GNSS blackout, perhaps caused by intentional  or unintentional jamming, would prevent AIS from being an effective system, possibly  over a wide area and for an appreciable time.
Future systems might increasingly exploit the complementary aspects of radar and  AIS.
This could improve the overall target-tracking capability available to ships and  will give support for detecting cooperative targets in clutter.
Possibly, the knowledge  from AIS that a target is likely to be at a particular range and azimuth could direct  concentrated processing techniques in that area, perhaps using pattern-matching algo - rithms as well as optimizing the false-alarm rate in the immediate area of the AIS- reported target.
It is ironic that the very targets that may be hidden in clutter are smaller  vessels that do not mandatorily carry AIS.
Also, a Class B system only transmits once  every 30 seconds at a maximum and so will be less useful for aiding radar even though  it can usefully alert navigators that a small target is present.
The use of AIS as an aid-to-navigation  (AtoN) has been put forward as a possible  replacement for racons, which are described in the next section.
In principle, AIS  AtoNs could replace racons, but in practice, it would be a retrograde step as they  cannot be used independently of a position fix system, such as GNSS.
However, they  can be usefully employed to indicate the integrity of the actual position of the mark,  which may have dragged or become unattached, and other additional data, such as  sea currents.
The AIS transceiver does not have to be situated on the actual mark and  could be shore-based to ease maintenance.
Used in this way, they are known as Virtual  AIS AtoNs.29 Up-to-date information concerning the mark and its integrity can be  automatically or manually fed-in by port authorities.
Such systems can also be used  for alerting mariners of the position of recent wrecks and other temporary and perhaps  visually unmarked navigation hazards.
22.8 RADAR BEACONS Radar beacons have played an important role in marine navigation ever since the early  days of radar.
They basically detect incident pulses from marine radars and instan - taneously transmit a distinctive signal that identifies the beacon and its position on  a radar display.
There are three main uses of such beacons.
The first of these is for  enhancing visual aids to navigation, such as buoys and landmarks, to enable them to  be prominently identified on a radar display.
These are normally called racons  (as a  contraction of radar beacons ).
Such systems form an important navigational service  that is well liked by mariners.
The second use is for Search and Rescue Transponders   (SARTs), which are mainly designed to be deployed from life rafts after a marine acci - dent.
The third category of use is for radar enhancement of small targets, such as plea - sure craft.
These are called radar target enhancers  (RTE) or active radar reflectors.
ch22.indd   25 12/17/07   3:02:38 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Civil Marine Radar 22.26  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 22 Racons.
 The International Association of Marine Aids to Navigation and  Lighthouse Authorities (IALA) sets the performance standards for racons.30 These  incorporate the technical characteristics set out in a specific ITU-R Recommendation.31  Because racons normally form only one subsystem of an AtoN.
they therefore need to  be small in size and power efficient since they are rarely connected to a main power  supply.
They often operate in an extreme environment, such as on a buoy buffeted by  the sea.
Racons are specified to meet an extended operational temperature range of  –40° to +70°C.
Modern racons operate by detecting an incident pulse and then measur - ing its frequency and responding at the same frequency, thereby reducing the interfer - ence potential with other in-band radars.
They are often dual-band (3 and 9 GHz).
The  ITU recommends that for pulse lengths of 0.2 µs or longer, the frequency accuracy of  the responding signal should be within ±1.5 MHz, and for pulses of less than 0.2 µs,  the frequency should be within ±3.5 MHz.
Swept frequency racons are effectively  obsolescent but are still permitted.
These work by having an internal RF source that is  slewing in frequency across the entire radar band with a saw-tooth waveform at a rate  between 60 and 120 seconds per 200 MHz.
All received pulses are responded to but  the interrogating radar will receive a racon burst only once every one to two minutes  when its receiver is in band to the particular transmission.
IALA recommends that racons have suppression techniques to avoid responding  to radar sidelobe transmissions.
This is not an easy task to implement and probably  impossible to make infallible.
Basically, the racon needs to build a table of radar sig - natures that it is currently receiving, based on frequency and pulse length.
It then  identifies whether high level and lower level pulses of the same signature are being  received and makes the assumption that these are from the same radar.
It sets a thresh - old level for individual radars such that it only responds to high-power main beam  interrogations.
Typically, peak transmit powers are about 1–2 watts.
Antennas are usu - ally omnidirectional in azimuth but can have a restricted elevation beamwidth and  typically have an overall gain of about 6 dB.
Prime power consumption in average  traffic can be less than 1 watt.
The modulation on the response signal of a racon paints a Morse code image on the  radar display.
The code identifies a particular AtoN and appears in the radial direction,  conventionally commencing with a dash.
This dash starts a short distance beyond the  actual position of the AtoN because of inherent delays in the response time of the racon.
 However, delays giving an error of less than 100 meters are readily achievable.
In good  conditions, the AtoN primary radar image will be displayed on the radar screen, helped if  a passive radar reflector is also a part of the AtoN.
Racons have to include muting periods  to allow ship radars to look for small targets in the vicinity of the racon identifier.
The long-term future of racons is unsure, although maritime authorities are assess - ing the situation.32 Mariners like them as they are useful, familiar, and give ship-relative  data.
However, it is difficult to see how they will survive in their original form as marine  radar moves away from utilizing magnetron-based systems.
Also, compared with earlier  years, when racons were essential, many more navigational aids are becoming available  that assist positioning.
These include multiple GNSS services, differential GNSS, AIS,  and enhanced VTS facilities.
There are also great improvements in onboard naviga - tional aids such as electronic charts and integrated navigation systems.
The reliance of navigation on a single system, such as GPS, or even a single tech - nology, such as GNSS, is not acceptable to the maritime community and neither to  aviation.
For instance, it is easy to jam all GNSS users over a wide area because of  the small amplitude of the received signal.
This means that radar and other position - ing systems are likely to be always used as essential navigational tools.
The overall  ch22.indd   26 12/17/07   3:02:38 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Civil Marine Radar  CIVIL MARINE RADAR  22.276x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 22 requirements for the electronic navigation of ships, including VTS reporting systems,  are being examined by IMO and IALA, with the intention of determining a future   e-Navigation concept ( e for electronic /enhanced ).
The continued need for racons or  a replacement technology will inevitably form part of this program.
If the continuous  availability of precise positional information cannot be totally relied upon, then it is  probably essential that some form of ship-relative system to identify fixed naviga - tional marks is available.
 SARTs.
 Search and Rescue Transponders33 (SART) form part of IMO’s Global  Maritime Distress and Safety System34 (GMDSS).
These are 9 GHz radar transponders  that are mainly designed to be used on survival craft (such as life rafts) in emergency  conditions.
They are relatively small and affordable.
On being triggered by a radar  pulse, a SART emits a 12-cycle frequency-swept saw-tooth waveform covering 9.2 to  9.5 GHz.
The extension down to 9.2 GHz covers the band used by search aircraft.
The  very fast upward frequency scan is accomplished in 0.4 µs; the downward scan takes  7.5 µs.
This forms the possibility of a displayed trace on the radar screen, consisting  of 12 radial dots and dashes as the upward and downward scans cross the passband of  the radar receiver, with the first dot at a slightly longer range than the SART position.
 In practice, the upward sweep is so fast that the dots are normally not visible on the  display and only the dashes can be seen.
Even these can be quite difficult to locate in  adverse sea clutter conditions.
The first dash displayed on the radar screen could be up to 0.8 nm away from the  actual SART position and so search craft have to take precautions not to run down  the survival craft when bearing down on the signal.
At short ranges, the swept gain  of the radar may truncate the nearer dashes.
Also at short ranges, because there is  no sidelobe suppression circuitry, SARTs can be triggered by radar sidelobes.
To  prevent adjacent SARTs from continuously triggering each other, there is a short  delay after a SART transmission before it may be triggered again.
To detect SARTs  in heavy sea clutter, it is often best to detune the radar receiver, eliminating all  other returns.
Some radar manufacturers provide a SART search mode that sets the  radar optimally for their detection, including inhibiting pulse-to-pulse correlation  and optimizing filter bandwidths.
AIS-based SARTs have now been proposed.
These  may eventually replace radar-based SARTs because the latter are difficult to detect  in adverse conditions.
Radar Target Enhancers.
 Radar target enhancers35 (RTEs) are used increas - ingly by small craft because, for their size, they offer a better enhancement in radar  cross section than can be given by a passive reflector.
In principle, they are simple  devices.
In-band received signals are amplified and retransmitted with minimum  delay.
Delays can be kept to a few nanoseconds, less than the equivalent dimen - sions of the craft, ensuring co-located returns of the enhanced signal and natural  radar reflection.
To prevent positive feedback between receiver and transmitter,  the transmit and receive antennas are normally physically separate, one above the  other, providing isolation.
Isolation can also be increased by transmitting on an  orthogonal polarization to that received.
Providing they are operating with linear  gain, there are no adverse effects from radar sidelobe interrogation.
However, at  close ranges, the signal from the main beam of the radar may saturate within the  RTE, effectively enhancing the levels of the RTE received signal through the radar  sidelobes.
The ITU regulations limit RTEs to an EIRP of 10 watts, with a minimum  gain of 50 dB.
ch22.indd   27 12/17/07   3:02:38 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Civil Marine Radar 22.28  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 22 22.9 VALIDATION TESTING The factors affecting the range performance of a radar system are well known, and  increasingly sophisticated design methodologies have greatly improved the detection  of all forms of radar.
The final proof, however, is how the radar actually performs at  sea.
As stated previously, shipborne radars are validated as meeting IMO performance  standards by being independently type approved to technical standards issued by the  IEC.
The IEC standards include defined methods of testing.
For a given target and radar  antenna height, it is relatively easy to define and execute a test to determine that a point  source target with a specific echoing area is detected at a given range in a minimal  clutter field.
It is very difficult to extend this to determine, in a repeatable and quanti - tative manner, the performance of the radar against point targets in predefined clutter  conditions.
For this reason, some basic performance tests have necessarily been loosely  defined to allow scope for approved test laboratories to make their own qualitative judg - ments on basic radar performance, normally based on opportunistically testing the radar  over the sea and in precipitation in a variety of situations.
Judgments on performance  can, therefore, be quite subjective and are naturally affected by the conditions actually  encountered during the tests.
Cost considerations can severely limit the length of test  programs and thereby the range of scenarios used.
Radars under type approval are typi - cally installed on a trial vessel for such tests or use a land site overlooking the sea.
This scenario is becoming increasingly unsatisfactory as advances in requirements  for safety and the protection of the environment mean that it is necessary to ensure that  type approval is consistently applied and is, therefore, measured in a quantitative man - ner.
In an attempt to resolve this, some work has been performed to try to better formal - ize marine radar clutter performance tests, including some research performed on behalf  of the UK Maritime and Coastguard Agency.36  This approach was aimed to minimize  any special configuration of the radar under test.
It is based on a system that generates  simulated target and clutter waveforms.
These are picked up by the antenna of the radar  under test from a nearby transmitting source, typically situated about 100 meters from  the radar antenna.
Co-located with the transmitting source is a receiver, which detects  the transmitted radar signal and continually analyses its frequency, pulse length, and  amplitude as the radar antenna rotates.
From this information, a signal waveform is  synthesized on a pulse-to-pulse basis, replicating reflected signals from targets and clut - ter.
The synthesis procedure calculates appropriate fluctuating target and clutter returns  from any desired theoretical model—which could also, in principle, include models  derived from recorded data of real target and clutter reflections.
Because the simulated  signal is predominately entering the radar through the sidelobes of the radar antenna— except when the radar main beam aligns with the simulator antenna—the synthesized  signal needs to be automatically adjusted in amplitude to compensate for the actual  sidelobe sensitivity in the direction of the simulator.
Effectively, the synthesizer has to  amplify the transmitted signal according to the inverse of the amplitude of each pulse  received from the radar.
The challenges in designing an affordable system include the  large dynamic ranges that have to be encompassed and the processing speed needed to  determine the characteristics of the transmitted signal.
In principle, a number of clutter and target models could be established by inter - national agreement, such that they were considered to be representative of conditions  around the world; agreed-upon test criteria could then be determined, and simulator  systems could be based at marine radar–type approval laboratories.
It has been found  ch22.indd   28 12/17/07   3:02:39 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Civil Marine Radar  CIVIL MARINE RADAR  22.296x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 22 that the system is adversely affected if set up close to large radar-reflecting objects,  such as buildings, and so needs to be located ideally in relatively open spaces, similar  to that found on an antenna far-field test range.
To enable tests to be more easily carried  out, direct injection of test targets and clutter into the RF path is feasible.
However,  this involves a certain amount of adaptation of the radar under test, which may be  considered inappropriate.
The potential move at 3 GHz to pulse compressed radar offers additional chal - lenges in the design of a universal simulator, as the system described is based on  testing noncoherent pulsed radars.
Systems based on digital RF memory may have to  be devised, storing waveforms that can be subsequently processed.
Target and clutter  models would obviously need to appropriately take into account doppler effects intro - duced by the movement of their equivalent scatterers.
22.10 VESSEL TRACKING SERVICES Radar heads for port control and coastal surveillance systems have some requirements  in common with those for shipborne radars.
This originally resulted in many of the  well-known suppliers of shipborne radar getting involved in this area.
They could  offer attractive prices as the subsystems were derivatives of the relatively high volume  shipborne market.
Over time, much of the market has become more sophisticated, and  because of this, specialist organizations now dominate the supply of systems for this  application.
The large costs associated with a major vessel tracking services (VTS)  operation, including massive antenna support towers, operations buildings, special - ized software, and disaster-proofed broadband communication systems, mean that the  costs of a more optimized radar head often become a relatively insignificant addi - tion.
This also means that switchable linear and circular polarization modes are more  common on VTS systems.
However, basic low-cost VTS systems still commonly use  subsystems intended for shipborne use, giving good cost savings compared to custom- made systems.
There are significant differences, however, in the requirements for a VTS radar  compared to a shipborne system.
The VTS antenna is mounted on a static platform.
 This means that the vertical pattern can be more optimally shaped.
Also, since the  design does not have to cope with the shock, vibration and instability experienced on  ships’ radar masts, larger antennas become feasible.
This allows azimuth beamwidths  to be narrower, therefore, reducing the size of clutter cells.
The required coastal area  to be covered can be large, and getting the best range out of a few radar heads situated  on tall towers is often more cost effective than utilizing many smaller installations.
 Because VTS often forms part of a nation’s security network, then a longer range  capability than that just required for port operations may be necessary.
This implies  that very high antenna towers are often needed, in some cases up to 100 meters.
This  exacerbates vertical lobing effects, which may need to be reduced by the use of verti - cal pattern shaping.
The long-range requirement often means that greater transmitter  power than that used on shipborne radars is needed, even though VTS antenna gains  can be higher.
Pulse lengths must be kept short to get good clutter immunity, but simul - taneously, long-range performance is required, again increasing the required transmit - ted power.
VTS radar heads are usually not operator configurable because a number  of operators can typically be using data from one head.
ch22.indd   29 12/17/07   3:02:39 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Civil Marine Radar 22.30  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 22 There are more opportunities to enhance performance because of the fixed antenna  position; for instance, sea clutter mapping becomes easier because the antenna is not  on a moving platform.
Also, the clutter conditions can be less variable because of the  restricted geographical area of operation, and there are no degradations in the accu - racy of the displayed radar image in having to compensate for a ship’s heading with  compass input.
In particular, target tracking is performed from a stable and static plat - form.
However, it is generally necessary to track many more targets than is required  on a shipborne radar, and normally VTS has fully automatic plot extraction and track  initiation.
Also, more information on tracked targets may need to be easily available.
 Much of this additional data can be automatically supplied by AIS.
The radar data  often has to be relayed many miles, to perhaps a number of operational centers.
It  may need to be combined with data from a number of radar heads and, therefore, will  be quite synthetic when displayed on operators’ screens, reducing the possibilities of  individual operator adjustment.
Extensive data communications networks become a  critical aspect in the performance of the VTS.
High reliability of the system is required  because of safety, environmental protection, and security aspects.
A total system avail - ability of 99.9% is not uncommonly specified, implying an average downtime of less  than 2 minutes per day.
Another major difference compared to shipborne radar is the custom nature of  the installation.
Radar heads are fixed, and there is a specific requirement for certain  performance parameters to be met in the particular localized environment.
Sea clutter,  although very variable, will have certain local characteristics, enabling more effective  optimization of the processing.
In particular, the actual performance can be more eas - ily measured against design requirements.
The design of high-performance antennas for VTS applications has a similarity to  air traffic control antennas, in that they both ideally require a tailored elevation pattern.
 The ideal pattern shaping for a high-mounted VTS antenna requires a sharp cut-off  above the horizon and a tapered pattern below.
Energy directed above the horizon  increases precipitation clutter and also reduces the antenna gain.
At angles below the  horizon, the gain should nominally follow a cosecant squared power law.
This is aimed  at giving a constant signal strength from a target of fixed RCS, independent of range.
 These are often known as inverted  or inverse  cosec squared antennas to differentiate  them from air traffic control radar antennas that have their shaping at angles above the  horizon.
Such shaping optimizes the pattern to the application, greatly enhancing over - all performance.
Typically, the pattern shaping is enabled by a doubly curved reflector  fed from a point-source primary feed.
An example from Easat Antennas is illustrated  in Figure 22.7.
This is a 7.5 meter reflector antenna with a 35 db gain at 9.3 GHz.
It  has an inverse cosecant-squared elevation pattern and a 0.3° azimuth beamwidth.
It  is remotely controlled to give horizontal or circular polarization.
The vertical pattern  shaping interacts with the STC of the radar receiver, and it is, therefore, necessary to  take this into account in the system design.
To improve detection, frequency diversity  is often used on prime systems.
IALA has issued detailed recommendations37 on the operational and technical per - formance requirements for VTS equipment.
There is much useful information in the  recommendations, and they are essential for procurers and designers of VTS radar  equipment.
They cover both coastal and waterway installations.
Many major rivers  of the world carry vast amounts of cargo on ships that can be surprisingly large.
The  meandering nature of rivers and relatively abrupt turns in canal systems, together with  the natural and manmade obstructions to radar, mean that waterway vessel traffic sys - tems are generally covered by many low-power radar heads on relatively low towers.
 ch22.indd   30 12/17/07   3:02:40 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Civil Marine Radar  CIVIL MARINE RADAR  22.316x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 22 Because of their number, such radars tend to be minimally adapted shipborne radars  as they offer adequate performance at relatively low cost.
Interestingly, the IALA recommendations allow CCTV solutions to compete with  radar when there is very low traffic density.
Automatic tracking of a single target is  then required.
However, on basic radar-based systems, IALA expects a 100 target track  capability and a plot extractor that can deal with more than 1,000 plots per rotation.
On  an advanced system, more that 300 targets may have to be tracked with a possibility  of more than 5,000 plots per antenna revolution.
APPENDIX THE EARLY DAYS OF CMR The use of commercial marine radar arose directly from the rapid development of  radar technology for military applications during World War II.
Even as early as 1944,  some attention was being given to the peacetime role of radar as a navigational aid  for commercial shipping.
In 1946, an “International meeting on radio aids to marine  navigation” was held in London and attended by representatives from 23 countries.38  The meeting was chaired by Sir Robert Watson-Watt.
It was seen that radar on com - mercial vessels had an important part to play in anti-collision, coastal navigation, and  pilotage decisions.
( Pilotage  is navigating in waters where a qualified pilot is required  to be onboard.) The future compulsory fitting of radar to ships was contemplated, as  was the desirability of an internationally agreed upon minimum performance stan - dard, with requirements for nationally issued certificates of type approval.
The need  to include the use of radar within the International Collision Regulations was clearly  seen, together with the need for certification of users.
FIGURE 22.7  Dual-polarized doubly curved VTS radar antenna ( Courtesy of Easat Antennas Ltd.
) ch22.indd   31 12/17/07   3:02:40 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Civil Marine Radar 22.32  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 22 In 1946, the UK favored operation at 9 GHz, presumably as it more affordably  met the UK perceived azimuth requirements of 3° resolution and 1° accuracy.
The  United States identified operational problems at 9 GHz that could be experienced  in the extreme rainfall conditions found on the U.S.
eastern seaboard.
These caused  “blackouts” on early 9 GHz systems—defined as an effective range of less than 1 mile.
 As a consequence, the U.S.
favored operation at 3 GHz.
The shortest pulse lengths  then commonly available (around 250 ns) made the clutter cells large, resulting in  9 GHz radars being very susceptible to rain clutter, particularly as clutter processing  techniques were in their infancy.
In 1946, there was no question that a commercial ship  could afford both a 3 and a 9 GHz radar, as the expense of even a single radar system  was seen to be a limiting issue.
Because of cost, it was already envisaged that fitment  would be confined mainly to certain classes of passenger ships that had a definite need  to carry radar, particularly those working in the north Atlantic, in congested areas or  areas subject to fog or ice.
The early trials in the UK concentrated on a single 9 GHz demonstration system  fitted to a naval vessel.
It was based around a 40 kW magnetron capable of 250 ns  pulses at a PRF of 1,000 Hz.
It was interesting that the speed of rotation could be var - ied between 20 and 100 rpm.
Despite the perceived modernity of today’s chart radars,  it was connected to an optional Chart Comparison Unit , which was an optical system  allowing the radar image to be displayed in coincidence with a paper chart.
The facility  to allow “North-up” operation was always seen to be a vital requirement for marine  navigation radar.
Parallel trials in the United States were conducted on a number of  candidate systems, using a broad range of frequency bands.
The initial trials were  conducted in the Great Lakes and were overseen by the Coast Guard.
The radar standards proposed in 1946 were not adopted internationally, although  the UK issued national performance standards based on them in 1948.
The UK stan - dard was also adopted by a number of other countries.
It was not until 1971 that  international marine radar standards were agreed by the Intergovernmental Maritime  Consultative Organization (IMCO, the original name of IMO).
However, the use of  radar on ships was first formally recognized by IMO in 1960 in an Annex to the  International Regulations for Preventing Collisions at Sea.
The influence of the 1946  proposed international standard was evident in the 1971 performance standards, even  to the extent of using identical wording in a number of places.
The similarity in performance requirements is still evident in the latest revisions of  the IMO performance standard.
For instance, the 1946 proposed performance speci - fication included the need to give a clear indication of coastlines rising to 200 ft at  20 miles, of a 500 gross registered ton (“Imperial” units) vessel at 7 miles and of a  30 ft fishing vessel at 3 miles.
The modern performance requirements, summarized in  Table 22.1, still use these figures but with parameters, except ranges, given in equiva - lent metric units.
The technical vision of the 1946 meeting was remarkable.
For instance, it was seen  that in the future it would be possible to overlay radar data automatically onto a chart  image displayed on a “television” type screen.
This was not to be realized on com - mercial systems for 50 years.
Also, it was observed that such display systems could  accomplish more than one function and not just be used for showing radar on a chart.
 This anticipated the concept of multifunction displays, now in use on some integrated  bridge systems.
It is interesting to note that Kelvin Hughes and Decca obtained the first type  approval for commercial marine radar in 1948; effectively, both are still supplying  ch22.indd   32 12/17/07   3:02:40 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Civil Marine Radar  CIVIL MARINE RADAR  22.336x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 22 marine radar today.
Kelvin Hughes has retained its name and Decca is incorporated  into the Sperry Marine organization of Northrop Grumman Corporation.
The 1948  Kelvin Hughes Type 1 radar had a peak power of 30 kW, 0.2 µs pulse width, and a  PRF of 1,000 Hz.
The 5 ft (1.5 meter) cheese antenna had horizontal and vertical  beamwidths of 1.6° and 11°, respectively, rotating at 30 rpm.
There was an antenna  heater to prevent icing, and the transmitter and the receiver (to IF) were “upmast”  (integrated within the antenna turning unit.) The display was a 9 in (23 cm) cathode  ray tube plan position indicator.
The similarities with systems being sold in the 21st  century are perhaps more surprising than the obvious differences.
LIST OF MARITIME RADAR-RELATED  ABBREVIATIONS AIS Automatic Identification System AtoN Aid to Navigation CCRP Consistent Common Reference Point CMR Civil Marine Radar COG Course Over Ground CPA Closest Point of Approach EBL Electronic Bearing Line ECDIS Electronic Chart Display and Information System ENC Electronic Navigational Chart (The data for ECDIS) FTC Fast Time Constant (differentiator) GNSS  Global Navigation Satellite System GPS Global Positioning System gt Gross tonnage (metric tonnes) HL Heading Line IALA International Association of Lighthouse Authorities IBS Integrated Bridge System IEC International Electrotechnical Commission IMO International Maritime Organization ITU International Telecommunications Union MFD Multi-function Display PI Parallel Index line NT Radar  New Technology Radar (Marine term for coherent solid-state radars) nm Nautical mile ( = 1842 meters) SART Search and Rescue Transponder SOG Speed Over Ground SOTDMA  Self Organizing Time Division Multiple Access STW Speed Through the Water TCPA Time to Closest Point of Approach VTS Vessel Traffic Services UTC Universal Time Coordinated VRM Variable Range Marker ch22.indd   33 12/17/07   3:02:41 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Civil Marine Radar 22.34  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 22 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 1.
Material from IMO publications is reproduced with the kind permission of the  International Maritime Organization (IMO), which does not accept responsibility  for the correctness of the material as reproduced: in case of doubt, IMO’s authentic  text shall prevail.
2.
The author thanks the International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) for per - mission to reproduce information from its International Standard IEC 62252  ed.1.0 (2004).
All such extracts are copyright of IEC, Geneva, Switzerland.
All  rights reserved.
Further information on the IEC is available from www.iec.ch.
 IEC has no responsibility for the placement and context in which the extracts and  contents are reproduced by the author, nor is IEC in any way responsible for the  other content or accuracy therein.
REFERENCES  1.
International Maritime Organization, www.imo.org.
 2.
“Revised recommendations on performance standards for radar equipment,” Resolution  MSC.192(79), International Maritime Organization, London, 2004.
 3.
International Association of Marine Aids to Navigation and Lighthouse Authorities, www   .iala-aism.org.
 4.
“Technical characteristics of maritime radio-navigation radars,” ITU-R Recommendation  M.1313, International Telecommunication Union, Geneva.
 5.
International Telecommunication Union, www.itu.int.
 6.
J.
Crony, “Civil marine radar,” in The Radar Handbook , 1st Ed., M.
I.
Skolnik.
(ed.), New York:  McGraw-Hill, 1970, Chapter 31.
 7.
J.
Ryan and C.
Kirby, “Iceberg detection performance analysis,” Report TP 14391E, Transportation  Development Centre, Transport Canada, 2005.
 8.
J.
N.
Briggs, “Target detection by marine radar,” Institution of Electrical Engineers (now the  Institution of Engineering and Technology), London, 2004.
 9.
“The international convention for the safety of life at sea (SOLAS), 1974,” International Maritime  Organization, London, as amended.
10.
International Electrotechnical Commission, www.iec.ch.
11.
“Maritime navigation and radiocommunication equipment and systems—Shipborne radar,” IEC  62388, International Electrotechnical Commission, Geneva, 2007.
12.
“Maritime navigation and radiocommunication equipment and systems—General requirements,”  IEC 60945, International Electrotechnical Commission, Geneva, 2002.
13.
“Maritime navigation and radiocommunication equipment and systems—Digital interfaces,” IEC  61162 (series), International Electrotechnical Commission, Geneva.
14.
“Regulations regarding the minimum requirements and test conditions for radar equipment used  for River Rhine and inland waterways,” Central Commission for the Navigation on the River  Rhine, Strasbourg, 1989.
15.
“Maritime navigation and radiocommunication equipment and systems—Radar for craft  not in compliance with IMO SOLAS Chapter V,” IEC 62252, International Electrotechnical  Commission, Geneva, 2004.
16.
R.
Gangeskar and Ø.
Grønlie, “Wave height measurements with a standard navigation ship radar,  results from field trials,” presented at Sixth International Conference on Remote Sensing for  Marine and Coastal Environments, Charleston, South Carolina, 2000.
ch22.indd   34 12/17/07   3:02:41 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Civil Marine Radar  CIVIL MARINE RADAR  22.356x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 22 17.
R.
Gangeskar, “Automatic oil-spill detection by marine X-band radars,” Sea Technology ,  August 2004.
18.
T.
K.
Bhattacharya et al., “Cross-polarized radar processing,” Report TP 13263E, Transportation  Development Centre, Transport Canada, 1998.
19.
R.
Pengelly, “Improving the linearity and efficiency of RF power amplifiers,” High Frequency  Electronics , September 2002.
20.
P.
D.
L.
Williams, “Civil marine radar—a fresh look at transmitter spectral control and diversity  operation,” The Journal of Navigation , vol.
55, pp 405–418, 2002.
21.
“Guidelines for the presentation of navigation-related symbols, terms and abbreviations,” Safety  of Navigation Circular 242, International Maritime Organization, London, 2004.
22.
“Performance standards for the presentation of navigation-related information on shipborne  navigational displays,” Resolution MSC.191(79), International Maritime Organization,  London, 2004.
23.
International Hydographic Organization, www.iho.shom.fr.
24.
“Transfer standards for digital hydrographic data,” Publication S-57, International Hydrographic  Organization, Monaco.
25.
H.
Hecht, B.
Berking, G.
Büttgenbach, M.
Jonas, and L Alexander, The Electronic Chart , 2nd Ed,  Lemmer, Netherlands: GITC, 2006.
26.
“Operational use of AIS,” Model Course 1.34, International Maritime Organization, London, 2006.
27.
 “The technical characteristics for a universal shipborne automatic identification system (AIS)  using time division multiple access in the maritime mobile band,” ITU Recommendation  M.1371-1, International Telecommunication Union, Geneva.
28.
“Maritime navigation and radiocommunication equipment and systems—Class B ship - borne equipment of the automatic identification system (AIS),” IEC 62287-1, International  Electrotechnical Commission, Geneva, 2006.
29.
“Recommendation A-126 on the use of the automatic identification System (AIS) in marine  aids to navigation,” Edition 1, International Association of Lighthouse Authorities (IALA),  Paris, 2003.
30.
“Recommendation R-101 on marine radar beacons (racons),” Edition 2, International Association  of Lighthouse Authorities (IALA), Paris, 2004.
31.
“Technical parameters for radar beacons (racons),” ITU Recommendation M.824-2, International  Telecommunication Union, Geneva.
32.
A.
P.
Norris, “The future of racons,” Final Report, Contract No 237293, General Lighthouse  Authorities, London, 2006.
33.
“Global maritime distress and safety system (GMDSS)—Part 1: Radar transponder—Marine search  and rescue (SART),” IEC 61097-1, International Electrotechnical Commission, Geneva, 1992.
34.
GMDSS Handbook , 2nd Ed., London: International Maritime Organization, 2000.
35.
“Technical parameters for radar target enhancers” ITU Recommendation M.1176, International  Telecommunication Union, Geneva.
36.
T.
P.
Leonard and S.
J.
Brain, “Radar performance test Methods—final report,” Research Project  RP544, UK Maritime and Coastguard Agency, Southampton, 2005.
37.
“Recommendation V-128 on operational and technical performance requirements for   VTS Equipment,” Edition 2.0, International Association of Lighthouse Authorities (IALA),  Paris, 2005.
38.
“International meeting on radio navigation aids to marine navigation, May 1946,” vol.
1 Record  of the meeting and demonstrations , His Majesty’s Stationery Office, London, 1946.
ch22.indd   35 12/17/07   3:02:41 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Civil Marine Radar 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 22   blind folio 22.36 ch22.indd   36 12/17/07   3:02:41 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Civil Marine Radar 