15.16x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 15 Sea Clutter Lewis B. Wetzel Naval Research Laboratory (retired) 15.1 INTRODUCTION For an operational radar, backscatter of the transmitted signal by elements of the  sea surface often places severe limits on the detectability of returns from ships, air - craft, and missiles, navigation buoys, and other targets sharing the radar resolution  cell with the sea surface. These interfering signals are commonly referred to as sea  clutter , or sea echo . 
The search for a useful understanding of this important radar  contaminant began with the collection and analysis of clutter data from operating  radars, with the goal of establishing the relationship between clutter signals and the  parameters of both the radar and the sea environment. Much of the earliest work  took place during WWII and can be found in one of the comprehensive series of  RADLAB volumes documenting the radar research that was done at that time.1 But  most of the clutter data from this period, and even into the 1960s, was collected in  bits and pieces from isolated experiments, often with poor, incomplete, or mislead - ing descriptions of the sea surface. It would seem a simple matter to refine these results by using instrumentation  radars operating over the wide variety of radar and environmental parameters encoun - tered in practice. 
But while the parameters relating to the radar system and its configu - ration, such as frequency, cell size, polarization, grazing angle at the surface, etc., can  be specified, selecting and quantifying the environmental parameters is quite another  matter. First, it has not always been clear which environmental parameters are impor - tant. For example, wind speed certainly seems to affect clutter levels, but the cor - relation of clutter with, say, a ship’s anemometer readings is often inconsistent. 
And  although the state of agitation of the sea surface ( sea state ) appears to have a strong  effect, it is a subjective measure and its relation to prevailing local winds is often  uncertain. Moreover, it has been found that the temperatures of the air and the sea  surface can affect the way in which measured wind speed is related to the generation  of clutter-producing waves, yet the importance of these effects were unappreciated  over most of the history of sea clutter measurements, so air and sea temperatures were  seldom recorded. Finally, even if the importance of an environmental parameter has  been recognized, it is often difficult (or too expensive) to measure it accurately in the  field under real sea conditions. 
While many aspects of sea clutter thus remained frustratingly ill-defined, the  earlier work did disclose some general trends, such as the tendency of average  clutter signal strengths at low to intermediate grazing angles to increase with the Chapter 15 ch15.indd   1 12/19/07   2:46:28 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Source: RADAR HANDBOOK. 
15.2  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 15 grazing angle and the wind speed (or sea state), and generally to be greater for  vertical polarization and in upwind/downwind directions. (For other reviews of  sea clutter and its history, see Skolnik,2 Nathanson,3 and Long.4) Sea clutter is,  however, a complex phenomenon, presenting various faces depending on the way  the radar views the scene. For example, it is commonly noted that when viewed on  an A scope (signal amplitude versus range), the appearance of sea clutter depends  strongly on the size of the resolution cell, or radar footprint. 
 For large cells, it  appears distributed  in range and may be characterized by a surface-averaged cross  section with relatively modest fluctuations about a mean value. As the size of the  resolution cell is reduced, clutter increasingly appears to contain sequences of iso - lated target-like, or discrete , returns that vary in time. At the higher resolutions,  the discrete returns tend to stand well out of the background, occurring for both  polarizations but most clearly evident with horizontal polarization at small grazing  angles. 
These isolated returns are called sea spikes  and are a common clutter com - ponent in this radar operating regime. Quite clearly, an understanding of sea clutter  in all its aspects will be a considerable undertaking. Fortunately, a close relation - ship between radar and oceanography has grown up in the fields of remote sensing,  leading to the accumulation of a large amount of information, both experimental  and theoretical, about how scattering at radar frequencies relates to oceanographic  variables. 
In many ways, this information serves as the basis of much of our current  understanding of sea clutter. In modeling sea clutter, there is a difference between a theory,  which relates the  physical scattering properties of the sea surface to the received signal, and a charac - terization,  which provides a description of the sea clutter data in terms of a statistical  model (e.g., Rayleigh, lognormal, Weibull, and K-distribution) that, although some - times suggestive of physical processes in the underlying scattering, is of greater direct  interest to the radar system designer in providing detection probabilities and false  alarm rates. Historically, attempts to provide a theoretical explanation of the observed behav - ior of clutter signals trace essentially from the work pursued during World War II  and described in the well-known MIT Radiation Laboratory book mentioned above.1  Unfortunately, the scattering models developed during this period, along with most  of those published over the following decade, failed to account in any convincing  way for the behavior of sea backscatter. 
In 1956, however, Crombie observed that at  high-frequency (HF) wavelengths (tens of meters) scattering appeared to arise from  a resonant interaction with sea waves of one-half of the incident wavelength, i.e., to  be of the Bragg type.5 Reinforced by the theoretical implications of various small  waveheight approximations and wave-tank measurements under idealized condi - tions, the Bragg model  was introduced into the microwave regime by many workers  in the mid-1960s.6–8 This produced a revolution in thinking about the origins of  sea clutter because it involved the sea wave spectrum , thus forging a link between  clutter physics and oceanography in what became the field of radio oceanography .  However, fundamental conceptual problems in applying the Bragg hypothesis in  microwave scattering, along with its inability to address significant aspects of mea - sured sea clutter, have led through the years to continuing inquiry into the physical  origins of sea scatter and how best to model it.9–14 This being the case, speculation  about physical models will be kept to a minimum in the sections on the empirical  behavior of sea clutter. The problem of modeling sea scatter will be discussed sepa - rately in a later section. 
ch15.indd   2 12/15/07   6:16:54 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Sea Clutter. 
 SEA CLUTTER  15.36x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 15 15.2 THE SEA SURFACE Close observation of the sea surface discloses a variety of features describable as  wedges, cusps, waves, foam, turbulence, and spray, as well as breaking events of all  sizes and masses of falling water. Any or all of these might contribute to the scatter - ing of electromagnetic waves responsible for sea clutter. The basic oceanographic  descriptor of the sea surface, however, is the wave spectrum , which says little about  the details of these features, but contains a great deal of information about the sea  surface in general and is central to the application of the Bragg scattering hypothesis. 
 Accordingly, some tutorial material describing the spectral characterization of the sea  surface is included in this section, along with a brief discussion of surface events such  as wave breaking and other surface effects thought to contribute to the production of  sea spikes . There are basically two types of surface waves, capillary  and gravity , depending  on whether surface tension or gravity is the dominant restoring force. The transition  between one and the other takes place at a wavelength of about 2 cm, so the smaller  capillary waves supply the surface fine structure while gravity waves make up the  larger and most visible surface structures. 
Sea waves have their origin primarily in the  wind, but this does not mean that the “local” wind is a particularly good indicator of  what the wave structure beneath it will be. In order to arouse the surface to its fully  developed  or equilibrium  state, the wind must blow for a sufficient time ( duration )  over a sufficient distance (  fetch ). That part of the wave structure directly produced  by these winds is called sea. 
But waves propagate, so even in the absence of local  wind, there can be significant local wave motion due to waves arriving from far away,  perhaps from a distant storm. Waves of this type are called swell , and since the surface  over which the waves travel acts as a low-pass filter, swell  components often take the  form of long-crested low-frequency sinusoids. The Wave Spectrum. 
 The ocean wave spectrum  describing the sea surface  appears in several forms. If the time history of the surface elevation is monitored at a  fixed point, the resulting time series may be processed to provide a frequency spectrum   S(  f  ) of the surface elevation, where S(  f  )df is a measure of the energy  (i.e., square  of the waveheight) of the waves in the frequency interval between f and f + df. Wave  spectra have been measured in the open ocean primarily for gravity waves down to  wavelengths of about 1 m. 
Open-ocean measurements of capillary wave spectra are  especially difficult to perform.15,16 For a gravity wave , the frequency f and the wavenumber K are related by the dis - persion relation  f = (1/2p )(gK)½ (15.1) where g is the acceleration of gravity and K = 2p /Λ, with Λ being the wavelength.  Although each individual gravity wave obeys this relation, the waves at a point on  the sea surface could come from any direction; so they are characterized by a two- dimensional propagation vector  with orthogonal components Kx and Ky, where the K  to be used in Eq. 15.1 is the magnitude K = (Kx2 + Ky2)1/2. 
The wavenumber spectrum  associated with S(  f  ) is a function of the two components of K and is commonly writ - ten as W(Kx, Ky). This is called the directional wave spectrum  and expresses the asym - metries associated with winds, currents, refraction, isolated swell components, etc.   ch15.indd   3 12/15/07   6:16:55 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Sea Clutter. 15.4  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 15 For a given source of asymmetry such as the wind, various parts of the spectrum  will display different directional behaviors. 
For example, in a fully developed sea,  the larger waves will tend to move in the direction of the wind while the smaller  waves will be more isotropic. Directional spectra are more difficult to measure and  are obtained by a variety of experimental methods, such as an array of wave staffs  to measure surface heights over a matrix of points, a multiaxis accelerometer buoy,  stereo photography, and even by processing radar backscatter signals. However, a  frequency spectrum measured at a point can contain no knowledge of wave direction,  so a wavenumber spectrum W(K) is often defined in terms of the frequency spectrum  S(  f  ) by the relation  W(K) = S(  f  (K))(df /dK) (15.2) with the relation between  f and K given by Eq. 
15.1. To account for the wind direction,  W(K) is sometimes multiplied by an empirical function of K and direction f  relative  to the (up)wind direction. Oceanographers have not always been in complete agreement about the form of  the frequency spectrum. 
Nonequilibrium wave conditions, inadequate sampling times,  poor ground truth, etc., can contaminate the data set from which empirical spectra  are derived. However, by careful selection of data from many sources, ensuring that  only equilibrium (fully developed) sea conditions were represented and the wind was  always measured at the same reference height (usually taken as 10 meters), Pierson  and Moskowitz17 established a simple empirical spectrum that has proven popular and  useful. It has the form  S(  f  ) = Af  −5 e−B(   fm /f  )4 (15.3) where g is the acceleration of gravity, and fm = g/2p U, corresponding to the frequency  of a wave moving with a velocity equal to the wind speed U; A and B are empirical  constants. 
This spectrum is illustrated in Figure 15.1 for several wind speeds. The  effect of increasing wind speed is simply to move the low-frequency cutoff to lower  frequencies along the high-frequency f  −5 asymptote. (It should be noted that most of  the oceanographers’ spectra are based on measurements at relatively low frequencies  and so cannot be taken seriously at frequencies above about 2 Hz. 
Nevertheless, these  spectral forms are often used up to 20 Hz or greater in predicting radar clutter under  the Bragg hypothesis.) Converting this frequency spectrum into an isotropic wavenumber spectrum  through Eq. 15.2 results in a spectrum of similar form, only with a K −4 asymptote.  Phillips17 derived this asymptotic behavior on dimensional grounds, and a widely used  simplification, obtained by replacing the smooth peak in Figure 15.1 by a sharp cutoff,  is generally referred to as the Phillips Spectrum :  W(K) = 0.005 K−4  K > g/U2   = 0     K < g/U2 (15.4) where the cutoff wavenumber corresponds to the frequency fm of the peak in Eq. 
15.3.  Opposed to this highly simplified form are increasingly complex spectra based on more  careful empirical studies18 as well as more sophisticated theoretical considerations.19 In discussing the characterization of the sea surface by its spectrum, it must be kept  in mind that the spectrum is a highly averaged description of how the energy  of the sur - face is distributed among the wavenumbers, or frequencies, of the waves present on it.  ch15.indd   4 12/15/07   6:16:55 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Sea Clutter.  SEA CLUTTER  15.56x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 15 Since the phases of these waves are lost, the spectrum gives no information about the  detailed morphology of the surface itself, i.e., about the complex surface features that  are responsible for the scattered field. 
This point will be raised again as we go along. General Sea Descriptors.  The shape of the curves in Figure 15.1 indicates that  the sea wave system is sharply peaked, so it should be possible to get a rough idea of  the behavior of the major waves on the surface by taking the values of period  (1/ f  )  and wavelength  (2p /K) defined at the spectral peak. 
These values are assigned to a  wave satisfying the dispersion relation Eq. 15.1 and having a phase velocity C = 2p f /K  equal to the wind speed U. By using Eq. 
15.1, the period T ′ and wavelength Λ′ thereby  defined take the form  T ′ = 0.64 U   Λ′ = 0.64 U 2 (15.5) where U is in meters per second. For example, the largest waves in a fully developed  sea for a 15 kt (8 m/s) wind will have a wavelength of about 135 ft (41 m) with a  period of 5 s. The statistical distribution of waveheights on the ocean surface is quite close to  gaussian, with a mean square height that can be obtained by integrating the wave - height spectrum over all frequencies (or wavenumbers). 
For spectra resembling those  in Figure 15.1, the rms waveheight is given approximately by  hrms = 0.005 U 2  m (15.6) FIGURE 15.1  Sea wave frequency spectra of the Pierson-Moskowitz  type, representing fully developed seas ( after W. J. Pierson and   L. 
Moskowitz16 © American Geophysical Union 1968 ) ch15.indd   5 12/15/07   6:16:56 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Sea Clutter. 
15.6  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 15 The rms waveheight contains contributions from all the waves on the surface, but  very often it is the peak-to-trough height for the higher waves that is of major interest.  This is certainly the case for a ship in a seaway or in the shadowing of the surface at low  radar grazing angles. The significant height , or peak-to-trough height of the one-third  highest waves, provides such a measure. 
It is denoted by H1/3 and is taken to be about  six times the spectral rms amplitude (see, e.g., Kinsman,20 Fig. 8.4-2). For a 15-kt wind,  this is only about 2 ft, but for gale-force winds of 40 kt, it rises to almost 15 ft, which  is a rather formidable sea. 
Looking at the sea, an observer might describe what is seen in terms of a subjective  state of the sea , e.g., “smooth,” “rough,” or “terrifying!” If these descriptions are listed  in order of severity and assigned numbers, these numbers define a sea state . A similar  numerical scale exists for wind speeds, the Beaufort wind scale , with numbers about  an integer higher than the corresponding sea state. But it is seldom used in reference  to sea clutter. 
There are, then, two numbers commonly used to indicate the activity of the sea  surface: a subjective sea state and a measured wind speed. Only when the wind has  sufficient fetch  and duration  to excite a fully developed  sea, can a waveheight be unam - biguously associated with it. The surface descriptors generally used in connection with  sea clutter—sea state, wind speed, and its associated equilibrium waveheight—are  given in Table 15.1, with the wind speed in knots, the significant waveheight in feet,  and the duration/fetch required for a fully developed sea in hours/nautical mile. 
It is  of interest to note that the median wind speed over the world’s oceans is about 15 kt,  corresponding to sea state 3. Breaking Waves and Other Surface Disturbances.  The observable features of  the sea surface that best suggest an origin for the sharp localized radar returns called sea  spikes  are surface events that are themselves sharply localized, events including break - ing waves of all sizes, induced either by the wind or by nonlinear interactions among  wave systems. 
Large-scale breaking waves display two characteristic behaviors—   spilling , in which an unstable wave peak unravels, and plunging , where the peak curls  over on itself and crashes onto the front face as a cascade of water masses, ending in a  chaotic jumble.20 Another different event is the microbreaker , a small, transient shock  front induced by a puff of wind or another wave. As noted earlier, highly averaged wave  spectra cannot disclose the morphology of such surface features, and, unfortunately,  physical oceanography is still unable to provide a generally satisfactory description or  characterization of wave breaking.21 Nevertheless, there are two useful heuristic param - eters relating elements of a breaking wave scene to wind speed. Whitecap density is a  visible tracer of breaking wave activity and has a power-law dependence on wind speed  TABLE 15.1  Sea-Surface Descriptors Sea State Wind Speed, kt Waveheight H1/3, ft Duration/fetch, h/nmi 1 (smooth) < 7 1  1/20 2 (slight) 7–12  1–3  5/50 3 (moderate) 12–16  3–5 15/100 4 (rough) 16–19  5–8 23/150 5 (very rough) 19–23  8–12 25/200 6 (high) 23–30 12–20 27/300 7 (very high) 30–45 20–40 30/500 ch15.indd   6 12/15/07   6:16:56 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Sea Clutter.  SEA CLUTTER  15.76x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 15 given by r wb ∼ U 3.5.22 The average length of a breaking wavefront moving at speed c also  depends on wind speed and is given by a parameter Λ(c).23 These parameters will appear  again later when we discuss some of the more recent models for sea clutter. 
An additional  feature of small-scale breaking, or other strongly nonlinear events, is the appearance of  “parasitic” or “bound” capillaries attached to the event and moving with it.20,24 They tend  to be small-amplitude features, localized and narrow-band. 15.3 EMPIRICAL BEHAVIOR OF SEA CLUTTER Sea clutter is a function of many parameters, some of them showing a complicated  interdependence, so we emphasize again that it is not an easy task to establish its  detailed behavior with a great deal of confidence or precision. For example, in a  proper sea clutter measurement, the polarization, radar frequency, grazing angle, and  resolution cell size will have been specified. 
Then the wind speed and direction must  be measured at a reference altitude, and if the results are to be compared with those  of other experimenters, the proper duration  and fetch  should be available to ensure  standardization to equilibrium sea conditions. Since these measured winds are related  to the wind structure at the surface through the atmospheric boundary layer, the shape  of this layer must be determined by measuring the air and sea temperatures. To com - plicate the picture still further, it has been found that sea clutter can be dependent on  the direction of the long waves, which includes swell  in the measurement area, so  ideally the directional wave spectrum  should be measured as well. 
Obviously, it is  unlikely that all of these environmental parameters will be recorded with precision in  every (or even any) sea clutter measurement; so considerable variability in the basic  conditions under which sea clutter data are collected by different experimenters can  be expected. It is of interest to note that in many of the reported measurements of sea  clutter, particularly in the older literature, wide inconsistencies between wind speed  and waveheight may be found. For example, a wind speed of 5 kt might be reported  with waveheights of 6 ft, or 20-kt winds with 2-ft waves. 
These pairings are not  consistent with the values for an equilibrium sea described in Table 15.1 and indicate  the unnoticed or unrecorded presence of heavy swell or highly nonequilibrium wind  conditions or both. Even with all the variables properly specified, recorded clutter  data can be spread over a wide dynamic range, especially at low grazing angles. Since sea clutter is generally viewed as a surface-distributed process, the basic clutter  parameter is taken to be the normalized radar cross section (NRCS), s  0, of the surface,  commonly referred to as sigma zero  and expressed in decibels relative to 1 m2/m2. 
It is  obtained experimentally by dividing the measured radar cross section of an illuminated  patch of the surface by a normalizing area, so differences in the definition of this area  can lead to inconsistencies among various reports of NRCS measurements. Scattering  from any distributed target involves the product of the transmitting and receiving sys - tem footprints integrated over the target. These footprints cover exactly the same area  for a monostatic radar and will depend on the pulse- and beamwidths, the range, and  the grazing angle. 
If the footprints are assumed to be of the cookie-cutter  type (constant  amplitude falling sharply to zero at the half-power points), then the relation between the  actual radar clutter cross section s  c, as inferred from the received power via the radar  equation , and the NRCS s  0 is given by  s  0 = s c  /Af (15.7) ch15.indd   7 12/15/07   6:16:57 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Sea Clutter. 
15.8  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 15 where for a radar with an antenna beamwidth B and rectangular pulse of length t,  viewing the surface at range R and grazing angle y, the area Af is either  Af = p  (BR)2/4 siny (15.8) for beam-limited conditions (e.g., continuous-wave (CW) or long-pulse radar at high  grazing angles) or  Af = (ct /2)BR/cosy (15.9) for pulse-width-limited conditions (e.g., short-pulse radar at low grazing angles). Real radars do not produce cookie-cutter footprints, however, since the antenna  beam will have a complex profile and the pulse might be shaped. For this reason,  an effective A must be obtained from a surface integration of the actual amplitude  profile of the footprint, which will tend to result in a smaller value of A than that  defined by Eq. 
15.8 or Eq. 15.9. This will produce larger values of s  0 as derived  from measured values of sc by Eq. 
15.7. Most experimenters use the half-power  beamwidth in Eq. 15.8) or Eq. 
15.9, with an error that is usually only 1 or 2 dB. Clutter Statistics.  Summaries of clutter measurements made before about 1970  may be found in several of the standard reference books on radar2,3 and radar clutter.4   Among the programs of this period, the most ambitious was that pursued in the  late 1960s at the Naval Research Laboratory (NRL),25 in which an airborne four-   frequency radar (4FR), operating with both horizontal and vertical polarizations at  UHF (428 MHz), L band (1228 MHz), C band (4455 MHz), and X band (8910 MHz),  made clutter measurements upwind, downwind, and crosswind in winds from 5 to  50 kt for grazing angles between 5° and 90°. 
The system was calibrated against stan - dard metal spheres dropped from aircraft, and wind speeds and waveheights were  recorded in the measurement areas from ship instruments. Typically, samples of s  0 for a given set of radar and environmental parameters are  scattered over a wide range of values and in the NRL measurements were organized  into probability distributions of the type shown in Figure 15.2. The data, represented  by the solid line, are plotted on normal probability paper with Rayleigh and log-normal  distributions shown for comparison (dashed lines). 
The ordinate is the percent of time  for which the abscissa is exceeded , and the abscissa is the value of s  0 as defined by  Eq. 15.7, with A taken from Eq. 15.8 or Eq. 
15.9 as appropriate. This particular distri - bution is representative of clutter from a relatively large radar footprint (pulse length  about 0.5 m sec or 75 meters) measured at intermediate grazing angles (20° to 70°) for  moderate wind speeds (about 15 kt). It is Rayleigh-like but shows a tendency toward  log-normal behavior for the larger cross sections. 
From a detailed statistical analysis  of the NRL 4FR data, Valenzuela and Laing26 concluded that, for this data at least, the  distributions of sea clutter cross sections were intermediate between the Rayleigh and  log-normal distributions. Organizing the data samples into probability distributions makes the median  (50%)  value a convenient statistical measure of the clutter cross section. But many inves - tigators process their data to provide the mean  value, and because the conversion  of a median  to a mean  requires knowledge of the probability distribution function,  care must be taken to avoid ambiguity in comparing the measurements of different  experimenters. 
The original analysis of the NRL 4FR data was based on median   cross sections and the assumptions of the cookie-cutter antenna beam embodied in  Eqs. 15.8 and 15.9.25–27 In later presentations of this data,28 the median  values of s  0  ch15.indd   8 12/15/07   6:16:57 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. 
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Sea Clutter.  SEA CLUTTER  15.96x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 15 were replaced by means , raising them by about 1.6 dB, and the area A in Eq. 15.7  was redefined in terms of a more realistic tapered footprint, adding another 1 to 2 dB. 
 This means that there can be a difference of 3 to 4 dB between the earlier and later  presentations of the same data, and since these results have been widely used and  quoted, it is important to ensure that the proper definition of s  0 is being used when  comparing them with clutter data that has been taken by other experimenters or in  using these results in clutter predictions. Figure 15.2 shows that even for intermediate grazing angles in the range 20°–70°  the sea clutter distribution departs from strictly Rayleigh. At lower grazing angles, and  particularly for narrow pulse widths, the presence of sea spikes  or other non-gaussian  behavior may be accommodated by one of the multiparameter or compound distribu - tions that express an excess of higher returns, such as the Weibull and K-distributions. 
 The latter was introduced to characterize the particular behavior of low-grazing-angle  clutter seen in a marine environment.29 Its success is very likely due to its relation to  the Rice distribution, which describes the statistics of steady signals in noise, thus  reflecting the statistics of “target-like” sea spike returns in a Rayleigh background.30FIGURE 15.2  An example of the probability distribution of sea  clutter data ( from J. C. Daley et al.25) ch15.indd   9 12/15/07   6:16:58 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Sea Clutter. 15.10  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 15 General Trends. 
 Being the first really comprehensive collection of clutter data  over a wide range of radar frequencies, the 4FR program produced many plots show - ing the dependence of sea clutter on grazing angle, frequency, polarization, wind  direction, and wind speed. However, comparison of these plots with others made both  earlier and later shows the extent of the variations to be found in sea clutter measure - ments reported by different investigators for exactly the same set of parameters. This  is seen clearly in Figure 15.3 a and b, which compares the grazing-angle dependence  of X-band clutter data for wind speeds in the neighborhood of 15 kt obtained from  four sources: NRL 4FR28 (these are mean  results for upwind directions and include  the antenna corrections mentioned above), aircraft measurements by Masuko et al.31  (also in the upwind direction), and summaries of data taken from books on radar  systems by Skolnik2 and Nathanson.3 The discrepancies between the different data  sets can be accounted for, at least in part, as follows. 
The older data summaries were  based on published measurements from various sources in which there is no speci - fication of wind direction. It may, therefore, be assumed that these data represent  some kind of average of upwind, downwind, and crosswind directions. As will be  seen, this average is about 2 to 3 dB smaller than the upwind returns. 
Moreover, the  early  NRL 4FR data was used liberally in the older data summaries, and it was noted  above that there is a difference of 3 to 4 dB between the early and later presentations  of the same NRL 4FR data, the latter  being used in Figure 15.3 a and b. With these  corrections, the curves might show closer agreement. Nevertheless, it is clear that  uncritical use of published clutter data could lead radar systems designers to choose  sea clutter estimates many dB apart for the same conditions. 
The NRL 4FR data set is unique in that no other program has reported measure - ments made over so wide a range of frequencies, grazing angles, and wind speeds at the  same time. Figure 15.4 shows the trends  for both vertically and horizontally polarized  FIGURE 15.3  Comparison of X-band clutter data from different sources for a nominal wind speed of  15 kn: ( a) vertical polarization and ( b) horizontal polarization ( based on data from H. Masuko et al.,31  NRL 4FR,25 M. 
I.  Skolnik,2 and F. E. 
Nathanson3) ch15.indd   10 12/15/07   6:16:59 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Sea Clutter. 
 SEA CLUTTER  15.116x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 15 sea clutter over a range of grazing angles down to 5 °. The curves represent the centers   of ± 5 dB bands that contain the major returns for the three higher frequencies (L, C,   and X bands—the UHF returns were a few decibels lower) and wind speeds above  about 12 kt. The major differences in sea clutter for the two polarizations are seen to  lie in the range of grazing angles between about 5 ° and 60 °, where the horizontally  polarized returns are smaller. 
This difference is found to be emphasized at both lower  wind speeds and lower frequencies. The cross sections approach each other at high  angles ( >50°) and, for the higher microwave frequencies, at low angles ( <5°) as well.  In fact, for grazing angles less than a few degrees and moderate to strong wind speeds,  observers have reported that at X band and at the higher sea states the horizontally  polarized returns can exceed the vertically polarized returns.1,32,33 The NRL 4FR system permitted transmission and reception on orthogonal polar - izations so that data could be collected for cross-polarized sea clutter. 
These returns  tended to have a weak dependence on grazing angle and were always smaller than  either of the like-polarized returns, lying in the cross-hatched region shown on  Figure 15.4. It is informative to compare measurements at different frequencies by different  investigators in different parts of the world under similar wind conditions. Figure 15.5  displays measurements of vertically polarized sea clutter down to a grazing angle of  20° for wind speeds of about 15 kt from three independent experiments using airborne  radars at C-, X-, and K-band frequencies.31,34,35 Although there is no assurance that  FIGURE 15.4  General trends in clutter behavior for average  wind speeds (about 15 kt) based on NRL 4FR data. 
Plots represent  L-, C-, and X-band data within ±5 dB. ch15.indd   11 12/15/07   6:16:59 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. 
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Sea Clutter. 15.12  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 15 all these measurements were made over fully developed seas, it is clear that there is  a rather strong consistency among them, which reinforces the observation made in  reference to Figure 15.4 that the frequency dependence of sea clutter at intermediate  grazing angles is weak at microwave frequencies from L to K band. Dependence on Wind Speed and Direction. 
 Experimentally, the relation  between sea clutter and wind speed is complex and uncertain, it having been found  to depend on almost all of the parameters that characterize sea clutter: frequency,  grazing angle, polarization, the state of the sea surface, the direction and speed of  the wind itself, and even on whether the measurements are made from an aircraft or  a tower platform.36 A common way to organize clutter data is to seek the best straight-line fit (linear  regression) between clutter cross sections in decibels and the log of the wind speed  (or some other parameter). This, of course, imposes  a power-law relation between  the variables: s  0 ∼ Un, where n is determined by the slope of the line. An example is  shown in Figure 15.6.37 On the other hand, while the totality of the NRL 4FR results  appeared to show saturation for wind speeds above about 20 kt, the high and low-to- moderate wind-speed data were collected at different times in different places under  different conditions of sea-surface development, and discrepancies between the two  data sets for common wind speeds have weakened the evidence for saturation.38  Other investigators deny that it is even possible to express wind dependence in the  form of a power law, proposing the existence of a kind of threshold wind speed,  below which clutter virtually vanishes and above which the clutter level rises rapidly  toward a saturation value.18 This is indicated by the curves in Figure 15.7, where  the straight lines correspond to various power laws and the curved lines derive from FIGURE 15.5  Frequency dependence of sea clutter for wind  speeds of about 15 kt: 5.3 GHz, Feindt;34 13.9 GHz, Schroeder;35  and 34.4 GHz, Masuko31 ch15.indd   12 12/15/07   6:17:00 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Sea Clutter.  SEA CLUTTER  15.136x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 15 wave spectrum considerations.18 It is possible to find examples of data that appear  to follow such behavior while at the same time being expressed as a power law by  brute linear regression, as illustrated in the tower data shown in Figure 15.8.37 This  behavior is not uncommon. 
FIGURE 15.7  A hypothetical wind-speed dependence of sea  clutter (curved traces) compared with various power laws (straight  lines) ( derived from W. J. Pierson and M. 
A. Donelan18 © American  Geophysical Union 1987 ) FIGURE 15.6  Sea clutter from a tower platform with power-law wind- speed dependence defined by linear regression (angle of incidence = 90°  grazing angle) ( after A. H. 
Chaudhry and R. K. Moore ,37 © IEEE 1984 ) ch15.indd   13 12/15/07   6:17:00 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Sea Clutter. 15.14  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 15 Nevertheless, the imposition of a power-law relation provides a convenient way  to visualize  trends  in the behavior of sea clutter with wind speed. 
The various air - craft measurements referred to above,31,34,35 augmented by data from a tower in the  North Sea,36,37 were used as the basis of the power-law plots of s  0 as functions of  wind speed and grazing angle shown in Figure 15.9 a,b. These plots suggest how sea  clutter for a given frequency (X band), wind direction (upwind), and polarization  behaves with wind speed and grazing angle. However, examination of the actual data  points underlying these linear regressions show point scatter that sometimes resem - bles Figure 15.6, sometimes Figure 15.8, and sometimes neither, so these straight  lines cover up considerable uncertainty. 
In fact, it appears that there is no simple  functional dependence of sea clutter on wind speed that can be established with any  confidence from existing data, although most investigators would probably agree  that the behavior of microwave sea clutter with wind speed at intermediate grazing  angles can be roughly described as follows: for light winds (less than 6 to 8 kt) sea  clutter is weak, variable, and ill defined; for intermediate winds (about 12 to 25 kt),  it can be described roughly by a power law of the type found in Figure 15.6; and for  strong winds (above about 30 kt), there is a tendency for it to level off. In fact, the  convergence of the lines in Figure 15.9 a,b with increasing wind speed suggests that  the reflectivity of the sea surface is tending toward Lambert’s law, for which there  is no dependence on grazing angle, frequency, or polarization but only on surface  albedo , or average reflectivity. In several of the experiments referenced above, the dependence of sea backscatter  on angle relative to the wind direction was found by recording the radar return from a  spot on the surface while flying around it in a circle. 
Figure 15.10 a,b gives an example  of this behavior for grazing angles of about 45° and wind speeds close to 15 kt.31 The  figures contain results obtained independently by three different groups. The behavior  shown here is representative of that found generally: sea clutter is strongest viewed  upwind, weakest viewed crosswind, and of intermediate strength viewed downwind,  the total variation being about 5 dB. Other studies corroborate this behavior .39FIGURE 15.8  Example of forcing a power-law fit (compare data points with  those in Figure 15.6) ( after A. 
H. Chaudhry and R. K. 
Moore  37 © IEEE 1984 ) ch15.indd   14 12/15/07   6:17:01 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Sea Clutter. 
 SEA CLUTTER  15.156x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 15 FIGURE 15.9  A representation of X band, upwind clutter behavior with wind speed and grazing angle:  (a) vertical polarization and ( b) horizontal polarization FIGURE 15.10  Dependence of clutter on wind direction: nominal wind speed, 15 kt; grazing angle  about 45°; upwind, 0°, 360°; and downwind, 180° ( after H. Masuko et al.,31 © American Geophysical  Union 1986 ) ch15.indd   15 12/15/07   6:17:02 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. 
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Sea Clutter. 15.16  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 15 Sea Clutter at High Grazing Angles.  The top lines in Figure 15.9 a,b corre - spond to clutter at a grazing angle of 90°, that is, for a radar looking straight down. 
 On a strictly empirical basis, the clutter cross section at this angle is only weakly  dependent on frequency, has a maximum of about 15 dB at zero wind speed (at  least for the antenna beamwidths and experimental configurations reported), and falls  off gradually as the wind picks up. Scattering at high grazing angles is commonly  regarded as a form of specular scattering from tilted facets of the surface, so it is of  interest to note that there appears to be a small range of angles in the neighborhood  of 80°  for which the cross section is almost completely independent of wind speed.  Since these angles correspond to complements of the common rms sea slope angles  of about 10°, it might be argued that as the wind increases, the clutter decrease  due  to increasing surface roughness is balanced by a clutter increase  due to an increasing  population of scattering facets. 
This line could, therefore, be regarded as the bound - ary separating the specular  regime, where the cross section is decreased by surface  roughness, from the rough-surface  regime, where the cross section increases with  surface roughness. It should further be noted that clutter measurements at these high  grazing angles will be relatively sensitive to the averaging effects of wide antenna  beamwidths, which could become a source of ambiguity in aircraft measurements at  the lower radar frequencies. At Low Grazing Angles. 
 At low grazing angles, below mean sea slope angles  of about 10°, sea clutter takes on a different character. The sharp target-like clutter  peaks known as sea spikes  begin to appear on A-scope presentations,1,32,40,41 and  the probability distributions assume a different form.30,42 Figure 15.11 a and b show  the presence of sea spikes in 125-second time histories of returns from a fixed spot,  measured off the coast of Florida with a variable-resolution X-band radar looking  into moderate ( a) and calm ( b) seas at a 1.5° grazing angle.24 Notice that the appear - ance  of the sea spikes is very similar for both moderate and weak wind conditions,  although the amplitudes  differ by almost 40 dB, and the vertically polarized returns  appear to be somewhat broader, while the horizontally polarized returns are more  spiky, particularly for short pulses in calm seas. These are all characteristics of sea  clutter at low grazing angles. 
The probability distributions of low grazing angle sea clutter change with wind  speed. Examples may be found in the measurements by Trizna of low-angle sea clut - ter using high-resolution (40-ns) shipboard radar in both the Atlantic and the Pacific  oceans.42 The probability distributions of the clutter cross sections were plotted in the  manner shown in Figure 15.12, which shows the distributions of horizontally polar - ized X-band data at a 3° grazing angle for low, medium, and high wind speeds (in order  from left to right). The low-wind trace corresponds to a Rayleigh distribution; the  other segmented traces are two-parameter Weibull distributions defined by different  parameter pairs. 
It is clear that the behavior is different and considerably more com - plex than that shown in Figure 15.2 for higher grazing angles and wider pulses. From  the character of the data, Trizna interprets these three-segment traces as showing pri - marily receiver noise in the lowest branch, distributed (spatially homogeneous) clutter  in the middle branch, and genuine sea spikes in the branch containing the highest  cross sections, some of which exceed 1000 m2. For the higher wind speeds and fully  developed seas encountered in the North Atlantic, the percentage of sea spikes in this  population was found to grow as the 3.5th power of the wind speed, which, interest - ingly, is the same wind-speed dependence shown by the percentage of whitecaps seen  on the surface,22 which, as noted in Section 15.2, are tracers for breaking waves. 
ch15.indd   16 12/15/07   6:17:02 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Sea Clutter. 
 SEA CLUTTER  15.176x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 15 FIGURE 15.11  Sea spikes at X band, 1.5° grazing angle, and various pulse widths: ( a) sea state 3 and  (b) sea state 1. Note equal amplitudes at the two polarizations and a 40 dB difference in clutter strength  between moderate and weak winds. ( from J.P . 
Hansen and V. F . Cavaleri41) FIGURE 15.12  Examples of clutter probability distributions  at low grazing angles ( after D. 
Trizna42) ch15.indd   17 12/15/07   6:17:04 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Sea Clutter. 
15.18  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 15 In comparing statistical results, it should be kept in mind that to the extent that  the sea surface may be viewed as a stationary homogeneous process, as it generally  is over the duration and spatial extent of any particular experimental event, the scat - tering cross section may be said to be ergodic , which means that the statistical results  obtained by time averaging from a small cell are equivalent to an ensemble average  from a larger cell, provided that the number of “samples” is the same in the two  cases.43 For this reason, the statistical implications of experimental data can be prop - erly compared only if the details of the sampling procedure are specified. However,  the number of samples in most of the experimental results shown thus far have been  sufficiently large that the differences between, for example, Figures 15.2 and 15.12,  may be considered real and related to differences in grazing angle rather than in reso - lution cell size. In fact, distributions closely resembling those in Figure 15.12 were  obtained much earlier from similar measurements with considerably broader pulse  widths.44 Other measurements have continued to confirm the differences that emerge  in A-scope appearance and statistical description of the clutter in this regime of low  grazing angles.45 Some attempts to describe the physical origin of these phenomena  will be discussed in Section 15.4 below. 
At Very Low Grazing Angles.  There is some evidence that sea clutter might  drop off more sharply below a critical angle  in the neighborhood of a degree or so.4  This critical angle, or critical range  for a radar at a fixed height, has been observed  from time to time since first noted in early observations of sea clutter.1 The critical  angle has been ascribed to interference between direct and (perfectly) reflected rays at  the scattering targets  responsible for the clutter signal, although these targets remain  unspecified.46 Although this simple picture could produce the R–7 decay that is some - times observed, a critical angle often fails to materialize, and when it does, it need  not show an R–7 decrease with range (equivalent to a fourth-power dependence on  grazing angle).1 An alternative explanation for this behavior, applicable at the higher  microwave frequencies, has been suggested based on a threshold-shadowing  model  for upwind and downwind directions.12,47 This model implies a sharp decrease in the  average cross section for grazing angles below a few degrees. In crosswind directions  with the radar looking along the troughs of the major waves, a much milder shadow - ing function will apply, so there should be a clear distinction between the upwind-   downwind and crosswind behavior of sea clutter at very low grazing angles. 
Examples of clutter behavior at these very low angles may be found in independent  measurements at relatively high wind speeds by Hunter and Senior off the south coast  of England48 and by Sittrop off the west coast of Norway.49 Their results for orthogonal  directions relative to the wind are shown in Figure 15.13, along with the predictions of  a conventional shadowing function50 and the threshold-shadowing function.47 It would  appear that a combination of conventional shadowing (which goes as the first power  of the grazing angle) across the wind, and threshold shadowing in upwind and down - wind directions, can account for the observed behavior of this very low-angle clutter  quite well. The decay law for very low-angle clutter should, therefore, depend on the  viewing angle relative to the wind direction, so it might occur with powers between  the first and the fourth. This is just what has been observed.51 It should be remarked,  however, that shadowing  at low grazing angles is a complex phenomenon (see below),  and the physical origin or even the existence of a critical angle is still open to ques - tion. 
Moreover, there is relatively little good data on very low-angle clutter for other  than X-band frequencies, so the general behavior of sea clutter in this angular regime  remains uncertain. ch15.indd   18 12/15/07   6:17:04 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. 
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Sea Clutter.  SEA CLUTTER  15.196x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 15 At HF and Millimeter-Wave Frequencies.  All the measurements described  above were made at microwave frequencies between UHF (428 MHz) and Ka band  (35 GHz). 
High-frequency (HF) radars usually operate in the frequency range  between about 5 and 30 MHz, corresponding to wavelengths between 60 and 10 m,  respectively. Since the operation of such radars takes place either by the ground  wave or over ionospheric ( sky-wave ) paths spanning great ranges, the grazing angles  tend to be small (between 0° and 20°). For these wavelengths and grazing angles,  measurements by Crombie indicate that the scattering from the sea surface was the  result of scattering from sea waves of one-half the radar wavelength,5 i.e., “Bragg”  scatter. 
In the years since these early measurements, there has been considerable  activity in the field of HF radar and HF clutter,52,53 and the results can be sum - marized as follows: For vertical polarization, the major energy of the HF clutter  signal appears in spectral lines displaced to either side of the carrier frequency by  the frequency of sea waves having a wavelength equal to half the HF wavelength l  (in meters). The relative strengths of the plus and minus lines are determined by the  proportion of advancing and receding Bragg-resonant wave components in the clut - ter cell. Provided the wind speed is greater than about 3λ kt (with l in meters) and  the sea is fully developed, the clutter cross section s  0 is about –29 dB and is rela - tively independent of wind speed and frequency. 
(The definition of s  0 in HF radar  is complicated by problems in properly defining antenna gains for ground-wave  and sky-wave paths and by propagation effects due to the ionosphere.) The clutter  spectrum tends to fill in around and between the lines as the wind picks up. For  horizontal polarization (which is possible only for sky-wave paths over which the  plane of polarization can be rotated by the Earth’s magnetic field), the cross section  is much smaller and shows the characteristic fourth-power decay with a decreasing  grazing angle. For these HF wavelengths of tens of meters, the sea is relatively flat,  and the scattering laws are simple. 
A detailed discussion of HF radar may be found  in Chapter 20.FIGURE 15.13  Differential behavior of very low-angle clutter for orthogonal wind directions:  Sc is a conventional shadowing function;50 ST is a threshold-shadowing function.47 (after data from  I. M. Hunter and Senior48 © IEEE 1966 and H. 
Sittrop49) ch15.indd   19 12/15/07   6:17:06 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Sea Clutter. 
15.20  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 15 At the other end of the potentially useful radar spectrum, in the millimeter-wave  band, the few published measurements of radar clutter lead to the conclusion that  millimeter-wave backscatter behaves in much the same manner as backscatter at the  lower microwave frequencies. This was suggested by the K-band curves shown in  Figure 15.5 for moderate wind speeds and further supported by some older shipboard  data at frequencies between 9 and 49 GHz.54 It should be noted that for maritime  radars clutter signal paths lie close to the sea surface, where the atmospheric and  water-vapor densities are highest. This means that at these higher frequencies the  clutter signal will be strongly affected by atmospheric absorption effects, and conse - quently the surface-related cross section inferred from the received signal strength in  any given measurement will depend upon the path length. 
Moreover, the role of sea  spray  in both scattering and absorption will certainly be more important than at the  lower microwave frequencies. It is difficult to find clutter data at frequencies above Ka band, although H- and  V-polarized returns at 95 GHz at a grazing angle of 1° were reported, both with  values close to –40 dB.55,56 The Spectrum of Sea Clutter.  The scattering features producing sea clutter are  associated with a surface subject to several types of motion. 
The features themselves  may be moving with small group or phase velocities over this surface while the surface  itself is moved, in turn, by the orbital velocities of the larger waves passing across it,  or the feature may be advected at the velocity of the wave system supporting it. The  scatterers might even be detached from the underlying surface, as in the plumes emit - ted at the crests of breaking waves, and move at speeds greater than the wave system  itself.57 At higher radar frequencies and in strong winds, the possibility of scattering  from spray carried by the wind field above the surface must be considered. All of this  complex motion shows up in a doppler shift imparted to the scattered electromagnetic  wave. 
Unfortunately, there is as yet little detailed physical understanding of the com - plicated phenomenology of sea clutter spectra. Measurements of microwave clutter spectra for real seas have been reported in the  literature for aircraft measurements of the spectral shape alone,58,59 fixed-site shore  measurements showing a shift in the spectral peak,60,61 and measurements from ships  at intermediate grazing angles.45 Other measurements of sea clutter spectra include  those made at much lower frequencies in the HF band, as described in the last section;  those made under artificial conditions in wave tanks,62 whose application to real-sea  conditions is uncertain; and those from other fixed-sites at high resolution and short  averaging times, to be discussed later. As it turns out, microwave sea clutter spectra have a rather simple form at the lower  grazing angles. 
Figure 15.14 illustrates typical spectral behavior at the two polariza - tions, based on data collected by Pidgeon for C-band clutter looking upwind at a few  degrees grazing.60 The peak frequency of the upwind spectrum appears to be determined by the peak  orbital velocity of the largest sea waves, plus a wind-dependent velocity increment  containing, but not entirely explained by, wind-induced surface currents. This peak  orbital velocity  is taken to be that of the major waves and may be obtained in terms of  the significant height H1/3 and peak period T ′ (Section 15.2) from the expression  Vorb = p H1/3 / T ′ = 0.15 U (m/s) (15.10) The approximate dependence on wind speed U was found by substituting H1/3 = 6 hrms  from Eq. 15.6, assuming a fully developed sea , and T ′ from Eq. 
15.5. To this, there must  ch15.indd   20 12/15/07   6:17:06 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. 
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Sea Clutter.  SEA CLUTTER  15.216x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 15 be added a wind-drift velocity of about 3% of U and a fixed scatterer  velocity (which  appears to be about 0.25 m/s in the X- and C-band measurements60,61,63). Summing these  components yields the virtual doppler velocity at the peak of the clutter spectrum for  the particular case of a vertically polarized X- or C-band  radar looking upwind at low  grazing angles:  Vvir = 0.25 + 0.18 U (m/s) (15.11) (As noted earlier, care must be taken whenever wind speed is used to parameterize  a process that depends on waveheight. 
There is an unambiguous relation only for a  fully developed sea in the absence of swell.) The remaining properties of the clutter  spectrum can now be discussed in terms of Vorb and Vvir . For example, the spectral  peak for horizontal  polarization follows a similar linear dependence on U, only with  a coefficient lying somewhere between 0.20 and 0.30, as may be noted in the sketch  shown in Figure 15.14. The reasons for the differences between the spectra for the two  polarizations are not as yet clear, although the tendency of the H-polarization spectra  to lie at a higher frequency is likely due to the preferential source of H-polarization  returns in faster-moving wave structures.45,64 The (half-power) width  ∆ of the clutter velocity  spectrum is quite variable,  depending on such things as radar polarization and sea conditions. 
It seems most  closely related to the peak orbital velocity given by Eq. 15.10. Nathanson shows  a plot containing spectral widths at both polarizations from several investigators  over a wide assortment of unspecified sea conditions.65 The points are widely  scattered, but the dependence on wind speed is given roughly, with a rather large  variance, by the expression ∆ ∼ 0.24 U (m/s), which is just the orbital velocity in  Eq. 
15.10 with a coefficient about halfway between the values for vertical ( ∼0.15)  and horizontal ( ∼0.30) polarization. For look directions away from upwind, the  peak doppler follows a cosine dependence quite closely, going to zero at crosswind  aspects and turning negative downwind.29 The width  of the spectrum appears to  remain relatively constant.FIGURE 15.14  Qualitative behavior of doppler  spectra of sea clutter looking upwind at low grazing  angles ( after C-band measurements by V . W. 
Pidgeon60  © American Geophysical Union 1968 ) ch15.indd   21 12/15/07   6:17:07 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Sea Clutter. 
15.22  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 15 The details of the clutter spectrum show little dependence on either the radar fre - quency or the grazing angle, at least for angles less than about 10°. In reviewing the  results of measurements at four frequencies—UHF, L, C, and X bands—Valenzuela  and Laing59 noted a relatively weak tendency of clutter bandwidth to decrease with  increases in frequency between the UHF and X bands and grazing angles between 5°  and 30°. Since both of these variations can likely be accompanied by a change in the  size of the radar footprint on the surface, they might be due to a dependence on resolu - tion cell dimensions, although the other workers found that the pulse length had little  effect on clutter bandwidth for values between about 0.25 and 10 µsec. 
Spectra obtained with short  averaging times disclose something of the origins  of the clutter spectrum. Figure 15.15 is a sequence of 0.2 second spectra obtained  by Keller et al.66 with a coherent vertically polarized X-band radar operating at a  grazing angle of 35° and a resolution cell size of about 10 m2. The zero-doppler ref - erence in this figure was located arbitrarily at –116 Hz. 
The spread along each line   FIGURE 15.15  Short-time averaged doppler spectra at X band for an  intermediate grazing angle of 35°; spectra computed at 0.2 sec intervals  (shallow-water data is from a fixed site on a pier.) ( from W. C. Keller  et al.66) ch15.indd   22 12/15/07   6:17:08 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Sea Clutter.  SEA CLUTTER  15.236x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 15 is due to the small-scale wave motions on the surface, while the larger meanders are  induced by the velocities of large waves moving through the measurement cell. 
The  wind speed was about 8 m/s, and a doppler shift of 100 Hz corresponds to a radial  velocity of 1.6 m/s. The average clutter spectrum expected for this wind speed and  grazing angle, with bandwidth estimated from Eq. 15.10, is included in the sketch  shown in Figure 15.15. 
The large spectral spike appearing in the center of the display  is no doubt due to a wave breaking in or close to the measurement cell. The doppler  velocity for this spike suggests a peak scatterer velocity about equal to the wind  speed, which would correspond to the velocity of the longest waves on the surface.  Although such events are relatively rare in a fixed area of 10 m2, they should occur  quite frequently within a large surveillance cell and might often have large scatter - ing cross sections associated with them. 
Similar records may be found in reference  Ward et al.29 Other Environmental Effects. Rain.  Early evidence of the effect of rain on sea clutter was mainly anecdotal; for  example, radar operators would report that sea clutter tends to decrease when it starts  to rain. 
However, there has been little in the way of reliable, quantitative experimental  information about the interaction between rain and wind-driven sea clutter in the open  ocean. Laboratory measurements by Moore et al.67 with artificial “rain” suggested that  for light winds the backscatter level increased with the rain rate, while for heavy winds  rain made little difference. Extensive measurements at Ku band in the open ocean  tended to confirm this behavior.68 In measurements in natural rain over Chesapeake Bay, Hansen69 found that even  a light rain (2 mm/h) changes the spectral character of sea clutter at moderate wind  speeds (6 m/s) by introducing a significant high-frequency component. 
He also  found some evidence in support of the radar operators, at least for the low graz - ing angles and horizontal polarizations with which most shipboard radars operate.  Figure 15.16 compares the correlation function of sea clutter (X band, low grazing  angle, H polarization) with and without rain for a 15-kt wind speed and a rain rate  of 4 mm/h. The sharp decrease in correlation time in the presence of rain reflects  the broadening of the clutter spectrum, although generally there appears to be little  quantitative information about the effect of rain on the spectrum of sea clutter. 
FIGURE 15.16  Effect of rain on the correlation function of wind-driven sea  clutter: X band, horizontal polarization, wind speed 15 kt, rain rate 4 mm/h  (from J. P . Hansen69) ch15.indd   23 12/15/07   6:17:08 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Sea Clutter. 15.24  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 15 The production of sea clutter by rain falling on a “calm” surface in the absence  of wind was also investigated by Hansen, with the results shown in Figure 15.17.69  A high-resolution X-band radar (40-ns pulse, 1° beamwidth), operating at a grazing  angle of about 3°, viewed the backscatter from a fixed spot on the windless surface of  Chesapeake Bay as the rain steadily increased from 0 to 6 mm/h. 
The cross sections for  vertical and horizontal polarizations were quite different for low rain rates but tended  to merge at a rain rate of about 6 mm/h. The magnitude of this splash  cross section rose  to a s  0 of about –40 dB, corresponding to highly averaged wind-induced cross sec - tions at this grazing angle for winds of about 10 kt. Further laboratory70 and theoreti - cal71 studies have shown that the major scattering feature under these conditions is the  vertical stalk  that emerges shortly after drop impact. 
Moreover, these studies suggest  that the V-polarized returns from raindrop splashes should be only mildly sensitive to  the rain rate, while the H-polarized returns should show a strong dependence on both  the rain rate and the drop-size distribution. Something of this behavior may be seen  in the data in Figure 15.17. Open ocean measurements at Ku band and at much higher  grazing angles72 show sufficient variability with wind speed, rain rate, and grazing  angle to leave the uncertainties that opened this section largely unresolved. 
In addition to scattering from the raindrop impacts, the distribution of raindrops  in the volume of the atmosphere above the surface can have two additional effects  on sea clutter—as an absorber/scatterer over the radar propagation path, which is  well-understood, and as a mass-additive to the wind, affecting momentum transfer  to the surface and thus the excitation of wind waves themselves, which is less  well-understood.73 Atmospheric Ducting.  Another topic in sea clutter that has been little explored  is the role played by propagation effects  within the atmospheric boundary layer  lying over the sea surface. The effects of atmospheric absorption have been noted  above in connection with millimeter-wave clutter, but at very low grazing angles,  the ray paths joining the radar to the surface become very sensitive to refractive  inhomogeneities in the atmospheric boundary layer. 
Over distances approaching and  FIGURE 15.17  Sea clutter produced by rain splashes alone on a calm surface   (20 dB corresponds to about s  0 = −40 dB) ( from Hansen69) ch15.indd   24 12/15/07   6:17:09 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Sea Clutter. 
 SEA CLUTTER  15.256x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 15 beyond the conventional optical horizon, such perturbations could produce strong  focus-defocus variations along the surface illumination profile74,75 or a general rise  in the local grazing angle.47 Figure 15.18 gives an experimental example of the effect  of ducting  on very low-angle sea clutter. 51 The grazing angle given as the abscissa  is actually a plot of inverse range, so the lifting of the cross section by ducting over  an order-of-magnitude span of ranges is very likely due to a rise in the local grazing  angle produced by refraction in the evaporative layer (first 10 meters or so above  the surface).47 Such effects should be suspected whenever the radar propagation path  extends beyond the optical  horizon. Shadowing. 
 The possibility of shadowing must be considered seriously whenever  the sea is viewed at grazing angles smaller than the rms slope angle of the sea surface.  Some examples were discussed earlier in connection with the behavior of sea clutter at  low grazing angles in Figure 15.13. In fact, the sharp falloff of the nonducting  data in  Figure 15.18 might be further evidence of the threshold shadowing  mentioned earlier. 
 However, the common idea of shadowing derives from the geometrical optics concept  of a sharp transition between light and darkness. By considering the implications of  diffraction  at the wave peaks, it is possible to determine the domain of radar frequen - cies and wind speeds over which the concepts of geometrical optics may be applied.  This was done in Wetzel,12 where it is shown how diffraction, rather than geometrical  shadowing, controls propagation into and out of the troughs of the waves under many  of the usual frequencies and wind speeds encountered in practical radar operations at  low grazing angles. 
For example, shadowing will take place at Ka band for any winds  above 15 kt, yet will hardly ever occur at L-band frequencies. Later analytical solu - tions based on numerical methods explored and expanded the idea of shadowing over  the sea surface under highly idealized,76 and more general77 conditions. Surface Currents. 
 The most obvious effect of a current on sea clutter would be  a shift in the peak of the doppler spectrum, analogous to the contribution of the 3%  wind-drift current mentioned in connection with Eq. 15.11. Another effect is related to  FIG.URE 15.18  Effect of ducting on low-angle clutter; wind speed  about 10 kt ( after F . 
B. Dyer and N. C. 
Currie51 © IEEE 1974 ) ch15.indd   25 12/15/07   6:17:09 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Sea Clutter. 
15.26  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 15 the fact that the excitation of the surface-wave system depends on the local apparent  wind  at the surface, so there can be significant differences in waveheight according  to whether the wind is blowing with or against the current. According to Eq. 15.6,  waveheight is proportional to the square of the wind speed, so in the Gulf Stream,  for example, with a current of 4 kt flowing north, a 15-kt northerly blowing against  the current will raise a sea three times as high as a 15-kt southerly blowing with the  current. 
Even with no wind, the presence of strong current shears  can produce highly  agitated surfaces. Shipboard observers have reported bands of roaring breakers pass - ing by on an otherwise-smooth surface, presumably produced by powerful surface- current shears associated with large-amplitude internal waves.78 In a more subtle way,  modulated currents are held responsible for synthetic aperture radar (SAR) images  that contain the expression of bottom topography produced by the Bernoulli Effect in  shallow waters.79 In each of the examples cited above, the current produces a change  in the surface roughness, which can be expected to give rise to a change in sea clutter  cross section. Contaminants. 
 The idea of pouring oil on troubled waters is a familiar one: the  angry surface will smooth and subside. In another age, the survival-gear locker of  every sailing ship would contain a bottle of oil to quiet the sea in a storm. Although  the effectiveness of this procedure has always been somewhat controversial, there  is no question that oil can produce a slick of smooth water at relatively low wind  speeds. 
In fact, biological oils, produced by bacteria, algae, and plankton, can be  found everywhere on the world’s oceans and form natural slicks in those regions  that combine the greatest oil concentration with the lowest wind speeds, e.g., close  to continental shorelines.80 Man-made contaminants can, of course, have the same  effect. A layer of oil only one molecule thick will significantly affect the ability of  the surface to support wave motions, but this layer must be continuous. The adja - cent molecules then sense each other and form a film that is resistant to horizontal  compression. 
The surface elasticity is changed, a type of longitudinal viscosity is  introduced, and the surface becomes stabilized against the growth of short waves up  to several inches in length.81,82 To the extent that radar sea clutter is produced by small-scale surface roughness (at  grazing angles less than about 80°), the presence of oil on the surface should lead to  a measurable decrease in clutter cross section. But, as noted above, the reduction of  small wave motions requires the existence of a continuous  monolayer; slick formation  is a go–no-go process, and so slicks will tend to have relatively sharp boundaries. In  operating the NRL 4FR system as a synthetic aperture radar to obtain images of the  slicks produced by oil spills, Guinard found that the slicks were well defined, that it  took very little oil to maintain a visible slick, that vertical polarization provided much  greater contrast than did horizontal, and that the slicks were quenched by winds and  currents.83 Although signal strength was not recorded in this imaging experiment, later  measurements at X and L bands by others84 indicated that at the higher grazing angles  (about 45°) the clutter reduction produced by the types of oil occurring in  natural   slicks was rather small, on the order of a percent. 
Since slicks are dispersed by the  wind and associated wave action at wind speeds greater than about 10 kt, the effect of  natural slicks on clutter may not be clear because they tend to occur in the regime of  low wind speeds where the sea surface is already ill defined. The celebrated sun glitter  measurements by Cox and Munk85 gave a quantitative  measure of the effect of contaminants on the surface slopes in open water, showing  that the wind-generated component of the rms slope of “oiled” waters is significantly  ch15.indd   26 12/15/07   6:17:09 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. 
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Sea Clutter.  SEA CLUTTER  15.276x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 15 smaller than that of “clean” water. The heavy commercial oils used in their experiment  were effective in suppressing small-scale waves over a range of wind speeds well  beyond those which would normally disperse the lighter natural oils, so the effect of oil  spills on sea clutter should be expected to extend to the higher wind speeds. 
In fact, at  these higher wind speeds, the depression of radar backscatter by such oils at X and Ka  bands can reach 10 to 20 dB at intermediate grazing angles between 30° and 60°.86,87 15.4 THEORIES AND MODELS OF SEA CLUTTER In addition to providing an intellectual basis for “understanding” sea clutter phenom - ena, a complete theory of sea clutter should ideally provide accurate a priori  predic - tions of all aspects of clutter behavior under all possible environmental conditions. In  spite of over 60 years of effort, the theory of sea clutter does neither of these tasks very  well, as we will see in this section. In the development of models of sea scatter based on physical theory, there are  essentially two basic and distinct approaches. 
Historically, the first approach assumed  sea scatter to have its origin in scattering features , or obstacles, actually present on or  near the sea surface. Early scattering models included rain (to model spray),88 smooth  circular metallic disks,46,89 arrays of semi-infinite planes,90 and fields of hemispheri - cal bosses,91 to name a few. Obviously, the choice of these scattering obstacles related  more to the preexistence of convenient scattering solutions for these shapes than to  insights gained from observing the sea. 
Since then, feature models have sought greater  reality by considering wedge shapes, as suggested by the sharp crests of Stokes waves  observed on most natural water surfaces12,32,92,93 and the shocks and plumes suggested  by the properties of wave groups and the hydrodynamics of breaking waves.12,57 The other approach to theoretical modeling derives the scattered field from a  global boundary-value problem (GBVP) in which the sea as a whole is considered a  boundary surface whose corrugations are described by some kind of statistical pro - cess. An enormous literature is devoted to the theory of surface scatter from this  point of view, stemming from the importance not only of radar sea scatter, but also  radar ground scatter and sonar reverberation  (the acoustic equivalent of radar clutter)  from both the surface and the bottom of the sea. Because the GBVP approach leads  to the analytical expression of the Bragg scattering hypothesis that has dominated the  theory of sea scatter since the late 1960s, a brief explanation of some of the central  ideas is included below. 
Theories Based on Global Boundary-Value Problems.  General formulations  of the GBVP, though elegant, are of little practical value, and some kind of approxi - mation is necessary to obtain useful quantitative results from them. The methods of  approximation relate to the two methods of formulating the GBVP: 1. 
Small-amplitude approximations (sea waveheights much smaller than the radar  wavelength) are used ab initio  with Rayleigh’s hypothesis, in which the surface  boundary conditions are employed to match an angular spectrum of outgoing plane  waves to the incident field.94–96 2. A general integral formulation based on Green’s theorem is pursued either in a  small-amplitude approximation6,97 or under the assumptions of physical optics  (surface curvatures much greater than the radar wavelength).98–100 ch15.indd   27 12/15/07   6:17:10 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. 
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Sea Clutter. 15.28  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 15 In formulation 1, sometimes called the small-perturbation method (SPM)  and asso - ciated most often with the work of Rice,94 the surface displacements are assumed  everywhere  to be much smaller than the radar wavelength, so the method is directly  applicable only to such cases as HF scattering with wavelengths of tens of meters,  at low to intermediate wind speeds, and with waveheights of a few meters at most.  The solution is in the form of a power series in the ratio of sea waveheight to radar  wavelength, and it predicts the first-order Bragg lines and second-order spectral filling  around the lines that were mentioned in the earlier section on HF sea clutter . 
On the other hand, the various integral formulations referenced above usually begin  with a very general expression for the fields scattered from the sea surface, which are  squared and ensemble-averaged over realizations of the sea surface to provide the  average power returned to the radar antenna, and then normalized to the illuminated  area as in Eq. 15.7. Despite the generality of the initial formulations, most of the final  expressions for s  0 either appear in, or can be put into, a form represented schemati - cally by the following simplified one-dimensional expression (see Holiday et al.,10  Bechmann and Spizzichino,99 Fung and Pan,101 and Valenzuela,102 for example):  σ ψ ψ0 2 2 4 1 41 22 2( ) ( ) [[ ( )]= −− − −AkF dy e e epi ky k h C y k k h22 2] −∞∞ ∫ (15.12) where A is a constant; k1 = k cosy and k2 = k siny where k is the radar wave - number (2 p /l); Fp (y  ) is a function of polarization p, grazing angle y , and the  electrical properties of seawater; h is the rms sea waveheight; and C(y) is the surface  correlation coefficient. 
Of course, the reduction of a complicated boundary-value  problem to so simple a form requires assumptions about both the surface fields and  the distribution of the sea heights (which is gaussian to a good approximation20). But  while the SPM approach mentioned above requires the ratios h/l to be small right at  the start, GBVP theories derived from expressions resembling Eq. 15.12 have no a  priori  restrictions on surface heights. 
The statistical properties of the sea surface enter through the correlation coeffi - cient C(y) appearing under the integral sign in the exponential in the brackets, and by  expanding this exponential in Eq. 15.12, it may be written  σ ψ ψ0 2 4 22 1 122 2 42 ( ) ( )!( )( )=( )− =AkF ek nW kpk hn n n∞ ∞ ∑ (15.13) where  W k d e h Cn i k n ( )( ) [ ( )] 212 21 = −∞∞ ∫τ ττ  (15.14) Small-amplitude Approximation.  In the limit of small ratios of rms waveheight to  radar wavelength or, more specifically,  2kh  1  (15.15) only the first term in the series in Eq. 
15.13 survives, and the cross section assumes  the very simple form  σ ψ π ψ ψ0 4 14 2 ( ) ( ) ( c os)( )= ′k F W kp  (15.16) ch15.indd   28 12/15/07   6:17:14 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Sea Clutter. 
 SEA CLUTTER  15.296x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 15 where the constant A has been made explicit and Fp has absorbed a sin2 term from the  series. W(1) is the Fourier transform of the surface correlation function, which makes  it the sea wavenumber spectrum (discussed in Section 15.2) evaluated at twice the  (surface-projected) radar wavenumber, which defines a Bragg (or half-wavelength)  resonance . Except possibly for the details of the angle factor Fp, Eq. 
15.16 is equiva - lent to the result obtained by the SPM discussed above, and although it is sometimes  felt that its derivation from a surface integral provides some potential for greater  generalization, it carries with it all of the same restrictions. Before proceeding further, it is instructive to look a little more closely at the impli - cations of the mathematical expressions in these formulations. Note that in Eq. 
15.12  the expression in the brackets under the integral is the only place at which the surface- wave properties of the sea appear. That is, the cross section is simply proportional to  the Fourier transform of a sea-surface functional, so the radar acts as a filter tuned to  the “spatial frequency” 2 k cosy , extracting that line from the spectrum of whatever  assortment of scatterers the sea surface functional expresses, whether they be long  swell components, short-wavelength noise, localized scattering features, or a chaotic  tumble of water balls. Only under quite special circumstances will there actually be  an identifiable surface-wave at that “frequency” that would justify the term Bragg  resonance  in its original sense, which, after all, was a resonance in an ordered crystal  lattice of discrete scatterers. 
Although authors often refer to “free Bragg waves,” such  objects are found primarily among the parasitic capillaries  referred to in Section 15.2  or among the ring waves  propagating out from the impact of a falling drop. This raises  a question about the meaning of such often-used terms as Bragg wavelets, Bragg  patches , and so on, as if such things had a real existence outside of their emergence  as an artifact of a filter operation. This confusion of concepts might be avoided by  visualizing the radar as extracting the “Bragg line” from the spectral compositions of  those surface features that contain a wave of length l /2cosy  in their Fourier repre - sentation , independent of the existence of such a wave as a real object. 
Nevertheless, this direct linear relation between radar cross section and the ocean - ographers’ descriptor of the sea surface has had a powerful influence on thinking about  the physical origins of sea clutter. It is appealing in its simplicity, and it suggests a  direct way both to predict radar clutter from measurements or forecasts of the sea spec - trum and, inversely, to use radar backscatter measurements to provide remote sensing  of the sea surface for oceanographic and meteorological applications—provided, of  course, that it correctly describes this relationship. Although Eq. 
15.16 successfully predicts (to 1st-order) the clutter returns at HF  frequencies, at microwave  frequencies the small-waveheight assumption on which  this model rests is violated on any real sea surface. The small-waveheight condition  expressed by Eq. 15.15 means that at X band, for example, the maximum departure of  the sea surface from a flat plane must be much smaller than 3 mm. 
Other Calculational Strategies.  Instead of expanding the exponential in the inte - grand of Eq. 15.12, it should be possible, at least in principle, to replace C(y) directly  by the Fourier transform of W(K) (the inverse of Eq. 
15.14 for n = 1), thus providing  a direct functional relationship between the radar cross section and the sea wave spec - trum without the restrictions of a small-amplitude approximation. This cumbersome  approach involves extensive computations even to obtain limited results in individual  cases, as shown in work by Holliday et al.10 In another limiting case, the basic integral formulation of the GBVP is solved in  the optical approximation (large k), resulting in an expression commonly called the  ch15.indd   29 12/15/07   6:17:15 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. 
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Sea Clutter. 15.30  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 15 specular return , because its origin may be traced to pieces of the surface that provide  a reflection point for the incident wave.99,102 This expression is written for a gaussian  sea surface in the form  σ ψ ψ ψ0 22 4 2 2( ) (|| /)csc exp[ cot / ] = − R s s (15.17) where s is the rms surface slope and R is the flat-surface reflection coefficient for nor - mal incidence. This is the type of scattering alluded to in connection with the high graz - ing angle returns discussed in Section 15.3; the tendency of s  0 to level off for grazing  angles close to 90° (see Figures 15.3 and 15.4) may be ascribed to this mechanism. 
From what has been said thus far, it can be seen that strict analytical solutions via  the GBVP approach appear to run into dead ends: intractable formal expressions in the  form of Eq. 15.12, small-amplitude approximations in the form of Eq. 15.16 that make  little sense for microwave scattering from real sea surfaces, or optical limits such as  Eq. 
15.17 that relate to the probability densities of specularly reflecting surface slopes.  It appears, therefore, that the use of integral formulations in the practical solution of  the sea clutter problem at microwave frequencies will require something more. Composite-Surface Hypotheses. 
 Since it is not clear how to extend straightfor - ward GBVP solutions beyond the limiting approximations described above, a heuristic  model was developed that viewed the sea as a carpet of Bragg scattering “wavelets”  modulated by the motions of the larger waves on the surface.102–104 This composite  surface model  is often referred to as the two-scale  model , in which it is imagined that  the surface-wave spectrum can somehow be separated into two parts, one containing  low-amplitude “Bragg scattering wavelets” whose integrated rms waveheight satisfies  the conditions of Eq. 15.16 and another that contains only the longer waves that tilt  and stretch and otherwise modulate the Bragg waves, affecting the Bragg scatterers  through a modulation transfer function ,105 as well as providing a specular component  resembling Eq. 15.17. 
Other assumptions include that (1) the correlation lengths of  the short Bragg waves be long enough that a resonant interaction is possible, but short  enough that adjacent areas on the surface contribute to the total signal in random phase  (note how “Bragg waves” are viewed here as physical objects); and (2) the long waves  that tilt and modulate the short waves have radii of curvature sufficiently large that the  curvature over the correlation length of the “Bragg patches” is small in some sense. In  its simplest and most commonly used “tilt” form, it interprets s  0 (y ) in Eq. 15.16) as  the cross section of a patch with local  grazing angle y  = s  0 + a , where a  is the local  wave slope and y 0 is the mean grazing angle. 
For the simple one-dimensional case,  this quantity is averaged over the sea slope angle distribution p(a ), yielding  σ ψ σ ψ α α α0 0 0 ( ) ( ) ( ) = + −∞∞ ∫p d  (15.18) For a more general two-dimensional sea, the local grazing angle is a function of the  slopes in and normal to the plane of incidence, so for each polarization p, the angle  function Fp(y ) in s  0 (y ) becomes a complex mixture of the angle functions of both  polarizations. Plant104 provides a comprehensive discussion of this model. Extensions  of this model into what might be called a three-scale model  are guided by the same  ideas that led to the two-scale model .72,106 An additional ad hoc spectral partition is  introduced between the longest and shortest wave components of the sea spectrum, but  this produced only modest improvement.106 ch15.indd   30 12/15/07   6:17:18 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Sea Clutter.  SEA CLUTTER  15.316x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 15 Although such composite-surface models may leave the impression that they have  emerged as a rigorous product of an integral formulation of the GBVP, it is clear that  they are not really scattering theories , but instead scattering pictures  assembled from  a group of more or less plausible assumptions. 
But with the failure of the more formal  GBVP theories to provide a general framework for predicting and understanding sea  clutter, these models have become the basis for most analytical approaches to micro - wave scattering from the sea. Figure 15.19 compares a sample of NRL 4FR data taken at high wind speeds   (> 22 kn) with the predictions of the pure SPM Bragg  model (in the form of Eq. 15.16)  for V-polarization and the two-scale model  (in the form of Eq. 
15.18) for H-polarization.   The wave spectrum used was the Phillips spectrum given in Eq. 15.4. 
Historically,  comparisons of this type have been used often to provide support for the Bragg scat - tering hypothesis,102,104 and the agreement often looks good, especially for vertical  polarization at the higher wind speeds. Yet why this is so remains a puzzling curiosity.  In this example, the wind speeds are high so the sea will be rough, but it was noted  above that the SPM approximation used in Figure 15.19 requires waveheights much  less than a centimeter, so this approximation is totally invalid for these data. 
Moreover,  the Phillips spectrum was used as the sea surface spectrum, but there is no evidence  that this spectrum holds down to the required capillary wavelength of about 1.5 cm.  In fact, the nature of the sea spectrum in this range remains uncertain and has been  referred to as “one of the most exciting unsolved problems of the sea surface.”16 The  primary effect of the two-scale model  is simply to raise the inapplicable SPM values  for H-polarization, which are dropping sharply with grazing angle, by including higher  local angles via Eq. 15.18. 
There would be little sensible effect on the more constant  vertical returns. Finally, the polarization differences themselves have been shown to  derive entirely from the behavior of the reflection coefficients at the underlying surface  (see, for example, Wright6 and Wetzel12), and so are not an intrinsic part of the Bragg  hypothesis and would apply to any small perturbation on the surface. Nevertheless,  agreement between measurement and prediction of the type illustrated in Figure 15.19  FIGURE 15.19  Comparison of the predictions of the Bragg hypothesis with NRL  4FR data (heavy lines) for higher wind speeds ( > 22 kt): dash-dotted lines, SPM  Bragg; dashed line, two-scale model for H-polarization only, assuming 10° mean  sea slopes ( after Valenzuela102) ch15.indd   31 12/15/07   6:17:18 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Sea Clutter. 15.32  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 15 has kept alive credibility in the Bragg scattering hypothesis in spite of the clear viola - tions of conditions and nonsequiturs noted above, as well as the lack of a proper theory  argued from first principles. 
The failure of this model to account for sea spikes and other non-Rayleigh returns  noted in Section 15.3 has led to an augmentation of the two-scale composite surface to  include breaking waves, a presumed source of these returns. One of the latest of these  two-scale-plus  models may be found in Kudryavtsev et al.,107,108 where breaking-   wave effects are incorporated analytically through the Phillips expression23 for the  density of breaking fronts as a function of wind speed (the parameter Λ(c) noted  in Section 15.2), with the scattering behavior based on Wetzel’s plume model (see  “Scattering by Surface Features”). The result is a significant improvement in sea  scatter predictions, emphasizing the importance of breaking in the scattering scene. 
 An example of this improvement is shown in Figure 15.20, where experimental data  for the polarization ratio  relative to wind direction was obtained from the Polrad96  program.107 One of the major claims for Bragg models has been their apparent abil - ity to agree loosely with the observed polarization ratios of sea clutter returns, and  in Figure 15.20, as in Figure 15.19, the data were compared to the predictions of the  SPM (pure) Bragg model and the two-scale model, while adding the two-scale-plus  model , which incorporates the effects of breaking waves. In this case, the Bragg  model and the two-scale model derived from it clearly fail to describe the observed  behavior of the polarization ratio, while the inclusion of breaking waves (full model)  provides a surprisingly faithful reproduction of the data, even at the high grazing  angle of 50°. The X-band data illustrated previously in Figure 15.10 a,b can also  be shown to corroborate the predictions of this model for a similar wind speed and  grazing angle, thus further supporting the suspicion that breaking-wave events will  contribute importantly to sea clutter over most  of the “rough surface” regime of graz - ing angles at these wind speeds. 
FIGURE 15.20  Polarization ratio versus wind direction for X-band radar  at 50° grazing angle and wind about 20 kt. Points : experimental data from  Polrad96 experiment; dashed line:  pure SPM Bragg; dashed-dotted line:  two- scale Bragg; solid line:  two-scale-plus model including breaking waves ( after  Kudryatsev et al.107 © The American Geophysical Union 2003 ) ch15.indd   32 12/15/07   6:17:19 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. 
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Sea Clutter.  SEA CLUTTER  15.336x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 15 Scattering by Surface Features.  A breaking wave, with plumes of water cas - cading down its face and perhaps a halo of spray above, is only one of the rich assort - ment of scattering elements appearing on the sea surface—including wedges, cusps,  microbreakers, hydraulic shocks, patches of turbulence, and gravity-capillary waves  (both wind-driven and parasitic)—any or all of which could contribute to the scattered  clutter signal. 
For example, the common Stokes wave20  has a quasi-trochoidal structure that resem - bles a wedge on the surface, so wedge scatter might describe an important aspect of sea  clutter.11,12,92,93 The scattering model is usually some variant of the familiar geometrical  theory of diffraction  (GTD),109 which is strictly applicable to the backscatter problem  only when the edge of the wedge is normal to the plane of incidence. Nevertheless, the  cross section predictions at the lower grazing angles for both polarizations show trends  similar to the predictions of the Bragg or composite-surface models.93 One major problem with all models based on scattering feature simulations is the  lack of reliable information about the shapes, sizes, orientations, speeds, lifetimes  and statistics of the features themselves. Thus, although there is often guidance  from either observation or theory, the predictions of such models will be based on  uncertain assumptions about these crucial parameters. 
As an example, water surface  stability arguments prevent the interior angle of a sharpening wave crest from fall - ing below 120°, which then becomes a convenient measure of the wedge angle in  wedge-scattering models. In Figure 15.21, the overall scale of wedge scattering as  calculated by the GTD was adjusted to locate the cluster of cross sections at the level  of the experimental values. Wedges appear to model the qualitative behavior with  both polarizations fairly well at the lower grazing angles. 
Figure 15.21 also includes two additional simple scattering models for comparison.  Lambert’s law, mentioned in connection with Figure 15.9 a,b, expresses the cross sec - tion in the form s  0 = A sin2y , where A is the surface albedo . Choosing A = −13 dB   (a reasonable value for microwave frequencies) gives a fairly good match to the verti - cally polarized returns over a wide range of grazing angles. 
The facet  model, expressed  FIGURE 15.21  Comparison of several ad hoc feature models with NRL 4FR data  (data the same as shown in Figure 15.19) ch15.indd   33 12/15/07   6:17:19 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Sea Clutter. 
15.34  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 15 by Eq. 15.17 and thought to describe clutter at the higher grazing angles, is shown  for 20 kt seas.102 The general behavior described by these two models seems to agree  about as well as any other, although they too must employ arbitrary assumptions to  obtain reasonable fits to the data, so the significance of this agreement is difficult to  assess. However, one might deduce from Figure 15.21 that sharp things (like wedges)  dominate the clutter at small grazing angles, flat things (like facets) at large angles,  and generally rough things at the intermediate angles. 
The theory of scattering from breaking waves referenced in connection with  Figure 15.20 was originally motivated by an attempt to explain the complex  behavior of sea spikes at low grazing angles observed by Lewis and Olin.40 This  theory was based on the plume model  of the most common spilling  breaker, in  which a water plume is emitted at the spilling crest and moves down the front  face;110 the scattering behavior was supplied by multipath illumination involving  reflections from the face of the wave.57 The elaboration of this model explained  much of the complex behavior of the observed sea spikes; however, like all other  models based on scattering features, it was necessary to make assumptions about  the sizes, shapes, and lifetimes of the scattering plumes. These parameters were all  inferred from observation of real sea surfaces, and the resulting predictions were  surprisingly good. Additionally, its success in the two-scale-plus  model mentioned  above provides further credibility. 
Although scattering features have been introduced mainly in connection with  low-grazing-angle sea clutter (see Wetzel12 for a detailed discussion), there is evi - dence, as noted above, to believe that feature scattering operates at all grazing angles.  Considering the failure of scattering theories formulated as a GBVP to provide any  predictions beyond those in certain limiting-case approximations and the precarious  nature of the logical infrastructure of the Bragg hypothesis in microwave scattering  from a natural sea, it is quite possible that further careful consideration of the actual  scattering features present on the sea surface will improve our understanding of sea  clutter in the future. Implications of Surface Geometry. 
 The approximations to the GBVP dis - cussed above were all formulated in the frequency domain, but a time-domain model  for sea scatter points to a possible general surface-geometric origin for the surface  returns.13,110 The model introduces the idea that the basic scattering elements of a  surface are localized at points of high surface curvature , as at the sharp tips of small  Stokes waves or at the corner of a plume intersecting the front face of a breaking  wave. Using a d-function as a probing pulse, an approximate expression for the scat - tering cross section was found as a function of surface curvature C (r(to)), where to is  the round-trip time from the radar to a point r(to) on the surface  s  (to) = B(y , s,to) C2(cto  /2cosy ) (15.19) with B a complicated trigonometric function of grazing angle y , surface slope s,  and to. The factor B peaks at points of specular reflection, so Eq. 
15.19 expresses the  effects of specular glints as well as sharp curvatures. Although the original theory13  is based on a physical optics formulation for a scalar field (see Sangston111 for the  vector form), some support for its implications can be gained from a plot of the square  of surface curvature over a real sea surface. Figure 15.22 a shows the surface slope   measured over a short segment of surface in the Gulf Stream,112 with the correspond - ing curvature-squared  profile below. 
The clutter cross-section defined for this profile  ch15.indd   34 12/15/07   6:17:20 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Sea Clutter. 
 SEA CLUTTER  15.356x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 15 by Eq. 15.19 clearly bears a resemblance to some of the high resolution returns shown  in Figure 15.11. Moreover, these spiky returns are correlated with just the kind of  surface bumps and wrinkles and slope discontinuities that have been identified as  sources of sea spikes in laboratory tank measurements.11,113,114 An example is shown  in Figure 15.22 b, where an ultra-high-resolution radar looks at the return from a  breaking wave whose surface is evolving as plotted above the radar signal. 
We see  that the spikes appear at the points of maximum surface curvature, although the large  signal peak is probably a specular reflection from the initial breaking front. It is often overlooked that the presumed origin of sea scatter is suggested by the  kind of measuring instrument being used, which in turn determines the most appro - priate theoretical basis—i.e., the “theory of the experiment.” If you go to sea with  a CW radar—an “averaging wave spectrometer”—you will be selecting a spectral  line by long integration times and interpret the origin as a wave effect, namely  a “Bragg resonance.” On the other hand, if you use a high resolution probe—a  radar microscope—the clutter scene will be populated by highly localized scatter - ing events, or sea spikes , isolated by a short-pulse, wide-bandwidth signal. In this  case, the most appropriate “theory of the experiment” is the time-domain formalism  described above. 
Other ways of viewing sea clutter in terms of surface geometry characterize the sea  and the clutter as fractal processes,115 or seek parameters describing its complexity by  defining a “strange attractor.”116 Unfortunately, these studies do not seem to contain  any useful insights into the physical scattering processes at the surface, except, per - haps, to conclude that sea clutter arises from multiple sources, which we already know.  On the other hand, the identification of changes in the characteristic measures  of these  processes (e.g., fractal dimension and embedding dimension) have been proposed as a  way to identify the presence of targets in clutter.FIGURE 15.22  (a) Measured slope (top curve) over a sampled surface in the Gulf Stream,112 with the cor - responding square of the surface curvature below; ( b) Wave-tank measurement of radar scattering from an  evolving breaking wave, correlated with wave surface height variations ( from M. A. 
Sletten and J. C. West 114  © The American Geophysical Union 2003 )Meters Time(s) (a) (b)Arbitary Units0 0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6(Curvature)2SlopeRadar SurfaceRelative height or echo amplitude0.8 0.6 0.4 0.21.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 ch15.indd   35 12/15/07   6:17:21 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Sea Clutter. 15.36  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 15 Numerical Methods. 
 With rapid increases in computer speed, it has become  practical to solve certain scattering problems by numerical methods, thereby side - stepping the introduction of the approximations required by the analytical solutions  described above. In surface scattering, particularly for the continuous sea surface, the  method of choice appears to be some variant of the Method of Moments.117 An exact  integral equation for the surface currents  excited by an illuminating field is solved  numerically over a grid of points, where the flexibility and accuracy of the solution  depends, essentially, on the grid spacing, the size of the surface features compared to  the illuminating wavelength, the extent of the surface over which the grid is laid, and  the efficiency of the computing algorithms used in what are extensive calculations.  Once found for an ensemble of surface realizations, these currents can be used in a  scattering integral over each of the surfaces to generate an ensemble of scattered fields ,  which are finally averaged into a surface scattering cross section.118 Although these  methods are often viewed as the “gold standard” for doing scattering calculations, their  complexity and difficulty generally restrict their application to idealized or laboratory  surface structures, where they simply confirm that Maxwell’s equations continue to  be verified in scattering experiments. 
Nevertheless, such numerical simulations can be  informative in identifying the source of particular scattering events, such as sea spikes,  along with their dependence on such radar parameters as grazing angle, polarization,  and frequency.119,120 Role of Laboratory Studies.  The sea surface is a natural system controlled by  the laws of hydrodynamics. But so is a bowl of soup or a tank of water or a rushing  stream—all of which might share certain behaviors with a sea surface, while pre - senting a venue much more amenable to the comfortable investigation of scattering  phenomenology. 
While there is the obvious matter of scale , one might entertain the  notion that what is found to hold in the small compass of a laboratory wave tank might  transfer with little alteration to the open ocean. But this certainly cannot be true; the  sea surface is structured by large-scale wind systems, impossible to duplicate under  laboratory conditions. Therefore, the laboratory is used almost exclusively to study in  detail how an electromagnetic wave interacts with some restricted and well-controlled  aspect of surface phenomenology that is thought to be involved in the open sea. 
There is a vast literature extending over almost 45 years reporting a wide variety of  laboratory experiments on microwave scattering from a disturbed water surface. The  earliest appear to be careful small-scale experiments in the mid-1960s to confirm the  existence of Bragg scatter at centimeter wavelengths,6 while at the other end of the  experimental scale, the chaos of a full-scale breaker was simulated by submerging a  hydrofoil across a 7 meter wide circulating water channel driven by 1.5 megawatts of  turbine power.121 But most laboratory experiments are more modest, involving a long  wave tank, perhaps a meter or two across, with the wave system produced by either a  controlled wind or a programmed wavemaker. To illustrate a few of the experiments and their results: Kwoh and Lake11 measured  X-band returns from gentle breaking waves in a wave tank and found that specular  and curvature scattering appeared to dominate over Bragg scattering for such sur - faces. 
Keller et al.,122 measured X-band returns and surface spectrum simultaneously  in a wave tank and found Bragg-based theories might have credence at intermediate  grazing angles and strong winds, but were unable to account for scattering behavior  under other conditions.  Sletten and West113,114 made a two-pronged approach to break - ing wave scatter, constructing a metallic model of a breaking wave, comparing its  ch15.indd   36 12/15/07   6:17:22 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. 
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Sea Clutter.  SEA CLUTTER  15.376x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 15 scattering properties with numerical calculations, and then going to the wave tank  to verify the scattering behavior for real water waves. Ericson et al.123 generated a  stationary breaker in a small flow tunnel and compared its scattering properties with  a specular point calculation. 
Coakley et al.121 set up a hydrofoil in a powerful water  channel, generating a large breaking wave front that produced radar returns consistent  with Lambert’s Law, along with the polarization ratios implied by multipath reflec - tions from the undisturbed front face. These investigators, along with many others,  have been exploring radar scattering from water surfaces in ways that can be expected  to contribute significantly to our growing understanding of sea clutter. 15.5 SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS In the early days of radar, the importance of knowing the sea clutter environment led  to many experiments under a variety of conditions. 
Variations in quality and complete - ness of ground truth, calibration of the equipment, and the experimenter’s experi - ence led to results that often showed considerable inconsistency and suggested clutter  behavior that was sometimes more a function of the vagaries of the experiment than of  the physics of the clutter. As data of increasingly better quality accumulated, it might  have been expected that the behavior of sea clutter would be established with increas - ing confidence. This has not always been so, leaving our general knowledge about  sea clutter to be summarized roughly as follows: For the higher 50% of wind speeds  encountered over the world’s oceans (greater than about 15 kt), microwave sea clut - ter at intermediate to high grazing angles has little dependence on frequency, and the  effects of wind speed are uncertain, seeming to depend on polarization, wind direction,  and grazing angle in often confusing ways. 
Yet various empirical descriptions and sta - tistical characterizations are available that allow much of the useful sea clutter regime  to be described in ways that can be of practical value to the radar community, provided  that some care is taken in defining and observing the pertinent parameters. However,  there are major areas of uncertainty present at any wind speed, whenever the grazing  angle goes below a few degrees and the surface illumination begins to feel the effects  of refraction and diffraction, and at any grazing angle, whenever the wind speed is  less than about 10 kt, where peculiarities and uncertainties in the generation of surface  roughness begin to emerge most strongly. At the low grazing angles encountered in  maritime radar operations, sea clutter becomes spiky and intermittent, requiring spe - cial attention to signal processing and the interpretation of the radar signal. 
Moreover,  features of the sea environment such as rain, currents, slicks, and refractive anomalies  can confuse the reliable separation of target returns from clutter artifacts. The question of microwave sea clutter theory remains unsettled. The most pop - ular model, the two-scale Bragg model, is actually an assemblage of assumptions  supported by circumstantial evidence; there is still no clear reason why it should  work when it does. 
In fact, there is increasing evidence from both the tank and the  open ocean that this model fails to account for many aspects of measured sea scatter  behavior. Augmenting it with a term expressing the effect of breaking waves in active  seas has improved predictions, but still perpetuates the ad hoc character of com - posite-surface models. Theories based on scattering by surface features have begun  to show promise, and at least one of these features—the breaking wave at various  scales, macro to micro—is increasingly recognized as an important contributor to  ch15.indd   37 12/15/07   6:17:22 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Sea Clutter. 15.38  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 15 sea clutter for low grazing angles and short pulses in particular. 
The major problem  of characterizing these features in a manner useful to quantitative predictions is still  being addressed. Perhaps the expression of the scattering properties of the surface in  terms of an intrinsic surface property like its fine-scale curvature might introduce an  organizing principle for the many bits and pieces that presently make up the theory  of sea scatter. In the last edition of this Handbook (1990), the final statement in this chapter was  “It will be interesting to see what progress will have been made in the theory of sea  clutter by the publication of the next edition of this handbook.” It appears that the  answer is—not much. 
But there is some evidence that the theory of sea scatter is  gradually being freed from the paralyzing monotheism of Bragg scatter, so there is  hope for the future. REFERENCES  1. D. 
E. Kerr, Propagation of Short Radio Waves , New York: McGraw-Hill Book Company, 1951.  2. 
M. I. Skolnik, Introduction to Radar Systems , 3rd Ed., New York: McGraw-Hill Book  Company, 2001. 
 3. F. E. 
Nathanson, Radar Design Principles , 2nd Ed., New York: McGraw-Hill Book Company,  1991.  4. M. 
W. Long, Radar Reflectivity of Land and Sea , 3rd Ed., Norwood, MA: Artech House,  2001.  5. 
D. Crombie, “Doppler spectrum of sea echo at 13.56 Mc/s,” Nature , vol. 175, pp. 
681–683, 1955.  6. J. 
W. Wright, “A new model for sea clutter,” IEEE Trans ., vol. AP-16, pp. 
217–223, 1968.  7. F. 
G. Bass, I. M. 
Fuks, A. I. Kalmykov, I. 
E. Ostruvsky, and A. D. 
Rosenberg, “Very high  frequency radio wave scattering by a disturbed sea surface,” IEEE Trans ., vol. AP-16,   pp. 554–568, 1968. 
 8. D. Barrick and Q. 
Peake, “A review of scattering from surfaces with different roughness scales,”  Radio Sci ., vol. 3, pp. 865–868, 1968. 
 9. D. Atlas, R. 
C. Beal, R. A. 
Brown, P. De Mey, R. K. 
Moore, C. G. Rapley, and C. 
T. Swift,  “Problems and future directions in remote sensing of the oceans and troposphere: a workshop  report,” J. Geophys. 
Res ., vol. 9(C2), pp. 2525–2548, 1986. 
10. D. Holiday, G. 
St-Cyr, and N. E. Woods, “A radar ocean imaging model for small to moderate  incidence angles,” Int. 
J. Remote Sensing , vol. 7, pp. 
1809–1834, 1986. 11. D. 
S. Kwoh and B. M. 
Lake, “A deterministic, coherent, and dual-polarized laboratory study  of microwave backscattering from water waves, part 1: Short gravity waves without wind,”  IEEE J. Oceanic Eng ., vol. OE-9, pp. 
291–308, 1984. 12. L. 
B. Wetzel, “Electromagnetic scattering from the sea at low grazing angles,” in Surface Waves  and Fluxes: Current Theory and Remote Sensing , chap. 12, G. 
L. Geernaert and W. J. 
Plant (eds.),  Dordrecht, Netherland: Reidel, 1989. 13. L. 
B. Wetzel, “A time domain model for sea scatter,” Radio Sci ., vol. 28, no. 
2, pp. 139–150,  March–April 1993. 14. 
D. Middleton and H. Mellin, “Wind-generated solutions, A potentially significant mechanism  in ocean surface wave generation and wave scattering,” IEEE J. 
Oceanic Eng ., vol. OE-10,  pp. 471–476, 1985. 
15. S. Tang and O. 
H. Shemdin, “Measurement of high-frequency waves using a wave follower,”  J. Geophys. 
Res ., vol. 88, pp. 9832–9840, 1983. 
16. W. J. 
Pierson and L. Moskowitz, “A proposed spectral form for fully developed seas based on the  similarity theory of S. A. 
Kitaigorodskii,” J. Geophys. Res ., vol. 
69, pp. 5181–5190, 1964. ch15.indd   38 12/15/07   6:17:22 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Sea Clutter.  SEA CLUTTER  15.396x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 15 17. 
O. M. Phillips, “Spectral and statistical properties of the equilibrium range in wind-generated  gravity waves,” J. 
Fluid Mech ., vol. 156, pp. 505–531, July 1985. 
18. W. J. 
Pierson, Jr. and M. A. 
Donelan, “Radar scattering and equilibrium ranges in wind-generated  waves with application to scatterometry,” J. Geophys. Res ., vol. 
91(C5), pp. 4971–5029, 1987. 19. 
S. A. Kitaigorodskii, “On the theory of the equilibrium range in the spectrum of wind-generated  gravity waves,” J. 
Phys. Oceanogr ., vol. 13, pp. 
816–827, 1983. 20. B. 
Kinsman, Wind Waves , Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1965. 21. O. 
M. Phillips, F. L. 
Posner, and J. P. Hansen, “High range resolution radar measurements of the  speed distribution of breaking events in wind generated waves: Surface impulse and wave energy  dissipation rates,” J. 
Phys. Oceanog ., vol. 21, 450, 2001. 
22. J. Wu, “Variations of whitecap coverage with wind stress and water temperature,” J. 
Phys  Oceanogr ., vol. 18, pp. 1448–1453, October 1988. 
23. O. M. 
Phillips, “Radar returns from the sea surface–Bragg scattering and breaking waves,”   J. Phys. Oceanogr ., vol. 
18, pp. 1063–1074, 1988. 24. 
W. P. Plant, “A new interpretation of sea surface slope probability density functions,” J. 
Geophys.  Res., vol. 108, no. 
C9, p. 3295, 2003. 25. 
J. C. Daley, J. 
T. Ransone, J. A. 
Burkett, and J. R. Duncan, “Sea clutter measurements on four  frequencies,” Naval Res. 
Lab. Rept. 6806, November 1968. 
26. G. R. 
Valenzuela and R. Laing, “On the statistics of sea clutter,” Naval Res. Lab. 
Rept. 7349,  December 1971. 27. 
N. W. Guinard, J. 
T. Ransone, Jr., and J. C. 
Daley, “Variation of the NRCS of the sea with increas - ing roughness,” J. Geophys. Res ., vol. 
76, pp. 1525–1538, 1971. 28. 
J. C. Daley, “Wind dependence of radar sea return,” J. 
Geophys. Res ., vol. 78, pp. 
7823–7833, 1973. 29. K. 
D. Ward, C. J. 
Baker, and S. Watts, “Maritime surveillance radar Part 1: Radar scattering from  the ocean surface,” IEE Proc ., vol. 137, Pt F, no. 
2, April 1990. 30. S. 
Watts, K. D. Ward, and R.T. 
A. Tough, “The physics and modeling of discrete spikes in radar  sea clutter,” presented at 2005 IEEE International Radar Conference, 2005. 31. 
H. Masuko, K. Okamoto, M. 
Shimada, and S. Niwa, “Measurement of microwave backscattering  signatures of the ocean surface using X band and Ka band airborne scatterometers,” J. Geophys. 
 Res., vol. 91(C11), pp. 13065–13083, 1986. 
32. A. I. 
Kalmykov and V . V . Pustovoytenko, “On Polarization features of radio signals scattered from  the sea surface at small grazing angles,” J. 
Geophys. Res ., vol. 81, pp. 
1960–1964, 1976. 33. I. 
Katz and L. M. Spetner, “Polarization and depression angle dependence of radar terrain return,”  J. 
Res. Nat. Bur. 
Stand., Sec. D . vol. 
64-D, pp. 483–486, 1960. 34. 
F. Feindt, V . Wismann, W. 
Alpers, and W. C. Keller, “Airborne measurements of the ocean radar  cross section at 5.3 GHz as a function of wind speed,” Radio Sci ., vol. 
21, pp. 845–856, 1986. 35. 
L. C. Schroeder, P. 
R. Schaffner, J. L. 
Mitchell, and W. L. Jones, “AAFE RADSCAT 13.9-GHz   measurements and analysis: Wind-speed signature of the ocean,” IEEE J. 
Oceanic Eng .,   vol. OE-10, pp. 346–357, 1985. 
36. G. P. 
de Loor and P. Hoogeboom, “Radar backscatter measurements from Platform Noordwijk  in the North Sea,” IEEE J. Oceanic Eng ., vol. 
OE-7, pp. 15–20, January 1982. 37. 
A. H. Chaudhry and R. 
K. Moore, “Tower-based backscatter measurements of the sea,” IEEE   J. Oceanic Eng ., vol. 
OE-9, pp. 309–316, December 1984. 38. 
F. T. Ulaby, R. 
K. Moore, and A. K. 
Fung, Microwave Remote Sensing, Active and Passive ,   V ol. III, Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, 1986, Sec. 20.2. 
39. B. Spaulding, D. 
Horton, and P. Huong, “Wind Aspect Factor in Sea Clutter Modeling,” presented  at 2005 IEEE International Radar Conference, 2005. 40. 
B. L. Lewis and I. 
D. Olin, “Experimental study and theoretical model of high-resolution  backscatter from the sea,” Radio Sci ., vol. 15, pp. 
815–826, 1980. 41. J. 
P. Hansen and V . F. 
Cavaleri, “High resolution radar sea scatter, experimental observations and  discriminants,” Naval Research Laboratory Report No. 8557, 1982. ch15.indd   39 12/15/07   6:17:23 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Sea Clutter. 15.40  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 15 42. 
D. Trizna, “Measurement and interpretation of North Atlantic Ocean Marine Radar Sea Scatter,”  Naval Res. Lab. 
Rept. 9099, May 1988. 43. 
P. Beckmann, Probability in Communication Engineering , New York: Harcourt, Brace and World,  Inc., 1967, Sect. 6.2. 
44. G. V. 
Trunk, “Radar properties of non-Rayleigh sea clutter,” IEEE Trans ., vol. AES-8,   pp. 196–204, 1972. 
45. P. H. 
Y . Lee, J. D. 
Barter, K. L. Beach, C. 
L. Hindman, B. M. 
Lake, H. Rungaldier, J. C. 
Shelton,  A. B. Williams, R. 
Yee, and H. C. Yuen, “X band microwave scattering from ocean waves,”   J. 
Geophys. Res ., vol. 100, no. 
C2, pp. 2591–2611, February 1995. 46. 
M. Katzin, “On the mechanisms of radar sea clutter,” Proc. IRE , vol. 
45, pp. 44–45, January 1957. 47. 
L. B. Wetzel, “A model for sea backscatter intermittency at extreme grazing angles,” Radio Sci .,  vol. 
12, pp. 749–756, 1977. 48. 
I. M. Hunter and T. 
B. A. Senior, “Experimental studies of sea surface effects on low angle  radars,” Proc. 
IEE , vol. 113, pp. 1731–1740, 1966. 
49. H. Sittrop, “X- and Ku-band radar backscatter characteristics of sea clutter,” in Proc. 
URSI  Commission II Specialist Meeting on Microwave Scattering from the Earth , E. Schanda (ed.),  Bern, 1974. 50. 
B. G. Smith, “Geometrical shadowing of the random rough surface,” IEEE Trans ., vol. 
AP-15,   pp. 668–671, 1967. 51. 
F. B. Dyer and N. 
C. Currie, “Some comments on the characterization of radar sea echo,” in   Dig. Int. 
IEEE Symp. Antennas Propagat ., July 10–12, 1974. 52. 
D. E. Barrick, J. 
M. Headrick, R. W. 
Bogle, and D. D. Crombie, “Sea backscatter at HF:  Interpretation and utilization of the echo,” Proc. 
IEEE , vol. 62, 1974. 53. 
C. C. Teague, G. 
L. Tyler, and R. H. 
Stewart, “Studies of the sea using HF radio scatter,” IEEE   J. Oceanic Eng ., vol. OE-2, pp. 
12–19, 1977. 54. J. 
C. Wiltse, S. P. 
Schlesinger, and C. M. Johnson, “Back-scattering characteristics of the sea in  the region from 10 to 50 KMC,” Proc. 
IRE , vol. 45, pp. 220–228, 1957. 
55. G. W. 
Ewell, M. M. Horst, and M. 
T. Tuley, “Predicting the performance of low-angle micro - wave search radars—Targets, sea clutter, and the detection process,” Proc. OCEANS  79,   pp. 
373–378, 1979. 56. W. 
K. Rivers, “Low-angle radar sea return at 3-mm wavelength,” Final Tech. Rept., Georgia  Institute of Technology, Engineering Experiment Station, Contract N62269-70-C-0489,  November 1970. 
57. L. B. 
Wetzel, “On microwave scattering by breaking waves,” in Wave Dynamics and Radio  Probing of the Ocean Surface , Chap. 18, O. M. 
Phillips and K. Hasselmann (eds.), New York:  Plenum Press, 1986, pp. 273–284. 
58. B. L. 
Hicks, N. Knable, J. Kovaly, G. 
S. Newell, J. P. 
Ruina, and C. W. Sherwin, “The spec - trum of X-band radiation backscattered from the sea surface,” J. 
Geophys. Res ., vol. 65,   pp. 
825–837, 1960. 59. G. 
R. Valenzuela and R. Laing, “Study of doppler spectra of radar sea echo,” J. 
Geophys. Res .,  vol. 65, pp. 
551–562, 1970. 60. V . 
W. Pidgeon, “Doppler dependence of sea return,” J. Geophys. 
Res ., vol. 73, pp. 1333–1341,  1968. 
61. Y . U. 
Mel’nichuk and A. A. Chernikov, “Spectra of radar signals from sea surface for different  polarizations,” Izv. 
Atmos. Oceanic. Phys ., vol. 
7, pp. 28–40, 1971. 62. 
J. W. Wright and W. 
C. Keller, “Doppler spectra in microwave scattering from wind waves,”   Phys. Fluids , vol. 
14, pp. 466–474, 1971. 63. 
D. Trizna, “A model for doppler peak spectral shift for low grazing angle sea scatter,” IEEE   J. Oceanic Eng ., vol. 
OE-10, pp. 368–375, 1985. 64. 
P. H. Y. 
Lee, J. D. Barter, K. 
L. Beach, E. Caponi, C. 
L. Hindman, B. M. 
Lake, H. Rungaldier,  and J. C. 
Shelton, “Power spectral lineshapes of microwave radiation backscattered from sea  surfaces at small grazing angles,” IEE Proc.-Radar, Sonar Navig ., vol. 142, no. 5, pp. 
252–258,  October 1995. 65. F. 
E. Nathanson, loc cit , Sec. 7.5. 
ch15.indd   40 12/15/07   6:17:23 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Sea Clutter. 
 SEA CLUTTER  15.416x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 15 66. W. C. 
Keller, W. J. Plant, and G. 
R. Valenzuela, “Observation of breaking ocean waves with coher - ent microwave radar,” in Wave Dynamics and Radio Probing of the Ocean Surface , chap. 19,   O. 
M. Phillips and K. Hasselmann (eds.), New York: Plenum Press, 1986, pp. 
285–292. 67. R. 
K. Moore, Y. S. 
Yu, A. K. Fung, D. 
Kaneko, G. J. Dome, and R. 
E. Werp, “Preliminary study  of rain effects on radar scattering from water surfaces,” IEEE J. Oceanic Eng ., vol. 
OE-4,   pp. 31–32, 1979. 68. 
R. F. Contreras, W. 
J. Plant, W, C. Keller, K. 
Hayes, and J. Nystuen, “Effects of rain on Ku band  backscatter from the ocean,” J. Geophys. 
Res ., vol. 108, no. C5, pp. 
3165–3180, 2003. 69. J. 
P. Hansen, “High resolution radar backscatter from a rain disturbed sea surface,” presented at  ISNR-84 Rec., Tokyo, October 22–24, 1984. 70. 
J. P. Hansen, “A system for performing ultra high resolution backscatter measurements of  splashes,” in Proc. 
Int. Microwave Theory & Techniques Symp ., Baltimore, 1986. 71. 
L. B. Wetzel, “On the theory of electromagnetic scattering from a raindrop splash,” Radio Sci .,  vol. 
25, No. 6, pp. 1183–1197, 1990. 
72. R. Romeiser, A. 
Schmidt, and W. Alpers, “A three-scale composite surface model for the ocean  wave-radar modulation transfer function,” J. Geophys. 
Res ., vol. 99, pp. 9785–9801, 1994. 
73. B. LeMehaute and T. 
Khangaonkar, “Dynamic interaction of intense rain with water waves,”   J. Phys. Oceanog ., vol. 
20, December 1990. 74. L. 
B. Wetzel, “On the origin of long-period features in low-angle sea backscatter,” Radio Sci .,   vol. 13, pp. 
313–320, 1978. 75. P. 
Gerstoft, L. T. Rogers, W. 
S. Hodgkiss, and L. J. 
Wagner, “Refractivity estimation using  multiple elevation angles,” IEEE J. of Oceanic Eng ., vol. 28, no. 
3, pp. 513–525, July 2003. 76. 
D. E. Barrick, “Near-grazing illumination and shadowing of rough surfaces,” Radio Sci ., vol. 
30,  no. 3, pp. 563–580, May-June 1995. 
77. J. M. 
Sturm and J. C. West, “Numerical study of shadowing in electromagnetic scattering  from rough dielectric surfaces,” IEEE Tran. 
in Geosci. and Remote Sensing , vol. 36, no. 
5,  September 1998. 78. R. 
B. Perry and G. R. 
Schimke, “Large-amplitude internal waves observed off the northwest coast  of Sumatra,” J. Geophys. Res ., vol. 
70, pp. 2319–2324, 1965. 79. 
W. Alpers and I. Hennings, “A theory of the imaging mechanism of underwater bottom topography  by real and synthetic aperture radar,” J. 
Geophys. Res ., vol. 89. 
pp. 10529–10546, 1984. 80. 
W. Garrett, “Physicochemical effects of organic films at the sea surface and their role in the  interpretation of remotely sensed imagery,” in ONRL Workshop Proc.—Role of Surfactant Films  on the Interfacial Properties of the Sea Surface , F. L. 
Herr and J. Williams (eds.), November 21,  1986, pp. 1–18. 
81. H. Huhnerfuss, W. 
Alpers, W. D. Garrett, P. 
A. Lange, and S. Stolte, “Attenuation of capillary  and gravity waves at sea by monomolecular organic surface films,” J. 
Geophys. Res ., vol. 88,   pp. 
9809–9816, 1983. 82. J. 
C. Scott, “Surface films in oceanography,” in ONRL Workshop Proc.—Role of Surfactant Films  on the Interfacial Properties of the Sea Surface , F. L. 
Herr and J. Williams (eds.), November 21,  1986, pp. 19–40. 
83. N. W. 
Guinard, “Radar detection of oil spills,” presented at Joint Conf. Sensing of Environmental  Pollutants, AIAA Pap. 71–1072, Palo Alto, CA, November 8–10, 1971. 
84. H. Hühnerfuss, W. 
Alpers, A. Cross, W. D. 
Garrett, W. C. Keller, P. 
A. Lange, W. J. 
Plant,   F. Schlude, and D. L. 
Schuler, “The modification of X and L band radar signals by monomolecular  sea slicks,” J. Geophys. Res ., vol. 
88, pp. 9817–9822, 1983. 85. 
C. S. Cox and W. 
H. Munk, “Statistics of the sea surface derived from sun glitter,” J. Mar. 
Res .,  vol. 13, pp. 198–227, 1954. 
86. W. Alpers and H. 
Hühnerfuss, “Radar signatures of oil films floating on the sea surface and the  Marangoni effect,” J. Geophys. Res ., vol. 
93, pp. 3642–3648, April 15, 1988. 87. 
H. Masuko and H. Inomata, “Observations of artificial slicks by X and Ka band airborne scat - terometers,” in Proc. 
Int. Geoscience and Remote Sensing Symp. (IGARSS’88) , Edinburgh,  September 12–16, 1988, pp. 
1089–1090. Published by Noordwijk, Netherlands: European  Space Agency, ESTEC, 1988. ch15.indd   41 12/15/07   6:17:23 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Sea Clutter. 15.42  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 15  88. 
H. Goldstein, “Frequency dependence of the properties of sea echo,” Phys. Rev ., vol. 
70,   pp. 938–946, 1946.  89. 
A. H. Schooley, “Some limiting cases of radar sea clutter noise,” Proc. 
IRE , vol. 44,   pp. 1043–1047, 1956. 
 90. W. S. 
Ament, “Forward and backscattering by certain rough surfaces,” Trans. IRE , vol. AP-4,   pp. 
369–373, 1956.  91. V . 
Twersky, “On the scattering and reflection of electromagnetic waves by rough surfaces,”  Trans. IRE , vol. AP-5, pp. 
81–90, 1957.  92. D. 
R. Lyzenga, A. L. 
Maffett, and R. A. Schuchman, “The contribution of wedge scattering to  the radar cross section of the ocean surface,” IEEE Trans . 
vol. GE-21, pp. 502–505, 1983. 
 93. L. B. 
Wetzel, “A minimalist approach to sea backscatter—the wedge model,” in URSI Open  Symp. Wave Propagat.: Remote Sensing and Communication , University of New Hampshire,  Durham, preprint volume, July 28–August 1, 1986, pp. 3.1.1–3.1.4. 
 94. S. O. 
Rice, “Reflection of electromagnetic waves from slightly rough surfaces,” Commun.   Pure Appl. Math ., vol. 
4, pp. 361–378, 1951.  95. 
W. H. Peake, “Theory of radar return from terrain,” in IRE Nat. 
Conv. Rec ., vol. 7, 1959,   pp. 
27–41.  96. G. 
R. Valenzuela, “Depolarization of EM waves by slightly rough surfaces,” IEEE Trans .,   vol. AP-15, pp. 
552–559, 1967.  97. F. 
G. Bass and I. M. 
Fuks, Wave Scattering from Statistically Rough Surfaces , New York:  Pergamon Press, 1979.  98. C. 
Eckart, “The scattering of sound from the sea surface,” J. Acoust. Soc. 
Am ., vol. 25,   pp. 566–570. 
1953.  99. P. 
Beckmann and A. Spizzichino, The Scattering of Electromagnetic Waves from Rough Surfaces ,  New York: Macmillan Company, 1963. 100. 
L. B. Wetzel, “HF sea scatter and ocean wave spectra,” presented at URSI Spring Meet., National  Academy of Sciences, Washington, April 1966. 
101. A. K. 
Fung and G. W. Pan, “A scattering model for perfectly conducting random surfaces:   I. 
model development,” Int. J. Remote Sensing , vol. 
8, no. 11, pp. 1579–1593, 1987. 
102. G. R. 
Valenzuela, “Theories for the interaction of electromagnetic and oceanic waves—a  review,” Boundary-Layer Meteorol ., vol. 13, pp. 61–85, 1978. 
103. B. F. 
Kuryanov, “The Scattering of sound at a rough surface with two types of irregularity,”   Sov. Phys. Acoust ., vol. 
8, pp. 252–257, 1963. 104. 
W. J. Plant, “Bragg scattering of electromagnetic waves from the air/sea interface,” in  Surface Waves and Fluxes: Current Theory and Remote Sensing , chap. 
12, G. L. Geernaert  and W. 
J. Plant (eds.), Dordrecht, Netherlands: Reidel, 1988. 105. 
A. Schmidt, V . Wismann, R. 
Romeiser, and W. Alpers, “Simultaneous measurements of the  ocean wave radar modulation transfer function at L, C and X bands from the research platform  Nordsee,” J. Geophys. 
Res ., vol. 100, pp. 8815–8827, 1995. 
106. W. P. 
Plant, “A stochastic, multiscale model of microwave backscatter from the ocean,”   J. Geophys. Res ., vol. 
107, no. C9, p. 3120, 2002. 
107. V . Kudryavtsev, D. 
Hauser, G. Caudal, and B. Chapron, “A semiempirical model of the normal - ized radar cross-section of the sea surface 1. 
Background model,” J. Geophys. Res ., vol. 
108,   no. C3, 8054, 2003. 108. 
V . Kudryavtsev, D. Hauser, G. 
Caudal, and B. Chapron, “A semiempirical model of the normal - ized radar cross-section of the sea surface 2. Radar modulation transfer function,” J. 
Geophys.  Res., vol. 108, no. 
C3, 8055, 2003. 109. E. 
F. Knott, J. F. 
Shaeffer, and M. T. Tuley, Radar Cross Section , 2nd Ed., Boston: Artech  House, 1993. 
110. M. S. 
Longuet-Higgins and J. S. Turner “An ‘entraining plume’ model of a spilling breaker,”   J. 
Fluid Mech ., vol. 63, pp. 1–20, 1974. 
ch15.indd   42 12/15/07   6:17:24 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Sea Clutter. 
 SEA CLUTTER  15.436x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 15 111. K. J. 
Sangston, “Toward a theory of ultrawideband sea scatter,” in IEEE National Radar  Conference 1997 , May 13–15, 1997, pp. 160–165. 112. 
D. Trizna (private communication), 1989. 113. 
J. C. West and M. 
A. Sletten, “Multipath EM scattering from breaking waves at grazing inci - dence,” Radio Sci ., vol. 32, no. 
3, pp. 1455–1467, 1997. 114. 
M. A. Sletten and J. 
C. West, “Radar investigations of breaking water waves at low grazing angles  with simultaneous high-speed optical imagery,” Radio Sci ., vol. 38, no. 
6, p. 1110, 2003. 115. 
J. Chen, T. Lo, J. 
Litva, and H. Leung, “Scattering of electromagnetic waves from a time-varying  fractal surface,” Microwave and Optical Tech. Lett ., vol. 
6, no. 1, p. 87, 2003. 
116. S. Haykin, “Radar clutter attractor: implications for physics, signal processing and control,”   IEE Proc. 
Radar: Sonar Navig ., vol. 146, no. 4, p. 
177, August 1999. 117. R. 
Harrington, Time-Harmonic Electromagnetic Fields , New York: McGraw-Hill, 1961. 118. D. 
J. Donohue, H-C Ku, D. R. 
Thompson, and J. Sadowski, “Direct numerical simulation  of electromagnetic rough surface and sea scattering by an improved banded matrix iterative  method, “ Johns Hopkins APL Tech. Digest , vol. 
18, no. 2, pp. 204–215, 1997. 
119. C. L. 
Rino and H. D. Ngo, “Numerical simulation of low-grazing-angle ocean microwave  backscatter and its relation to sea spikes,” IEEE PGAP , vol. 
46, no. 1, 133–141, 1998. 120. 
J. C. West, J. 
M. Sturm, and A-J Ja: Low-Grazing Scattering from Breaking Water Waves Using  an Impedance Boundary MM/GTD Approach, IEEE Trans. Antennas Propagat ., vol. 
46, no. 1,  pp. 93–100, January 1998. 
121. D. B. 
Coakley, P. M. Haldeman, D. 
G. Morgan, K. R. 
Nicolas, D. R. Penndorf, L. 
B. Wetzel,  and C. S. 
Weller, “Electromagnetic scattering from large steady breaking waves,” Experiments  in Fluids , vol. 30, no. 5, pp. 
479–487, May 2001. 122. M. 
R. Keller, B. L. 
Gotwols, W. J. Plant, and W. 
C. Keller, “Comparison of optically-derived  spectral densities and microwave cross-sections in a wind-wave tank,” J. Geophys., Res .,   vol. 
100, no. C8, pp. 16163–16178, 1995. 
123. E. A. 
Ericson, D. R. Lyzenga, and D. 
T. Walker, “Radar backscatter from stationary breaking  waves,” J. Geophys. 
Res ., vol. 104, Issue C12, p. 29679, 1999. 
124. Y. G. 
Trokhimovski, “Gravity–capillary wave curvature spectrum and mean-square slope  retrieved from microwave radiometric measurements (coastal ocean probing experiment),”  J. f Atmosph. Oceanic Tech ., vol. 
17, no. 9, pp. 1259–1270, 2000. 
ch15.indd   43 12/15/07   6:17:24 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Sea Clutter. 
6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 15   blind folio 15.44 ch15.indd   44 12/15/07   6:17:24 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Sea Clutter. 
