21.16x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 21 Ground Penetrating Radar David Daniels ERA Technology 21.1 INTRODUCTION The terms ground penetrating radar (GPR), ground probing radar, subsurface radar,  or surface penetrating radar (SPR)  refer to a radar-based electromagnetic technique  designed primarily for the location of objects or interfaces buried beneath the Earth’s  surface or located within a visually opaque structure. GPR is a successful example of  the exploitation of ultrawideband radar and typically a GPR with a range of 1 m would  operate over the range 0.3 GHz to 3.3 GHz. 
Although GPR has many similarities to radar systems, there are some key differ - ences, which need to be appreciated when comparing them with conventional radar  systems. GPR systems are a special class of ultrawideband (UWB) radar system and  can radiate energy in the range of frequencies from a few MHz up to 10 GHz with a  bandwidth of up to a decade, but more usually 2–3 octaves. The typical average radi - ated power, integrated over the band of interest, may be in the order of a milliwatt, but  the power per Hz may be as low as picowatts. 
GPR is usually operated so that the target, which is within a lossy dielectric, is  only a few wavelengths from the aperture of antenna. The total path losses within a  few wavelengths may reach 100 dB or more depending on the material. Many GPR  systems operate in a region where the wavelengths radiated are greater or in the same  order of magnitude as the target dimensions. 
Thus, GPR operates between the Rayleigh  region and Mie or resonance region of the target dimensions. This is very different  from conventional radar systems where the target dimensions are much larger than the  wavelength of the incident radiation, i.e., the optical region. The technology of GPR is largely applications-oriented and the overall design phi - losophy, as well as the hardware, is usually dependent on the target type and the mate - rial of the target and its surroundings. 
GPR is vulnerable to extremely high levels of  clutter at short ranges and this, rather than signal/noise recovery, is its major technical  challenge. The system to be specified should take this into account. All these aspects  pose special design problems for GPR, which is described in detail by Daniels.1 This  chapter is a summary of that material and is referenced by courtesy of the IEE. 
A typical GPR system is shown in Figure 21.1 and consists of a pair of antennas,  one for transmit and one for receive, connected to the transmitter receiver and proces - sor and contained within a sealed enclosure, a battery and control processor, and dis - play unit. The wheels drive a shaft encoder that triggers data acquisition and hence the  display that is synchronised to the movement of the system. An example of the display, Chapter 21 ch21.indd   1 12/17/07   2:50:59 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Source: RADAR HANDBOOK. 21.2  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 21 which takes the form of a cross section of the ground surveyed by the GPR, is shown  in Figure 21.2. 
The horizontal scale is 10 cm per marker and the vertical scale is time  in nanoseconds (51 ns). An explanation of the image is provided later in this chapter. GPR system design can be classified into two groups. 
GPR systems that transmit an  impulse and receive the reflected signal from the target using a sampling receiver can  be considered to operate in the time domain. GPR systems that transmit individual fre - quencies in a sequential manner and receive the reflected signal from the target using a  frequency conversion receiver can be considered to operate in the frequency domain. The first use of electromagnetic signals to determine the presence of remote terres - trial metal objects is generally attributed to Hülsmeyer in 1904, but the first description  of their use for location of buried objects appeared six years later in a German patent  by Leimbach and Löwy. 
The work of Hülsenbeck in 1926 appears to be the first use  of pulsed techniques to determine the structure of buried features. He noted that any  Radar Processor and Display Battery Housing forTransmitter—Receiverand Antennas FIGURE 21.1  Typical GPR system ( Courtesy US Radar ) FIGURE 21.2  Typical display from GPR ch21.indd   2 12/17/07   2:51:01 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. 
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Ground Penetrating Radar.  GROUND PENETRATING RADAR  21.36x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 21 dielectric variation, not necessarily involving conductivity, would also produce reflec - tions and that the technique, through the easier realization of directional sources, had  advantages over seismic methods. Pulsed techniques were developed from the 1930s  onward as a means of probing to considerable depths in ice (Steenson2 and Evans3);  in fresh water and salt deposits (Unterberger4); in desert sand and rock formations  (Kadaba5 and Morey6). 
Probing of rock and coal was also investigated by Cook7,8 as  well as Roe,9 although the higher attenuation in the latter material meant that depths  greater than a few meters were impractical. Nilsson10 gives a more extended account  of the history of GPR and its growth up to the mid-1970s. From the 1970s, the range of  applications has been expanding steadily, and now includes those given in Table 21.1. 
 Purpose-built equipment for each of these applications has been being developed, and  the user now has a better choice of equipment and techniques. GPR has advanced rapidly as a result of a variety of applications, but as the require - ments have become more demanding, so the equipment, techniques, and data process - ing methods have been developed and refined. A GPR transmits a regular sequence of low-power pulses of electromagnetic  energy into the material or ground and then receives and detects the weak reflected  signal from the buried target. 
The energy is in the form of either a very short dura - tion impulse, a sweep over a range of frequencies, radiation of noise over a defined  band, or a pseudorandom coded sequence of pulses. Most GPR systems, all of which  need to comply with the relevant national and international regulations regarding  radio transmitters, operate within the range of frequencies from 10 MHz to 10 GHz  and can have a bandwidth of several GHz. The FCC requirement for UWB limits  the radiated power to –41 dBm Hz–1. 
The topic of radar system design is covered  in many texts and useful information will be found in the following references:  Daniels11,12 Cook and Bernfeld,13 Skolnik,14 Nathanson,15 Wehner,16 Galati,17 and  Astanin and Kostylev.18 The buried target can be a conductor, a dielectric, or combinations of both. The  surrounding host material can be soil, earth materials, wood, rocks, ice, fresh water, or  manmade materials such as concrete or brick. A typical GPR achieves a range of up to  a few meters, but some special systems can penetrate up to hundreds of meters or even  kilometers. 
A few GPR systems have been operated from aircraft and from satellites  to image geological features buried beneath the Saharan deserts as well as measuring  the depth of the Moon and features on Mars or comets. The range of the GPR in the  ground is limited because of the absorption the signal undergoes, while it travels on   its two-way path through the ground material. GPR works well through materials such  as granite, dry sand, snow, ice, and fresh water, but will not penetrate certain clays that  TABLE 21.1  Main Applications of GPR Archaeological investigations Bridge deck analysis Detection of buried mines (anti-personnel and anti-tank) Forensic investigations (detecting buried bodies) Geophysical investigations Pipes and cable detection Rail track and bed inspection Road condition survey Snow, ice, and glacier  ch21.indd   3 12/17/07   2:51:02 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Ground Penetrating Radar. 21.4  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 21 are high in salt content or salt water because of the high absorption of electromagnetic  energy of such materials. 
For comparison, the total two-way path loss from Earth to  the Moon using a 1 GHz radar would be greater than 200 dB for a range of 356,400  km and a target radar cross section in the order of 1012 m2, whereas a GPR radar often  encounters a path loss in excess of 70 dB for ranges of less than a meter . In air, the GPR signal travels at the speed of light, but is slowed down in ground  materials by their dielectric constant; hence, true range needs calibrating for each  material. GPR will not penetrate metal because of the latter’s conductivity. 
There are now a number of commercially available equipments, and the technique  is gradually developing in scope and capability. Many GPR systems are mobile and  mounted on wheels or skids to be moved by hand, but systems can be used on vehicles  for rapid survey by means of an array of antennas. Other GPR systems are designed  to be inserted into boreholes to provide images of the intervening rock. 
Typical GPR  system attributes are given in Table 21.2. Most GPR systems use separate, man-portable, transmit and receive antennas,  which are placed on the surface of the ground and moved in a known pattern over the  surface of the ground or material under investigation, and an image can be generated,  in real time, on a display either in grey scale or in color. By systematically surveying  the area in a regular grid pattern, a radar image of the ground can be built up. 
GPR  images are displayed either as two-dimensional representations, using horizontal   (x or y) and depth ( z) axes or a horizontal plane representation ( x, y) at a given depth  (z) or as a three-dimensional reconstruction. GPR data may be classified as A-scan,  B-scan, or C-scan depending on the plane of image (note these are not the same as  conventional radar A, B, and C scans). A GPR A-scan is a measurement at a single  fixed point in space and is displayed in amplitude ( y) and range ( x). 
A B-scan is a  representation usually in grayscale or color-coded image intensity of a plane ( x, z or  y, z) of scan whereas a C-scan represents a horizontal plane ( x, y) at a given depth  (z). Alternatively, the GPR may be designed to provide an audible warning of target  presence while the GPR is moved. The GPR image of a target is very different from its optical image because the  wavelengths of the illuminating radiation are similar in dimension to the target. 
This  results in a much lower definition in the GPR image and one that is highly dependent  on the propagation characteristics of the ground. The beam pattern of the antenna is  widely spread in the dielectric and this degrades the spatial resolution of the image,  unless corrected. Refraction and anisotropic characteristics of the ground may also  distort the image. 
For some longer-range systems, synthetic aperture processing tech - niques are used to optimize the resolution of the image and will be discussed later . TABLE 21.2  Characteristics of GPR Systems in a Soil of Relative Dielectric Constant of 9 and  Loss Tangent of 0.1 Pulse Duration in ns Center Frequency in MHz Range in Meters Depth Resolution 0.5 2000    <0.25 0.025 1 1000    <0.5 0.05 2  500 <1 0.1 4  250 <2 0.2 8  125 <4 0.4 16  63 <8 0.8 32  31  <16 1.6 ch21.indd   4 12/17/07   2:51:02 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. 
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Ground Penetrating Radar.  GROUND PENETRATING RADAR  21.56x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 21 Unprocessed GPR images often show “bright spots” caused by multiple inter - nal reflections as well as a distortion of the aspect ratio of the image of the target  caused by variations in the velocity of propagation. Symmetrical targets, such as  spheres or pipes, cause migration of the reflected energy to a hyperbolic pattern. 
GPR  images can be processed to compensate for these effects, and this is usually carried  out offline. A GPR can be designed to detect specific targets such as interfaces in  roads, pipes, and cables by means of polarized radiation and localized objects such  as cubes, spheres, and cylinders. GPR is capable of detecting features many hundreds  of years old; hence, a prospective site should remain unexcavated, prior to survey, so  as to preserve its information. 
A simplified diagram of the various sources of clutter in a GPR environment is  given in Figure 21.3, and it can be seen that separation of the various signals is the key  to identifying the wanted signal. Inevitably there have been some claims for GPR capability that are simply out - side the realms of known physics, and these seem to have been seized on by some  sections of the media. A claim was made that a particular GPR and its operator  could detect targets the size of golf balls at a depth of eight meters. 
Clearly, the  wavelengths capable of propagating to eight meters in soil would be so much larger  than a golf ball–sized target that the radar cross-sectional area of the latter would  fade into insignificance, even noise. The persuasiveness of the claimant and the lack  of understanding of basic physics on the part of some potential users enabled this  kind of claim to be seriously considered. Claims were made that a GPR had been  developed “that can provide three-dimensional images of objects up to 45.7 meters  below the surface of land and sea. 
Such a device would allow verifiers to identify  underground weapons facilities, like those of concern in Libya, Iraq, and North  Korea. The underwater detection capability could also be used to verify treaties  dealing with submarines and nuclear weapons positioned on the seabed.” How well  FIGURE 21.3  General system operation of GPR showing targets and sources of clutter ( Courtesy IEE ) ch21.indd   5 12/17/07   2:51:03 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. 
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Ground Penetrating Radar. 21.6  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 21 GPR would propagate through seawater is an interesting question given the known  attenuation of seawater at radar frequencies. A careful analysis of some of the claims  about the same radar was published by Tuley19 and is interesting reading. 
21.2 PHYSICS OF PROPAGATION IN MATERIALS Introduction.  Conventional radar systems are generally not significantly affected  by the propagation characteristics of the medium the radar signals travel through, apart  from rain, absorption spectra of the atmosphere, or ionized atmospheric layers. This is  definitely not the case with GPR where the transmission medium may be non-isotro - pic, high dielectric and high loss, and may be layered. 
Therefore, an understanding of  soil and material propagation characteristics is important, and this section describes  the key features of the physics of propagation in materials. Maxwell’s equations are the foundation for the consideration of the propagation of  electromagnetic waves. In free space, the magnetic susceptibility and electric permittivity  are constants, that is, they are independent of frequency and the medium is not dispersive. 
 In a dielectric with a zero loss tangent, no losses due to attenuation are encountered, and  hence there is no consideration of the attenuation, which occurs in real dielectric media. If an alternating electric field is applied to a material, the individual molecules will  be induced to rotate in an oscillatory manner about an axis through their centers, the  inertia of the molecules preventing them from responding instantaneously. Similar  translational effects can occur. 
The polarization produced by an applied field (such as  a propagating radar wave) is closely related to the thermal mobility of the molecules  and is, therefore, strongly temperature dependent. Note that polarization in this context  is different from the polarization of EM waves. In general, the relaxation time (which  may be expressed as a relaxation frequency) depends on activation energy, the natural  frequency of oscillation of the polarized particles, and on temperature. 
Relaxation  frequencies vary widely between different materials. For example, maximum absorption occurs at very low frequencies in ice (103 Hz),  whereas it takes place in the microwave region in water (106 Hz–1010 Hz); thus, the  effects of this phenomenon can have a direct bearing upon the dielectric properties  of materials at the frequencies employed by GPRs, especially if moisture is present  within a material. There are a number of other mechanisms, which cause a separa - tion of positively and negatively charged ions resulting in electric polarization. 
These  mechanisms can be associated with ionic atmospheres surrounding colloidal particles  (particularly clay minerals), absorbed water, and pore effects, as well as interfacial  phenomenon between particles. The general form of the model that describes the frequency dependence of such  systems is the Debye19 relaxation equation:  ′−′′= +− +∞∞ε ε εε ε ωτiis 1 (21.1) where  e′ is the real part of the dielectric permittivity,  e′ = real part of the dielectric permittivity  e″ = imaginary part of the dielectric permittivity  e∞ = high frequency limiting value of the permittivity ch21.indd   6 12/17/07   2:51:04 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. 
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Ground Penetrating Radar.  GROUND PENETRATING RADAR  21.76x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 21  es = low frequency limiting value of the permittivity  w   = radian frequency = 2p  f )  t   = relaxation time constant The frequency of maximum movement and loss occurs at w  = 1/t. In general, single relaxations are rarely observed in natural systems. 
Instead,  there are distributions of relaxations corresponding to distributions of size scales  that influence movement of charge. There are several equations describing such  distributed systems, with the most common experimental observations in agreement  with the model from Cole and Cole20:  ′−′′= +− +∞∞ε ε εε ε ωταiis 1 ( ) (21.2) where a describes the breadth of the time constant distribution from a single relaxation,  a  = 1, to an infinitely broad distribution, a  = 0, with a common process. Different  polarization processes may be described by a series of Cole-Cole equations with dif - ferent values of a  and other parameters. 
The electromagnetic properties of a buried target must be different from the sur - rounding soil or material, and this means that to a first order its relative dielectric con - stant should be significantly lesser or greater than the host soil. Typically, most soils  exhibit a relative dielectric constant, which ranges between 2 to 25. Fresh water has  a relative dielectric constant of approximately 80. 
It should be noted that the ground  and surface are quite likely to be inhomogeneous and contain inclusions of other rocks  of various size as well as manmade debris. This suggests that the signal to clutter per - formance of the sensor is likely to be an important performance factor. Clutter may be  regarded as any radar return that is not associated with the wanted target and needs to  be defined with respect to a particular application. 
Attenuation.  Electromagnetic waves propagating through natural media experi - ence losses, to both the electric (E) or magnetic (H) fields. This causes attenuation  of the original electromagnetic wave. 
Plane waves are good approximations to real  waves in many practical situations. More complicated electromagnetic wavefronts  can be considered as a superimposition of plane waves, and this method may be used  to gain an insight into more complex situations. For most soils of interest in GPR, the  magnetic response is weak and need not be considered as a complex quantity, unlike  the permittivity and conductivity. 
However, in certain soil types, such as those derived  from volcanic rocks or otherwise high in iron content, full consideration of the mag - netic properties is necessary. In the case of lossy dielectric materials, both conduction  and dielectric effects cause absorption of electromagnetic radiation. The electromagnetic material properties that describe such a system are in the com - plex propagation constant g  :  γ α= = + ik ib (21.3) where  g = propagation constant  k = wave number (2 p  /l)  a = attenuation constant [nepers/m]  b = phase constant [radians/m] ch21.indd   7 12/17/07   2:51:07 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Ground Penetrating Radar. 21.8  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 21 The field at a distance z from the source is given by  E zt E e ez j t z( ,)( )= ⋅ ⋅− ⋅ ⋅ − ⋅ 0α ω b (21.4) The wavelength, l, in the medium is in meters,  λπ= =2 bv f (21.5) where f is frequency in Hertz. 
The losses in such systems are described in terms of tangents of loss angles, d,  between electric and magnetic fields. The electrical loss tangent is given by tanδε εσ ωεe=′′ ′+′, which can be simplified to tanδσ ωεe≈′ for low loss materials      (21.6) representing the sum of the charge transport and polarization relaxation losses, and the  phase angle between electric field and current density. The skin depth or attenuation  length is 1/ a [m]; the distance electromagnetic energy travels while being attenuated  by 1/e in amplitude. 
This distance is known as the skin depth, d, and provides an initial  guide to the useful penetration depth of a GPR system although in some media the  useful range may be greater. The individual propagation constants can be written as  α ωµε ε εωµε ε=′+′′ ′  −    =′+′′ 21 1212 b′ ′  +     ε2 1  where   a  = attenuation factor   b  = phase constant and the dimensionless factor e″/e′ is more commonly termed the material loss tangent. This discussion has not considered the electromagnetic and magnetic loss tangent,  and these may need to be considered in special cases. 
It can be seen from the above expressions that the attenuation constant of a mate - rial is, to a first order, linearly related (in dBm–1) to frequency. It is not sufficient to  consider only the low frequency conductivity when attempting to determine the loss  tangent over the frequency range 107 to 1010 Hz. In the case of a material that is dry  and relatively lossless, it may be reasonable to consider that tan de is constant over that  frequency range. 
However, for materials that are wet and lossy such an approximation  is invalid. However, there are a number of other factors that influence the effective  penetration depth, notably the strength of reflection from the target sought, and the  degree of clutter suppression of which the system is capable. A first order estimate of the various contributions to signal loss can be carried out  using the standard radar range equation, although this is only applicable for far-field  conditions and thus has restrictions. 
 PP AG k Rert R=−. .. . 
( .. ).σ πα 42 22  (21.7) ch21.indd   8 12/17/07   2:51:14 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. 
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Ground Penetrating Radar.  GROUND PENETRATING RADAR  21.96x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 21 where  Pt = transmitted power in watts  Pr = received power in watts  A = antenna gain  G = antenna effective aperture  R  = range in meters  a = target radar cross section  k = calibration coefficient The cumulative losses include the transmission coefficients into the ground; the  spreading losses describe the R–4 losses for a target of 1 m2; and the attenuation  losses are for a soil with a er of 9 and tan d  of 0.1. Fixed losses include the trans - mission losses into the soil and the effective radar cross section of the target, which  comprises its true radar cross section and reflection loss from the target. 
Note that  a conducting reflector will have low return loss whereas a nonconducting reflector  will have a high return loss. In Figure 21.4, the calculation has been derived from  1 meter to 10 meters as the radar range equation is not an accurate model in this  range less than 1 meter. and the purpose of the explanation is to provide a basic  introduction to first order signal estimation. 
Reflection.  In any estimation of received signal level, it is necessary to consider  the coefficients of reflection and transmission, as the wave passes through the dielectric  to the target and Snell’s Laws describe the associated angles of incidence, reflection,  transmission, and refraction. Where lossy materials are involved, complex angles of  refraction may occur unlike the simple classical case, and polarization and the Stoke’s  matrix may also be required for oriented high-aspect ratio features like pipes, wires,  and fractures. 
FIGURE 21.4  Losses for GPR signal versus range (Courtesy IEE)Range in metresR0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 0 10 01010 0 −10 −20 −30 −40 −50 −60 −70 −80 −90−90Signal level in dB Reference Fixed lossesSpreading lossAttenuation Noise floorClutter ch21.indd   9 12/17/07   2:51:15 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Ground Penetrating Radar. 
21.10  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 21 The intrinsic impedance h of a medium is the relationship between the electric  field, E, and the magnetic field, H, and is a complex quantity given by  ηωµ σ ω ε=− −j j (21.8) At the boundary between two media, some energy will be reflected and the  remainder transmitted. The reflected field strength is described by the reflection  coefficient, r:  r=− +η η η η2 1 2 1 (21.9) where h1 and h2 are the impedances of medium 1 and 2, respectively. The reflection coefficient has a positive value when h2 > h1, such as where an  air-filled void exists in a dielectric material. 
The effect on a pulse waveform is to  change the phase of the reflected wavelet so that targets with different relative dielec - tric constants to the host material show different phase patterns of the reflected signal.  However, the propagation parameters (relative dielectric constant and loss tangent) of  the host material, the geometric characteristics of the target, and its dielectric param - eters affect the amplitude of the reflected signal. Clutter. 
 A major difficulty for operation of GPR systems is the presence of  clutter within the material. Clutter  is defined as sources of unwanted reflections that  occur within the effective bandwidth and search window of the radar and present  as spatially coherent reflectors. The definition of clutter very much depends on the  wanted target. 
The operator of a GPR system searching for pipes may classify the  interfaces between road layers as clutter, whereas the operator of a system measuring  road layer thickness might consider pipes and cables as sources of clutter. Careful  definition and understanding are critically important in selecting and operating the  best system and processing algorithms. Clutter can completely obscure the buried  target and a proper understanding of its source and impact on the radar is essential. 
Polarization.  A complete description of the radar scattering cross section of  a target includes a description of its polarization scattering characteristics (not the  same as molecular polarization). The polarizing properties of targets are described  by the Stokes parameters, and the polarization coordinates can be represented on  the Poincare Sphere. 
All of these are well described in standard texts on optics and  electromagnetic theory. In summary, these descriptions allow the state of an electro - magnetic wave to be described in terms of linear, elliptical, and circular polarization  (left-handed or right-handed). It is well known that linear targets such as wires act  as depolarizing features and that a linearly polarized crossed dipole antenna rotated  about an axis normal to a linear target such as a wire or pipe produces a sinusoidal  variation in received signal. 
However, the null points are a distinct disadvantage,  because the operator is required to make two separate, axially rotated measurements  at every point to be sure of detecting pipes at unknown orientations. An attractive  technique is to radiate a circularly polarized wave, which automatically rotates the  polarized vector in space and hence removes the direction of signal nulls. These  techniques can be used to discriminate in favor of the target. 
For example, a right- handed circularly polarized (RHCP) wave will be reflected as a left-handed circularly  ch21.indd   10 12/17/07   2:51:18 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Ground Penetrating Radar. 
 GROUND PENETRATING RADAR  21.116x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 21 polarized (LHCP) wave from a planar surface, but some proportion of RHCP will be  reflected from a thin pipe or wire. This enables the ground-surface reflection to be  reduced while enhancing that from the thin pipe or wire. Velocity. 
 The velocity of propagation of electromagnetic waves in free space is  approximately 3 × 108 ms–1 but slows in a material depending on its relative permittiv - ity and relative magnetic permeability. The velocity of propagation of electromagnetic  waves in a soil with a value for er of 9 would be slowed to 1 × 108 ms–1. The time to a  target at a range of 1 meter is, therefore, 20 ns, and GPR systems operate at time ranges  between a few nanoseconds up to 200 ns, although some systems for probing through  ice may use ranges up to several tens of milliseconds. 
In general, it is not possible to make a reliable estimate of propagation velocity or rela - tive permittivity in a medium from a single measurement without trial holing (inserting a  probe into a predrilled hole) or other supplementary information. Even in the case where  a measurement is carried out at one location, it is often found that significant variations in  velocity will occur within comparatively short distances from the original location. This  can lead to significant errors in the estimation of depths of reflectors. 
One procedure that  overcomes this limitation is known as common depth point surveying, which utilizes two  antennas in bistatic operation at a number of transmit and receive positions. The velocity of propagation is given by n  = (mo  mr eo er)–1/2; hence in a material  with mr = 1, the velocity becomes n  = c/(er)1/2. The phase velocity is given by n  = w  /b  and as  b=′+′′ ′  +      ωµε ε ε 21 12 (21.10) The phase velocity is also dependent on the factor e″/e′, which is also tan d. 
 It is also possible to derive velocity from multiple measurements scanning over a  target, but this works well only in relatively uncluttered situations where the media has  no anisotropic characteristics. Dispersion.  The frequency dependent nature of the dielectric properties of the mate - rial causes the phase velocity of the component frequencies of a wideband signal to suffer  differential propagation values. 
Hence, there will be variation in the velocity of propa - gation with frequency. Dielectrics exhibiting this phenomenon are termed dispersive.   In this situation, the different frequency components within a broadband radar pulse would  travel at slightly different speeds, causing the pulse shape to change with time. 
However,  the propagation characteristics of octave band radar signals in most earth materials remain  largely unaffected by dispersion In many instances, the potential variation in the velocity  of wave propagation over the frequency range of interest is small and can be ignored. Depth Resolution.  For traditional radar systems, it is accepted that two identical  targets can be separated in range if they are 0.8 of a pulse width apart. 
In optics, Lord  Rayleigh proposed that the resolving power of an instrument is when the principal  intensity of one component coincides with the first intensity minimum of the other com - ponent. Many GPR pulses take the form of a Ricker wavelet (the second differential of  a gaussian impulse), and an example of two pulses from targets is shown in Figure 21.5  where both the impulses and their envelopes are shown. When the targets are closer, as  ch21.indd   11 12/17/07   2:51:20 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Ground Penetrating Radar. 21.12  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 21 shown in Figure 21.6, although it is possible to distinguish their envelopes, it becomes  increasingly difficult to resolve the actual pulses because the signal might be due to a  resonance generated by a single target; hence, in the case of pulses with an envelope  that has no minima, the 0.8 pulse width resolution criteria may not be optimal. 
Essentially, range resolution is defined by the bandwidth of the received signal. A  receiver bandwidth in excess of 500 MHz and typically 1 GHz is required to provide  a typical resolution of between 5 and 20 cm, depending on the relative permittivity of  the material. When a number of features may be present, a signal having a larger bandwidth is  required to be able to distinguish between the various targets and to show the detailed  structure of a target. 
In this context, it is the bandwidth of the received signal that is  important, rather than that of the transmitted wavelet. The material acts as a low pass  filter, which modifies the transmitted spectrum in accordance with the electrical prop - erties of the propagating medium. There are some applications of GPR, such as road  layer thickness measurement, where the feature of interest is a single interface. 
Under  such circumstances, it is possible to determine the depth sufficiently accurately by  measuring the elapsed time between the leading edge of the received wavelet provided  the propagation velocity is accurately known. Although a greater depth resolution is achieved in wetter materials for a given  transmitted bandwidth because of the reduced wavelength in high dielectric materials,  earth materials with significant water content tend to have higher attenuation proper - ties. This characteristic reduces the effective bandwidth, tending to balance out the  change so that within certain bounds the resolution is approximately independent of  loss within the propagating material.FIGURE 21.5  Two resolved Ricker wavelets0.2 0.1 0 −0.1 −0.201282563845126407688961024 FIGURE 21.6  Two unresolved Ricker wavelets0.13 −0.13 01282563845126407688961024 ch21.indd   12 12/17/07   2:51:21 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Ground Penetrating Radar.  GROUND PENETRATING RADAR  21.136x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 21 Where interfaces are spaced more closely than one half wavelength, the reflected  signal from one interface will become difficult to resolve with that from another. 
It should be noted that the normal radar criteria for range resolution is less appropri - ate for the case of a weak target adjacent to a strong target, and there is no accepted  definition of resolution for the case of unequal size targets. Plan Resolution.  The plan ( plan is defined as a plane normal to the direction  of propagation) resolution of a GPR system is important when localized targets are  sought and when there is a need to distinguish between more than one at the same  depth. 
Where the requirement is for location accuracy, which is primarily a topo - graphic surveying function, the system requirement is less demanding. The plan resolution is defined by the characteristics of the antenna and the sig - nal processing employed. In general radar systems (apart from SAR), to achieve an  acceptable plan resolution requires a high gain antenna. 
This necessitates a sufficiently  large aperture at the lowest frequency to be transmitted. To achieve small antenna  dimensions and high gain, therefore, requires the use of a high carrier frequency,  which may not penetrate the material to sufficient depth. When selecting equipment  for a particular application, it is necessary to compromise between plan resolution, size  of antenna, the scope for signal processing, and the ability to penetrate the material. 
 Plan resolution improves as attenuation increases, provided that there is sufficient sig - nal to discriminate under the prevailing clutter conditions. In low attenuation media,  the resolution obtained by the horizontal scanning technique is degraded, but only  under these conditions do synthetic aperture techniques increase the plan resolution.  Essentially the ground attenuation has the effect of placing a “window” across the  SAR aperture, and the higher the attenuation the more severe the window. 
Hence, in  high attenuation soils, SAR techniques may not provide any useful improvement to  GPR systems. SAR techniques have been applied to GPR but very often in dry soils  with low attenuation. SAR techniques typically require measurements made using transmitter and  receiver pairs at a number of antenna positions to generate a synthetic aperture or to  focus the image. 
Unlike conventional radars, which generally use a single antenna,  most GPR systems use separate transmit and receive antennas to provide receiver  isolation. The GPR community refers to this as a bistatic mode, although actually the  antenna system is closely spaced and mobile. This is different from the traditional  radar community that associates the term bistatic  with large separations. 
21.3 MODELING Models of the GPR situation range from a simple single frequency evaluation of  path losses to complete 3D time-domain descriptions of the GPR and its environ - ment. Modeling techniques include single frequency models, time-domain models,  ray tracing, integral techniques, method of moments (MoM), and discrete element  methods. The Finite-Difference Time-Domain (FDTD) technique has become one of  the popular techniques and can be developed to run on most desktop computers with  relative efficiency. 
It should be noted that GPR systems often operate in intimate contact with the  ground and very close to the target. Thus the antenna radiates in the near-field whereas  some geophysical GPR systems operate at longer ranges (10 m to 2 km), and they  ch21.indd   13 12/17/07   2:51:21 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. 
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Ground Penetrating Radar. 21.14  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 21 could be considered to operate in the Fresnel and even Fraunhofer (far-field) region.  When the target is so close to the antenna, it interacts with the reactive fields of the  antenna, and accurate models would reflect this mode of operation. 
The most basic model uses the radar range equation and enables an estimate of  received signal level, dynamic range, and probability of detection to be assessed. It  has significant weaknesses in that most close-range GPR systems are operating in the  near-field or even the reactive field of the antenna whereas the model assumes a far- field model. It is probably more relevant to the longer-range geophysical applications  where the target is many tens of meters from the radar. 
Many GPR receivers were originally based on sampling oscilloscope technol - ogy and the use of voltage became experimentally more useful. The most basic  model for assessment of voltage signal level is derived from the radar range equa - tion, which does have the limitations previously noted. However, it does enable  a first order assessment of anticipated signal levels and an example is given in  this section. 
The model is based on the equation for the voltage at the receiver  as a function of range r and target radar cross-section s and given by reference  Rutledge and Muha.30 In the first model shown in Figure 21.7, the antenna is set at a height of 15 cm above  the target (dielectric cylinders of 1 cm thickness, ranging in size from 0.05 m diameter  to 0.5 m diameter). The target has a value of er of 2.2 and the soil er = 5 and tan d  = 0.2.  The radiated pulse has a center frequency of 1 GHz and an output pulse peak voltage  of 10 volts. 
The radar receiver has an equivalent bandwidth of 300 MHz to 3 GHz and  an equivalent receiver noise voltage of 2.49.10–5 volts. The probability of detection (PD) is derived from the error function of the signal-to- noise ratio, as shown in Figure 21.8. Note that these values only relate to the receiver  noise and do not include external sources of false alarms due to clutter . 
The most basic model is that of the transmission line equivalent and is useful for  assessing the time-domain signature of a physical situation. A conceptually simple  model can be used to gain an insight into the optimum center frequency of operation  and is shown in Figure 21.9. Each layer is modeled as equivalent impedance and the transmission and reflec - tion coefficients are calculated for each interface. 
The velocity of propagation and  the material losses are included although not the spreading losses. The reason for  this is that the received A-scan would normally have time-varying gain applied   in the receiver and signal processing, and to introduce spreading loss and then com - pensate is an inefficient modeling exercise. In the model only the first reflection is  computed, although multiple internal reflections within each layer will be generated  and a full representation should include these. 
The parameters of the layers are given  in Table 21.3. FIGURE 21.7  Physical layout of GPR system ( Courtesy IEE ) Antenna at height H  Air / soil interf ace  Target at range r and diameter from 50mm to 500mm  ch21.indd   14 12/17/07   2:51:22 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. 
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Ground Penetrating Radar.  GROUND PENETRATING RADAR  21.156x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 21 FIGURE 21.8  Graph of probability of detection as a function of target range in millimeters and  target diameter (50 mm left-hand side to 500 mm right-hand side in increments of 50 mm). Ground  surface is shown as a vertical line. 
 (Courtesy IEE )11PD0.6 0.5 0.4 0.3 0.2 0.1 000 0100 200 300 400 500 600 R 1×103700 800 900 10000.70.80.9 FIGURE 21.9  Layout of transmission line model ( courtesy IEE )LAYER  1AIRLAYER  2LAYER  3LAYER  4LAYER  5 TABLE 21.3  Layer Characteristics for Transmission Line Model Layer Range in Meters Relative Dielectic Constant erLoss Tangent Material 0 0  1 0 Air 1 0.3  6  0.31 Lossy layer 2 0.6  1 0 Air void 3  0.85  9  0.01 Sub base 4 1 16 0.1 Wet base 5 infinite 25 0.1 Wet bedrock ch21.indd   15 12/17/07   2:51:24 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Ground Penetrating Radar. 
21.16  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 21 The output from the model is shown in Figure 21.10 and Figure 21.1 1. Finite-Difference Time-Domain (FDTD) methods can be used to model the field  propagation of a typical GPR system. The antenna used for this purpose is a resistively  loaded TEM horn, as described by Martel et al.22 It is 35 cm long with an aperture of  10 cm by 30 cm. 
The TEM horn has ultrawideband capabilities from 200 MHz to 4 GHz.  It is positioned above a metallic target buried in the ground as shown in Figure 21.12.  The distance between the horn aperture and the air-ground, interface is 25 cm (different  from the earlier model). 
The modeled target is a cylinder with a radius of 3.5 cm and  a height of 5 cm. It is shallowly buried at about 2.5 cm below the air-ground interface.  FIGURE 21.10  Simulation of A-scan using 300 MHz center frequency ( Courtesy IEE )1 0.5 −0.5 −1−10 40 60 80 100 120 tA-scan simulation 140 160 180 2001 FIGURE 21.11  Simulation of A-scan using 500 MHz center frequency ( Courtesy IEE )1 0.5 −0.5 −1−10 40 60 80 100 120 tA-scan simulation Equiv alent timeAmplitude 140 160 180 2001 ch21.indd   16 12/17/07   2:51:25 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Ground Penetrating Radar.  GROUND PENETRATING RADAR  21.176x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 21 The ground is modeled as a uniform lossy material with a relative permittivity of 13  and a conductivity of 0.005 S/m (Siemens/meter). 
The air-ground interface is assumed  to be perfectly flat. From the field plot, one can recognize the antenna structure and the strong field  region on and inside the horn plate. The buried object is also visible. 
The main reflec - tion caused by the air-ground interface can clearly be seen coming back toward the  antenna system. In addition, a weaker reflection coming from the buried object is  starting to form and follows the air-ground interface reflection in time. This is a typical  time-domain characteristic of standoff GPR system. 
Moreover, other physical phe - nomena can be observed such as the free space path loss and the reduction in velocity  of propagation in the ground. It should be noted that the process of physically scanning the antenna system over  the target creates a hyperbolic image of the target, as shown in Figure 21.13. For the  two-dimensional case ( x = position on surface and z = depth to the target) of a material  with known constant velocity, the measured time to the point reflector is given by t  and then the distance to the point reflector is given by z = vt / 2. 
At any position along  the x-axis the distance z is also given by  z x x zi i= − + ( )02 02 (21.11) 0−18−36−54−72 FIGURE 21.12  Electric field plot on a vertical cut plane after the main ground  reflection  (Courtesy IEE ) ch21.indd   17 12/17/07   2:51:27 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Ground Penetrating Radar. 
21.18  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 21 FIGURE 21.13  Typical hyperbolic image of GPR data from a reflector of circular  cross section ( Courtesy IEE ) Xo, ZoX axis Z axis M This equation shows that the measured wavefront appears as a hyperbolic image  or a curve of maximum convexity. Migration technique may be used to move or  migrate a segment of an A-scan time sample to the apex of a curve of maximum  convexity. The hyperbolic curve needs to be well-separated from other features and a  good signal-to-noise ratio is needed for this technique to work well. 
21.4 PROPERTIES OF MATERIALS The determination of the dielectric properties of earth materials remains largely exper - imental. Rocks, soils, and concrete are complex materials composed of many different  minerals in widely varying proportions, and their dielectric parameters may differ  greatly even within materials that are nominally similar. Most earth materials contain  moisture, usually with some measure of salinity. 
Since the relative permittivity of  water is in the order of 80, even small amounts of moisture cause a significant increase  of the relative permittivity of the material. A large number of workers have investi - gated the relationships between the physical, chemical, and mechanical properties of  materials and their electrical and, in particular, microwave properties. In general, they  have sought to develop suitable models to link the properties of the material to its elec - tromagnetic parameters. 
Such models provide a basis for understanding the behavior  of electromagnetic waves within these media. The real and imaginary dielectric losses  ch21.indd   18 12/17/07   2:51:28 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. 
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Ground Penetrating Radar.  GROUND PENETRATING RADAR  21.196x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 21 as a function of frequency can be plotted over a wide frequency range and a typical  result is shown in Figure 21.14. Information on the geological properties of earth soils can be found in the Digital  Soil Map of the World and Derived Soil Properties CD, published by the Food and  Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. 
This enables the ten map sheets of  the world to be classified in terms of parameters such as pH (concentration of hydro - gen ions), organic carbon content, C/N (carbon-to-nitrogen) ratio, clay mineralogy,  soil depth, soil moisture capacity, and soil drainage class. Such information is useful  in assessing the potential of RF techniques and particularly GPR for particular geo - graphic regions. There are two benefits to understanding soil properties in relation to GPR. 
The first  is to understand the applicability of GPR to particular soils and hence the possibility  of using GPR to detect buried targets such as pipe, cables, landmines, etc. The second  is to use GPR to characterize soils and soil properties. GPR can provide a detailed map of the subsurface, which when combined with  traditional soil survey methods can provide information on the type of soil, its extent  laterally and in depth, the water table, the layering and features of the soil, and hence  its local geology and history. 
GPR has been used in the U.S. by the Department of Agriculture-Natural  Resources Conservation Service (USDA-NRCS) as a quality control tool for soil  mapping and investigations. The use of GPR in soil survey activities has provided  information about soil resources that would have been unobtainable by other means  or would have been uneconomical to obtain. 
An example of the results of this work  is shown in Figure 21.15.FIGURE 21.14  Dielectric properties e′ (upper) and e″ (lower) of lossy soil as a  function of frequency ( Courtesy IEE )Frequency20 16 12 8 4 0 1.1081.10111.10101.109 ch21.indd   19 12/17/07   2:51:28 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Ground Penetrating Radar. 
21.20  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 21 21.5 GPR SYSTEMS The choice of system design is to a large extent governed by the type of target, the res - olution required, and the anticipated ground attenuation and clutter. The depth range of  the radar system is likely to be primarily defined by the soil attenuation, once a particu - lar range of frequencies has been chosen. However, it can be shown that considerable  variations (10–30 dB) in the sensitivity of competing system designs actually translate  to relatively small changes in depth performance in lossy soils. 
The selection of a suitable waveform for transmission, at least in terms of resolu - tion, can be considered a function of the duration of the complex envelope of the sig - nal. The output from most ultrawideband radar systems can be compared in terms of a  time-domain representation of the waveform. Almost all types of radar can be assessed  not just by their signal-to-noise and signal-to-clutter ratios but also by comparing their  inherent range sensitivity. 
Such a procedure reveals the characteristics that control the  radar performance. The design of a GPR system is defined by the modulation tech - nique, and time domain, frequency domain, and pseudo-random-coded domain radar  designs are most likely to be encountered. Frequency domain radars may use either  stepped frequency or continuously swept frequency modulation. 
They transmit, on a  repetitive basis, a nominally constant amplitude signal whose frequency increases in a  linear progression from the lowest to the highest value. Recovery of the receiver signal from noise may be achieved by either conventional  bandpass filters or by the matched filter or Wiener filter. The fundamental operation of a matched filter is correlation. 
The amplitude of  each point in the output signal is a measure of how well the filter kernel matches the  corresponding section of the input signal. The output of a matched filter does not nec - essarily look like the signal being detected, but if a matched filter is used, the shape  of the target signal must already be known. The matched filter is optimal in the sense FIGURE 21.15  GPR Soil Suitability Map of the Continental (Conterminous) United States ( Courtesy  of USDA-NRCS ) ch21.indd   20 12/17/07   2:51:29 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Ground Penetrating Radar.  GROUND PENETRATING RADAR  21.216x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 21 that the peak signal output to mean noise ratio is greater than can be achieved with any  other linear filter. 
This is not always the best filter to use for time-domain waveforms  where the fidelity of the output may be a requirement. The Wiener filter separates signals based on their frequency spectra. The gain of  the Wiener filter at each frequency is determined by the relative amount of signal and  noise at that frequency: The Wiener and matched filter must be carried out by convolu - tion, making them extremely slow to execute. 
The matched filter radar receiver provides an optimum linear processing of radar in  the presence of noise. The radar signal is processed by a filter that cross-correlates the  received waveform with a suitably time-delayed version of the transmitted waveform.  The output results in an output in which the amplitude of the latter and its position in  delay time is related to the target radar characteristic. 
This type of receiver is widely  used to process chirp, step frequency, and pseudo-random-coded waveforms, and the  design of such waveforms is extensively described in the literature. Many commercial time-domain radar systems use a sampling receiver to down - convert the radar signals from the nanosecond time frame to a millisecond time frame  that is easier to post process. However, a real disadvantage of the sampling receiver is  its limited dynamic range due to the sampling diodes and inherently high noise level  due to its wide bandwidth. 
Details of typical sampling receivers, which are essentially  the same as sampling oscilloscopes, can be found in the literature, and once issues of  sampling linearity in time are addressed, the generic design has formed the basis for  the majority of commercial GPR systems. A key parameter for most GPR systems is the mean power. The time-domain radar  transmits, on a repetitive basis, a short duration impulse. 
Consequently, its peak power  is significantly greater than its mean power. This is not the case with stepped frequency  whose radiated power per spectral line is higher than the time-domain radar that gives an  advantage in terms of transmitter peak signal capability compared with the impulse GPR. 21.6 MODULATION TECHNIQUES There are three main modulation techniques: time domain, frequency domain, and  pseudo-random-coded radar. 
GPR systems that transmit an impulse and receive the  reflected signal from the target using a sampling receiver can be considered to operate in  the time domain. GPR systems that transmit individual frequencies in a sequential man - ner and receive the reflected signal from the target using a frequency conversion receiver  can be considered to operate in the frequency domain. The latter systems often recon - struct the downconverted frequencies to recover a time-domain replica of the signal. 
All GPRs may have to detect signals from a target that may be –50 to –100 dB  lower than the radiated signal at ranges in the order of a meter (6.6 ns in free space). In  addition, the received signal will contain temporal scattering information on the target  that can be exploited. The temporal fidelity of received signal needs to be preserved and thus designers of  GPR have to ensure that the receiver is not saturated by the transmitted signal, the anten - nas do not cause time sidelobes, and the receiver does not distort the received signal. 
Time Domain.  Most commercially available GPR systems use short pulses or  impulses such as the Ricker wavelet, as shown previously in Figure 21.5. The high- speed sequential sampling approach used to acquire RF waveforms produces a low  ch21.indd   21 12/17/07   2:51:29 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Ground Penetrating Radar. 21.22  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 21 SNR because the spectrum of the sampling pulse is a poor match for that of the  received pulse. 
In general, the dynamic range of the sampling receiver is typically  60 dB, without range (time) varying gain. The effect of the range varying gain is to  enable the lower amplitude signals from targets at a greater range to be amplified so as  to be above the minimum sampling threshold signal level. This is equivalent to a linear  receiver with a 90 dB or more dynamic range. 
Signal averaging or integration of the  samples can increase the effective sensitivity by the amount of averaging and this can  be typically 10 to 30 dB. The ratio of the peak transmitted signal to the mean receiver  noise level can be up to 150 dB. The antennas that can be used with time-domain GPR are limited to linear phase  designs such as resistively loaded dipoles, TEM horns, or Impulse Radiating Antennas  (IRAs). 
It should be noted that ultrawideband antennas fall into two classes, those that  radiate a reasonably short impulse with low time sidelobes and fundamentally pos - sess a linear phase-frequency characteristic. The alternative class of antennas, such as  log periodics, have wideband frequency characteristics but nonlinear phase-frequency  characteristics. Essentially, the latter class will cause the different frequency compo - nents of an impulse to be radiated at different times, hence dispersing the impulse. 
 If such antennas are used with time-domain radar, the dispersive properties of the  antenna used must be compensated by suitable post-processing filtering. The time-domain radar system transmits a sequence of pulses, typically of ampli - tudes within the range between 20 V to 200 V and pulse widths within the range  between 200 ps to 50 ns at a pulse repetition interval of between several hundred  microseconds to one microsecond, depending on the system design. The impulse  generator is generally based on the technique of rapid discharge of the stored energy  in a short transmission line. 
The most common method of achieving this is by means  of a transistor operated in avalanche breakdown mode used as the fast switch and a  very short length of transmission line. It is quite feasible to generate pulses of several  hundred kV albeit at long repetition intervals. The output from the receive antenna  is applied to a flash A/D converter or a sequential sampling receiver. 
The latter nor - mally consists of an ultrahigh speed sample and hold circuit. The control signal to the  sample and hold circuit, which determines the instant of sample time, is sequentially  incremented at each pulse repetition interval. For example, a sampling increment of  t = 100 ps is added to the previous pulse repetition sampling interval to enable sam - pling of the received signal at regular intervals as indicated in Figure 21.16. 
FIGURE 21.16  Typical sampling receiver used for time-domain GPR systemsTransmitter  Antenna Receive  Antenna Ch 1Ch 1 I/O8 Bit Control 16 Bit Data  OutputGEN DELAY CLOCK TVG HOLD ADCSAMPLING  CONTROL SAMPLING  HEADA A ch21.indd   22 12/17/07   2:51:29 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Ground Penetrating Radar. 
 GROUND PENETRATING RADAR  21.236x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 21 The principle of the sampling receiver is, therefore, a downconversion of the radio  frequency signal in the nanosecond time region to an equivalent version in the micro-  or millisecond time region. The incrementation of the sampling interval is terminated  at a stage when, for example, 256, 512, or 1024 sequential samples have been gathered.  The process is then repeated. 
There are several methods of averaging or “stacking”  the data; either a complete set of samples can be gathered and stored and further sets  added to the stored data set, or alternatively, the sampling interval is held constant for a  predetermined time to accumulate and average a given number of individual samples.  The first method needs a digital store but has the advantage that each waveform set  suffers little distortion if the radar is moving over the ground. The second method does not need a digital store and a simple low-pass analogue  filter can be used. 
However, depending on the number of samples that have been aver - aged, the overall waveform set can result in being “smeared” spatially if the radar is  moving at any speed. The stability of the timing increment is very important and gen - erally this should be 10% of the sampling increment; however, practically a stability  in the order of 10 ps to 50 ps is achieved. The effect of timing instability is to cause a  distortion, which is related to the rate of change of the RF waveform. 
Evidently, where  the RF waveform is changing rapidly, jitter in the sampling circuits results in a very  noisy reconstructed waveform. Where the rate of change of signal is slow, jitter is less  noticeable. Normally, control of the sampling converter is derived from a sample of  the output from the pulse generator to ensure that variations in the timing of the latter  are compensated automatically. 
The key elements of this type of radar system are the  impulse generator, the timing control circuits, the sampling detector, and the peak hold  and analogue to digital converter. Frequency Domain Radar.  The main potential advantages of the frequency  domain radar are the wider dynamic range, lower noise figure, and higher mean powers  that can be radiated. 
There are two main types of frequency domain radar, Frequency  Modulated Carrier Wave (FMCW) and Stepped Frequency Carrier Wave (SFCW).  FMCW radar transmits a continuously changing frequency over a chosen frequency  range on a repetitive basis. The received signal is mixed with a sample of the transmit - ted waveform and results in a difference frequency, which, although fundamentally  related to the phase of the received signal, is a measure of its time delay and hence  range of the target. 
The difference frequency or intermediate frequency (IF) must be  derived from an I/Q mixer pair if the information equivalent to a time-domain repre - sentation is required (i.e., to reconstitute an impulse), as a single-ended mixer only  provides the modulus of the time-domain waveform. The basic FMCW radar system  is particularly sensitive to certain parameters. In particular, it requires a high degree  of linearity of frequency sweep with time to avoid spectral widening of the IF and  hence degradation of system resolution. 
Dennis and Gibbs23 made an assessment of the  sensitivity of time sidelobe level to linearity and showed the ratio of sidelobe to peak  level was dependent on the sweep linearity. Practically, the effect of a nonlinearity of  a few percent is to cause significant time sidelobes, as this needs to be compensated in  the transmitter modulator design. The SFCW radar transmits a series of incremental frequencies and stores the  received IF signal to then carry out a Fourier transform reconstruction of the time- domain equivalent waveform. 
The SFCW has found many applications in GPR  because the requirements on scan rate are relatively modest. The impact of mobile  communications technology has had a significant impact on reducing the cost of radar  components for this design. Two forms of the synthesized radar can be considered. 
 ch21.indd   23 12/17/07   2:51:30 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Ground Penetrating Radar. 
21.24  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 21 The first and simplest system is stepped frequency continuous wave radar. The second  form is more complex in that each individual frequency is appropriately weighted in  amplitude and phase prior to transmission. Normally, the radar is calibrated both to  establish a reference plane for measurement as well as to reduce the effect of variations  in the frequency characteristics of components and antennas. 
A much wider class of antenna is available for use by the designer of frequency  domain radars. The noise floor of the receiver is much lower than the time-domain  equivalent, simply by virtue of its lower bandwidth and hence lower thermal noise.  Typically, a sensitivity of –120 dBm is found and a system peak transmitted signal  to mean receiver noise range of 180 dB is feasible. 
It should be noted that the IF  bandwidth of the receiver in FMCW and SFCW systems can be made relatively small  whereas the sampling receiver in the time-domain receiver has a bandwidth of many  GHz and hence a poor noise performance. The main potential advantage of a stepped frequency or FMCW GPR is its abil - ity to adjust the range of frequencies of operation to suit the material and targets and  electromagnetic environment under investigation if the antenna has an adequate pass - band of frequencies. It can radiate a higher mean power level per spectral line than  the time-domain radar, and its ability to integrate the received signal level improves  the system sensitivity. 
The calibration of the radar does, of course, depend on stable  system characteristics and antenna parameters that are invariant with the spacing of  the front surface and the antenna. Although on first consideration, frequency domain  radars should offer a superior sensitivity to time-domain radars, because of their lower  IF receiver bandwidth and hence thermal noise, both the type of receiver and the range  sidelobes of the radiated spectrum may result in an equivalent or worse sensitivity in  terms of range resolution as discussed above. Pseudo-random-coded Radar. 
 Work has been carried out on pseudo-random- coded modulation techniques for GPR. The main advantage of this method is that the  energy transmitted is spread more evenly over the spectrum than with any other modu - lation method and hence the likelihood of interference to other users of the spectrum  is minimized. In addition, the chances of other users of, say, mobile phones interfering  with the GPR operator are also reduced. 
The mean power is the lowest of any of the  modulation schemes and this is helpful in meeting regulatory requirements. The transmitted signal has noise-like characteristics and the received signal is  cross-correlated with a sample of the transmitted signal. The range of the target is  given by the time position of the cross-correlated signal and the amplitude by the peak  of the cross-correlated signal. 
Control of the cross-correlation sidelobes is vital to  achieve good range resolution and the sidelobes are affected by the antenna and system  characteristics as well as the duration and randomness of the transmitted waveform.  Further information is given by Narayanan24 and Sachs et al.25,26 21.7 ANTENNAS In the ultrawideband case, the radar antennas are considered in terms of their transfer  function rather than their gains or effective apertures. In many cases, a separate transmit  and receive antenna is used; hence their transfer functions may not be identical. 
The type  of antenna that is used with ultrawideband radar has an important role in defining the  performance of the radar. ch21.indd   24 12/17/07   2:51:30 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. 
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Ground Penetrating Radar.  GROUND PENETRATING RADAR  21.256x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 21 Element antennas are characterized by linear polarization, low directivity, and rela - tively limited bandwidth, unless either end-loading or distributed-loading techniques  are employed in which case bandwidth is increased at the expense of radiation effi - ciency. An elemental antenna is a dipole in contrast to aperture antennas such as horns. 
 A normal short dipole antenna fed with a very short current impulse will radiate from  the feed points and the end of the element because of the latter’s discontinuity as far  as current flow is concerned. The current impulse will be reflected from the end of  the dipole and travel up and down the dipole causing a series of impulses of radia - tion. This extends the time signature of the radiated waveform and degrades the range  resolution of the system. 
This effect is shown in Figure 21.17 where the radiation pat - tern is shown at a time several pulse durations after application. The outer perimeter  represents the energy radiated at time zero followed at intervals by the radiation from  the feed points and the end of the element. As it is required to radiate only a very short impulse, it is important to eliminate  the reflection discontinuities from the feed points and ends of the antenna either by  end loading or by reducing the amplitude of the charge and current reaching the ends. 
 The latter can be achieved either by resistively coating the antenna or by constructing  the antenna from a material such as Nichrome, which has a defined loss per unit area.  In this case, the antenna radiates in a completely different way as the applied charge  becomes spread over the entire element length, and hence, the centers of radiation are  distributed along the length of the antenna. Typical radiated field patterns for a resis - tively loaded dipole are shown in Figure 21.18. 
However, the reduction in impulse  duration is achieved at the expense of efficiency and loaded antennas may have effi - ciencies as low as 10%. The types of antennas that are useful to the designer of ultrawideband radar fall  into two groups: dispersive antennas and nondispersive antennas. Dispersive antennas  have a nonlinear phase/frequency response whereas nondispersive antennas have a  substantially linear phase/frequency response. 
Examples of dispersive antennas that  have been used in ultrawideband radar are the exponential spiral, the Archimedean  FIGURE 21.17  Radiated field pattern from a conducting dipole element due  to an applied impulse ( Courtesy IEE ) ch21.indd   25 12/17/07   2:51:31 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Ground Penetrating Radar. 
21.26  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 21 spiral, the logarithmic planar antenna, the Vivaldi antenna, slot antennas, and the expo - nential horn. The impulse response of this class of antennas generally results in a  waveform whose time frequency response is extended (and is similar to a chirp, albeit  with an inconstant amplitude) if the input is an impulse. Examples of nondispersive antennas are the TEM horn, the bicone; the bow  tie; the resistive, lumped element-loaded antenna, and the continuously, resistively  loaded antenna. 
The input voltage driving function to the terminals of the antenna in  impulse radar is typically a narrow gaussian pulse of 200 ps, and this requires the  impulse response of the antenna to be extremely short. The main reason for requir - ing the impulse response to be short is that it is important that the antenna does not  distort the input function and generate time sidelobes. These time sidelobes would  obscure targets that are close in range to the target of interest; in other words, the  resolution of the radar can become degraded if the impulse response of the antenna  is significantly extended. 
However, in principle, all antennas are dispersive to some extent but nondispersive  antennas do not need correction in the signal processing, which reduces the overall  complexity of the radar processing. The very short range operation of many GPR  systems enables operation of antennas in a way that does not conform to traditional  analytic models of antenna gain and aperture. Horn antennas have found most use with FMCW ultrawideband radars where the  generally higher frequency of operation and relaxation of the requirement for linear  phase response permit the consideration of this class of antenna. 
FMCW ultrawide - band radars have used an offset paraboloid fed by a ridged horn. This arrangement was  designed to focus the radiation into the ground at a slant angle to reduce the level of  the reflection from the ground. Care needs to be taken in such arrangements to mini - mize the effect of back and sidelobes from the feed antenna, which can easily generate  reflection from the ground surface. 
One method of radiating circular polarization is to use an equi-angular spiral  antenna. The dispersive nature of this type of antenna causes an increase in the dura - tion of the transmitted waveforms, and the radiated pulse takes the form of a “chirp” FIGURE 21.18  Radiated field pattern from a resis - tively loaded dipole element due to an applied impulse   (Courtesy IEE ) ch21.indd   26 12/17/07   2:51:32 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. 
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Ground Penetrating Radar.  GROUND PENETRATING RADAR  21.276x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 21 in which high frequencies are radiated first, followed by the low frequencies. A “spik - ing” filter, which may take the form of a conventional matched filter, however, may  compensate for this effect, or a more sophisticated filter such as Wiener filter, which  recovers the original shape of the waveform, applied to the antenna. 
It is important to appreciate the effect of the material in close proximity to the  antenna. In general this material, which in most cases will be soil or rocks or indeed  ice, can be regarded as a lossy dielectric and by its consequent loading effect can play  a significant role in determining the low frequency performance of the antenna and  hence GPR. The behavior of the antenna is intimately linked with the material and,  in the case of borehole radars, the antenna actually radiates within a lossy dielectric,  whereas in the case of the GPR working above the surface, the antenna will radiate  from air into a very small section of air and then into a lossy half space formed by  the material. 
The behavior of antennas both within lossy dielectrics and over lossy  dielectrics is well reported. The propagation of electromagnetic pulses in a homoge - neous conducting earth has been modeled by Wait27 and King,28 and the dispersion of  rectangular source pulses suggests that the time-domain characteristics of the received  pulse could be used as an indication of distance. The interaction between the antenna and the lossy dielectric half space is also sig - nificant as this may cause modification of the antenna radiation characteristics both  spatially and temporally and should also be taken into account in the system design. 
 In the case of an antenna placed on an interface, the two most important parameters  are the current distribution and the radiation pattern. At the interface, currents on the  antenna propagate at a velocity, which is intermediate between that in free space and  that in the dielectric. In general, the velocity is retarded by the ( ) / εr+1 2 . 
The net  result is that evanescent waves are excited in air, whereas in the dielectric the energy  is concentrated and preferentially induced by a factor of n3:1. The respective calculated far-field power density patterns, in both air and dielectric,  are given by Rutledge29 (see Table 21.4), and these are plotted for a relative dielectric  constant of 9 in Figure 21.19 and Figure 21.20. For comparison, the far-field pattern  of a dipole radiating into free space is shown in Figure 21.21. 
The above expressions in Table 21.4 assume that the current source contacts the  dielectric, whereas a more general condition is when the antenna is just above the  dielectric. A significant practical problem for many applications is the need to main - tain sufficient spacing to avoid mechanical damage to the antenna. It can, therefore, be  appreciated that the effect of changes in distance between the antenna and half space is  to cause significant variation in the resultant radiation patterns in the dielectric. 
A particularly useful antenna capable of supporting a forward traveling TEM wave  is the TEM horn. In general, such antennas consist of a pair of conductors either  Power Power Plane Radiation pattern in dielectric x direction Radiation pattern in dielectric y direction  H αηcos cos c osq q qa a d +  2 αηη ηcos cos c osq q qd a d +  2  E αηcos c os cos c osq q q qa d a d+  2 αηη ηcos c os cos c osq q q qa d a d+  2TABLE 21.4  Power Density Patterns in Air and Dielectric ch21.indd   27 12/17/07   2:51:39 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. 
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Ground Penetrating Radar. 21.28  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 21 flat, cylindrical, or conical in cross section, forming a V structure in which radiation  propagates along the axis of the V structure. Although resistive termination is used,  this type of antenna has a directivity on the order of 10–15 dB depending on size;  hence, useful gain can still be obtained even with a terminating loss on the order of FIGURE 21.19  E-plane plot of far-field power density of a current element  radiating into a lossless material of dielectric constant of 900 −1 −1−2 −2 −20 1 2 2−3 −4−4 Horizontal distance in arbitrar y unitsDepth in arbitrary units FIGURE 21.20  H-plane plot of far-field power density of a current  element radiating into a lossless material of dielectric constant of 900 −1 −1−2 −2 −20 1 2 2−3 −4−4 Horizontal distance in arbitrar y unitsDepth in arbitrary units ch21.indd   28 12/17/07   2:51:40 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Ground Penetrating Radar.  GROUND PENETRATING RADAR  21.296x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 21 3 dB to 5 dB. 
A further development of the TEM horn is given by Martel21 in which  the antenna is composed of a set of spread “fingers” forming the shape of a horn as  shown in Figure 21.22. Each finger is a wire with a diameter of 1 mm and is resis - tively loaded at different locations along the length of the antenna. The feed compo - nent for the antenna is comprised of a 50 Ohm coax, feeding a tapered parallel plate  waveguide with a width of 30 mm and a height of 7 mm. 
A taper along the width of  the top parallel plate is used as a transition to transform a 50 Ohm unbalanced line  into a 50 ohm balanced line.FIGURE 21.21  H-plane plot of far-field power density of a current element  radiating into free space 120 150 180 210 240 270 θ3003300306090 0.8 0.6 0.4 0.2 FIGURE 21.22  Antenna and feed geometry of loaded TEM horn, L = 30  cm (Courtesy IEE )L WH7 mm30 mm ch21.indd   29 12/17/07   2:51:41 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Ground Penetrating Radar. 
21.30  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 21 The predicted and actual time-domain pulse of the optimum design is shown in  Figure 21.23.The shape of the time-domain antenna response is similar to a second  derivative gaussian signal. It can be seen that most of the internal reflections have been  suppressed. The rate of decrease for the unwanted ringing is better than 9 dB/ns. 
The  VSWR was better than 2:1 from 100 MHz to 5.8 GHz. There are many configurations of antenna that can be used; crossed dipoles and  parallel dipoles are the most popular. The main reason for the use of two antennas is  that TR switches that are fast enough for GPR are not yet available. 
21.8 SIGNAL AND IMAGE PROCESSING The three basic permutations of GPR data presentation are shown in Figure 21.24. The  most basic GPR data record is an A-scan. An A-scan provides amplitude-time record  of a single measurement over a target. 
Only amplitude-range information is plotted.  GPR is generally used in such a way as to generate a sequence of A-scans related to  the survey position on the ground surface. This sequence can be termed a B-scan and  an example is shown in Figure 21.24. 
This effectively represents one axis ( z) depth and  the orthogonal axis ( x or y) linear position. The amplitude of the signal may be shown  as a series of overlapping signals or, alternatively, a “wiggle plot” (borrowed from  seismic terminology) or a grayscale-coded intensity plot or a pseudo-color image. In  the modeled example shown, the hyperbolic spreading of the target spatial response  can be seen. 
As shown in Figure 21.24, a C-scan consists of a plan view ( x, y plane  over a defined range of depth z). Note that these terms are not the same as used in  conventional radar display. The received time waveform can be described as the convolution of a number of  time functions each representing the impulse response of some component of the radar  system in addition to noise contributions from various sources. 
Note that two antennas  are used: one transmits and one receives.  s t s t s t s t s t s t s tr s c t ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ) ( ) = ⊗ ⊗ ⊗ ⊗ ⊗af gf gr⊕ ⊕ +s t n tar( ) ( ) (21.12) where  ss(t)  = signal applied to the antenna  sad(t)  = antenna impulse response  sc(t)  = antenna cross coupling responseFIGURE 21.23  Predicted and actual pulse responses of loaded TEM horn antenna  (Courtesy IEE )20? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? 21 25 Time (ins)26 30Ch. 2 = 80.00 mVolts/div  Timebase = 1.00 ns/divOffset = 0.000 Volts Delay = 240.180 ns250.180 ns 240.180 ns 245.180 ns 29 27 28 24 23 22 ch21.indd   30 12/17/07   2:51:43 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Ground Penetrating Radar.  GROUND PENETRATING RADAR  21.316x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 21  sgd(t)  = ground impulse response  st(t)  = impulse response of target  n(t) =  noise (d denotes direction— f being forward and r reverse direction) Each contribution has its own particular characteristics that need to be consid - ered carefully before application of a particular processing scheme. 
Ideally the signal  applied to the antenna should be a Dirac function but practically it is more like a  skewed gaussian impulse of defined time duration. Most antennas used in surface  penetrating applications have a limited low frequency response and tend to act as  high-pass filters, effectively differentiating the applied impulse and hence creating a  time-limited function. In most cases, near identical antenna are used, and if these are  spaced sufficiently far from the ground surface, then saf(t) = sar(t). 
In the case of anten - nas operated in close proximity to the ground, then both saf(t) and sar(t) are variant with  FIGURE 21.24  Coordinate system for scan description  (Courtesy IEE ) orz z zz x xxx yA SCAN B SCAN C SCANy yy ch21.indd   31 12/17/07   2:51:43 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Ground Penetrating Radar. 
21.32  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 21 changes in the ground surface electrical parameters. Essentially the impedance of the  antenna is changed by its proximity to the ground; hence it cannot be considered to  have a stable impulse response. Any processing scheme that relies on invariant antenna parameters should take into  account the mode of operation of the antennas and the degree of stability that is prac - tically realizable. 
The antenna cross coupling response sc (t) is composed of a fixed  contribution s′c(t) due to antenna cross coupling in air and a variable contribution s″c(t)  due to the effect of the ground or nearby objects. Hence sc(t) = s′c(t) + s″c(t). It has been  found possible to reduce the amplitude of sc(t) to very low levels, in the case of crossed  dipole antennas to below –70 dB simply by attention to the precision of construction,  and in the case of parallel dipole antennas to below –60 dB by the interposing between  the antennas of suitable absorbing material. 
However, s″c(t) can be significantly larger  and degrades the overall value of sc(t) to –40 dB. The value of sa(t) is determined by  any local inhomogeneities in the soil or by any covering material whether of mineral or  vegetable origin. There is unfortunately little that can be done to predict variations in  s″c(t), and it is not amenable to treatment by many processing algorithms. 
The variation  in s″c(t) is much greater with the crossed dipole antenna than the parallel dipole. The  ground impulse response  sg(t) can be determined from its attenuation and dielectric  constant across the frequency range of interest. The target impulse response can be composed of the convolution of the wanted  target response, together with many other reflectors, which may not be wanted by the  user but which are valid reflecting targets as far as electromagnetic waves are con - cerned. 
The time separation of the targets is related to their physical spacing as well as  the velocity of propagation, which can vary depending on the material properties. Where the targets are well separated in range, it is relatively straightforward to  separate the radar reflections, but this becomes progressively more difficult as targets  become closer together, as instead of separable time-domain signatures the reflections  will merge together. As the antennas generally used for GPR have poor directivity, the pattern of the  reflected waveform in the B-scan represented the spatial convolution of the antenna  pattern with the target. 
The reader is referred to Figure 21.13, shown previously, which  illustrates this effect. This spatial pattern does not represent an image of the object of  interest and much effort has been made to develop methods to reconstruct the target  image from GPR data. FIGURE 21.25  Envelope of A-scan sample time series ( Courtesy IEE ) Amplitude τAmplitude  Probability  Distribution ch21.indd   32 12/17/07   2:51:44 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Ground Penetrating Radar.  GROUND PENETRATING RADAR  21.336x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 21 Deconvolving the image using any of the following processes can do this; syn - thetic aperture processing, conjugate gradient methods, and reverse time migration are  extensively reported in the literature. 
Many of these techniques work well on isolated  targets such as pipes, which have well-defined geometrical boundaries. The situation  is more difficult with stratified layers and, of course, anisotropic materials. When a reconstructed image of the buried object is created, whether as a B-scan  or C-scan (area at a particular range of depths), it is necessary to interpret the radar  image as being generated by a physical structure. 
This is not always easy in the case of  a cluttered image, and a great deal still depends on the field experience of the operator.  Examples of unprocessed B-scan data and the same corrected for spreading loss and  attenuation are shown in Figure 21.26 and Figure 21.27. Although a C-scan is essentially an x, y plane at a selected value of Z or range of  values of Z, many of the processes described in the previous section can be applied.FIGURE 21.26  B-scan unprocessed data ( Courtesy IEE ) FIGURE 21.27  B-scan data corrected for spreading loss and attenuation  (Courtesy IEE ) ch21.indd   33 12/17/07   2:51:45 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Ground Penetrating Radar. 21.34  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 21 Remembering that a GPR B-scan results in a hyperbolic cross section from a  target, then an area scan (C-scan) will result in a hyperboloid of revolution whose  vertical axis runs through the target. 
A plane orthogonal to the vertical axis will gener - ate a circular feature whose radius increases with depth. A typical example is given  in Figure 21.28, which shows the C-scans from an anti-tank mine buried at different  depths with the center of the mine shown as an overlay. These images represent an  unfocussed representation of the target as a result of the 3D spatial convolution of the  antenna pattern with the target. 
The variability of ground conditions, as well as the physics of EM wave propa - gation and reflection, must be carefully taken into account in attempting to classify  targets even after image processing. For example, the depth image of a void is always  apparently smaller than its physical size; corner reflectors of any reasonable size gen - erate large apparently discontinuous reflection images; and conductive targets, which  reverberate by means of stored energy, create extended depth images. The image of  a buried target generated by a GPR will not, of course, correspond to its geometrical  representation. 
The fundamental reasons for this are related to the ratio of the wave - length of the radiation and the physical dimensions of the target. In most cases for  GPR, the ratio is close to unity. This compares very differently with an optical image,  which is obtained with wavelengths such that the ratio is considerably greater than  unity (typically 100,000:1). 
In GPR applications, the effect of combinations of scat - tering planes, for example, the corner reflector, can cause “bright spots” in the image,  and variations in the velocity of propagation can cause dilation of the aspect ratio of  the image. Although many images can be focused to reduce the effect of antenna beam  spreading, regeneration of a geometric model is a much more complex procedure and  is not usually attempted. The general objective of signal processing as applied to GPR is to present either  an image that can readily be interpreted by the operator or to classify the target return  with respect to a known test procedure or template. 
The general processing problem encountered in dealing with GPR data is in the  widest sense the extraction of a localized wavelet function from a time series, which  displays very similar time-domain characteristics to the wavelet. This time series is  generated by signals from the ground and other reflecting surface, as well as internally  from the radar system. Unlike conventional radar systems in which the target can gen - erally be regarded as being in motion compared with the clutter, in the GPR case, the  target and the clutter are spatially fixed and the radar antenna is moved with respect  to the environment. 
It is assumed that data are recorded to an adequate resolution. Most antennas used  in surface penetrating applications have a limited low-frequency response and tend to  act as high-pass filters effectively differentiating the applied impulse. As the ground  acts as a low pass filter, the ground largely defines the bandwidth of reflected signal. 
 FIGURE 21.28  Sequence of unfocussed C-scans of a set of a buried AT mine targets at depth  increments of 10 mm ( Courtesy IEE ) ch21.indd   34 12/17/07   2:51:45 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Ground Penetrating Radar. 
 GROUND PENETRATING RADAR  21.356x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 21 In the case of antennas operated in close proximity to the ground, the antenna charac - teristics may vary as a result of changes in the ground surface electrical parameters.  Any processing scheme that assumes the antenna parameters remain constant needs  to account for the mode of operation of the antennas and the degree of stability that is  practically realizable. This is a particular issue for GPR and needs careful attention to  reduce the effect of antenna-ground surface interaction. 
Some of the ancillary requirements of an operational GPR system need to be con - sidered. Accurate, high-resolution, low-cost position referencing systems for use with  radar for subsurface survey techniques are now available. It is important that data can  be related to a true geographic reference particularly when filed on digital mapping  systems and used to define areas of safe working. 
Another consideration is the plane of polarization of the electromagnetic energy.  For targets with one large area dimension such as a pipe, the radar cross-scattering  section will be larger when the polarization vector is in line with the pipe. This means  that any area that is surveyed with, say, parallel dipoles must be surveyed in orthogonal  directions to ensure that no targets are missed. 
The same requirement also relates to  crossed dipole antennas. 21.9 APPLICATIONS It is only possible to provide a brief summary of the wide variety of the applications  for GPR, which has in some cases become an established and routine method of sub - surface investigation. GPR, in the hands of an expert, provides a safe and noninvasive  method of conducting speculative searches without the need for unnecessary disruption  and excavation. 
A typical example of a GPR image is shown in Figure 21.29 with the  various features identified. GPR has significantly improved the efficiency of the exploratory work that is fun - damental to the construction and civil engineering industries, the police and forensic  sectors, security/intelligence forces, and archaeological surveys. GPR has been very successfully used in forensic investigations. 
The most notori - ous case being in the United Kingdom in 1994, when the gravesites, under concrete  and in the house of Fred West, of the victims of the serial murderer were pinpointed.  In Belgium, the gravesites of the victims of the pedophile, Duteous, were detected  in 1996. FIGURE 21.29  Typical radar image of concrete floor showing rears, joints, mesh, etc: 1 ns pulse - width, horizontal markers every 10 cm, vertical scale 0.5 m ( Courtesy IEE ) Joints Steel Reinf orcing MeshRebar ch21.indd   35 12/17/07   2:51:47 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Ground Penetrating Radar. 21.36  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 21 Archaeological applications of GPR have been varied, ranging from the explora - tion of Egyptian and North American Indian sites as well as castles and monasteries  in Europe. 
The quality of the radar image can be exceptionally good, although correct  understanding normally requires joint interpretation by the archaeologists and radar  specialists. Since 1990, the Square Geophysical Survey Project, under the auspices of  the National Museum of Scotland and the Glasgow Museums, have been carrying out  geophysical and archaeological surveys at Square in Egypt. Square forms part of the  necropolis of the ancient Egyptian capital city of Memphis. 
The burial grounds extend  from Abu Roash, just to the north of Cairo, southward through Giza, Abusir, Saqqara,  and Dahshur to Meidum approximately 20 km to the south. The famous Step Pyramid of  the 3rd Dynasty ruler, King Zoser, dominates the site of Saqqara. The main monument  is known as the Gisr el-Mudir, which consists of a 400 meter east to west by 600 meter  north to south stone enclosure. 
The walls are of extremely crude construction, but mas - sive. This monument may constitute one of the oldest stone buildings in Egypt and  hence the world. One of the main goals of the project has been to determine what, if  anything, lies within the enclosure. 
Despite many years of surveying, nothing has been  found apart from a small area of mud brick pavement. A number of radar sections had  been measured over this area previously, and in view of the magnetometry results, the  radar profiles were reexamined. The sections have been measured on 25 meter centers,  so it was purely by chance that one radar survey line went straight down the flight of  steps (excavated) seen in Figure 21.30 with the radar image in Figure 21.31.FIGURE 21.30  Temple steps ( Courtesy IEE ) FIGURE 21.31  Radar section along the flight of steps  (Courtesy IEE ) ch21.indd   36 12/17/07   2:51:47 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Ground Penetrating Radar.  GROUND PENETRATING RADAR  21.376x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 21 Abandoned antipersonnel land mines and unexploded ordnance are a major hin - drance to the recovery of many countries from war. 
Their effect on the civilian popu - lation is disastrous and major efforts are being made by the international community  to clear the problem. Most detection is done with metal detectors, which respond to  the large amount of metallic debris in abandoned battlefield areas and hence have  difficulty in detecting the minimum metal or plastic mine. GPR technology is being  applied to this problem as a means of reducing the false alarm rate and providing  improved detection of low-metal-content mines. 
Typical examples of radar images at  various scales are shown in Figure 21.32 and Figure 21.33. GPR has been used for surveying many different types of geological strata rang - ing from exploration of the Arctic and Antarctic icecaps and the permafrost regions  of North America, to mapping of granite, limestone, marble, and other hard rocks as  well as geophysical strata. The radar data shown in Figure 21.34 were collected at  Finsterwalderbreen glacier, Svalbard, Norway, which is an island almost 80° north  of Norway. 
The glacier is an 11 km long, land-terminated glacier with an area of  35 square km. The glacier depth starts at 30 meters and increases down to 250 meters.  In the beginning of the profile, only the bottom echo is seen. 
At around 2 km horizontal  distance, some internal scattering from the glacier is seen. This is scattering from the  free water inside the glacier. From 4 km to 5 km, the bottom echo is difficult to see  due to scattering. 
The thickness of the various layers of a road can be measured using GPR techniques  as shown in Figure 21.25. The great advantage is that this method is nondestructive  and high speed (>40 km/hr) and can be applied dynamically to achieve a continuous  profile or rolling map. The accuracy of calibration tends to reduce as a function of FIGURE 21.32  Example of GPR image of TMA3 AT mine ( Courtesy IEE ) FIGURE 21.33  Example of AT mine images taken over a 4 m by 20 m test site with the MINDER GPR  radar system ( Courtesy IEE ) ch21.indd   37 12/17/07   2:51:48 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Ground Penetrating Radar. 21.38  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 21 depth because of the attenuation characteristics of the ground. 
The accuracy may be  quite high (i.e., a few millimeters) for the surface-wearing course, but will reduce to  centimeters at depths of one meter.FIGURE 21.34  Radar profiles along the centerline on Finsterwalderbreen glacier at  320–370 MHz ( from Hamran et al., 2000 ) 0 1000 2000 3000 Distance [m]Depth [m]0 50 100 150 200 250 FIGURE 21.35  Radar images using 1.5 GHz pulse duration along an 8-m long transversal  trace close to a joint of a highway concrete deck. Top: Polarization parallel to the dowels; bottom:  Polarization perpendicular to the dowels. ( Courtesy IEE) Position in m Position in mBackface of concreteDowels JointsTime in ns Time in nsBOE_ _009.DATBOE_ _006.DAT 0 0 1 2 3 40 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 5 6 70 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 0.00 0.06 0.12 0.18 0.24 0.00 0.06 0.12 0.18 0.24 0.300.30 Depth in m Depth in m ch21.indd   38 12/17/07   2:51:50 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Ground Penetrating Radar.  GROUND PENETRATING RADAR  21.396x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 21 It has been shown that it is feasible to detect AT mines in dry soil conditions using  airborne radar systems that operate over the frequency range 0.2–1 GHz. 
Figure 21.36  shows a radar image taken from an altitude of 400 meters above the Yuma desert.   The radar operated at a depression angle of 45°and achieved a nominal resolution of  80 cm. It was capable of detecting metal AT mines of 30-cm diameter buried at a depth  of 15–30 cm in a soil of conductivity 8–10 mmhos/m. 
Further details can be obtained  from SRI International USA. 21.10 LICENSING All countries require that GPR systems are properly regulated and operated in accor - dance with national and international requirements. Users should consult with their  national authorities to determine the regulatory environment. 
Within the European Union (EU), there are two main considerations govern - ing the use of GPR. These are the use first of the equipment as a deliberate radio  frequency radiator and second as an equipment that must satisfy the EMC require - ments of the EU. The European Telecommunications Standards Institute (ETSI)  regulatory body is in the process of drafting specifications and information can be  found at http://www.etsi.org that will cover the use of such equipment as a deliber - ate radio frequency radiator. 
Legislation and an ETSI product specification means  that this equipment will need to conform to the Radio & Telecommunications  Terminal Equipment (R&TTE) — Directive. In the short term, until a new prod - uct specification is introduced and formally published in the Official Journal of  the European Communities, the EMC Directive should be applied. All equip - ment, including ultrawideband radar or GPR, must be ( Conformité Européene)  CE marked to demonstrate that it satisfies the relevant directives of the European  Union. 
The CE mark may only be applied when the requirements of all other   relevant EU Directives, such as safety, have also been demonstrated. In the U.S.  the FCC web site30 provides current information and the limits are shown in  Figure 21.37.FIGURE 21.36  UWB SAR image of buried AT mines in the Yuma Desert, aircraft at 400 m altitude  (Courtesy SRI International USA, Dr. 
R. Vickers ) ch21.indd   39 12/17/07   2:51:50 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. 
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Ground Penetrating Radar. 21.40  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 21 REFERENCES  1. D. 
J. Daniels, Ground Penetrating Radar , 2nd Ed. IEE Radar Sonar Navigation and Avionics  Series, London: IEE Books, July 2004. 
 2. B. O. 
Steenson, “Radar methods for the exploration of glaciers,” Ph.D. dissertation, Calif. Inst. 
 Tech., Pasadena, CA, 1951.  3. S. 
Evans, “Radio techniques for the measurement of ice thickness,” Polar Record , vol. 11,   pp. 406–410, 1963. 
 4. R. R. 
Unterberger, “Radar and sonar probing of salt,” in 5th Int. Symp. on Salt , Hamburg  (Northern Ohio Geological Society), 1979, pp. 
423–437.  5. R. 
M. Morey, “Continuous sub-surface profiling by impulse radar,” in Proc. Conf. 
Subsurface  Exploration for Underground Excavation and Heavy Construction , Amer. Soc. Civ. 
Eng., 1974,  pp. 213–232.  6. 
P. K. Kadaba, “Penetration of 0.1 GHz to 1.5 GHz electromagnetic waves into the earth surface  for remote sensing applications,” in Proc. 
IEEE S.E. Region 3 Conf , 1976, pp. 48–50. 
 7. J. C. 
Cook, “Status of ground-probing radar and some recent experience,” in Proc. Conf.  Subsurface Exploration for Underground Excavation and Heavy Construction , Amer. 
Soc. Civ.  Eng., 1974, pp. 
175–194.  8. J. 
C. Cook, “Radar transparencies of mine and tunnel rocks,” Geophys ., vol. 40, pp. 
865–885,  1975.  9. K. 
C. Roe and D. A. 
Ellerbruch, “Development and testing of a microwave system to measure coal  layer thickness up to 25 cm,” Nat. Bur. Stds., Report No.SR-723-8-79 (Boulder, CO), 1979. 
10. B. Nilsson, “Two topics in electromagnetic radiation field prospecting,” Ph.D. 
dissertation,  University of Lulea, Sweden, 1978. 11. D. 
J. Daniels, Surface Penetrating Radar , IEE Radar Sonar Navigation and Avionics Series 6,  London: IEE Books, 1996. 12. 
See Reference 1.FIGURE 21.37  FCC emission limitsfc greater than 3.1 GHz fc less than 960 MHz Part 15 Limit Frequency in GHz101100UWB EIRP Emission Level in dBm −70−65−60−55−50−45−40 ch21.indd   40 12/17/07   2:51:51 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Ground Penetrating Radar. 
 GROUND PENETRATING RADAR  21.416x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 21 13. Cook and Bernfeld, Radar Signals, An Introduction to Theory and Application , Norwood, MA:  Artech House, p. 9. 
14. M. Skolnik, Radar Handbook , 2nd Ed., New York: McGraw-Hill, 1990, Chap. 
10. 15. F. 
Nathanson, Radar Design Principles , New York: McGraw-Hill, 1969, Chap. 8. 16. 
Wehner, High Resolution Radar , Chap 4. 17. Galati, Advanced Radar Techniques and Systems , IEE Radar Sonar Navigation and Avionics  Series V ol. 
4 London: IEE Books, 1993, p. 104. 18. 
Astanin and Kostylev, Ultra-wideband Radar Measurements Systems , IEE Radar Sonar  Navigation and Avionics Series, Vol. 7, London: IEE Books, 1997, Chap. 1. 
19. M. T. 
Tuley, J. M Ralston, F. S. 
Rotondo, A. M. Andrews, and AE. 
M. Rosen, “Evaluation  of EarthRadar unexploded ordnance testing at Fort A.P. Hill, Virginia,” IEEE Aerospace and  Electronics Systems Magazine , vol. 
17, issue 5, pp. 10–12, May 2002. 20. 
P. Debye, Polar Molecules , New York: Chemical Catalog Co., 1929. 21. 
K. S. Cole and R. 
S. Cole, “Dispersion and absorption in dielectrics, I, alternating current  characteristics,” J. Phys. 
Chem ., vol. 9, pp. 341–351, 1941. 
22. D. J. 
Daniels, “Resolution of UWB signals,” IEE Proc. Radar Sonar and Navigation , vol. 146,  pp. 
189–194, August 1999. 23. C. 
Martel, M. Philippakis, and D. J. 
Daniels, “Time domain design of a TEM horn antenna for  GPR,” presented at Millennium Conference on Antennas and Propagation, April 2000. 24. D. 
J. Daniels,  “An assessment of the fundamental performance of GPR against buried land - mines,” presented at SPIE Detection and Remediation Technologies for Mines and Minelike  Targets XII, Orlando , FL, April 2007 25. G. 
Denniss “Solid-state linear FMCW systems –their promise and their problems,” in Proc. IEEE  Int. Mic. 
Conf ., Atlanta, GA, 1974, pp, 340–345. 26. R. 
M. Narayanan, Y . Xu, P. 
D. Hoffmeyer, and J. O. 
Curtis, “Design, performance, and applica - tions of a coherent random noise radar,” Optical Engineering , 37(6), pp. 1855–1869, June 1998. 27. 
J. Sachs, P. Peyerl, F. 
Tkac, and M. Kmec, “Digital ultra-wideband-sensor electronics integrated  in SiGe-technology,” in Proc. of the EuMC , vol. 
II, Milan, Italy, September 2002, pp. 539–542. 28. 
J. Sachs and P. Peyerl, “Chip integrated UWB radar electronics,” presented at Third DTIF  Workshop, Ground Penetrating Radar in Support of Humanitarian Demining , JRC, Ispra, Italy,  September 2002. 
29. J. R. 
Wait, “Propagation of electromagnetic pulses in a homogeneous conducting earth,” Appl.  Sci. Res. 
B , vol. 8, pp. 213–253, 1960. 
30. R. W. 
P. King and T. T. 
Nu, “The propagation of a radar pulse in sea water,” J. Appl. Phys .,   73, (4), pp. 
1581–1589, 1993. 31. D. 
B. Rutledge and M. S. 
Muha, “Imaging antenna arrays,” IEEE Trans , AP130, (Q), pp. 533–540,  1982. 32. 
Federal Communications Commission, http://www.fcc.gov/aboutus.html. ch21.indd   41 12/17/07   2:51:51 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. 
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Ground Penetrating Radar. 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 21   blind folio 21.42 ch21.indd   42 12/17/07   2:51:51 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. 
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Ground Penetrating Radar. 