12.16x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 12
Reflector Antennas
Michael E. Cooley and Daniel Davis
Electronic Systems  
Northrop Grumman Corporation
12.1 INTRODUCTION
Role of the Radar Reflector Antenna.  Radar reflector antennas provide the 
means by which the transmit (receive) energy and its associated waveform is radiated 
into (coupled from) free space. In transmit mode, the antenna launches a guided wave 
from the transmitter into free space and typically focuses this radiated energy over a 
limited angular range or beamwidth. In receive mode, the reflector antenna operates in 
a reciprocal manner, receiving reflected radar target energy, i.e., echoes, from a limited 
angular range. These received echoes are then converted into guided waves that are 
amplified and subsequently processed in the radar receiver.
Typically, the radar reflector antenna must be designed to enable beam scanning 
over the field-of-view (FOV) via either mechanical or electronic means (or some com -
bination of both). In Section 12.4, methods of electronic beam scanning (limited FOV) 
using array feeds are discussed. Thus, the radar reflector antenna performs several 
important functions: (1) It converts the guided wave from the transmitter to a radiated 
wave (or vice versa on receive); (2) It concentrates or collimates the radiated energy 
into a directive beam of specified gain and beamwidth; (3) It collects the reflected 
energy scattered from the radar target; and (4) It supports beam scanning via either 
electronic or mechanical means (or both).
Antenna Beam Scanning.  For most radar applications, the trade or choice 
between a reflector antenna and a direct radiating phased array is typically driven by 
factors relating to scan rate, scan volume, and cost. Reflector antennas are typically 
employed in a radar when (1) slower scan rates are sufficient and mechanical scan -
ning suffices, and/or (2) a very high gain (electrically large) aperture is required and a 
phased array, i.e., an electronic scanning array (ESA), is cost prohibitive, and/or (3) the 
required scan volume is limited and can be satisfied via use of an array-fed reflector. 
During the 1980s and 1990s, phase shifter and T/R module technology greatly matured 
and ESA costs dropped dramatically. These advances have resulted in increased inter -
est and utilization of ESAs for wide scan radar applications, and array-fed reflectors 
where limited electronic scan suffices.
Advantages and Applications of the Radar Reflector Antenna.  In the previous 
paragraph, the proliferation of ESA antennas in modern radar systems is linked to the Chapter 12
ch12.indd   1 12/17/07   2:30:48 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Source: RADAR HANDBOOK 12.2  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 12
dramatic T/R module cost reductions and technology improvements. The improved per -
formance of ESA radars is cited as a reason for decreased utilization of reflector antennas 
in many of today’s radar system designs.
However, there are still applications where the reflector antenna is well suited to radar 
applications and will continue to find applications in the future. Three relevant examples of 
radar applications well suited to the use of reflector antennas are briefly described below.
Low Cost Radar.  For very cost-constrained applications where mechanical scan 
rates suffice, reflector antennas are still the dominant choice. One such niche is com -
mercial weather radar, e.g., NEXRAD and TDWR.
V ery High-Gain, Long-Range Radar .  For very high-gain radar applications, the cost 
of an ESA is typically still prohibitive, and the reflector provides an economical means of 
realizing such high gains. Two examples of long-range radar applications generally requir -
ing very high antenna gains are (1) missile defense radar and (2) space-based radar.
Limited Scan Radars.  Some radars operate over a limited field-of-view and/or the 
requirements dictate fast electronic scanning over a small FOV and slower mechanical 
scanning over a larger field of view. ESA-fed reflector architectures are well suited for 
such applications and are described in greater detail in Section 12.3. Three relevant exam -
ples are (1) missile defense radar, (2) space-based radar, and (3) ground-based search and 
track radar (1D azimuth electronic scanning suffices for some of these applications).
Classification of Reflector Antennas.  Radar reflector antennas can be classified in 
various ways. One useful classification criteria is electrical design, i.e., the reflector optics 
configuration. Table 12.1 provides a summary level comparison of some common radar 
 Single Reflector 
ParabolicCylindrical 
Reflector Dual Reflector 
(Cassegrain or 
Gregorian)Confocal 
ParaboloidsSpherical and 
Torus
Electronic 
Scanning
(Escan)•  Limited in both 
Azimuth and 
Elevation
•  Achieved via 
Feed switching•  Wide 1D 
scanning
•  Uses ESA 
line source 
for wide 1D 
scanning•  Limited in both 
Azimuth and 
Elevation
•  Achieved via 
feed switching•  Uses planar 
ESA source
•  Typically 
limited, but 
tradable 
by varying 
magnification•  Potential for 
very wide 1D 
scanning (torus) 
or 2D Scanning 
(spherical)
•  Achieved via 
feed switching 
Aperture 
Efficiency
Feed 
Type(s)•  Medium to high
•  No escan : Single 
horn
•  Escan : Array 
(switched feeds)•  Medium to 
high
•  1D ESA line  
source• High
•  No escan :  
Single horn
•  Escan : Array 
(switched feeds)• High
•  2D ESA 
planar source•  Modest to low
•  Switched 
beam array on 
circular arc 
(torus reflector) 
or spherical 
arc (spherical 
reflector)
Blockage 
Concerns•  Mitigate feed 
blockage via 
offset geometry•  Mitigate feed  
blockage 
via offset 
geometry•  Mitigate feed 
blockage via  
offset geometry
•  Can move feed 
behind reflector•   Mitigate feed 
blockage 
via offset 
geometry•  Serious 
concern for 
very wide scan 
configurationsTABLE 12.1  Comparison of Key Features of Reflector Architectures
ch12.indd   2 12/17/07   2:30:49 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Reflector Antennas  REFLECTOR ANTENNAS  12.36x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 12
reflector architectures from this perspective. More detailed discussions of the characteris -
tics of these architectures are included in Section 12.3 wherein each of these architectures 
is afforded a dedicated subsection. Another means of classification is via platform (vehi -
cle) or site (ground-based, ship-based, airborne, or space-borne). The platform frequently 
drives mechanical and environmental requirements and often either enables or constrains 
the reflector size. In Section 12.3, reflector architectures are discussed and compared, and 
in Section 12.6, mechanical and environmental design considerations are addressed.
Chapter Synopsis.  The balance of this chapter is divided into five sections. 
Section 12.2 summarizes the basic design principles and parameters governing reflec -
tor antenna design. Section 12.3 provides a brief overview of conic sections and classes 
of reflector systems and associated optics. Section 12.4 discusses various types of 
reflector feeds and related design principles. Section 12.5 describes reflector analysis 
and synthesis methods and associated design software packages. Finally, Section 12.6 
briefly reviews mechanical design issues and considerations.
12.2 BASIC PRINCIPLES AND PARAMETERS
Fundamentally, reflectors are antennas that work on optical principles, on receive, 
focusing energy to a focal point as a lens does for light. On transmit, power emanat -
ing spherically from a low gain, broad-patterned feed is reflected and energy is col -
limated to form a plane wave thereby providing increased antenna gain and a narrower 
beamwidth. In discussing antennas, one can use either transmit or receive arguments 
because antennas are reciprocal devices. This means that both the transmit and receive 
performance of a passive antenna, e.g., patterns, gain, losses, etc., can be predicted 
using basic aperture antenna principles. In this section, these basic reflector design 
principles are reviewed via use of a canonical example.
Consider a parabolic-shaped reflector forming a circular aperture, fed by a horn at 
a central focal point. This simple reflector configuration has a surface shape defined 
by the equation
 zx y
ff =+−2 2
4 (12.1)
where f is the focal length and the vertex is located at z = −f. The resultant antenna 
beam pattern points in the positive z-direction. For a round reflector of diameter D, the 
edge or rim is a circle and the edge dimensions are on this circle defined by
 x yD
edge edge2 22
4+ =
 (12.2)
This reflector is shown in Figure 12.1.
One frequently is interested in the angle a from the z-axis to points on the reflector 
surface:
 α=+ 

 222 2
arctanx y
f
 (12.3)
ch12.indd   3 12/17/07   2:30:52 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Reflector Antennas 12.4  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 12
Thus, the edge angle for a round reflector is
 αedge=

 24arctanD
f (12.4)
Another useful parameter is the distance r from the focal point to a point on the reflector:
 r fx y
f= ++2 2
4 (12.5)
Aperture Gain and Losses.  The gain of the reflector antenna is one of its most 
important parameters. It is convenient to describe the reflector antenna gain with ref -
erence to the fundamental gain limit an aperture of area A. This limit, applicable to 
aperture antennas of sufficient electrical size (approximately 25 square wavelengths 
or greater), is the so-called aperture gain Gap,
 GA
ap=4
2π
λ (12.6)−20−15−10−505101520
−20−15−10 −5 0X
zaedge
fDrXX
a
FIGURE 12.1  Parabolic reflector in x-z plane
ch12.indd   4 12/17/07   2:30:56 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Reflector Antennas  REFLECTOR ANTENNAS  12.56x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 12
where l is the wavelength. For a round reflector of diameter D, this aperture gain 
limit is
 apGD=

π
λ2
 (12.7)
In practice, it is sometimes useful to describe reflector gain by decrementing the 
aperture gain by subtracting various aperture radiation losses such as spillover, taper 
efficiency, feed blockage, reflector leakage, surface distortion, strut blockage, feed align -
ment, etc., from Gap. These loss factors are described in detail later within this section.
Directive Gain and Feed Losses.  Directive gain or directivity is a measure of 
the peak power relative to the average power radiated by an isotropic radiator, i.e., a 
radiator that radiates energy equally in all directions. Directive gain considers only the 
radiated power; thus, antenna losses such as feed mismatch, feed loss, and waveguide 
and/or cable losses must also be considered. However, the radar engineer typically 
tabulates these losses separately for use in other radar calculations. Antenna directiv -
ity is an imposing calculation requiring volume integrals, but typical reflector pattern 
computation codes express the pattern in terms of directivity, and the antenna losses 
are generally accounted for separately. In the text that follows, reflector directivity is 
described based upon available “aperture gain” and associated radiation losses. This 
approach should be intuitive to the radar engineer.
Aperture-Field Method of Analysis.  The aperture-field reflector analysis 
method is based upon ray-tracing principles and works well for symmetric, center-fed 
parabolic reflectors. With this method, the aperture field distribution is calculated in an 
x-y plane at z > 0 (Figure 12.1) by assuming coherent reflection of spherical radiation 
from a feed at the focal point. The field distribution is then used to compute the far-
field radiation pattern. For more complex geometries, e.g., offset-fed reflectors, this 
method does not work as well as the more rigorous physical optics (PO) method that 
is described in Section 12.4.
For the simple center-fed focal feed example shown in Figure 12.1, the simpler 
aperture-field method of analysis is accurate and its application is simple and straight -
forward and makes the discussion of the radiation losses easier to follow. Using this 
method of analysis, the field amplitude on an x-y grid, Fgrid, in the aperture plane is 
easily determined from the feed and space tapering:
 F x y F x yzf
rF x y z
xgrid feedfeed( ,) ( , ,)( ,, )= =
+12+ +y
f2
24 (12.8)
where Ffeed is the feed radiation pattern. For this case, with the feed at the focal point, 
the total distance traveled from the feed to the reflector and back to the aperture-plane 
is equal. This expression is deceptively simple and accurately accounts for the feed-
reflector transformations and area projections.1,2
The resultant aperture field, F v(ˆ), is then transformed to the far field using the 
spatial transformation:
 F v F x y ej x i y ix y(ˆ) ( , )ˆ ˆ ˆ=+( ) •
grid2π
λv v
x y,∑
 (12.9)
ch12.indd   5 12/17/07   2:31:01 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Reflector Antennas 12.6  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 12
where ˆvis a unit vector in the direction of interest. Note that Eq. 12.9 is a simple 2D 
spatial summation analogous to that used for array antenna pattern calculations.
Taper Efficiency.  In antenna design, aperture taper is used to lower sidelobes. 
The modest resultant loss and increased beamwidth is the price and one is usually 
willing to pay to obtain the desired sidelobe level. The loss associated with aperture 
taper is accounted for in the taper efficiency. However, the taper efficiency is not an 
ohmic loss where energy is dissipated, but is a redistribution of energy. In the case of 
a reflector fed by a horn, the taper distribution is determined by the feed horn pattern, 
the distance to the reflector, and the projected area in the direction of peak radiation. 
For a radially symmetric feed and reflector, where the field is radially symmetric and 
Fgrid(x,y) = g(r), the efficiency, h, is computed as
 ηπ
π π=∫
∫ ∫g r r dr
g r r dr r dr( )
( )2
2 22
2
 (12.10)
Spillover Loss.  Spillover loss refers to feed power that misses, or spills over, the  
edges of the reflector. In the radar reflector design process, one typically adjusts the 
edge illumination to achieve a desired taper and sidelobe level resulting in modest 
spillover loss. Spillover loss is the feed power that is lost via radiation beyond the 
edges of the reflector. This loss can be computed as
 Spillover Loss T otalFeedPowe rFeedPowe r= −1IncidentonReflector
Total FeedPowe r

 
 (12.11)
For a radially symmetric feed and reflector, this calculation is straightforward.
Edge diffraction and resultant antenna backlobes are a related consequence of 
feed spillover and edge taper. For any given reflector design, edge illumination of the 
reflector will produce radiation behind the reflector due to diffraction. This diffraction 
may be thought of as re-radiation from the edge of the reflector that causes radiation 
lobes behind the reflector. For a center-fed reflector such as that shown in Figure 12.2, 
a primary backlobe will arise directly behind the reflector due to coherent addition of 
the edge diffraction currents. One common means of specifying this backlobe level is 
via the front-to-back F/B ratio, i.e., the ratio of the main beam and backlobe gains. The 
analysis of these reflector edge diffraction effects and associated F/B ratios for some 
common reflector geometries are described by Knop.3
Feed Blockage.4,5 Many reflector systems suffer feed and/or feed-support 
blockage to some degree. For center-fed geometries, there will definitely be block -
age because the feed is within the FOV of the reflector. A consequence of blockage 
is higher sidelobes, the levels of which depend upon the blockage area. Another con -
sequence is loss due to blockage and depends upon the blocked electric field to main 
electric field ratio, Eb/Em, which, in turn, is determined from the ratio of blocked power 
to total power on the main reflector, Pb/Pm, and ratio of the gain of the blocking object 
to the gain of the main reflector, Gb/Gm:
 E
EP
PG
Gb
mb
mb
m

=2
 (12.12)
ch12.indd   6 12/17/07   2:31:05 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Reflector Antennas  REFLECTOR ANTENNAS  12.76x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 12
Reflector taper is often approximated by a radial amplitude distribution4
 g(r) = 1 − r2 (12.13)
where r is the radial distance normalized to the reflector radius and g(r) drops to zero 
at the edge. The use of this taper function leads to a simple blockage loss equation:
 P
Pg r dr
g r r drD
D
Gb
mb
m=∫
∫2
01
2
012
20 2
2( )
( )π
π
b b
mb
mGD
D=2
2η (12.14)
where h is the efficiency, as given in Eq. 12.10. Using Eq. 12.14 and Eq. 12.15 leads 
to the simple expression for blockage loss typically found in the literature5:
 E
ED
D
E
Eb
mb
m
b
m=
= −

= −2
1 12
2
2
BlockageLoss 2 22
22D
Db
m


 (12.15)
where Db and Dm are the diameter of the blockage and reflector, respectively.
The effective feed horn dimensions causing blockage may be different from the 
physical dimensions. If the walls are not tapered, such as shown in Figure 12.3, the 
effective size of the blockage hole can be larger than the projected obstacle area. 
FIGURE 12.2  Graphical representation of spill -
over loss
ch12.indd   7 12/17/07   2:31:08 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Reflector Antennas 12.8  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 12
For feeds with conducting walls, the effective H-plane width, w', is at least l/4 and 
increases with depth D:
 ′= + { } w w D max / , /λ λ4 2 (12.16)
where max indicates taking the larger of the two values. The increase in effective width 
can sometimes be reduced by adding capacitive loading, which can constrain the effec -
tive width to about a quarter wavelength wider than the physical width. The effective 
E-plane dimension is the same as the actual dimension.
Gain Optimization.  Three of the principal reflector antenna losses, taper effi -
ciency (loss), spillover, and blockage, have been explained in detail above. These 
design parameters (loss factors) affect one another and are often traded to optimize 
antenna performance, e.g., gain, sidelobes, etc. Other typical reflector losses, described 
later in this section, are resistive loss factors that simply reduce the antenna gain.
The design trades associated with taper efficiency, spillover, and blockage are 
illustrated by use of an example. Computed losses are shown in Figure 12.4 for a  
20-wavelength diameter center-fed circular reflector with a 10-wavelength focal 
length, and a gaussian feed horn (a horn with a radiation pattern described by a gauss -
ian function). The gaussian feed used in this sample analysis is a hypothetical feed 
with a radially symmetric pattern and very low spillover, and most typical feed horn 
patterns are well approximated by a gaussian feed model. The feed size determines the 
edge taper, i.e., the larger the feed, the greater the edge taper. The plot in Figure 12.4 
shows how the three loss terms, and the total loss, vary as a function of feed pattern 
edge taper, that is, the feed power directed at the edge of the reflector, relative to the 
feed pattern peak. This is used here because the feed pattern is measured independent 
of the reflector. When the edge taper is low, virtually all the power strikes the reflector 
and the loss is insignificant. As taper decreases, there is more spillover, and feed power 
misses the reflector, increasing the loss. On the other hand, with too much taper, the 
taper efficiency is poor because the reflector is under illuminated.
FIGURE 12.3  Capacitive loading to reduce feed horn blockage
ch12.indd   8 12/17/07   2:31:10 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Reflector Antennas  REFLECTOR ANTENNAS  12.96x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 12
Figure 12.4 demonstrates the gain optimization process with a hypothetical feed 
pattern, blockage, etc., and the total loss is 1.11 dB (77% efficiency) when a −9.5 dB 
edge taper is implemented. Although the plot of Figure 12.4 includes taper, blockage, 
and spillover losses, there are additional losses that must be included when assessing 
the overall aperture efficiency. These losses, e.g., feed blockage, surface reflection, 
feed mismatch, and resistive losses, etc., vary from system to system, but 0.8 dB is 
typical. With these additional losses, the overall loss becomes 1.91 dB or 64% aperture 
efficiency (typical for a single reflector system).
Sidelobe requirements must also be considered. As shown in Figure 12.5, for the 
same center-fed reflector system, the sidelobe level can be reduced by increasing the 
feed pattern edge taper.−2−1.8−1.6−1.4−1.2−1−0.8−0.6−0.4−0.20
−20 −17.5 −15 −12.5 −10 −7.5 −5
Feed Pattern Edge Taper in dBLoss in dB
TotalFeed Blockage
Spillover
Taper Efficiency
FIGURE 12. 4 Taper efficiency, spillover, blockage, and total loss vs. feed pattern edge taper
−40−35−30−25−20
−15 −12.5 −10 −7.5 −5
Feed Pattern Edge Taper in dBLoss in dBIncluding Blockage
Unperturbed
FIGURE 12. 5 Sidelobe levels, with and without blockage, vs. feed pattern  
edge taper
ch12.indd   9 12/17/07   2:31:11 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Reflector Antennas 12.10  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 12
Figure 12.5 also shows that feed blockage increases the sidelobe level; for example, 
with a –10 dB edge taper, one obtains –25.5 dB sidelobes rather than −27.5 dB side-
lobes. Figures 12.6 and 12.7 further illustrate this impact. This blockage effect can be 
modeled as a “hole” in the aperture that can be represented by a broad pattern with 
less gain. This blockage pattern is subtracted from unperturbed (unblocked) aperture 
fields, as shown in Figure 12.6.
The associated patterns, with and without blockage, are shown in Figure 12.7. The 
alternating large, small, large, and so on, sidelobe progression is characteristic of a 
blocked aperture.
Surface Leakage Loss.  Many reflector surfaces are designed with a grid, a wire-
mesh, or metalized fabric surface in order to minimize wind resistance, reduce weight, 
and/or enable stowage/deployment. Some common reflector mesh surface patterns are −0.200.20.40.60.81
0 5 10 15 20
AngleFields
BlockedUnperturbed
FIGURE 12. 6 Unperturbed field and field including feed blockage
−60−50−40−30−20−100
0 5 10 15 20
AngledBBlocked
Unperturbed
FIGURE 12. 7 Unperturbed pattern and pattern including blockage
ch12.indd   10 12/17/07   2:31:12 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Reflector Antennas  REFLECTOR ANTENNAS  12.116x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 12
shown in Figure 12.8. The mesh opening size is generally chosen to be as large as pos -
sible, but the gap, s, between conductors must be substantially less than l/2 to cutoff 
and prevent significant transmission of electromagnetic energy through the surface. 
The attenuation, in decibels, through the passage depth t is approximately 27 t/s, plus 
fringing losses, which are approximately 27( l /2s − 1).
The power passing through the reflector, or transmission loss, can be determined 
using a handy nomograph.6 One selects the grid spacing and thread radius to achieve 
the transmission loss required. The resulting loss in antenna gain is termed leakage 
loss, and the relationship between leakage loss and transmission loss is plotted in 
Figure 12.9 for a conductive reflector (no ohmic losses). The leakage loss vs. spacing 
relationship for Figure 12.8 a can also be computed using an equivalent circuit, with 
shunt susceptance, b, developed by Mumford,7 the source of the nomograph6:
 b
se
bd s= −
−


=+−λ
πln.
/0 83
1
1
12Leakage L oss/ /4 (12.17)
FIGURE 12. 8 Common reflector surface materials for reduced wind resistance: ( a) tubing, ( b) expanded 
metal, ( c) rectangular, ( d) double layer, and ( e) screen
ch12.indd   11 12/17/07   2:31:13 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Reflector Antennas 12.12  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 12
This nomograph6 is frequently used for the simple configurations in Figure 12.8 a. For 
other configurations and thread forms, the same equation can be used by computing 
an equivalent radius by matching the cross sectional areas.
One significant source of radiation in the back hemisphere is leakage through 
the reflector. This radiation level is determined from the difference between primary 
(feed horn) and secondary (reflector) gains and the leakage (loss) radiation through 
the mesh.
There are two considerations regarding the reflector surface leakage. The leakage 
loss affects the reflector gain directly. The radiation level in the back hemisphere is a 
function of the feed gain, reduced by the transmission loss through the reflector. Thus, 
the reflector designer must consider both the leakage loss and the transmission loss 
(Figure 12.9).
There are, however, additional backlobes that are distinct from the back radiation due 
to surface leakage. These additional lobes are due to reflector edge diffraction that adds 
coherently and typically causes a relatively strong main backlobe behind the reflector. 
Center-fed geometries, i.e., those with reflector edges equidistant from the feed, enable 
coherent addition of the diffracted energy directly to the rear of the reflector. For these 
geometries, the backlobe level is directly related to the edge illumination level.3
Surface Roughness Loss.  All radar reflector antennas, especially those that are 
mechanically scanned or deployed, require careful consideration of mechanical design 
details. First, the reflecting surface must be designed and built so that it remains within 
close tolerances (typically ± 0.03l) even under dynamic operating and environmental 
conditions. Also, the feed must be accurately aligned with respect to the reflector. The 
feed-support structure and the reflector stiffening structure must maintain the feed 
location and surface dimensions while the antenna is being rotated. This dimensional 
stability must be maintained through wind loading, temperature variations, or other 
environmental factors to ensure that pattern performance is maintained.−1.50−1.25−1.00−0.75−0.50−0.250.00
−25 −20 −15 −10 −5
Transmission Loss in dBLeakage Loss in dB
FIGURE 12. 9 Reflector leakage loss vs. transmission loss
ch12.indd   12 12/17/07   2:31:14 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Reflector Antennas  REFLECTOR ANTENNAS  12.136x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 12
Reflector antenna gain loss due to surface roughness has been discussed by John 
Ruze8,9 using a statistical point of view. The loss of gain due to small roughness errors 
is approximately9
 G
G022
1 14≈ − = −

 δπ ε
λ (12.18)
where δ2is the mean square phase error, e is the effective rms surface error, l is the 
wavelength, G0 is the gain without phase error, and G is the gain with phase error.
The roughness loss effects embodied in Eq. 12.18 are captured in Figure 12.10 
where gain loss vs. surface roughness (in lieu of phase 
error) is plotted. The plot shows that for 0.10 dB gain 
loss, the rms surface error must be less than 0.01 l. To 
maintain modest losses, surface errors must be tightly 
controlled.
Another consideration in mesh reflectors is system -
atic surface deformation. For many reflectors, a mesh 
is attached to a metal or composite backing structure. 
For spaceborne deployable reflectors, the mesh is typi -
cally a very sheer fabric-like membrane that is stretched 
across the surface and attached at a finite number of 
points to form the reflecting surface. In either case, 
there are surface distortions between the precisely con -
trolled mounting points. This sets up a systematic error 
in the form of periodic cusps (see Figure 12.11). These 
errors typically cause pattern grating lobes because these 
error cusps are normally several wavelengths apart.  
The grating lobes are easily recognizable based on their −4−3.5−3−2.5−2−1.5−1−0.50
0 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05 0.06
Roughness, ε/λLoss in dB
FIGURE 12.10  Surface roughness, e/l, vs. loss
FIGURE 12.11  Systematic dis -
placement between supports with 
a cusp between supports
ch12.indd   13 12/17/07   2:31:17 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Reflector Antennas 12.14  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 12
well-defined angular spacing. For a grid with supports, and associated errors, a distance 
s apart, the grating lobe appears at
 q = arcsin (s/l) (12.19)
The grating lobe amplitude depends on the depth of the distortion (Figure 12.11), 
and is typically
 Grating L obe=

42π ε
λ (12.20)
where e is the depth of the cusp.
Feed Displacement.  The permissible total error in the overall feed-reflector 
system alignment10–12 is generally restricted to l/8 or ±l/16. On the basis of this 
criterion, the resultant maximum deviation from the parabolic condition (feed at 
focus) would be ±l/32. Displacement of the feed along the focal axis (the z-axis in 
Figure 12.1) produces an even-order phase error on the aperture illumination. This 
results in modest beam broadening and some filling of the first null, but is normally 
not too detrimental.
Displacement of the feed normal to the z-axis produces an odd-order phase error in 
the aperture and causes higher sidelobes on one side of the beam. Furthermore, such 
displacement will cause the beam to mispoint. If the displacement is small, fixed, 
and known, one can typically calibrate out the fixed mispointing bias. However, if 
the displacement is random, say caused by vibration, the beam pointing error can be 
a problem. The reflector beam will be steered by q radians if the feed is displaced off 
axis by an amount e
 q = arctan(e /f), radians  (12.21)
where f is the focal length. So if the lateral feed displacement error is e, the beam 
pointing error, ∆q, is
 ∆θε
ε=+/
( /)f
f 12, radians
 (12.22)
Strut Blockage.  Struts are used to support the feed, and for center-fed reflec -
tors, typically form a tripod, as shown in Figure 12.12. Strut scattering is a complex 
phenomena that depends on strut size, strut geometry, field polarization, and other fac -
tors. However, in general, strut interference scattering will lie within a conical region 
about the strut axis. The strut is illuminated by a planar wavefront and one edge of the 
scattering cone lies on the reflector axis (see Figure 12.13). If the strut tilts at 30° to 
the axis, the scattering cone maximum angle is twice the tilt angle, or 60°. Thus, the 
scattering from three struts forms intersecting rings, as shown in Figure 12.14. This 
causes the most blockage at the pattern peak where the three rings intersect.
Polarization plays a significant role in strut scattering. For the example shown in 
Figure 12.12, strut #1 is parallel to the E-field and its blockage area is larger than its 
actual physical cross section. However, the lower struts, #2 and #3, are tilted 60° with 
respect to the E-field, and therefore appear smaller than their physical cross section.
ch12.indd   14 12/17/07   2:31:19 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Reflector Antennas  REFLECTOR ANTENNAS  12.156x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 12
−1−0.75−0.5−0.2500.250.50.751
−1−0.75−0.5−0.25 0 0.25 0.5 0.75 113 2
13 2
90°Off 
Axis
FIGURE 12.14  Axial view of 30° tripod strut blockage interference 
patternsReflected 
wavefrontStrut axisStrut
FIGURE 12.13  Strut 1 and maximum scattering cone 
−20−15−10−505101520
- -30∞E
HStrut 1 
- -30∞
Strut 3 Strut 2Reflector  
Edge
−5Strut 1
30°
0 −10 −20−15
FIGURE 12.12  Center-fed reflector with tripod struts, side view, and axial view
ch12.indd   15 12/17/07   2:31:21 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Reflector Antennas 12.16  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 12
12.3 REFLECTOR ANTENNA ARCHITECTURES
Reflector antennas are built in a wide variety of shapes and sizes with a corresponding 
variety of feed systems to illuminate the surface(s), each suited to its particular appli -
cation. Figure 12.15 illustrates the most common of these reflectors, each of which is 
described in some detail in the following subsections. The paraboloid in Figure 12.15 a 
collimates radiation from a feed at the focus into a pencil beam, providing high gain and 
minimum beamwidth. The parabolic cylinder in Figure 12.15 b performs this collima -
tion in one plane but allows the use of a linear array in the other plane, thereby allowing 
flexibility in either steering or shaping of the beam in that plane. If beam shaping (not 
scanning) is the goal, an alternative method using a single feed, in lieu of a linear array, 
is shown in Figure 12.15 c. Shaping of the surface along the vertical axis is used to spoil 
the beam shape in this plane, but because only the phase of the wave across the aperture 
is changed, there is less control over the beam shape than in the parabolic and/or phase 
cylinder shown in Figure 12.15 b wherein the linear array may be adjusted in amplitude.
Very often the radar designer needs multiple beams to provide increased coverage 
or to determine angle. Figure 12.15 d shows how multiple discrete feed locations pro -
duce a set of secondary beams at distinct angles. The additional feeds must be offset 
from the focus, and the resultant secondary beams will suffer some gain loss and dis -
tortion commensurate with the associated feed displacement. If an ESA feed is used, 
the reflector system can be designed to enable electronic beam scanning, albeit over 
a limited FOV . The use of modern ESA and ESA-like reflector feeds to achieve elec -
tronic scanning is discussed further in Section 12.4. An especially common multiple 
beam design is the monopulse antenna in Figure 12.15 e, used for angle determination 
on a single pulse, as the name implies. In this instance, the second beam is normally a 
difference beam with its null at the peak of the first beam.
FIGURE 12.15  Common reflector antenna types: ( a) paraboloid, ( b) parabolic cylinder, ( c) shaped, 
(d) stacked beam, ( e) monopulse, and ( f) Cassegrain
ch12.indd   16 12/17/07   2:31:21 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Reflector Antennas  REFLECTOR ANTENNAS  12.176x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 12
Multiple reflector systems, typified by the Cassegrain antenna shown in 
Figure 12.15 f, offer one more degree of flexibility by shaping the primary beam and/
or allowing the feed system to be conveniently located behind the main reflector. 
The symmetrical arrangement shown has significant blockage, but offset geometries 
mitigate feed blockage.
In modern reflector antenna design, combinations and variations of these basic 
types are widespread; however, design goals generally stress beam gain(s), shape(s), 
location(s), etc., while stipulating minimal losses and low sidelobe levels.
Paraboloidal Reflector Antennas.  The theory and design of paraboloidal reflec -
tor antennas are extensively discussed in the literature.13–17 A basic geometry is shown 
in Figure 12.16 a, which assumes a parabolic reflector surface of focal length f with  
a feed at the focal point. It can be shown from geometrical optics considerations that  
a spherical wave emerging from the focal point, F, and incident on the reflector is 
transformed, after reflection, into a plane wave traveling in the positive z direction 
(Figure 12.16 b).
Although reflectors are commonly illustrated with a round outline or rim and a cen -
tral feed point, a variety of reflector aperture shapes are used in practice, as shown in 
Figure 12.17. Often, the azimuth and elevation beamwidth requirements differ, requir -
ing an oblong aperture, as shown in Figure 12.17 b-e.
If low sidelobe levels are required, feed blockage may become intolerable, requir -
ing the use of an offset feed (Figure 12.17 c). The feed is still generally located at the 
focal point, but the reflector is realized via use of a different portion of the parabola. 
For offset-fed reflector configurations, the focal axis generally does not intersect the 
reflector surface. Feeds for offset-fed reflectors are generally aimed close to, but 
slightly beyond, the center of the reflector area to account for the larger space taper 
(spreading loss) on the far side of the reflector. This generally results in a slightly 
unsymmetrical aperture illumination.
The corners of most paraboloidal reflectors are frequently rounded (not shown) 
or mitered (Figure 12.17 d) to reduce extraneous surface area and/or minimize the 
torque required to turn the antenna. Because these corner regions are generally weakly 
FIGURE 12.16  Geometrical representation of a paraboloidal reflector: ( a) geometry and ( b) operation
ch12.indd   17 12/17/07   2:31:22 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Reflector Antennas 12.18  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 12
illuminated by the feed, their removal generally has little impact on the gain. However, 
circular and elliptical outlines/rims will produce modest sidelobes in both principal and 
nonprincipal planes. If very low sidelobes are specified in nonprincipal planes, it may be 
necessary to maintain square corners, as shown in the upper part of Figure 12.17 e.
Parabolic-Cylinder Antenna.18,19 It 
is quite common that either the beam must 
be steerable or shaped in only one plane, 
either azimuth or elevation. A parabolic 
cylindrical reflector fed by a linear array 
feed can accomplish this at moderately 
higher cost.
The parabolic cylinder antenna can be 
applied to achieve a precisely shaped beam 
from a common aperture. The AN/TPS-63 
(Figure 12.18) uses a vertical array to pro -
vide fine control of the elevation pattern 
with a single elevation column feed array 
and so is very cost effective. The eleva -
tion beam-shaping incorporates a steep 
beam slope at the horizon to allow radar 
operation at low elevation angles without 
degradation from ground reflections. The 
TPS-63 produces a much sharper slope at 
the horizon than a shaped reflector of equal 
height. The array feed enables superposi -
tion of beams close to the aperture normal, 
thereby enabling very high taper efficiency 
(near full aperture gain).
FIGURE 12.17  Paraboloidal reflector aperture shapes or rims: ( a) round outline/rim, ( b) oblong, 
(c) offset feed, ( d) mitered corner, ( e) square corner, and ( f ) stepped corner
FIGURE 12.18  AN/TPS-63 parabolic-cylinder  
antenna ( Courtesy Northrop Grumman Corporation )
ch12.indd   18 12/17/07   2:31:23 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Reflector Antennas  REFLECTOR ANTENNAS  12.196x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 12
The basic parabolic cylinder geometry is shown in Figure 12.19. The reflector 
surface is defined as
 zy
ff = −2
4 (12.23)
where z is the distance from the focal plane, f is the focal length of the cylindrical 
reflector, and y is the horizontal dimension. For the parabolic cylinder, the surface does 
not vary with x, the height. The feed is generally on the focal line, and in many ways, 
the design of parabolic cylinder reflectors is similar to that of paraboloidal reflectors. 
One significant difference is that the feed energy diverges cylindrically rather than 
spherically, and so the feed power density falls off as 1/ r  rather than 1/ r 2.
The height of the parabolic cylinder (Figure 12.19 a) must allow for beamwidth, 
shaping, and steering of the linear feed array. When the line source steers at angle q 
from broadside, the primary beam from the source lies on a conic, and the intercepts 
at the upper right and left corners of the reflector are farther up than in the center, as 
shown in Figure 12.19 b. Therefore, the corners of parabolic cylinder reflectors are 
seldom rounded in practice.
Shaped Reflectors.  Fan beams with a specified shape are required for a variety of 
reasons. A common elevation shaped beam requirement is to provide equal echo signal 
power on targets at constant altitude. If the transmit and receive beams are identical, 
and if secondary effects are ignored, this can be achieved with a power radiation pat -
tern proportional to csc2q, where q is the elevation angle.13 In practice, the well-known 
cosecant-squared pattern is typically modified to account for the curvature of the earth 
and the characteristics of sensitivity time control (STC).
FIGURE 12.19  Parabolic cylinder: ( a) geometry and ( b) surface extension enables line 
source steering.
ch12.indd   19 12/17/07   2:31:25 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Reflector Antennas 12.20  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 12
A relatively simple way to shape the beam is to shape the reflector, as Figure 12.20 
illustrates. Each portion of the reflector is designed to reflect a portion of the inci -
dent energy in a different direction, and to the extent that geometric optics is valid, 
the power density at that angle is the integrated sum of the power density from the 
feed across that portion of the reflector. Silver13 graphically describes a procedure for 
determining the reflector contour for a cosecant-squared beam. However, computer 
software packages now exist that enable synthesis of arbitrary beam shapes via appli -
cation of iterative optimization techniques in conjunction with physical optics–based 
pattern computations. These analysis methods and software packages are summarized 
in Section 12.5.
Offset-fed parabolic reflectors are often used to mitigate feed blockage. However, 
reflector shaping can also be used to mitigate blockage and is sometimes applied to 
redirect the reflected energy away from the feed, as shown in Figure 12.20. Figure 12.21 
illustrates how shaping can be applied to virtually eliminate blockage even though the 
feed appears to be within the FOV of the reflector.
The ASR-9 antenna (Figure 12.22), found at major airports, typifies shaped reflec -
tor antenna design. The elevation beam shape is tailored using a computer-aided 
design process, and azimuth sidelobes are lowered by offsetting the feed so there is no 
blockage. Two linear or circularly polarized elevation beams are produced by using 
two feedhorns. One beam is close to the horizon for close in targets, and the second is 
higher in elevation, so it receives less ground clutter for long range tar gets.
One typical characteristic of shaped reflectors is lower aperture efficiency. 
Generally, the surface shaping process spoils the aperture phase and broadens the 
beam thereby inherently reducing the aper -
ture efficiency. However, this sacrifice in 
aperture efficiency is generally accepted by 
the radar designer when beam shaping is 
desired or required.
The second antenna atop the ASR-9 
reflector (Figure 12.22) provides an inde -
pendent tracking system. It is an Air Traffic 
Control Radar Beacon System array antenna 
that transmits and receives narrow azimuth 
sum, difference, and guard beams, all shaped 
in elevation. It requires a transponder aboard 
the aircrafts targeted, as it has low gain.
FIGURE 12. 20 Reflector shaping
FIGURE 12. 21 Elimination of blockage
ch12.indd   20 12/17/07   2:31:26 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Reflector Antennas  REFLECTOR ANTENNAS  12.216x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 12
Multiple-Reflector Antennas.20–30 There are both difficulties and advantages 
associated with adding a secondary, or subreflector, to a paraboloidal reflector system. 
The shape of the subreflector determines how the power will be distributed across the 
primary reflector and thereby provides some control over amplitude in addition to 
phase in the aperture, making it possible to produce very low spillover or to produce 
a specific low-sidelobe distribution. By suitable choice of shape, the apparent focal 
length can be enlarged so that the feed size is practical or even feasible. This is some -
times necessary for monopulse operation.
The Cassegrain dual reflector antenna (Figure 12.23), derived from optical tele -
scope designs, is the most prevalent dual reflector configuration. Figure 12.23 a shows 
a small subreflector between the feed and parabolic main reflector. The feed illumi -
nates the hyperboloidal subreflector, which in turn illuminates the paraboloidal main 
reflector. The feed is placed at one focus of the hyperboloid, and the paraboloid focus 
is coincident with the second focus of the hyperboloid. The use of a subreflector also 
allows the feed to be located behind the main reflector and closer to the transmitter 
and receiver in order to minimize transmission line losses. Furthermore, if the feed is 
located behind the main reflector, the center of gravity will be biased closer to the main 
reflector vertex thereby simplifying the design of both the structure and the gimbal  
(precision mechanical positioning system).
The Gregorian dual reflector antenna system (not shown in Figure 12.23) is similar 
to the Cassegrain, but it uses an ellipsoidal subreflector in lieu of a hyperboloid result -
ing in a lengthening of the reflector system (along the focal axis).
The parameters of the Cassegrain reflector20 are related by the following expressions:
 tan yv / 2 = 0.25 Dm / fm 
 1/tan yv + 1/tan yr = 2fc / Ds  (12.24)
 1 - 1/e = 2Lv / fc 
FIGURE 12. 22 ASR-9 shaped reflector with offset feed. Air Traffic Control Radar 
Beacon System (ATCRBS) array is mounted on top. ( Courtesy Northrop Grumman 
Corporation )
ch12.indd   21 12/17/07   2:31:26 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Reflector Antennas 12.22  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 12
where the eccentricity e of the hyperboloid is given by
 e = sin[(yv + yr) / 2] / sin[( yv − yr) / 2] 
The equivalent-paraboloid20 concept is a convenient method of analyzing the radia -
tion characteristics using a single reflector “equivalent” model. This method utilizes 
a paraboloid of equal diameter, but a larger focal length to model the dual-reflector 
Cassegrain system. The equation
 fc = Dm / (4 tan(yr / 2)) (12.25)
defines the equivalent focal length, and the focal length ratio or magnification m is 
given by
 m = fc / fm = (e + 1) / ( e − 1) (12.26)
FIGURE 12. 23 Cassegrain dual reflector antenna systems (the larger surface is the main reflector 
and the smaller surface is the subreflector): ( a) ray optics ( b) typical axial configuration,20 and ( c) 
offset configuration
ch12.indd   22 12/17/07   2:31:27 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Reflector Antennas  REFLECTOR ANTENNAS  12.236x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 12
The magnification m is a useful metric in that it provides a measure of the reduction in 
size/length along the focal axis that is enabled by use of the Cassegrain reflector system 
in lieu of a single parabolic reflector system. The feed is designed to produce suitable 
illumination within subtended angles ±yr associated with the longer focal length fc.
Aperture blocking can be large for center-fed Cassegrain antennas. The blockage 
can be minimized by choosing the diameter of the subreflector to be equal to that of 
the feed.20 This occurs when
 D f kS m=2λ/ (12.27)
where k is the ratio of the feed-aperture diameter to its effective blocking diameter. 
Ordinarily k is slightly less than 1. For linearly polarized radar applications, aperture 
blocking can be significantly reduced by using a polarization-twist reflector and a 
subreflector made of parallel wires.24 This twist reflector design enables a 90° rotation 
of the polarization such that the polarization of the beam upon reflection from the main 
reflector is orthogonal and transparent to the gridded subreflector .
Blockage can also be eliminated by offsetting both the feed and the subreflector 
(Figure 12.23 c). With blockage and supporting struts and spillover virtually elimi -
nated, this geometry is useful for very low sidelobe applications.24
As described earlier, the aperture efficiency of single reflector systems is maxi -
mized by balancing the feed taper and the feed spillover and minimizing other losses, 
but is typically 55–65%. However, dual reflector systems (e.g., Cassegrain) have an 
additional degree of freedom and surface shaping can be applied to decrease the taper 
loss and enable aperture efficiencies in excess of 70%.25,26
A different type of dual reflector system that is particularly well-suited to applica -
tions where limited electronic scanning is required is the so-called confocal reflector 
system27–30 shown in Figure 12.24. This system employs two parabolic reflectors, a 
main and a sub, that share a common focal point. The optics of this system is designed 
such that a plane wave source, say from an array, is first converted to a spherical 
wave at the subreflector. Then, upon reflection from the subreflector, the feed energy 
converges at the common focus and diverges again as a spherical wave before finally 
reflecting from the main reflector.
The confocal system has several interesting properties, tied to the magnification 
factor M:
 M = fM / fS (12.28)
where fM and fS are the focal lengths of main and subreflectors, respectively. The first 
property shows that the system is essentially a feed source magnifier. The reflector 
gain, Gr, is described by
 Gr ≈ Gf  × M 2 × cos(qr) (12.29)
where Gf is the gain of the feed array and qr is the scan angle of the reflector (second -
ary) beam. The second property defines the scanning. The reflector scan angle, qr, is 
defined by the following equation:
 qr ≈ qf /M (12.30)
where qf is the feed scan angle. For example, if the magnification factor is 10 and the 
ESA feed array is scanned 30°, the reflector beam will scan approximately 3°.
ch12.indd   23 12/17/07   2:31:28 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Reflector Antennas 12.24  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 12
Scan aberrations lead to moderately higher scan losses and slight beam scan angle 
deviations from those predicted by Eqs. 12.29 and 12.30 when ideal ESA plane wave 
excitations, i.e., linear phase slope, are applied. However, the amplitude and phase 
controls in the ESA allow for scan aberration compensation via conjugate matching 
of the aperture fields.29 Thus, the use of an ESA feed enables recovery of scan losses 
resulting from aberrations in the system.
Confocal reflector architectures have been the subject of study and analysis for 
many years and numerous demonstration systems have also been developed.25–28 
Although confocal reflectors have not been adopted for significant usage in opera -
tional systems, these reflector systems are likely to be part of some next-generation 
radars due to the relatively recent maturation of enabling ESA technology.
Spherical Reflectors.31–34 The spherical reflector31 is sometimes used for appli -
cations requiring scanning or multiple beams over very wide angles. Its design is based 
upon the fact that, over limited angular regions, a spherical surface viewed from any 
point halfway between the center of a sphere and its surface is nearly parabolic. This 
means that if a feed is moved along an inner spherical surface of constant radius R/2, 
where R is the radius of the spherical reflector, the secondary beam can be steered. The 
range of beam steering is limited by the size of the spherical reflector, i.e., the portion 
of a full sphere realized by the reflector. The scanning capability can be implemented 
via use of either a single movable feed or an array with switchable feeds.
Self-blockage (reflector blocking itself) is another potential limiting factor in spher -
ical reflector systems. However, 360° of azimuth steering can be accomplished via 
a polarization design scheme similar to the polarization twist subreflector described FIGURE 12. 24 Confocal dual reflector antenna fmain 
fsubfsubParabolic 
Main Reflector 
Common 
FocusDmain
Parabolic 
SubreflectorDsubfmain 
αAESAαRef = αAESA/ Mag
Phased 
Array Feed
Mag =  
ch12.indd   24 12/19/07   2:38:24 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Reflector Antennas  REFLECTOR ANTENNAS  12.256x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 12
above24 for the Cassegrain system. In this design, the feed polarization is tilted 45° and 
the reflector is formed of conducting strips parallel to the polarization. However, the 
conducting strips on opposing sides of the reflector are twisted 90°, thereby enabling 
transmission of the reflected energy. This type of antenna is known as a helisphere .
If wide angle scanning in only one plane, i.e., azimuth or elevation, is required, a sim -
ilar design called the parabolic torus32 is more applicable. The parabolic torus reflector is 
a surface that is spherical in one plane (azimuth or elevation) and parabolic in the other 
plane. This design takes advantage of both the wide scanning enabled by the spherical 
shaping and the high aperture efficiency enabled by the parabolic shaping. The height 
(elevation) dimension of the reflector is set by the required elevation beamwidth.
The parabolic torus has seen application in various radars including the original 
BMEWS system33 and the SPS-30 and SPQ-9B34 systems.
12.4 REFLECTOR FEEDS
Whereas phased array antennas are frequently chosen for radar system designs, reflec -
tor antennas were once the dominant antenna design choice for medium- to high-gain 
radar apertures. Obviously, the cost of a single feed horn and metal reflector is much less 
than the same size array with many individual elements and associated phase shifters, 
amplifiers, receivers, etc. Consequently, many radars currently in the field use reflec -
tor antennas. Furthermore, reflector antenna designs are used in modern radar designs 
where moderate scan rates and scan volumes are required or low cost is essential.
Many legacy radars employ reflector antennas with single feed elements or a cluster 
of feeds (i.e., an array) with a fixed beam RF combiner or divider network. Figure 12.25 
shows some typical single-feed reflector configurations utilizing horn, waveguide,  
and dipole feeds. Figure 12.26 shows a few common types of flared horn feeds.  
FIGURE 12. 25 Some typical reflector antenna configurations
ch12.indd   25 12/17/07   2:31:30 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Reflector Antennas 12.26  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 12
Other types of feeds such as dipoles, microstrip patches, notches, etc., are sometimes 
used, but for single-feed reflector implementations, flared waveguide horns are the 
most common. The feed (in conjunction with the reflector) must also satisfy the antenna 
polarization requirements and handle required peak and average power levels under 
all operational environments. Other feed design considerations include the operating 
bandwidth and the potential implementation of any additional modes/patterns, e.g., 
difference or squinted beams.
For single-feed radar reflector antennas such as those depicted in Figures 12.25, 
mechanical scanning is generally achieved via a gimbal (a precision mechanical point -
ing system). Radar antenna gimbal designs vary greatly depending upon scan rate, 
FOV , tracking requirements, antenna size, mass, etc.
Basic Feeds.35,36 For radars requiring a simple pencil beam, basic single mode 
waveguide horn feeds such as pyramidal (TE01 mode) and conical (TE11 mode) horns are 
widely used. Single-mode, flared horns will provide linearly polarized pencil beams and 
will generally handle high power. For more demand -
ing applications requiring tracking modes, polarization 
diversity, high beam efficiency, or ultra-low sidelobes, 
feed designs become correspondingly more complex. 
For such applications, segmented, finned, multimode, 
and/or corrugated horns, as illustrated in Figure 12.26, 
are often used. Multimode feeds enable realization of 
difference mode patterns with a compact, single feed -
horn and, as such, are especially useful for tracking 
applications.
Monopulse Feeds.37–40 Monopulse is frequently 
used in radar tracking and surveillance systems to 
either keep the beam pointed on the target (tracking) 
or to accurately measure the angle to the target (sur -
veillance).37–40
Amplitude comparison monopulse systems, illus -
trated in Figure 12.27, use the sum of the two feed 
FIGURE 12. 26 Various types of horn feeds for reflector antennas
FIGURE 12. 27 Amplitude com -
parison monopulse antenna showing 
sum and difference beams
ch12.indd   26 12/17/07   2:31:31 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Reflector Antennas  REFLECTOR ANTENNAS  12.276x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 12
outputs to form a high-gain low-sidelobe beam and the difference of the two squinted 
beams to form a precise, deep null at boresight. The sum beam is used on both trans -
mit and receive to detect the target. The difference beam is receive only and provides 
angle determination. In most applications, both azimuth and elevation difference beam 
ports are implemented. Figure 12.27 illustrates the concept of amplitude compari -
son monopulse. A feedback loop minimizes the received difference beam signal by 
mechanically steering the antenna to keep the null (and the corresponding sum beam 
peak) on target.
There are numerous ways to realize amplitude monopulse beams in a reflector 
antenna design, but most designs generally fall into two classes; (1) multifeed and 
(2) multimode. Multifeed designs use combining networks to generate differential 
feed distributions. In its simplest form, an (az/el) multifeed monopulse feed array 
can be realized as a four-element feed, as shown in Figure 12.28. However, some 
applications use more feed elements to further tailor the distribution to improve 
efficiency and/or difference beam slope.
If the reflector is illuminated with a simple four-element feed, a conflict generally 
arises between the goals of high sum-beam efficiency and high difference-beam slope 
from the monopulse comparator. The former requires a small overall feed size, whereas 
the latter requires large individual feeds (Figure 12.29). Numerous design methods 
have been devised to overcome this problem, as well as the associated high difference 
pattern sidelobes. These methods either use different sets of feed elements for the sum 
and difference beams or apply different array amplitude/phase weightings for each of 
the beams. If horn feed elements are used, one approach is to oversize the feeds to 
enable multimode excitation for the sum beam as described by Hannan.40 A comparison 
of some common monopulse feed configurations is included in Table 12.2.
FEED1 FEED2
FEED3 FEED4
0      180 0       180
SUM DELTA AZDELTA EL
FEED 1FEED 2
FEED 3FEED 4FEED 1
FEED 3SUM DELTA EL DELTA AZ
FEED 3FEED 1FEED 2
FEED 4 FEED 4FEED 2
Feed Excitations for 3 Beam Modes (Sum, Delta El 
and Delta Az). Pluses and Minuses Denote 
Relative Phases (+ and – Differ by 180 Degrees) 
FIGURE 12. 28 Four-element monopulse feed with dum, delta az, and delta el ports
ch12.indd   27 12/17/07   2:31:31 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Reflector Antennas 12.28  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 12
Array Feeds.  A single feed at the focal point of a parabola forms a beam parallel 
to the focal axis. Additional feeds displaced from the focal point form additional beams 
at angles from the axis (see Eq. 12.21). Thus, one can employ a multiple feed array with 
appropriate electronics to feed a reflector and provide either multiple displaced beams 
or electronic beam switching, i.e., beam scanning to discrete angles. A reflector system 
such as this can effectively provide electronic scanning over a narrow FOV . However, 
this type of array-fed reflector architecture does suffer from one drawback. A parabola 
converts a spherical wave into a pure plane wave only when the source (feed) is at the 
focus. If the source (feed) is displaced from the focus, the reflected wave is somewhat 
distorted and this results in gain loss and beam shape distortion. Figure 12.30 shows 
the effect of this distortion on the pattern of a typical center-fed reflector as the feed is 
moved off-axis.
H plane E plane Sidelobes, dB
Feed shape Type of Horn Efficiency Slope Slope Sum Difference
Simple four-horn 0.58 1.2 1.2 19 10
Two-horn dual-mode 0.75 1.6 1.2 19 10
Two-horn triple-mode 0.75 1.6 1.2 19 10
Twelve-horn  0.56 1.7 1.6 19 19
Four-horn triple-mode 0.75 1.6 1.6 19 19TABLE 12.2  Monopulse Feedhorn Performance
FIGURE 12. 29 Plots of sum-beam efficiency and difference-beam slope 
as a function of associated edge tapers ( H-plane shown)
ch12.indd   28 12/17/07   2:31:32 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Reflector Antennas  REFLECTOR ANTENNAS  12.296x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 12
A phased array (ESA) type feed covering the focal region (planar or curved in 
shape), such as that shown in Figure 12.31 b, can provide improved capability. It offers 
two enhancements that extend the capability above and beyond that of a multiple feed 
array with switched beams. The phased array fed reflector can transmit or receive 
beams over continuous angles within the FOV whereas the multiple feed array is 
limited to discrete beam positions. It also provides greater aperture efficiency because 
it allows for adjustment of the element amplitudes and phases to reduce scan losses 
due to aberrations. If we view the reflector as a collector of parallel rays from a range 
of angles covering the FOV and examine the converging ray paths (Figure 12.31 a), it 
is evident that an appropriately sized feed region can be found that intercepts most of 
the energy. If the phased-array feed array is appropriately designed, beam distortion 
and scan losses (such as those shown in Figure 12.30) can be effectively eliminated. 
This sort of design approach wherein the feed array amplitude/phase distribution is 
“matched” to the focal plane fields is often referred to as conjugate field matching .41
FIGURE 12. 30 Patterns for off-axis feeds
ch12.indd   29 12/17/07   2:31:36 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Reflector Antennas 12.30  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 12
Feed arrays, such as that illustrated in the ARSR-4 reflector antenna shown in 
Figures 12.31 and 12.32, have also been used to enable shaped beams and low side-
lobe patterns. Passive combiner networks are used to generate multiple receive beams 
stacked in elevation and a single transmit beam. The receive beams require low azi -
muth sidelobes. A conventional beamforming approach would incorporate an array 
at the focal plane with a single beam 
per feed; however, the associated phase 
distortion due to displacement causes 
poor azimuth sidelobes. To correct 
this problem, the feed array is placed 
forward of the azimuth focal point, 
enabling compensation and sidelobe 
improvements via use of multiple feeds 
per beam with appropriate feed phasing 
(Figure 12.31 a). Two different focal 
lengths are used in the reflector, one for 
elevation and a longer one for azimuth. 
The feed is on a curved surface, opti -
mized via ray tracing, and is forward of 
the azimuth focal point. For each row, 
the amplitude and phase is optimized for 
a beam with low azimuth sidelobes. The 
elevation patterns for each single row 
have poor sidelobes, but several rows 
are used for each receive beam thereby 
improving the elevation sidelobes. For 
transmit, all 24 rows (the whole array) 
are used. On receive, 9 groups of rows 
are used to form 9 receive beams.
FIGURE 12.31  Extended feed region improves sidelobes of offset feed (used on 
ARSR-4): ( a) ray geometry and ( b) curved feed
FIGURE 12. 32 ARSR-4 low-sidelobe reflector 
with offset array feed ( Courtesy Northrop Grumman 
Corporation )
ch12.indd   30 12/17/07   2:31:37 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Reflector Antennas  REFLECTOR ANTENNAS  12.316x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 12
12.5 REFLECTOR ANTENNA ANALYSIS
Reflector antenna analysis methods can generally be lumped into three classes or catego -
ries: (1) Physical Optics (PO), or induced current methods, (2) Geometrical Optics (GO) 
methods, with and without diffraction terms, and (3) rigorous, or full-wave, methods.
Physical Optics (PO) Reflector Analysis.  The Physical Optics (PO) method 
is commonly employed for the most rigorous reflector analysis due to its accuracy. 
It incorporates the field properties of the feed, and models the resultant fields from 
the reflector, thus enabling the computation of the cross polarization properties. 
Furthermore, the method is more accurate for feeds that are not at the focal point and 
reflectors that are not parabolic. There are many good references that describe the the -
ory behind the method and how it is applied to the analysis of reflector antennas.42–44 
PO is a very general “high frequency” analysis method that generally provides high 
fidelity pattern predictions for most reflector systems as long as the reflector dimen -
sions are large, say, greater than about five wavelengths in both dimensions. An over -
view of PO is provided here to enable an understanding of the fundamentals of the 
method. The PO method can be broken into two steps: (1) the calculation of induced 
reflector surface currents, and (2) the integration of these currents (with an appropriate 
free space vector Green’s function kernel) to determine the far-field patterns.
First, consider the calculation of the reflector surface currents. It is assumed that 
the field from the feed that is incident on the reflector has a spherical wavefront 
with amplitude tapering defined by the feed pattern. So, as a first step, the feed is 
mathematically modeled to determine the incident field amplitude and phase at the 
reflector surface. Different models are applied depending on the choice of feed used 
in the design; examples include waveguide feed horns, microstrip patches, dipoles, 
etc. Sometimes the feed model will instead employ measured feed patterns if such 
data is available. All models must be normalized to some prescribed radiated power 
level, e.g., 1 watt. Figure 12.33 shows a typical waveguide feed horn model and its 
associated local coordinate system.
Based on an appropriate application of equivalence principle and the induction 
theorem,42–44 the currents induced on the reflector can be determined from the feed 
FIGURE 12. 33 Waveguide feed horn model 
and coordinate system
ch12.indd   31 12/17/07   2:31:37 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Reflector Antennas 12.32  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 12
H-field incident at the surface of the reflector. The key premise of the equivalence 
principle is that fields from a scatterer (e.g., a reflector) can be represented by an 
“equivalent” electric current Jand magnetic current M that are directly related to the 
incident E and H fields via
 J n H = ×ˆ (12.31) 
   M n E = − ×ˆ  (12.32)
where ˆnis the normal to the reflector surface. The application of the equivalence 
principle to PO-based reflector analyses as shown here is a specialized case wherein 
the reflector is an electric conductor, and contributions from surface currents on the 
backside of the reflector are deemed negligible. An appropriate application of image 
theory42–44 imposes a zero tangential E-field (Eq. 12.32) and doubles the electric cur -
rent, J (Eq. 12.31), resulting in an equivalent surface current represented by
 J n H = ×2ˆ (12.33)
Now consider a generalized reflector surface as shown in Figure 12.34. The sur -
face is divided into rectangular grid regions of area dA that intercept the incident feed 
field. If the feed far-field H-field pattern is H v(ˆ), polarized in the direction ˆv, then the 
incident H-field at the reflector is
 H H v v n e dA r = ⋅−(ˆ) (ˆ ˆ) /jkr4π (12.34)
Combining Eqs. 12.34 and 12.33 yields the equivalent surface current Jat area dA
 J n H v v n e dA r = × ⋅−2 4 ˆ (ˆ) (ˆ ˆ) /jkrπ (12.35)
where ˆnis the normal to the surface, ˆsis the observation direction (Figure 12.34), r is 
the distance from the feed to the reflecting surface, k = 2p /l, i.e., the wavenumber, 
and the e−jkr/4p�r term accounts for the propagation phase and space loss from the feed 
to the reflector surface.
FIGURE 12. 34 Generalized reflector geometry
ch12.indd   32 12/17/07   2:31:51 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Reflector Antennas  REFLECTOR ANTENNAS  12.336x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 12
The final step in the PO-based pattern solution is to calculate the reflector far fields 
via a vector integration of the product of the surface current and the free space Green’s 
function.44 The magnetic vector potential A is defined by the equation
 AJ e dr
r rjkr r
=′
−′ ∫∫∫− − ′| |
| |4π (12.36)
The vector E-and H-fields are related to Avia simple derivatives and/or vector  
multiplications. In practice, Eq. 12.36 is computed as a summation of numerical inte -
grations. Proper convergence of the field solution and resulting patterns is a function of 
the grid size, and this is generally achieved and verified by incrementally decreasing the 
grid size until the solution stabilizes. Achieving sufficient convergence in reflector PO 
computations within reasonable computer run times (a few minutes or less) is rarely a 
problem with modern computers.
Geometrical Optics (GO) Reflector Analysis, Including GTD/UTD.  There are 
a variety of GO-based pattern reflector analysis methods, all of which are rooted in ray 
tracing and some of which are augmented with diffraction terms for improved accuracy. 
Although the simple GO method (no diffraction terms) works reasonably well, it is not 
generally as accurate as PO. However, two of the more common enhanced methods, 
Geometrical Theory of Diffraction (GTD) and Uniform Theory of Diffraction (UTD),45 
include edge diffraction and are much more accurate. UTD is essentially an enhance -
ment of GTD wherein localized GTD singularities are corrected. The diffraction terms in 
UTD increase the accuracy of the basic GO solution and will properly predict the pattern 
asymmetries of more generalized reflector geometries. Like PO, GTD/UTD methods  
will generally provide high-fidelity pattern predictions for most reflector systems  
(center-fed, offset, single, dual, etc.) as long as the reflector size is approximately 5 l or 
larger. More detailed descriptions of GTD/UTD can be found in various references.45,46
Full-Wave Reflector Analysis Methods.  Rigorous or full-wave methods include, 
for example, the method of moments (MOM), the finite element method (FEM), and 
the finite difference time domain (FDTD) method. Although these methods are very 
rigorous and highly accurate, they are not generally employed for reflector design/
analysis because they tend to be too computationally intensive. These methods are 
more typically applied for precision analysis of microwave devices or electrically 
“smaller” antennas, e.g., radiators and feeds, that are no more than a few wavelengths 
in size. In recent years, hybrid methods incorporating PO or GO/GTD along with 
MOM, FEM, or FDTD have been developed. These methods enable enhanced reflec -
tor feed modeling, i.e., integrated with reflector analysis, and rigorous modeling of 
electrically small scatterers, e.g., small subreflectors or feed support struts.
Computer Codes for Reflector Design and Analysis.  A number of commer -
cial and university codes have been developed for the analysis and design of reflec -
tor systems. Two of the more well-known and commonly used codes are GRASP 
and the SATCOM Workbench with its NEC-REF module. GRASP is a commercially 
available PO-based reflector design and scattering analysis code developed by TICRA 
(Copenhagen, Denmark). The SATCOM Workbench was developed by The Ohio State 
University ElectroScience Laboratory (OSU-ESL) and is a user-friendly code that 
incorporates a wide variety of software modules, some of which are based upon legacy 
ch12.indd   33 12/17/07   2:31:55 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Reflector Antennas 12.34  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 12
OSU codes such as NEC-REF (OSU Reflector Code). The SATCOM Workbench is 
available to members of the USA Satellite Industry Code Consortium.47
TICRA GRASP is a generalized PO-based code intended for both reflector system 
design/analysis and scattering analyses. GRASP has popular GUI-versions that run 
on Microsoft PC-based Windows operating systems (2000, 2003, NT, XP) as well as 
LINUX. Although the GRASP code is PO-based, it also includes a Physical Theory of 
Diffraction (PTD) option as well as a Geometrical Optics (GO)/ Uniform Geometrical 
Theory of Diffraction (UGTD) option that can be turned on when needed. The code 
is very general in that it can model standard conic section-based reflectors as well as 
arbitrarily shaped surfaces or scatterers if desired. It also has a suite of feed models to 
draw upon and has tools to enable feed array modeling. Figure 12.35 shows a snapshot 
of the GRASP GUI window, including a rendering of an array-fed reflector and its 
associated beam rosetta, i.e., an overlay of beams associated with each of the indi -
vidual array feeds. Some other notable features of the GRASP code include scattering 
models for mesh, frequency selective or lossy reflector surfaces, and a spherical wave 
expansion (SWE) feature for modeling of systems wherein the reflector or scatterer is 
in the near field of the feed source. Finally, there are various other antenna software 
modules available from TICRA that can be used in conjunction with GRASP. One 
notable example is Physical Optics Shaper (POS), an optimizer module for shaped 
reflector synthesis and/or feed array amplitude/phase weight synthesis. More informa -
tion is available at www.ticra.com.
The OSU-ESL SATCOM Workbench47 is a Microsoft Windows–based modular 
software package for PC platforms running Windows 95/98/2000/XP. It contains 
a variety of modules or so-called wizards in addition to the generalized GO/GTD-
based reflector/scattering code backbone. The core GO/GTD reflector/scattering 
FIGURE 12. 35 TICRA GRASP GUI, multibeam array-fed reflector model and patterns
ch12.indd   34 12/17/07   2:31:55 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Reflector Antennas  REFLECTOR ANTENNAS  12.356x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 12
code portion of the SATCOM Workbench is based upon the legacy NEC-REF and 
NEC-BSC codes. The EM Workbench, like GRASP, is very general in its capabili -
ties, i.e., it can handle a diversity of reflector/scatterer shapes and combinations and 
also has various feed models to draw upon. It also has feed and array wizards that 
employ full-wave EM models that can be used as sources for reflector and scatter -
ing design/analyses. Figure 12.36 shows a snapshot of the Workbench GUI window, 
including a rendering of an offset-fed reflector and its associated beam pattern. More 
information is available at esl.eng.ohio-state.edu.
12.6 MECHANICAL DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS
Reflector mechanical design is a detailed discipline unto itself with a multitude of 
factors to consider. Furthermore, designs vary significantly depending upon many 
factors, including platform, reflector size, environment, frequency of operation, scan/
FOV , and cost constraints. Although it is not within the scope of this chapter to address 
mechanical design in detail, a brief survey of design factors and considerations pro -
vides some useful insights.
 The platform, i.e., vehicle, or installation site is a significant driver for radar sen -
sors in general, including the antenna. Platform  is a generic term referring to the 
vehicle where the radar and antenna are installed. Typical radar platforms include 
pedestal (fixed site), ground vehicles, ships, airplanes, UA Vs, and spacecraft/satellites. 
The following short section is devoted to platform impacts and some key associated 
design drivers. These include mass, volume (stowage/deployment), gimbals (precision 
mechanical positioning systems), materials, and mechanical tolerances. Finally, there 
is a brief discussion of environmental design considerations and radomes. 
xy
z
−180 −90 0 90 180
Theta−30−142183450Magnitude (dB)Maximum = 46.987999 
FIGURE 12. 36 OSU-ESL SATCOM Workbench GUI, offset Gregorian reflector model and pattern
ch12.indd   35 12/17/07   2:31:57 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Reflector Antennas 12.36  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 12
Installation Is a Significant Mechanical Design Driver.  The platform is gen -
erally a dominant mechanical design driver because it determines the environment 
(thermal, vibration, etc.), and it typically drives the available size, weight, and power 
(SWAP) for the radar and the reflector antenna. Table 12.3 provides a qualitative com -
parison of typical design requirements and features for radar reflector antennas on 
ground-based, ship-based, airborne, and spaceborne platforms.
Mass, Volume, Stowage, Deployment, and Gimbaling.  The degree to which 
these five factors, mass, volume, stowage, deployment , and gimbaling  drive the reflec -
tor design vary in accordance with the reflector system and the platform. However, 
PLATFORM DRIVES REFLECTOR ANTENNA MECHANICAL DESIGN
Ground-based Ship-based Airborne Spaceborne
Mass •  Typically not a major 
driver.
•  May be a driver if 
field deployment is 
required.•  Typically not a 
major driver.•  Typically a 
significant driver.
•  Could be a major 
driver depending 
on size of antenna 
and platform.•  A major driver; launch 
costs are very high and 
are driven by available 
volume and mass for 
radar payload.
•  Use of light weight 
materials is important.
V olume •  Typically not a major 
driver.
•  May be a driver if 
field deployment is 
required•  Depends, a 
driver in some 
cases•  Typically a 
significant driver
•  Could be a major 
driver depending 
on size of antenna 
and platform•  A major driver; launch 
costs are very high and 
are driven by available 
volume and mass for 
radar payload.
•  Once in space,  
antenna deployments 
are typically needed, 
e.g., unfolding, etc.
Thermal •  Can be a major 
driver.
•  Radars are typically 
high power.
•  High power densities 
at feed or feed array 
are common.
•  Cooling system 
design to maintain 
feed temp can be a 
challenge.•  Can be a major 
driver.
•  Radars are 
typically high 
power.
•  High power 
densities at 
feed or feed 
array are 
common.
•  Cooling system 
design to 
maintain feed 
temp can be a 
challenge.•  Can be a major 
driver.
•  Radars are 
typically high 
power.
•  High power 
densities at feed 
or feed array are 
common.
•  Cooling system 
design to maintain 
feed temp can be a 
challenge.•  A major driver, need 
sophisticated modeling 
to predict solar heating 
throughout orbit.
•  Passive cooling systems  
are generally employed, 
e.g., heat pipes.
Vibration •  Typically not a major 
driver.
•  However, must 
consider vibration 
during transport 
(truck, airplane, 
other?).•  Typically not a 
major driver.•  Typically a major 
driver.•  Typically a major 
driver, driven by launch 
vehicle (rocket).TABLE 12.3  Mechanical Design Drivers for Reflector Antenna Systems as a Function of Platform
ch12.indd   36 12/17/07   2:31:58 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Reflector Antennas  REFLECTOR ANTENNAS  12.376x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 12
mass and volume constraints generally have a significant impact on the reflector system 
design. Furthermore, some sort of stowage and deployment of the reflector is some -
times required, especially for larger reflectors. These considerations and constraints 
drive the choices of materials, structural designs, passive and active mechanisms, etc. 
It is beyond the scope of this chapter to address this topic in detail. However, it’s useful 
to show a couple examples for illustration.
Consider, first, a ground-based dual-reflector design with a 9-meter main reflector 
aperture. This reflector, shown in Figure 12.37, is used for an S-band meteorological 
radar application.48 The panelized aluminum reflector is mechanically scanned via use 
of a gimbal (not shown). The feed, a dual-polarized waveguide horn, is also shown in 
Figure 12.37. The structural design of this large reflector was a significant task driven 
by the need to maintain low reflector surface distortion (less than 50 mils) with severe 
wind and gravity-loading forces and thermal gradients.
The second example is a space-based deployable reflector. The mesh reflector, 
shown in both stowed and deployed configurations in Figure 12.38, is an offset reflec -
tor with a 12.25 meter circular projected aperture.49 This L-band design, developed by 
Northrop-Grumman Space Technologies Astro Aerospace group, has been successfully 
launched and deployed and is currently in use on several communication satellites.50 
A total of five reflectors of aperture diameters 9 meters, 12 meters, and 12.25 meters 
have been flown. Studies have addressed the potential usage of this reflector technol -
ogy for various space-based radar applications, including weather sensing/monitoring 
(NEXRAD)51 and planetary SAR mapping missions (lunar and Mars). Significant fea -
tures of this reflector include its precise surface accuracy, high stiffness and stability, low 
mass, and reliable deployment. For example, for the reflector shown in Figure 12.38, an 
RMS surface accuracy of less than 50 mils from all error sources including in-orbit ther -
mal gradients was achieved via prudent material choices and matching of the associated 
material coefficients of thermal expansion (CTEs). Pointing precision due to eclipse 
thermal snap has been measured in orbit at less than 0.01 degrees.52PLATFORM DRIVES REFLECTOR ANTENNA MECHANICAL DESIGN
Ground-based Ship-based Airborne Spaceborne
Stowage/
Deployment•  Can be a driver 
if system is 
transportable.•  Typically not a 
requirement.•  Typically not 
a requirement, 
but there are 
exceptions.•  Typically required, 
generally a major 
design driver.
•  Reliability of 
deployment is a major 
concern; mission 
depends on it.
Other •  Is transportability 
a requirement? 
Are there multiple 
environments to 
which the radar 
antenna will be 
exposed?•  Where on the 
ship is the radar 
antenna? Is it 
covered with a 
radome? Will it 
be exposed to 
water or wave 
slap?•  V olume is a major 
constraint, not 
much room for 
antenna apertures.•  Specialized 
environments.
    •  Launch drives 
vibration and 
acoustic loads.
    •  Radiation a driver at 
some orbits.
    •  Thermal extremes, 
including gradients, 
are a concern.TABLE 12.3  Mechanical Design Drivers for Reflector Antenna Systems as a Function of Platform 
(Continued )
ch12.indd   37 12/17/07   2:31:59 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Reflector Antennas 12.38  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 12
FIGURE 12. 37 Ground-based S-band 9-meter dual reflector and dual-pol feed: a) photo of system; b) 
mechanical CAD rendering showing panelized reflector surface and support structure; and c) dual-polarized 
waveguide feedhorn ( Courtesy General Dynamics C4 Systems )
FIGURE 12. 38 Space-based deployable L-band ASTROMesh reflector with 12.25 meter 
circular projected aperture ( Courtesy Northrop Grumman Corporation )
ch12.indd   38 12/17/07   2:32:00 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Reflector Antennas  REFLECTOR ANTENNAS  12.396x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 12
Deployable space-based reflectors have also been developed by the Harris Corpo-
ration for various space-based communications applications. See www.harris.com for 
more details.
Because most reflector designs have at best limited electronic scan capability, a 
gimbal is typically needed to extend the (mechanical) FOV for the radar. The key 
factors or specifications that typically drive the design or procurement of the gimbal 
are scan rate, slew requirements, acceleration/deceleration requirements, torque and 
load (reflector mass) requirements, power requirements, etc. It is important for the 
radar system engineer to understand these factors and associated practical gimbal 
design limits.
Environmental Factors and Considerations.  The impact of environmental fac -
tors varies widely, but some of the factors that are typically significant include thermal, 
vibration, and exposure (e.g., salt, sand, water, radiation, etc.). Thermal effects, i.e., 
spatial or temporal temperature variations, are of particular concern for spaceborne 
sensors that often see very significant temperature changes (greater than 100° C tem -
poral or spatial variation is not uncommon). Vibration is another concern, especially 
for airborne and spaceborne reflectors. Reflectors on these platforms generally see 
particularly stressing vibration levels driven by airplane or launch vehicle (rocket) 
environments. Potential exposure to salt, sand, water, etc., is highly dependent upon 
platform, use of radome (or not), etc., but must be considered in the design.
Radomes.  Radomes are used when it is necessary to protect antennas from 
adverse environmental effects. Ideally, a radome should be perfectly transparent to the 
RF radiation from (or to) the antenna and yet be able to withstand such environmental 
effects as wind, rain, hail, snow, ice, sand, salt spray, lightning, and (in the case of 
high-speed airborne applications) thermal, erosion, and other aerodynamic effects. In 
practice, these environmental factors determine the mechanical design of the radome, 
and the desire for ideal RF transparency must be compromised because mechanical 
and electrical requirements are often in conflict.
Radomes cause four major electrical effects on antenna performance. Beam deflec -
tion is the shift of the electrical axis, which is critical for tracking radar. Transmission  
loss is the measure of energy lost by reflection and absorption. The reflected power  
causes antenna mismatch in small radomes and sidelobes in larger radomes.
Radome design is a specialized art, and many books53,54 are devoted to its intricate 
details. This section makes no attempt to provide radome design information as such 
but instead is aimed at making the radar system designer aware of the basic concepts 
behind the types of radomes available for various applications.
Three general classes of radome are of interest for reflector antenna applica -
tions: feed covers , which often have to endure pressure, high voltage, and heating; 
covers attached to the reflector , which alter the pattern in a fixed manner; and 
external radomes , within which the antenna moves. External radomes are the most 
common and will, therefore, be emphasized. Within each class, a variety of skin 
and skin-supporting designs is available to minimize the electrical effects under 
the constraints of the environment. The radome skin may be rigid, supported by a 
framework, or air-supported.
The most common rigid radome-wall structures are shown in Figure 12.39 and are 
known as homogeneous single layer, A-sandwich, B-sandwich, C-sandwich, multiple-
layer sandwich, and dielectrics with metal inclusions.
ch12.indd   39 12/17/07   2:32:01 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Reflector Antennas 12.40  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 12
Single Layer . The homogeneous single-layer radome has been used in many 
radome applications. Materials for this type have included fiberglass-reinforced plas -
tics, ceramics, elastomers, and monolithic foam. The optimum thickness for a single 
layer is a multiple of a half wavelength in the dielectric material at the appropriate 
incidence angle, but many single-layer radomes are simply thin-wall approximations 
to the zero-thickness case.
A-Sandwich . A commonly used radome-wall cross section is the A-sandwich, 
which consists of two relatively dense thin skins and a thicker low-density core. This 
configuration exhibits high strength-to-weight ratios. The skins are generally fiberglass-
reinforced plastics, and the core is a foam or honeycomb. Inorganic skin and core sand -
wiches also have been developed for high-temperature applications. As a rule, the skins 
of the sandwich are made symmetrical or of equal thickness to allow midband cancel -
lation of reflections.
B-Sandwich . In contrast to the A-sandwich, the B-sandwich is a three-layer con -
figuration whose skins have a dielectric constant lower than that of the core material. 
This wall cross section is heavier than that of the A-sandwich because of the relatively 
dense core. The B-sandwich is not commonly used because the core dielectric constant 
is quite high for a proper match.
C-Sandwich . The C-sandwich is a five-layer design consisting of outer skins, a 
center skin, and two intermediate cores. The symmetrical C-sandwich can be thought 
of as two back-to-back A-sandwiches. This configuration is used when the ordinary 
A-sandwich will not provide sufficient strength, or for certain electrical performance 
characteristics, or when one layer is to serve as a warm-air duct for deicing.
Multiple-Layer Sandwich . Multiple-layer sandwiches of 7, 9, 11, or more layers  
are sometimes considered when great strength, good electrical performance, and 
lightweight are required. Some of these designs have used thin layers of fiberglass 
FIGURE 12.3954 Common radome-wall cross 
sections: ( a) single layer, ( b) A-sandwich, (c) B-
sandwich, ( d) C-sandwich, ( e) multiple-layer sand -
wich, and ( f ) dielectrics with metal inclusions
ch12.indd   40 12/17/07   2:32:02 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Reflector Antennas  REFLECTOR ANTENNAS  12.416x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 12
laminates and low-density cores to attain high transmission performance over large 
frequency bands.
Dielectric Layers with Metal Inclusions . Metal inclusions have been considered 
for use with dielectric layers to achieve frequency filtering, broad-frequency-band 
performance, or reduced-thickness radomes. Thin layers of metal inclusions exhibit 
the characteristics of lumped circuit elements shunted across a transmission line. For 
example, a grid of parallel metal wires exhibits the properties of a shunt-inductive 
susceptance.
There are many additional radome design issues and application specific consider -
ations and design drivers, but these are beyond the scope of this chapter .
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors wish to acknowledge and thank Helmut Schrank, Gary Evans, and Daniel 
Davis (also co-author of this chapter) for Chapter 6, “Reflector Antennas,” in the second 
(1990) edition of this handbook.55 We are grateful for their contributions and portions of 
the second edition chapter have been retained.
Portions of the material in the “Radome” subsection were adapted from 
Chapter 14,“Radomes,” in the first (1970) edition of this handbook,56 which was 
authored by Vincent J. DiCaudo.
REFERENCES
 1. J. D. Kraus, Antennas , 2nd Ed., New York: McGraw-Hill Book Company, 1988: Sec. 2-34.
 2. W. L. Stutzman and G. A. Thiele, Antenna Theory and Design , Chapter 8, New York: John Wiley 
and Sons, 1981.
 3. C. M. Knop, “On the front to back ratio of a parabolic dish antenna,” IEEE Trans. Antennas 
Propag ., vol 24, pp. 109–111, January 1976.
 4. W. V . T. Rusch, “Scattering from a hyperboloidal reflector in a cassegrain feed system,” IEEE 
Trans ., vol. AP-11, pp. 414–421, July 1963.
 5. C. L. Gray, “Estimating the effect of feed support member blocking on antenna gain and sidelobe 
level,” Microwave J ., pp. 88–91, March 1964.
 6. Microwave Engineers Handbook and Buyers Guide , New York: Horizon House, 1964, p. 143.
 7. W. W. Mumford, “Some technical aspects of microwave radiation hazards,” Proc. IRE , pp. 427–447, 
February 1961.
 8. J. Ruze, “The effect of aperture errors on the antenna radiation pattern,” Nuovo Cimento, Suppl ., 
vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 364–380, 1952.
 9. J. Ruze, “Antenna tolerance theory—A review,” Proc. IEEE , vol. 54, pp. 633–640, April 1966.
10. S. Silver (ed.), Microwave Antenna Theory and Design , MIT Radiation Laboratory Series, 
vol. 12, New York: McGraw-Hill Book Company, 1949.
11. Y . T. Lo, “On the Beam Deviation Factor of a Parabolic Reflector,” IRE Trans ., vol. AP-8, 
pp. 347–349, May 1960.
12. P. D. Potter, “Application of spherical wave theory to Cassegrainian-fed paraboloids,” IEEE 
Trans ., vol. AP-15, pp. 727–736, November 1967.
13. R. C. Johnson and H. Jasik (eds.), Antenna Engineering Handbook , 2nd Ed., New York: McGraw-Hill 
Book Company, 1984, pp. 32–11, 32–12.
ch12.indd   41 12/17/07   2:32:02 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Reflector Antennas 12.42  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 12
14. Y . T. Lo and S. W. Lee (eds.), Antenna Handbook: Theory, Applications and Design , Reflector 
Antennas , Chapter 15, New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold Co. Inc., 1988.
15. C. J. Sletten, “The theory of reflector antennas,” Air Force Cambridge Res. Lab., AFCRL-66-761, 
Phys. Sci. Res., Paper 290, 1966.
16. K. S. Kelleher and H. P. Coleman, “Off-axis characteristics of the paraboloidal reflector,” Naval 
Res. Lab. Rept. 4088, 1952.
17. A. W. Rudge and N. A. Adatia, “Offset parabolic reflector antennas: A review,” Proceedings 
IEEE , vol. 66, no. 12, pp. 1592–1618, December 1978.
18. D. G. Kielsy, “Parabolic cylinder aerials,” Wireless Eng ., vol. 28, pp. 73–78, March 1951.
19. R. L. Fante et al., “A parabolic cylinder antenna with very low sidelobes,” IEEE Trans ., vol. AP-28, 
pp. 53–59, January 1980.
20. P. W. Hannan, “Microwave antennas derived from the cassegrain telescope,” IRE Trans ., 
vol. AP-9, pp. 140–153, March 1961.
21. P. D. Potter, “Aperture illumination and gain of a Cassegrainian system,” IEEE Trans ., vol. AP-11, 
pp. 373–375, May 1963.
22. W. V . T. Rusch, “Scattering from a hyperboloidal reflector in a Cassegrainian feed system,” IEEE 
Trans ., vol. AP-11, pp. 414–421, July 1963.
23. E. J. Wilkinson and A. J. Applebaum, “Cassegrain systems,” IRE Trans ., vol. AP-9, pp. 119–120, 
January 1961.
24. C. J. Sletten et al., “Offset dual reflector antennas for very low sidelobes,” Microwave J ., 
pp. 221–240, May 1986.
25. W. V . Rusch, “The current state of the reflector antenna art,” IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag ., 
vol. AP-32, no. 34, pp. 319–320, April 1984.
26. T. Haeger and J. J. Lee, “Comparisons between a shaped and nonshaped small cassegrain 
antenna,” IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag ., vol. 38, no. 12, December 1990.
27. R. A. Pearson, E. Elshirbini, and M. S. Smith, “Electronic beam scanning using an array-fed dual 
offset reflector antenna,” IEEE AP-S Int. Symp. Dig ., pp. 263–266, June 1986.
28. E. P. Ekelman and B. S. Lee, “An array-fed, dual-reflector antenna system (of offset confocal 
paraboloids) for satellite antenna applications,” IEEE Symp. Antennas Propag ., pp. 1586–1589, 
1989.
29. H. K. Schuman and D. R. Pflug, “A phased array feed, dual offset reflector antenna for testing 
array compensation techniques,” IEEE Symp. Antennas Propag ., pp. 466–469, 1990.
30. W. D. Fitzgerald, “Limited electronic scanning with a near-field Cassegrainian system,” 
Technical Report 484, MIT Lincoln Laboratory, 24 September 1971.
31. T. Lee, “A study of spherical reflectors as wide angle scanning antennas,” IEEE Trans. Antennas 
Propag ., vol. 7, pp. 223–226, July 1959.
32. T. Chu and P. P. Iannone, “Radiation properties of a parabolic torus reflector,” IEEE Trans. 
Antennas Propag ., vol. 37, no. 7, July 1989.
33. M. Skolnik, “A long range radar warning system for the detection of intercontinental ballistic 
missiles,” MIT Lincoln Laboratory TR 128, August 15, 1956.
34. M. Skolnik, Introduction to Radar Systems , 3rd Ed., New York: McGraw-Hill, 2002, pp. 662, 663.
35. C. A. Balanis, Antenna Theory Analysis and Design , Chapters 13 and 15, New York: John Wiley 
and Sons, 1982.
36. A. W. Love (ed.), Electromagnetic Horn Antennas , New York: IEEE Press, 1976.
37. W. Cohen and C. M. Steinmetz, “Amplitude and phase sensing monopulse system parameters,” 
Microwave J ., pp. 27–33, October 1959.
38. D. R. Rhodes, Introduction to Monopulse , New York: McGraw-Hill Book Company, 1959.
39. L. J. Ricardi and L. Niro, “Design of a twelve-horn monopulse feed,” IRE Int. Conv. Rec.,  
part. 1 , March 1961, pp. 49–56.
40. P. W. Hannan and P. A. Loth, “A monopulse antenna having independent optimization of the sum 
and difference modes,” IRE Int. Conv. Rec., part. 1 , March 1961, pp. 57–60.
ch12.indd   42 12/17/07   2:32:02 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Reflector Antennas  REFLECTOR ANTENNAS  12.436x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 12
41. B. Saka and E. Yazgan, “Pattern optimization of a reflector antenna with planar-array feeds and 
cluster feeds,” IEEE Trans. Antennas Propagat ., vol. 45, no. 1, January 1997.
42. R. F. Harrington, Time Harmonic Electromagnetic Fields , New York: McGraw-Hill, pp. 106–116, 
1961.
43. L. Diaz and T. Milligan, Antenna Engineering Using Physical Optics: Practical CAD Techniques 
and Software , Boston: Artech House, 1996, pp. 193–196.
44. C. A. Balanis, “Green’s functions” in Advanced Engineering Electromagnetics , Chapter 14, New 
York: John Wiley and Sons, 1989.
45. P. H. Pathak, “High frequency techniques for antenna analysis,” Proc. of the IEEE , vol. 80, no. 1, 
January 1982.
46. Y . T. Lo and S. W. Lee (eds.), Antenna Handbook: Theory, Applications and Design, Techniques 
for High Frequency Problems , Chapter 4, New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold Co. Inc., 1988.
47. G. F. Paynter, T. H. Lee, and W. D. Burnside, “Expansion of existing EM Workbench for multiple 
computational electromagnetics codes,” IEEE Antennas and Propagation Magazine , vol. 45, 
no. 3, June 2003.
48. D. Brunkow, V. N. Bringi, P. C. Kennedy, S. A. Rutledge, V. Chandrasekar, E. A. Mueller, and 
R. K. Bowie, “A description of the CSU-CHILL National Radar Facility,”. J. Atmos. Ocean. 
Tech ., 17, pp. 1596–1608, 2000.
49. M. Thomson, “The astromesh deployable reflector,” IEEE Symp. Antennas and Propag ., 
pp. 1516–1519, 1999.
50. M. Thomson, “Astromesh Deployable Reflectors for Ku and Ka-Band Satellites,” AIAA Symp ., 
2002, pp. 1–4.
51. J. K. H. Lin, H. Fang, E. Im, and U. O. Quijano, “Concept study of a 35m spherical reflector 
system for NEXRAD in space application,” presented at 47th AIAA/ASME/ASCE/AHS/ASC 
Structures, Structural Dynamics, and Materials Conference, Newport, RI, May 1–4, 2006.
52. R. Fowell and Wang, H., “Precision pointing of the Thuraya satellite.” presented at 26th AAS 
Guidance and Control Conference, Breckenridge, CO, February 5–9, 2003.
53. R. C. Hansen, Microwave Scanning Antennas , New York Academic Press, New York, 1966; Los 
Altos, CA: Peninsula Publishing, 1985.
54. J. D. Walton, Jr. (ed.): Radome Engineering Handbook , New York: Marcel Dekker, 1970.
55. M. Skolnik (ed.): Radar Handbook , 2nd Ed., New York: McGraw-Hill, 1990.
56. M. Skolnik (ed.): Radar Handbook , 1st Ed., New York: McGraw-Hill, 1970.
ch12.indd   43 12/17/07   2:32:03 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Reflector Antennas 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 12  
blind folio 12.44
ch12.indd   44 12/17/07   2:32:03 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Reflector Antennas 