20.16x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 20 HF Over-the-Horizon Radar James M.
Headrick Naval Research Laboratory (retired) Stuart J.
Anderson Australian Defence Science and Technology Organisation 20.1 INTRODUCTION Beyond-the-horizon detection of terrestrial targets at ranges of thousands of kilometers  can be achieved by radars operating in the high-frequency (HF) band (3 to 30 MHz).
This  very long range coverage is obtained by using skywave  propagation, that is, reflecting  the radar signals from the ionosphere.
HF ground wave (surface wave) propagation  over the sea has been used for intermediate but still over-the-horizon distances, up to  several hundred kilometers.
Occasionally HF radar systems also find applications in  line-of-sight applications at short range.
This chapter focuses predominantly on skywave  radar, though much of the discussion applies equally to surface wave radar.
Rather than  amalgamate discussion of the two radar configurations throughout the chapter, the  distinctive features of HF surface wave radar are treated separately in an appendix at  the end of the chapter.
In one sense.
the development of HF skywave radar can be traced back to the 1920s,  when skywave echoes were identified,1 but the first HF radar systems were not deployed  until the 1950s.2 Since then, skywave radar has evolved to address applications such  as the detection and tracking of aircraft, ballistic and cruise missiles, and ships.3–15 In  addition to detecting “skin” echoes from targets of interest, HF radar is useful for observ - ing various forms of high-altitude atmospheric ionization, both natural, including those  associated with aurorae and meteors, and artificial, including the interaction of space - craft and ballistic missiles with the ionospheric plasma.16–19 Further, the wavelengths  used are of the same order as ocean surface gravity waves, and this correspondence can  be exploited to provide information on the wave directional spectrum, ocean currents,  and, by inference, surface winds.5 Indeed, scattering from the sea can often be employed  as a radar cross section (RCS) amplitude reference and is a widely used diagnostic tool.
 The narrow-band waveforms employed, the low frequencies, and the nature of the trans - mission path make the spatial resolution coarse when compared with higher-frequency  radars, but the doppler resolution can be exceedingly fine.
The magnitude and doppler  distribution of the echoes from the distant Earth’s surface (often termed backscatter ,  though that term should be reserved for monostatic radars) are major factors in setting  system dynamic range, spectral purity, and signal processing requirements.Chapter 20 ch20.indd   1 12/20/07   1:15:20 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	Source: RADAR HANDBOOK 20.2  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 20 For effective radar operation, environmental parameters that affect radar performance  need to be determined in real time, defined as that interval in which there are no large-scale  changes in the ionosphere.
Typically, this is of the order of 10–30 minutes.
Transmission- path information is generally derived from adjunct vertical and oblique sounders as well  as by using the radar itself as a sounder.
An ionospheric electron density model complex  enough to enable adequate sounding interpretation is required.
Ionospheric or transmis - sion path statistical climatologies and forecasts are necessary for radar design and for  development of site-specific models.
In addition, other users in the HF spectrum must be  observed continuously and operating frequencies selected to avoid interference.
The essential features of skywave propagation can be seen in Figure 20.1.
The  ionosphere, being an ionized gas with free electrons, will reflect all radar signals when  the radar frequency is less than the plasma frequency  given by  f NP e ≅ ×−9 106  (20.1) FIGURE 20.1  Ray-tracing through a model ionosphere, showing the variation of the radar footprint  with carrier frequency.
The contours map the plasma frequency or electron density.
ch20.indd   2 12/20/07   1:15:23 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	HF Over-the-Horizon Radar  HF OVER-THE-HORIZON RADAR  20.36x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 20 where fP is in MHz and Ne is in electrons per cubic meter.
For a given elevation angle a , if  the radar frequency exceeds fp/sinα at the height of maximum ionization, rays launched  at higher elevation angles will escape, resulting in a so-called skip or dead  zone within  which the Earth’s surface is not illuminated.
Beyond this skip zone, energy is returned to  the Earth, reaching a maximum range when the rays leaving the antenna are horizontal.
 Useful range coverage will lie between these limits, which define the one-hop zone .
As shown in Figure 20.2, a multiplicity of hops may exist, and energy may even  circle the earth; clutter echoes from these long ranges can seriously degrade radar  performance.
A comparison of Figures 20.1 a, 20.1 b, and 20.1 c reveals that different  range extents are illuminated by using different operating frequencies, with longer  starting ranges requiring higher frequencies.
In the examples shown, 16 MHz illumi - nates ranges from 1300 to 3000 km, whereas 19 MHz illuminates ranges from 1650 to  2750 km whereas 22 MHz illuminates from 1950 to 2750 km.
Hence, the farthest edge  of the footprint need not increase with frequency, depending on the prevailing iono - spheric conditions.
In this example, a single ionospheric layer is considered.
Normally,  there are two or three distinct layers such that signals may partially penetrate the lower  layers to be reflected by a higher layer.
As a consequence, the relationship between  the range to a target and the measured echo time delay becomes multivalued, with  unknown parameters such as layer heights that must be estimated by various tech - niques as described later in this chapter.
To illustrate the operating principles of a skywave radar, Figure 20.3 presents a  map showing multiple surveillance tasks assigned to a hypothetical radar with 360 °  azimuthal coverage.
Five sectors of current surveillance activity are shown, each  addressing a particular mission as indicated, each mission consisting of a number of  dwell interrogation regions (DIRs) .
The electronically steered radar transmit beam  steps through these DIRs, in some assigned sequence, illuminating each DIR with an  appropriate waveform for a corresponding interval during which the receiving system  acquires a coherent time series of echo samples.
The coherent integration time (CIT)  depends on the type of observation but is almost always in the range of 1–100 seconds.
 Each transmitter footprint is analyzed by forming simultaneous contiguous receive  beams, on the order of 1/2 ° wide at 15 MHz in the case of the U.S.
Navy ROTHR and  the Australian Jindalee and JORN radars, which equates to a 10 km cross-range resolu - tion at a 1200 km range.
The task-specific requirements on DIR revisit rates determine  the sequencing of the DIR interrogations and, of course, set the limit on how many  tasks can be addressed.
FIGURE 20.2  Numerically computed rays illustrating multiple hop propagation across the equatorial zone.
 The elevated peak electron density near the equator at ~2500 km is the Appleton anomaly.
ch20.indd   3 12/20/07   1:15:23 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	HF Over-the-Horizon Radar 20.4  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 20 Consider the set of tasks and DIRs shown in Figure 20.3.
Task 1 would require only  short CITs, 1–2 s, say, if the aircraft is assumed to be large, and would need revisits  perhaps every minute, as the flight is not expected to maneuver so the track will be  well-behaved and observed position errors would be due to ionospheric fluctuations.
 Only the single DIR containing the aircraft need be interrogated.
Task 2, barrier sur - veillance, if concerned with ship traffic, can afford to relax the revisit time to tens  of minutes as ships move so slowly, but in order to achieve detection, long CITs of  20–30 s are required to separate the ship echoes from the sea clutter in the doppler  spectrum.
Even so, the radar can step across the barrier arc, with plenty of time to  interleave a Task 1 dwell between addressing successive DIRs in Task 2.
If the barrier  Task 2 were concerned with aircraft, with a CIT of 1–2 s, the revisits would need to  be frequent enough to achieve the desired probability of detection before the aircraft  had time to cross the barrier.
One approach is to widen the barrier by processing more  range cells or by reducing the waveform bandwidth and allowing the range cells to  grow wider, but this may fail if the ionosphere does not support propagation over the  increased range depth.
Another possibility is to increase the revisit interval over a  subset of the DIRs.
The relative priority of Tasks 1 and 2 would also need to be taken  into account.
Task 4 (ballistic missile launch detection) would require much more frequent sur - veillance if a launch were believed to be imminent, or else the missile might escape  from the radar footprint without being detected.
Assume a CIT of 5 seconds and a  tolerable revisit interval of 10 s.
Tasks 1 and 4 could be interleaved, for example, by  carrying out five dwells of Task 4, and then one of Task 1, and then repeating this pat - tern.
Task 3 is concerned with slow-moving ships, so the revisit interval could be tens 1 Radar 545°N 30°N 15°N 90°W 75°W 60°W0°2 463 45°W30°W15°W0° FIGURE 20.3   Some coverage and tasking options for hypothetical HF radars on a (fictitious) mid- Atlantic island.
The coverage regions numbered 1–5 correspond to skywave radar missions as follows: 1,  air route monitoring; 2, barrier surveillance; 3, strategic waterway monitoring; 4, ballistic missile launch  detection; and 5, remote sensing and hurricane tracking.
The sector designated 6 is representative of HF  surface wave radar coverage.
ch20.indd   4 12/20/07   1:15:25 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	HF Over-the-Horizon Radar  HF OVER-THE-HORIZON RADAR  20.56x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 20 of minutes, but a long CIT of perhaps 20–30 s is required in order to separate the ship  echoes from the sea clutter in the doppler spectrum.
During this time, Task 4’s require - ments would be violated.
Tasks 3 and 4, as defined, are incompatible.
Task 5 (remote sensing of ocean conditions) would have a much lower priority as  it deals with slowly varying phenomena, so it would need only occasional revisiting.
 The smaller sector shown as Task 6, extending to a range of 400 km, is representative  of the coverage of an HF surface wave radar, as used for protecting the approaches to  a port, for example.
This example is typical of the scheduling and resource allocation problem that is  central to HF skywave radar operations.
Compromises are often unavoidable.
The  situation is further complicated by the continuous variation of ionospheric propaga - tion conditions, which must be monitored and used to guide tasking, as when bad  ionospheric “weather” is likely to preclude certain missions.
Almost invariably, the sectors and, indeed, the individual DIRs within a sector will  require different carrier frequencies, even for a given range, as the ionosphere may  vary substantially across the full range and azimuth extent of the active coverage.
 The defining characteristic of HF skywave radar is that the radar operator must select  frequencies that are optimum for the various tasks and adapt these frequencies to the  ever-changing ionosphere.
This chapter sets out to explain the principal features of HF skywave radar as it is  presently implemented, emphasizing the physical considerations that govern system  design and performance.
20.2 THE RADAR EQUATION A form of the radar equation, Eq.
20.2, can be used to point to aspects of HF radar  that are significantly different from radars that use higher frequencies.
These differ - ences include adaptation to environment, frequency and waveform selection, radar  cross section, path losses, multipath effects, noise, interference, antenna gain, spatial  resolution, and clutter.
For the case of noise-limited detection, the radar equation  takes the form  S NP G G T F L L N Rt r p p s=avl2 3 044σ π( ) (20.2) where  S/N  = output signal-to-noise ratio  Pav = average transmitted power  Gt = transmitter antenna gain  Gr = receiver antenna gain  T  = coherent processing time  l = wavelength  s = target radar cross section  Fp = propagation-path factor  N0 = noise power per unit bandwidth  Lp, Ls = transmission-path and system losses  R  = distance between radar and target ch20.indd   5 12/20/07   1:15:28 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	HF Over-the-Horizon Radar 20.6  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 20 These parameters are explained briefly as follows: Antennas, Gt and Gr : A common convention for HF-band radars is to include the  effect of the ground in the antenna performance characterization, and that con - vention will be used here.
For example, a half-wave dipole in free space has a  maximum gain over an isotrope of 2.15 dB.
If that antenna is oriented vertically,  just above but not touching a perfectly conducting earth, its maximum gain will  be increased by a factor of 4, or 6 dB, to 8.15 dB at 0 ° elevation angle.
Because  the Earth is never perfect, its conductivity and dielectric constant are factors in  determining antenna performance.
The electrical properties of the Earth are a much  stronger factor for vertical polarization than for horizontal; however, terrain fea - tures and surface roughness are important for both polarizations.
Coherent processing time, T: For ranges beyond the skip distance, HF radar returns  almost invariably contain Earth backscatter at the same ranges as targets.
Doppler  processing is used to separate targets from Earth backscatter; hence, coherent sam - ples are acquired over an interval T, which may exceed 100 s, though it is usually  in the range of 1–20 s.
Wavelength ( l): The wavelength or operating frequency must be selected so that  the transmitted energy is reflected by the ionosphere to illuminate the desired area  of the Earth.
The spectrum of the emissions must be constrained not to interfere  with other users.
Because both the ionosphere and the HF-band occupancy distribu - tions are time-varying parameters, adaptive radar management is required.
Radar cross section (RCS), s : The radar cross section of conventional targets will  generally be a function of frequency, polarization, and aspect angle, but at HF, the  target dimensions are typically of the same order as the wavelength, so scatter - ing behavior is different from that observed at higher frequencies.
Scattering also  occurs from the environment—clutter—so models of the scattering coefficient per  unit area of land and ocean surfaces, or per unit volume of the turbulent ionosphere,  are used to provide effective RCS values for Eq.
20.2 when those natural scatter - ers are the “targets” of interest.
Thus, for the RCS of Earth clutter, the normalized  surface scattering coefficient s ° is multiplied by the resolution cell size A.
The  important resolution cell size factors, viz.
receiver antenna beamwidth and spectral  bandwidth, are not explicitly contained in Eq.
20.2 (Clutter frequently sets the limit  to target detectability; in which case, it is the signal-to-clutter ratio rather than the  signal-to-noise ratio that is of interest.
Accordingly, a different form of the radar  equation must then be employed.) Propagation factors (Fp): Several propagation phenomena, including Faraday  polarization rotation, ground-reflection multipath, multiple hop propagation, and  ionospheric focusing may need to be included in the equation, depending on the  scenario of interest.
Faraday rotation refers to the variation of the polarization of  the signal incident on the target as a function of time and distance, arising from its  propagation through the magnetized ionospheric plasma; linearly polarized trans - mitted signals often arrive in the target zone with a rotated axis of polarization but  still essentially linearly polarized.
Since many targets have RCS that vary with  polarization, an important result is that the most favorable polarization will illu - minate the target recurrently.
The spatial scale of the polarization “fringes” in the  radar footprint is typically in the range 10–100 km, and the change of frequency  needed to rotate the plane of polarization by 90 ° at a given location in the radar  footprint (the polarization bandwidth) is of the order of 100 kHz, so differential  ch20.indd   6 12/20/07   1:15:29 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	HF Over-the-Horizon Radar  HF OVER-THE-HORIZON RADAR  20.76x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 20 effects may be significant.
Of course, polarization will also fluctuate at the receiv - ing antenna as a consequence of the time-varying return path.
Noise (No): For radars operating in the HF band, the receiver internal noise is almost  always less than the external noise.
Losses (  Lp, Ls): The loss term Lp contains the two-way losses along the path   traversed, including ionospheric absorption and ground-reflection losses; Ls repre - sents any radar system losses.
Ionospheric losses, while predicted on a statistical  basis, can constitute a major unknown in real-time radar operation.
Range (R): The range in Eq.
20.2 is the “slant range,” that is, the length of the sky - wave path between target and radar, not the distance as measured along the Earth’s  surface.
The ionospheric reflection height needs to be used to convert this slant  range to great-circle ground distance.
The apparent range to a particular target may  take on more than one value since multiple paths may exist.
With these interpretations, the radar equation (Eq.
20.2) can be used to model  the performance of skywave radars when noise, not clutter, is setting the limit to  target detectability, noting that the complexity and statistical nature of ionospheric  propagation and the external noise environment means that it is often necessary  to apply the equation to probability distributions, not scalar values of the param - eters.
When the target’s velocity places its doppler shift beyond those of any clut - ter returns, the noise-limited model is appropriate, but there are two important  situations where this is not the case.
The first is ship detection, where the intrinsic  doppler spread of sea clutter routinely extends beyond the typical doppler shifts of  most ship echoes.
The second case is the phenomenon of spread doppler clutter,  which arises from plasma instabilities and turbulence, especially post-sunset and  at high and low latitudes.
The equivalent velocity of this type of clutter can extend  to hundreds of meters per second, masking even fast aircraft returns.
These topics  are addressed in Section 20.8.
Dealing with clutter-limited situations is a vital part  of the radar designer’s task, requiring a detailed understanding of the phenomena  and their distributions.
20.3 FACTORS INFLUENCING   SKYWAVE RADAR DESIGN Principal Differences Between HF and Microwave Radar.
 Before analyzing  HF skywave radar systems in detail in the sections that follow and describing those  properties of the environment that impact their design and performance, it is instruc - tive to summarize the principle differences between skywave radar and conventional  microwave radar.
This provides a cautionary reminder not to extrapolate too readily  from the familiar characteristics of the microwave domain to the HF band.
HF skywave radars operate at ranges about an order of magnitude greater than  microwave long-range air surveillance radars.
The HF radar wavelength is hundreds  of times greater, so the antennas are proportionately larger, as much as two or three  kilometers in length if they are to see ships, but considerably less if only aircraft are  to be detected.
Transmitter average power might be on the order of several hundred  kilowatts for a skywave radar, but on the order of a few kilowatts for a microwave  ATC radar.
The observation time (CIT) for skywave systems can range from one to  many tens of seconds, but is on the order of tens of milliseconds for microwave radar.
 ch20.indd   7 12/20/07   1:15:29 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	HF Over-the-Horizon Radar 20.8  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 20 The long observation time for a skywave radar is needed to obtain the necessary echo  signal energy to ensure reliable target detection as well as to obtain the long integra - tion times needed for effective doppler processing.
The ionosphere has a dominating  influence on skywave radar, whereas the normal atmosphere has very little effect on  microwave radar.
The skywave radar’s frequency and other parameters are driven  primarily by the need to propagate via the ionosphere.
Constraints imposed by propa - gation and the availability of unoccupied frequency channels dictate that the range  resolution of HF radars is not nearly as good as that of microwave systems.
The HF  transmitter has to maintain stringent control of its radiated signal spectrum so as to  avoid interference to other users of the HF spectrum.
(A similar consideration applies  to microwave radars, but not to the extent that it does at HF.
Military microwave radars  like to have available a wide spectral width for purposes of electronic protection and to  extract more detailed target information, but the increasing demands of civilian wire - less services have reduced the available spectrum available to microwave radars to the  point where it is limiting performance.) The sensitivity of microwave radars is limited by receiver noise, but the sensitivity of  HF radars is limited by external noise that enters the receiver through the antenna.
This  external noise is due not only to natural mechanisms such as thunderstorms but to the sig - nals from the many HF transmitters throughout the world.
Both microwave and HF radars  can be limited by the large echo signals from land or sea, though in HF skywave radars,  the problem is particularly severe.
Doppler processing is essential under such conditions.
 For some aircraft, the radar cross section at HF is significantly larger than that at micro - waves.
Many HF OTH radars utilize an FM-CW waveform, so widely separated sites are  needed to minimize the leakage of the transmitter into the receiver.
Microwave radars  have used FM-CW waveforms in the past, but in most cases, these have been replaced by  waveforms that don’t require separate transmitter and receiver sites.
Table 20.1 presents a comparison of some key radar parameters for representative  radar systems of each type, and contrasts the ways in which the respective modes of  propagation, scattering, noise, and deployment constrain the form and function of  radar systems.
Implications for Skywave Radar Design .
From an examination of Table 20.1,   it is clear that a skywave radar is not simply a microwave radar scaled up in size by  a factor of ~ 1000, that is, in proportion to the wavelength.
Referring to the radar  equation, the R–4 loss term means that, for a representative tenfold increase in detec - tion range of HF over microwave, 40 dB extra range loss accumulates.
This cannot  all be recovered by radiating more power and increasing antenna gain, for practical  engineering reasons and cost, apart from constraints imposed by ionospheric propa - gation.
Coherent (doppler) processing provides the necessary processing gain, but the  processing times required—from 1 to 100 s—mean that revisit rates when conducting  surveillance over an extended region will fall below acceptable levels unless multiple  receive beams are processed in parallel.
Designers have explored different trade-offs,  in most cases, converging on schemes in which 15–30 receive beams are formed  within a broader transmitted beam footprint.
The reduced transmitting antenna gain  may be compensated by increasing power or coherent processing time.
Even under benign conditions, the ionosphere seldom supports highly coher - ent propagation over bandwidths greater than ~200 kHz, even when clear channels  wide enough to accommodate such waveforms are available, which is infrequently.
 More typically, clear channels range from 10–50 kHz, so the waveform bandwidth  is normally chosen to lie in this range.
The corresponding range resolutions extend  ch20.indd   8 12/20/07   1:15:29 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	HF Over-the-Horizon Radar  HF OVER-THE-HORIZON RADAR  20.96x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 20 from 3–15 km.
The cross-range resolution cell dimension L(R) at range R is given  by LR D≈l where D is the receiving array aperture and l is the radar wavelength.
 I.
M ICROWA VE  RADAR II.
HF SKYWA VE  RADAR Type chosen for comparison Long-range air traffic  control such as ARSR-3Joint aircraft and ship detection, two- site radar such as Jindalee, JORN, and  ROTHR Major antenna dimension (m) 10–15 1000–3000 Average transmit power (kW) 4 400  Antenna radiation pattern Fully defined by antenna  constructionStrongly influenced by ground  properties around antenna Typical operating range (km) 280–450 1000–4000 Minimum range (km) 1000 Range resolution (m) 300 1500–15000 Propagation medium •  Homogeneous or  stratified • Nondispersive • Isotropic • Stable • Linear • Nearly constant•  Structured horizontally and  vertically, both deterministically and  randomly, on many scales • Frequency dispersive • Anisotropic (magnetoionic) • Highly dynamic • Weakly nonlinear •  Varies dramatically with time of  day, season, etc.
Radar signal propagation path • Line-of-sight •  Usually unique; may  have simple ground- reflection multipath • Relatively stable• Reflected from ionosphere •  Multiple paths, resulting in multiple  echoes from a single target, at  different apparent ranges, bearings,  elevation angles, and doppler shifts • Unstable •  Poorly known, must be inferred  from ancillary sounding systems Dominant propagation effects  on the radar signal•  Multipath interference  between direct and  surface-reflected signals• Attenuation • Focusing and defocusing • Polarization transformation • Phase modulation • Wavefront distortion Target scattering regime Optical (high frequency),  i.e., target size  radar  wavelengthRayleigh – resonance, i.e., target size   < or ∼  radar wavelength Clutter •  Can be serious,  especially at short  ranges •  Minimized by narrow  beam, short pulse, and  doppler processingLook-down viewing geometry  inevitably results in strong ground  echoes at the same range as the target,  typically 20–80 dB stronger than the  target echo Doppler processing Widely used for detection  of moving targets in clutterEssential to separate moving targets  from strong clutter returnsTABLE 20.1  Key Differences Between Microwave Radar and HF Skywave Radar   (The parameter values quoted here are intended to be broadly representative, rather   than an attempt to span all known systems.) ch20.indd   9 12/20/07   1:15:32 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	HF Over-the-Horizon Radar 20.10  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 20 Hence, to achieve L = 10 km at 1200 km range when the frequency is 15 MHz, and  thus a resolution cell not too eccentric in shape, requires an array aperture of about  2400 m.
Feeding arrays of this size can require hundreds of kilometers of cables or, in  some systems, fiber optics, and raises challenging problems in array calibration.
The  transmitting array aperture, assuming ≈ 20 receive beams to be fitted into the transmit  beam, need be only ~ 120 m at this frequency.
It follows from the radar equation and the considerations just discussed that trans - mit power in the range of 200–1000 kW is generally appropriate for detecting small  aircraft targets over a wide range of conditions.
In order to radiate power efficiently,  the transmitting antenna elements tend to be large, resonant structures; for example,  the vertical log-periodic antennas used in the JORN system are up to 43 m tall.
In  contrast, the choice of receiving antenna element has traditionally been based on the I.
M ICROWA VE  RADAR II.
HF SKYWA VE  RADAR Frequency constraints Can be serious  because of the need for  wideband radar systems  and by competition  for the microwave  frequency spectrum by  communications and other  electromagnetic services•  Bounded above by the statistical  availability of skywave propagation  to ranges of interest •  Bounded below by spectrum  availability, antenna size, and the  rapid fall-off in target RCS •  Must not interfere with other users  in the crowded HF spectrum, thus  limiting choice of frequency and  bandwidth •  Must adapt continually to the  changing ionosphere so as to  maintain illumination of current  target region Noise floor dominated by Internal receiver noise  (thermal, etc.)Sources (atmospheric, galactic,  anthropogenic, etc.) Siting constraints •  Unobstructed, elevated  sites preferred•  Receive array site must be EM  quiet, generally rural, to avoid  city and industrial noise at HF  frequencies •  Huge arrays require flat, open  spaces to minimize topographic  effects on beam patterns •  If a bistatic or two-site quasi- monostatic design is adopted, it  needs two sites with adequate  separation (~100 km) and the  correct geographical relationship  relative to the coverage arc •  Location on the Earth must be such  that auroral and equatorial spread  doppler echoes don’t mask targetsTABLE 20.1  Key Differences Between Microwave Radar and HF Skywave Radar   (The parameter values quoted here are intended to be broadly representative, rather   than an attempt to span all known systems.) ( Continued ) ch20.indd   10 12/20/07   1:15:32 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	HF Over-the-Horizon Radar  HF OVER-THE-HORIZON RADAR  20.116x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 20 precept that efficiency is of low importance for HF reception because external noise  is almost always far stronger than internal noise.
A more efficient receiving element  accepts more signal power but equally more external noise so, prima facie , nothing is  gained in terms of the signal-to-noise ratio.
Cost is thus reduced by employing a small  receiving antenna element.
Heights of 4–6 m are common.
The look-down geometry of skywave illumination results in strong clutter returns  in the same range cell as the target, demanding a high dynamic range able to support  clutter-to-target energy ratios in excess of 80 dB.
This places severe demands on the  spectral purity and dynamic range of the radar waveform generator, transmitting, and  receiving systems.
High sensitivity has the side effect of revealing the echoes from  many natural scatterers in the ionosphere, as well as the spectrum of ground clutter that  has been spread in doppler by the fluctuations of the signal propagation path.
In order  to recognize and suppress these unwanted returns, which can obscure target echoes,  an understanding of the underlying physics is essential.
A distinctive requirement of a skywave radar is a suite of auxiliary systems to mon - itor the state of the ionosphere and the availability of unoccupied channels in which  to operate.
This reliance on continuous environmental monitoring and the associated  ability to adapt the radar parameters and tasking to make best use of the prevailing  conditions cannot be satisfied with simple, low dynamic range equipment, for that  would fail to reveal many of the phenomena that are setting the threshold for target  detection and tracking.
Further, a high degree of automation is essential to keep up  with the changing environment.
A comparison of principle design parameters of several current and former opera - tional HF skywave radars is presented in Table 20.2, illustrating the diversity of engi - neering solutions that have been implemented to meet specific mission objectives.
 Jindalee  Stage BJORN- LavertonAN/FPS-118  ECRS/WCRSAN/TPS-71 ROTHR NostradamusSteel Yard (Komsomolsk  na Amur) Developer DSTO,  AustraliaTelecom  Australia GEC-Marconi  UK RLM  USA-AustraliaGeneral Electric  USARaytheon  USAONERA,  FranceNIIDAR,  Russia Year of first  target detections1982 2000 1983 1987 1994 1977 Configuration Quasi- monostaticQuasi- monostaticQuasi- monostaticQuasi- monostaticTrue  monostaticQuasi- monostatic Tx – Rx site  separation (km)100 80 160 100, 160 n/a Max.
transmitter  power (kW)160 300 1200 200 50 1500  Tx gain (dB) 18–27 23 ERP 76 dBW 80 dBW 80 dBW 75 dBWTABLE 20.2  Principal Design Parameters for Some Major HF Skywave Radar Systems,   Past and Present   (This information has been compiled from sources that, in some cases, are incomplete.
Where only  partial information is provided, it may still be useful for comparison purposes.
Notes: (i) VLPA  denotes vertical log-periodic antenna and (ii) 2-band ( n-band) linear arrays are usually constructed as  contiguous collinear arrays.) ch20.indd   11 12/20/07   1:15:33 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	HF Over-the-Horizon Radar 20.12  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 20 Jindalee  Stage BJORN- LavertonAN/FPS-118  ECRS/WCRSAN/TPS-71 ROTHR NostradamusSteel Yard (Komsomolsk  na Amur) Tx array design 2-band linear  array of  8 (low band)  and 16 (high  band) VLPA  antennas 2 adjacent  2-band linear  arrays of VLPA  antennas;  arrays oriented  at 90 ° to each  other3 contiguous  6-band linear  arrays of  canted dipoles  with 41-m tall  backscreens,  12 elements per  band; arrays  oriented at 60 ° 2-band linear  array of 2  ×  16 VLPA  antennas Y-shaped  array of 3 ×  32 biconical  elements  randomly  distributed2 × vertical  curtain arrays  of 13 masts ×  10 vertically  stacked  horizontal  cage dipoles Frequency   range (MHz)5–28 5–32 5–28 5–12 10.5–28 6–28 4–30 Tx apertures (m) 137 160, 160 304, 224, 167,  123, 92, 68 3 arms × 128  (long) × 80  (wide)  Tx azimuth  beam steer (deg)± 45° ± 45° ± 30° ± 32° 360° Rx array design Linear array  of 462 5-m fan  monopole pairs  grouped as  32 overlapped  subarrays2 linear arrays  of 480 twin  monopole  elements;  arrays at 90 °3 contiguous  linear arrays  of 246 × 5.4  m vertical  monopoles  with 20 m  backscreens;  arrays at 60 °Linear array  of 372 × 5.8 m  vertical twin  monopolesY-shaped  array of 3 × 96  7 m biconical  elements  grouped as 3  ×  16 subarrays  with random  distribution2 × vertical  curtain arrays  of 30 masts ×  10 vertically  stacked  horizontal  cage dipoles Rx aperture (m) 2766 2970 1518 / 2440 2580 3 arms  ×   384 (long)  ×  80 (wide)  500 (long)  ×  143 (high) No.
of receive  channels32 480 82 372 48 5 Rx azimuth  beam steer± 45° ± 45° ± 30° ± 45° 360° Waveform type Linear FM/CW Linear FM/CW Linear FM/CW Linear FM/ CW Linear  FM/CWCoded pulse Binary phase  coded pulse Waveform  repetition  frequency (Hz)~ 4–80 ~ 4–80 10–60 5–60 10, 16, 20 Waveform  bandwidth(kHz)4–40 typical 4–40 typical 5–40 4.17–100 40 Coherent  integration   time (s)1.5– 5 Air  mode 15–40 Ship  mode1.5–15 Air  mode 15–40 Ship  mode0.7–20.5 1.3–49.2 Primary mission Aircraft  detectionAircraft  detectionAircraft  detectionAircraft  detectionAircraft  detectionBallistic  missile  detection Secondary  missionsShip detection Remote  sensingShip detection Remote  sensingCruise missile  detectionShip  detectionShip detection Remote  sensingAircraft  detection Cruise missile  detectionTABLE 20.2  Principal Design Parameters for Some Major HF Skywave Radar Systems,   Past and Present   (This information has been compiled from sources that, in some cases, are incomplete.
Where only  partial information is provided, it may still be useful for comparison purposes.
Notes: (i) VLPA  denotes vertical log-periodic antenna and (ii) 2-band ( n-band) linear arrays are usually constructed as  contiguous collinear arrays.) ( Continued ) ch20.indd   12 12/20/07   1:15:33 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	HF Over-the-Horizon Radar  HF OVER-THE-HORIZON RADAR  20.136x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 20 The term quasi-monostatic is used to denote configurations in which the transmit and  receive sites are separated, as is often done with radars employing FM-CW wave - forms, but not so far apart that the angle subtended at the target is more than ~5 °, so  the scattering behavior is close to what is observed for exactly monostatic geometry .
20.4 THE IONOSPHERE   AND RADIOWAVE PROPAGATION The solar activity that drives the ionization of the Earth’s upper atmosphere is variable  on a diurnal, seasonal, and long-term basis with a superimposed random component and  occasional major storms and other disturbances.
Further, the Earth’s lower atmosphere  is coupled to the ionosphere by a variety of upward-propagating wave and radiation  processes, whereas the Earth’s magnetosphere, the region beyond the ionosphere where  the solar wind interacts with the Earth’s magnetic field, is the source or conduit for  corresponding perturbations from above.
The ionospheric response to all these external  forces is governed not only by inertial effects but also by chemical reactions and by the  embedded time-varying electric and magnetic fields that link the ionospheric plasma  to the Earth and to the interplanetary medium.
As a consequence, the structure of the  ionosphere undergoes changes on a wide variety of spatial and temporal scales, which  drastically affect its properties as a medium for radiowave propagation.
The primary requirement for radar system design is a quantitative description of  the propagation characteristics over the proposed coverage region.
Specifically, the  radar designer needs a statistical description that will enable matching the transmitted  signal, power level, and antenna gain pattern to the supported frequency span, noise  levels, propagation loss characteristics, and ray paths to the target region.
In addition,  the radar operator needs a model with enough sophistication to permit full interpreta - tion of the real-time soundings for operating parameter selection, signal processing,  and data analysis.
With this latter requirement, a statistical description is usually not  adequate, as important features may be lost.
For example, under rapidly changing  ionospheric conditions, the radar echoes will experience a time-varying doppler shift.
 Averaging over time would result in a doppler shift tending to zero.
Clearly, this is of  no value to the operator wishing to compensate for ionospheric motion and hence to  retrieve a meaningful estimate of target radial velocity.
As a second example, consider  the situation where an atmospheric gravity wave (AGW) is propagating through the  ionosphere in the vicinity of the control point (ionospheric reflection point) while  a target is being tracked.
The ionosphere is only ~ 0.1% ionized at the altitudes of  interest to HF radar, but waves in the neutral gas, under the restoring force of gravity,  transfer their motion to the free electrons via collisions.
As the distribution of electrons  defines the “reflecting surface” experienced by the radar signals, the apparent bearing  and range of the target will fluctuate as the ionospheric “reflecting surface” undulates  in response to the AGW.
This undulation is known as a traveling ionospheric distur - bance (TID).
TIDs may have wavelengths of hundreds of kilometers and speeds up to  1000 kilometers per hour.
Unless the radar makes appropriate real-time corrections to  the target coordinates, tracking accuracy will be severely impaired.
To address these various needs, it is advantageous to adopt corresponding descrip - tions or models, emphasizing different aspects of the ionosphere and its influence on  radiowave propagation and, hence, HF radar performance.
In many cases of practical  interest, ionospheric models developed originally for HF communications purposes  ch20.indd   13 12/20/07   1:15:34 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	HF Over-the-Horizon Radar 20.14  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 20 can be adapted to the radar context, where the main difference is the greater sensitiv - ity of radar observations to dynamical processes.
This arises primarily because of the  extremely high dynamic range required to accommodate and preserve target echoes in  the presence of strong clutter and external noise.
Ionospheric Structure.
 The basic physics of ionization and recombination pro - cesses leads to a natural division of the ionosphere into a number of regions: D Region.
 This region occupies the lowest altitudes considered.
It extends from  50 to 90 km, with electron density increasing rapidly with altitude in the daytime.
 Its properties reflect the balance between free electron production by the incident  solar radiation flux and free electron loss via various electron-ion and electron-neutral  recombination processes.
Accordingly, the maximum ionization in the D region occurs  near the sub–solar point and will be greatest during periods of highest solar activity  (sunspot maximum), though it does not achieve densities sufficient to reflect or even  significantly refract HF radio waves.
The key role of the D region in HF radiowave  propagation is signal attenuation via electron-neutral collisions that are frequent at  these moderate altitudes where the neutral species density is still relatively high.
It is  not represented explicitly in some ionospheric models where its effects are accounted  for with an empirically derived path-loss calculation.
E Region.
 This ionization region extends between about 90 and 130 km in alti - tude with a maximum near 110 km when sunlit.
In addition, there may be anomalous  ionization referred to as sporadic E.
This latter ionization layer is typically only a few  kilometers thick and usually short-lived, often lasting less than an hour; it may be either  smooth or patchy, is seasonally and diurnally variable, weakly correlated with solar  activity, showing a tendency to favor low sunspot numbers, and has marked variation  with latitude.
From the propagation perspective, sporadic E holds a special place as the  layer providing the most stable propagation over coherent integration times typical of  skywave radar.
Because it is only ~100 km above the Earth’s surface, the maximum  range that can be reached via one-hop E-layer propagation is only ~2000 km, though  normally the layer is not totally reflecting, so some energy continues upward to the  F-layer where it is reflected to reach the Earth’s surface at much greater ranges.
F Region.
 This is the highest-altitude region of interest for skywave propagation,  and it is also the region of greatest electron density.
In the daylight hours, the F region  sometimes manifests two component layers, especially in summer.
The Fl region lies  between 130 and 200 km and, like the E region, is directly dependent upon solar  radiation; it reaches maximum intensity about 1 h after local noon.
The F2 region is  variable in both time and geographical location.
The altitude of the F2 region peak lies  typically between 250 and 350 km at middle latitudes.
The F2-region ionization shows  marked day-to-day variations and, in general, is not the regular sun follower that the  E and F1 regions are.
The simple physical picture of the ionosphere as consisting of several more or less  concentric layers must be modified substantially at both low and high latitudes to  take into account the effects of the impressed electric and magnetic fields.
To begin  with, the displacement of the Earth’s magnetic axis from its rotational axis means that  the ionosphere does not preserve a more or less constant form enveloping a rotating  earth.
Near the magnetic equator, where the geomagnetic field is close to horizon - tal, atmospheric tides and associated winds drive the so-called E-region and F-region  ch20.indd   14 12/20/07   1:15:34 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	HF Over-the-Horizon Radar  HF OVER-THE-HORIZON RADAR  20.156x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 20 dynamos, resulting in an upward drift of the ionospheric plasma and its subsequent  descent along the geomagnetic field lines.
The resulting electron density depletion at  the equator and roughly symmetric enhancements in the vicinity of ~ 20 ° N/S latitude  is known as the Appleton  or equatorial anomaly.
 Besides causing errors in estimated  target range and bearing, the tilted ionospheric “reflecting surface” near the equator  can support scattering of incident radiowaves into low-loss elevated trans-equatorial  modes (chordal modes) that return strong clutter from the opposite hemisphere, often  with highly unstable phase characteristics.
In the polar zones, the near-vertical geomagnetic field lines provide a pathway  for charged particles and disturbances of solar and magnetospheric origin to reach  ionospheric heights and contribute to ionization processes and plasma transport.
The  best known phenomena here are the aurorae, which are concentrated in ovals pole - ward of the boundary where the Earth’s geomagnetic field lines change from closed  (connected to their images in the opposite hemisphere) to open, that is, connected to  the interplanetary magnetic field.
A wide variety of plasma waves and instabilities  populate these regions, producing irregularities that achieve high electron densities  and hence, provide strong sources of spread-doppler clutter.
They have been known to  impact skywave radar systems severely.
Ionospheric Variability.
 While all ionospheric properties are time-varying, from  an OTHR perspective, it is useful to separate the “fast” processes or “dynamics” from  the “slow” or “structural” variability.
A phenomenon is termed dynamical  relative to  a radar observation process if it occurs on a timescale commensurate with the corre - sponding process timescale, such as (i) pulse/waveform repetition interval, (ii) coherent   integration (dwell) time, (iii) scan revisit time, or (iv) mission / track lifetime.
 Dynamical processes impact directly on how one should process the received signals  or perform tracking.
Slow processes, such as the 11-year solar cycle, seasonal changes,  and the diurnal cycle of the E- and F-layers can generally be treated as quasi-stationary  background processes that set up the ionospheric structure at any given time, within  which fast processes may occur.
An exception to this classification arises with the  dawn and dusk terminators, that is, the day-night boundaries; sweeping around the  Earth at 1600 km/hr, they produce abrupt changes in the ionosphere and trigger large- scale instabilities.
Structural Variability.
 The day-night cycle produces drastic changes in the ion - ization distribution within the ionosphere.
At night, the D-layer disappears, the E and  F regions experience a substantial decrease in ionization, and the equatorial and polar  regions are more prone to large-scale perturbations.
The extent of diurnal variation can  be seen by examining Figure 20.4, which shows measured electron density (expressed  in terms of plasma frequency as defined in Eq.
20.1) versus virtual height and time- of-day at a mid-latitude location.
* Typically, the diurnal variation requires a radar to  vary its operating frequency by more than an octave in frequency to maintain 24-hour  surveillance over a fixed target location.
*  Virtual height is the reflection height computed from signal time delay by assuming that the radiowave travels at  the speed of light as if in free space; in fact, the radiowave group velocity in the plasma is lower, so the true height  is less.
For most purposes, it is more convenient to deal with virtual height, because there are two theorems that  dramatically simplify practical calculations.
Martyn’s theorem shows that complicated oblique skywave ray paths  via the true reflection point can be replaced to good approximation with simple rectilinear geometry via the virtual  reflection point.
The theorem of Breit and Tuve demonstrates that, to good approximation, the time-of-flight is  unchanged by this substitution.
Davies21 provides a clear explanation of these useful theorems.
ch20.indd   15 12/20/07   1:15:34 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	HF Over-the-Horizon Radar 20.16  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 20 What is more surprising is the day-to-day variability, even at mid-latitudes, which  impacts significantly on HF radar performance.
The inability to predict reliably even  a day in advance is a serious consideration in radar design and scheduling.
An illustration of day-to-day variability is presented in Figure 20.5, which over - lays 30 vertical incidence soundings recorded at the same time of day for a month.
45015 10Plasma frequency (MHz)5 00 4 8 12 Time of day (local)16 20 24400 350 300 250 200 FIGURE 20.4  Diurnal variation of the electron density profile, as measured by the plasma frequency,  plotted for various virtual heights (in km).
The data was recorded by a vertical incidence sounder at  latitude 18.0 S, longitude 144.9 E on 17 September 2002, SSN = 88.
FIGURE 20.5  Comparison of measured vertical incidence ionograms  for a fixed time of day over a month with a model-based prediction of the  median, denoted by the small circles.600 400 200 01 Sounding frequency (MHz)2Altitude (km) 4 6 8 ch20.indd   16 12/20/07   1:15:36 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	HF Over-the-Horizon Radar  HF OVER-THE-HORIZON RADAR  20.176x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 20 The traces plot the virtual height versus radiowave frequency for the ordinary  ray (see  subsection below on radiowave propagation).
Soundings of this type—ionograms— measure the return trip time delay for a signal to travel up to the height at which the  electron density is sufficient to reflect it, that is, where the plasma frequency fp equals  the incident radiowave frequency.
Also shown in Figure 20.5 is the corresponding monthly median, taken from the  model of Thomason et al.22 Consider the critical frequency, that is, the highest reflected  frequency, corresponding to the ionosphere’s peak electron density.
The upper and  lower deciles depart from the median by typically ± 25%.
Over such a range of fre - quency, terms in the radar equation such as antenna gains, target RCS, and slant range  may vary substantially, so radar performance is inevitably statistically distributed.
 Although it makes sense to use median values for many radar performance modeling  calculations, the radar designer should adopt a conservative approach and assume the  lowest critical frequency.
Perhaps the most intriguing major cause of systematic variation is the 11-year  cycle of solar activity.
Various correlated parameters have been defined to measure  this activity, including the 10.7 cm solar flux, sunspot number, and various magnetic  indices.
Figure 20.6 shows the smoothed average sunspot number plotted from 1956,  the year of the first validated OTHR detections of military targets (achieved by the  MUSIC  radar at NRL2).
Enhanced solar activity impacts on the ionosphere in many ways, but its most sig - nificant action from a radar perspective is to produce substantially higher ionization  levels that persist at usable levels through the night, so higher radar frequencies can be  employed and the minimum achievable range decreases.
In addition, the height of the  maximum electron density increases, so one-hop propagation can reach greater ranges.
 FIGURE 20.6  The variation of the monthly median sunspot number since 1956, the year of the first opera - tional skywave radar detections ch20.indd   17 12/20/07   1:15:36 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	HF Over-the-Horizon Radar 20.18  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 20 Daytime absorption increases for a given frequency because of higher D-layer densi - ties, but this is compensated by access to higher operating frequencies.
An increase in  the number and severity of magnetic storms and sudden ionospheric disturbances is  another consequence of higher solar activity, as are increased post-sunset plasma bub - ble activity and associated scintillation in equatorial regions, solar flares, and coronal  mass ejections all of which disrupt stable propagation.
Solar flares are giant explosions  on the sun’s surface, generally occurring near sunspots, which emit ionizing radiation  that penetrates into the D region and dramatically increases absorption.
The resulting  sudden ionospheric disturbance (SID) or short-wave fade-out  can completely inca - pacitate a skywave radar for a period from minutes to hours.
Perhaps more importantly,  although the flare itself is not predictable, the associated burst of particles will start to  arrive a few hours later, with most ejected material reaching Earth several days later,  seriously disrupting HF propagation.
The critical importance of solar activity will be  demonstrated in Section 20.13 in the context of radar performance prediction.
Ionospheric Dynamics.
 As the radar signals traverse the ionosphere, motions of the  plasma medium along the propagation path imprint themselves on the signals in ways  that can degrade or obliterate the target information of interest.
Skywave radars can be  designed to recognize the signatures of these phenomena, adjusting the radar frequency,  choice of waveform, and processing to mitigate their effects where necessary.
Sometimes  the ionospheric motions actually help the radar, for example, by enabling it to discrimi - nate between natural noise and some forms of deliberate interference.
Thus, it is vitally  important to understand not only the structure of the ionosphere and the opportunities it  provides for propagation, but also the motions and disturbances that inhabit it.
The variety of wave types and irregularity of production mechanisms in the ion - osphere is enormous, and includes not only those arising naturally but also many  induced phenomena such as those resulting from ground-based ionospheric RF heat - ers or rocket interactions with the ambient plasma.
Among the most important from  the radar point of view are the following: • Transient plasma structures associated with ionized meteor trails; at any given loca - tion, meteors have a strong diurnal variation and directionality.
They are ever-pres - ent and constitute a major source of clutter for HF radars.19 • Large and medium scale atmospheric gravity waves (AGW) produced by energetic  phenomena in the lower atmosphere propagate upward with increasing amplitude  until nonlinear processes begin to dominate, resulting in wave breaking.
Large AGWs  may persist for hours and propagate over global distances, causing serious deviation  of incident radiowaves.23 They are sometimes the major cause of tracking errors.
• Magnetic disturbances originating where the solar wind impacts on the magneto - sphere; they propagate earthward and cause resonant oscillations of the geomagnetic  field lines permeating the ionosphere.
The field lines are “frozen in” to the iono - spheric plasma and, hence, the ionosphere vibrates locally at frequencies typically  in the range of 10–2–100 Hz, imposing a corresponding modulation on any transiting  radiowaves.24 Ship echoes can be obscured by this modulation.
• The equatorial electrojet, part of the global system of fields and currents driven by  the dynamo action of winds and tides, is host to small scale field-aligned irregulari - ties with characteristic velocity distributions.25 Some small-scale plasma instabilities  may endure for a fraction of a second, others for tens of seconds, evident to radars as  spread-doppler clutter that prevents the detection of small targets.
ch20.indd   18 12/20/07   1:15:37 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	HF Over-the-Horizon Radar  HF OVER-THE-HORIZON RADAR  20.196x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 20 • Equatorial plasma bubbles often appear after sunset and convect upward through the  F region where they contribute to strong diffuse doppler-spread scattering referred  to as spread-F.26 Detection of all targets is difficult when this effect occurs.
• The aurorae are dynamic structures governed by fields and plasma flows in the mag - netosphere; strong electric fields aligned with the magnetic field accelerate electrons  down into the ionosphere where they produce highly ionized formations that reflect  radio waves very efficiently.
The resulting doppler-spread echoes are so strong they  can incapacitate a radar through its sidelobes.
• Geomagnetic storms and sub-storms result from solar flares and coronal mass ejec - tions.
As mentioned earlier, hard X-rays and ultraviolet radiation raise D-layer ion - ization dramatically with consequent increases in radiowave absorption.
Within an  hour and for a day or so after, flare-generated particle bursts start to arrive and are  channeled down the magnetic field lines at high latitudes, causing ionospheric heat - ing and associated diffusion to lower latitudes, together with a variety of magnetic  field perturbations.
HF propagation is often severely disrupted.
Models and Their Uses.
 Knowledge of the conditions to be expected for a par - ticular radar deployment is vital to radar design, as well as providing a guide to echo  interpretation and a means to simulation and performance prediction.
This type of  information, based on decades of ionospheric observations and theory, is conveniently  distilled in models that are widely available and used extensively.
But even more  importantly, from the operational perspective, HF radars must maintain a real-time  ionospheric model (RTIM) that is intimately linked with the radar subsystems, serving  to guide frequency selection, radiated power, task scheduling, coordinate registration  (converting from the radar coordinates of time delay and angle-of-arrival to geographi - cal coordinates), ionospheric mode structure interpretation, and association of mul - tiple tracks from a single target.
Unlike the climatological models, RTIMs must be  updated continuously with information from an auxiliary network of beacons.
Oblique  and vertical incidence sounders and transponders have been deployed for this purpose.
 For instance, the JORN radars exploit approximately 20 sounders and related facilities  distributed around the coast of Australia.
Radar performance in most operational roles  is governed by the fidelity of the adopted RTIM.
It is important to differentiate between models that describe the physical (or  physico-chemical) state of the ionosphere and models that describe radiowave propa - gation characteristics, though the latter are often derived from the former by apply - ing ray-tracing methods, and the former are predominantly derived from radiowave  propagation measurements such as point-to-point link statistics and vertical incidence  soundings.
Both classes are of general applicability to HF communications and geo - physical investigations, as well as skywave radar.
Models of the Ionospheric Medium.
 Models of the ionosphere fall into two   categories: • Climatological models based on sounder, rocket, and satellite measurements.
Being  derived from statistics, they provide no explicit information on real-time “‘weather.”  that is, irregularities, waves, and other dynamic processes, though measures of vari - ability may be provided.
Many early models had their genesis in the large database of  recorded ionospheric soundings made during the International Geophysical Year of  1957–1958 and the International Year of the Quiet Sun of 1964–1965.
These models,  ch20.indd   19 12/20/07   1:15:37 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	HF Over-the-Horizon Radar 20.20  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 20 which focused on the spatial distribution of electron density, were used extensively  in early HF radar performance analyses and include ITSA-1, ITS-78, RADAR C,  IONCAP, and AMBCOM.27–32 Lucas 33 provides details of these models and their  origins.
Some of the prediction methods have not been well documented although  widely distributed; also, users frequently “improve” upon a model and prediction  method to suit their specific needs.
As an example, the model RADAR C29 is the basic  building block of Thomason et al.
in NRL Report 832122; however, they added a D  region, a collision-frequency distribution, an Earth’s magnetic field, a topside elec - tron distribution, an auroral electron-density modification,34 and other features that  make the model more generally useful.
The ionospheric model as described in NRL  Report 8321 has been used for some of the examples presented in Section 20.13.
 The International Reference Ionosphere (IRI) is perhaps the foremost modern exam - ple, presently available as version IRI-2001.35–37 Other climatological models used  in HF radar applications are PIM,38,39 PRISM,40,41 and FAIM.42 • Physics-based or first principles models, such as USU GAIM,43 JPL/USC GAIM,44  SAMI3 developed by Huba and Joyce,45 and Khattatov’s model,46 solve the plasma  dynamics and composition equations governing evolution of density, velocity, and  temperature for various ion species on a global 3D grid, subject to the Earth’s mag - netic field and prevailing solar indices.
These models required seeding with initial  conditions, often a limiting consideration.
For both classes, improved accuracy of forecasting is achieved by assimilating  data from ground-based sounders, total electron content (TEC) derived from GPS, UV  airglow data, and in situ measurements of electron density from satellites and other  sources.
Often the assimilation is performed within an extended Kalman filter frame - work, so accuracy estimates are a byproduct.
Further, site-specific applications may  benefit from adaptation of the underlying model parameters and coef ficients.
The complex structure and dynamics of the ionospheric medium govern HF sky - wave propagation primarily through the space-time variation of the free electron  density distribution.
A useful simplification is to regard the large-scale ionospheric  structure as defining the propagation geometry throughout the illumination volume,  whereas the dynamical processes impose their respective modulations on the transit - ing signals.
Computational Aspects and Ray-tracing.
 For many OTHR purposes, it suffices  to employ a ray-theoretic representation of the radiowave field.
Ray-tracing techniques  fall into two categories: analytic and numerical.
Analytic methods are fast but rely on fit - ting parametric models to the electron density profiles and are, hence, of limited use for  operational applications where accuracy is critical.
They are also limited by their inability  to handle magnetoionic effects on propagation.
Nevertheless, they provide closed form  expressions for group range, phase path, ground range, and other parameters, and there - fore, can be very useful for computationally intensive studies such as system optimiza - tion.
The multi-quasi-parabolic (MQP) model of Hill47 based on Croft’s QP technique48  is widely used, while quasi-cubic models have been proposed by Newton et al.49 Numerical ray-tracing codes are versatile and able to accommodate almost arbi - trary ionospheric structure, at the expense of computational burden.
Of the many  numerical ray-tracing codes developed over the years, the implementation by Jones  and Stephenson50 based on integration of the first-order Haselgrove equations remains  the most widely used.
Coleman51 has developed an alternative implementation.
ch20.indd   20 12/20/07   1:15:38 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	HF Over-the-Horizon Radar  HF OVER-THE-HORIZON RADAR  20.216x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 20 Models of Ionospheric Radiowave Propagation.
 From the HF skywave radar per - spective, interest is usually centered not on the ionosphere per se but on how it deter - mines radiowave propagation.
Models such as VOACAP52 and ASAPS53 generate  predictions of point-to-point (circuit) parameters, including maximum and minimum  usable frequency, elevation angle, group path, mode probability, path loss, and signal- to-noise ratio, for user-specified terminal characteristics.
A more general capability is  available with Proplab.54 As these models are based on their respective climatological databases, they are of  no use for real-time applications such as RTIM and are inadequate for serious radar  design, which should be based on measurements taken at the proposed deployment  site, but they can be useful for answering certain questions, such as “Can my signal be  heard at X and if so, at what SNR?” For calculations requiring moderate accuracy, geometrical optics or virtual ray- tracing based on Martyn’s Theorem can be applied to stored semi-empirical electron  density profiles, or better, stored “snapshots” of the ionosphere generated by an RTIM.
 Alternatively, analytic ray-tracing can be performed on analytic profiles fitted to RTIM  databases.
The most accurate predictions come from the application of sophisticated  ray-tracing routines to a database of RTIM snapshots.
When a radiowave propaga - tion model is combined with radar system parameters, target scattering characteristics,  and HF noise distributions, the radar equation (Eq.
20.2) can be solved to predict the  radar’s performance, as treated in Section 20.13.
This is the basic approach employed  within RADAR C,29,55,56 for instance.
From the operational HF radar viewpoint, use  of these propagation models is limited to statistical studies of radar performance, not  real-time radar support applications such as coordinate registration because of the  poor fidelity of the assumed electron density distributions and the shortcomings of  geometric ray-tracing.
Other Models and Propagation Issues.
 Studies of HF radar performance at  low latitudes have shown that it is often necessary to incorporate models of dynamical  processes, either because they manifest themselves directly in the doppler structure  of radar echoes or because they are indicators of other phenomena that do.
Useful  models in this category include HWM93,57 which describes the structure of the zonal  and meridional neutral winds throughout the ionosphere, and WBMOD,58 which  describes scintillation arising from small scale irregularities such as those associated  with spread-F in the post-sunset ionosphere.
These models find important applications  to the analysis and interpretation of doppler-spread clutter.
A number of phenomena have been ignored in the preceding discussion, though  their effects can be observed in some skywave radar systems.
They include (i) a variety  of nonlinear processes that can occur during ionospheric propagation,59 (ii) delayed  echoes,60 focusing at the antipode, and (iii) round-the-world propagation.61 The most  significant practical exploitation of such phenomena can be found in experiments  directed at ionospheric modification.
20.5 WAVEFORMS FOR HF RADAR The factors that govern the choice of waveform in HF radar systems can be grouped  into two classes.
First, there are the considerations common to microwave radar, that  is, range and doppler resolution as described by the ambiguity function and optimized  ch20.indd   21 12/20/07   1:15:38 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	HF Over-the-Horizon Radar 20.22  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 20 for target detection and estimation, realizability in hardware, susceptibility to interfer - ence, efficiency, and the electrical properties of the scatterers of interest.
In addition: • HF radar waveforms must fit within available clear channels in the HF frequency  band, complying with stringent constraints on leakage into channels occupied by  other users.
• They must be compatible with the fact that the radar is operating in a “waveguide,”  namely the volume between the Earth’s surface and the ionosphere, with unique  possibilities for multiple propagation paths including round-the-world propagation,  significantly modifying the effective ambiguity function.
• They must be able to achieve the desired measurement capability in the presence of  extremely strong ground clutter.
• They must be designed so as to minimize distortion or corruption by the ionospheric  medium or, at least, enable such distortion to be estimated and mitigated by signal  processing after reception.
• They must heed the constraints on peak versus average power imposed by the HF  transmitting equipment and antennas.
The waveforms used in most operational HF skywave radars are variations on the  periodic linear frequency-modulated continuous wave (LFM-CW) signal.
Often, there  is some provision for amplitude shaping, normally at the commencement and end  of each sweep.
The Jindalee radar was designed with the facility to apply a num - ber of amplitude notches within the sweep, thereby enabling the radar to sweep at  zero amplitude across narrow-band users in the same frequency band without causing  interference.
Another class of variations involves departing from a linear frequency  modulation.
By varying the frequency-time characteristic of the waveform, range side- lobes can be reduced and spectral leakage can be controlled.
Controlling the phase  discontinuity from the end of one sweep to the beginning of the next provides another  dimension in which the waveform properties can be optimized.
Further generalization  of the FM-CW waveform is possible by relaxing the condition that the waveform be  periodic.
This is a powerful tool for controlling range-ambiguous echoes, which can be  shifted about in the range-doppler plane to uncover previously obscured target echoes.
 And perhaps most importantly, in the congested HF spectrum where clear channels of  adequate bandwidth to achieve the desired resolution may be scarce, FM-CW wave - forms defined over two or more separate subbands are readily synthesized.
Most early HF skywave radars employed pulse waveforms, in part because the tech - nology of the day did not support FM-CW waveforms with the required level of spec - tral purity for this demanding application but also because pulse waveforms enjoy some  undeniable advantages.
First, they can be employed from a single transmit-receive site,  avoiding the cost and complexity of acquiring suitable land, duplicating many facilities  and synchronizing two widely separated sites.
Second, the ability to gate the echoes in  time means that the only clutter power that impacts on the range footprint spanned by a  pulse is clutter originating in that footprint.
This relaxes the waveform generator dynamic  range requirements somewhat, especially when phenomena such as auroral clutter may   cause problems, though to achieve the same probability of detection, peak power must  increase to maintain equivalent average power.
Third, as a consequence of reduced dynamic  range requirements and assuming for the moment that strict spectral emission controls are  not an issue, more efficient amplifiers can be used, as discussed in the following section.
 Fourth, pulse waveforms may be less susceptible to some forms of jamming.
ch20.indd   22 12/20/07   1:15:38 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	HF Over-the-Horizon Radar  HF OVER-THE-HORIZON RADAR  20.236x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 20 But there are disadvantages.
First, emission controls are almost invariably a seri - ous matter when it comes to obtaining a license to radiate.
Second, there are radar  applications beyond basic target detection where extremely high spectral purity is  essential, as with detection of small ships at low speeds.
Third, the antenna design  must be able to handle higher field strengths without arcing and sparking, which  introduces noise.
Fourth, unlike the FM-CW case, it is not generally feasible to  synthesize suitable pulse waveforms from separate subbands of the HF spectrum  when wide clear channels are not available.
Fifth, there are fewer options for radi - ating multiple waveforms simultaneously from the same transmitting facility.
And  sixth, for high power HF radars, the additional power density associated with pulse  waveforms in the ionosphere may, in principle, cause self-modulation from non - linear effects.
20.6 THE TRANSMITTING SYSTEM Transmitters.
 Most of the radar designs and missions require transmitter aver - age power levels between 10 kW and 1 MW.
Antennas are generally arrays of radiat - ing elements, and the common practice with HF radar is to drive each element with  a separate amplifier.
 This approach permits beam steering at a low power level in the  amplifier  chain.
The active element in each final transmitter stage can be either a tra - ditional vacuum tube62 or a solid-state device.63,64 Most operational HF radars employ  solid-state amplifiers based on a hierarchy of modules, starting with elemental ampli - fiers of perhaps 500 W and combining these progressively via passive networks until  the final output power is attained.
Relative phase shifts or time delays are inserted in  the amplifier chain, driving each antenna element to steer the resultant beam.
This  architecture enhances reliability and provides graceful degradation in the event of  module failure.
Solid-state HF radar transmitters operate at power efficiencies lower than those  based on vacuum tube amplifiers.
Vacuum tube amplifiers are also more robust and  have been used successfully in a number of HF skywave radars including the AN/FPS- 118.
The adoption of solid-state amplifiers in radars such as ROTHR and Jindalee/ JORN is driven by the need to accommodate instantaneous frequency switching over  wide bandwidths while maintaining high linearity and spectral purity.
These radars  routinely interleave different surveillance tasks with widely separated carrier frequen - cies—8 and 24 MHz, for example—switching as often as every one or two seconds  while conforming to strict spectral emission standards.
Such instantaneous frequency  changes would place unachievable switching demands on the high-level vacuum tube  radio frequency circuits.
Meeting power control and amplitude-shaping of waveform  requirements dictates linear operation of amplifiers.
Apart from the requirement to meet emission guidelines laid down by national  and international spectrum management authorities, high spectral purity is essential  because skywave radar uses doppler processing to separate the targets from the clut - ter, and hence, the clutter returned on the phase and amplitude noise sidebands radi - ated by the transmitter must be kept below the echo power of desired targets.
This  can impose a stringent condition on the emitted signal-to-noise ratio of the transmit - ter, and hence, on the signal-to-noise ratio of the waveform generator.
For example,  noise spectral density at 10 Hz from a carrier may need to be as low as –100 dBc in  order to detect some targets of interest.
For designs employing an amplifier for each  ch20.indd   23 12/20/07   1:15:39 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	HF Over-the-Horizon Radar 20.24  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 20 antenna element, the radiated phase noise will generally add noncoherently and thus  be suppressed by ~15 dB relative to beamformed noise power for a 32-element array.
 But that is not the end of the matter—transmitter phase noise will be reflected by the  distant Earth surface and integrated across the receiver passband, raising the phase  noise contributions to the noise floor by a factor that, for an FM-CW waveform, is  roughly equal to the ratio of the waveform bandwidth to the waveform repetition  frequency.
The lower-level stages of signal amplification can generally be designed  to add essentially zero noise, but mechanical vibration in the high-power amplifiers  can add appreciable amounts so care must be exercised in the air or liquid coolant  flow system design.
If the radar is to perform wide-area surveillance, frequent frequency changes are  required in order to cover the various range extents.
In addition, relative phase or time- delay changes are required in each amplifier chain to accomplish azimuthal steering.
 A broad-bandwidth performance and a tolerance to a variable voltage standing-wave  ratio load are, therefore, essential features in an HF radar transmitter.
Typically, one  might specify VSWR < 2 at full power over an operating range of 5–30 MHz, say, with  an ability to tolerate higher VSWRs at fractional power outputs.
Since the antenna ele - ments will be wideband, harmonic filters may be required.
For example, one transmit - ter and harmonic filter combination might have a 5 to 9 MHz passband and a stopband  for 10 MHz and higher frequencies; a second combination might pass up to 17 MHz  and reject 18 MHz and higher, and the design would continue in this manner to the  highest frequency of operation.
Some skywave radar designs call for up to six bands.
 A related issue is the occurrence of mutual coupling between antenna elements in the  transmit array.65 Energy coupled back into an amplifier from its neighbors can reach  levels that result in intermodulation distortion, as well as causing load resonances that  stress the amplifier chain.
Antennas.
 The choice of antenna configuration is intimately linked to the radar  mission, generally defined in terms of target types, radar coverage, and coverage rate.
 The Naval Research Laboratory magnetic-drum recording equipment (MADRE)  radar2 employed a single antenna, duplexed and used for both transmit and receive.
 This 100-m-wide by 40-m-high aperture provided sufficient gain and angular resolu - tion for aircraft tracking in the upper part of the HF band.
The experimental French  OTH radar Nostradamus11–13 likewise employs a single antenna array, configured as  three horizontal arms of length 384 m radiating from a central control center, though  only a subset of elements are used to transmit, whereas all of the elements are used  for reception.
Such truly monostatic designs have the special advantage that the out- bound propagation path to a target is almost identical to the in-bound path.
Monostatic  radars with separate transmit and receive antennas experience decorrelation between  the paths as the separation increases and different parts of the ionosphere become  involved.
Either form of monostatic radar avoids the costs of multiple sites and asso - ciated communications infrastructure, and the challenge of finding suitable sites with  an appropriate geographical relationship, but they are constrained in waveform choice  and/or radiated power by the need to avoid simultaneous transmission and reception,  as well as being potentially susceptible to range-folded clutter.
In particular, the class  of FM-CW waveforms has been widely adopted, driven mainly by constraints on spec - tral emissions outside the nominal radar bandwidth.
For these reasons, configurations  employing separate transmit and receive antenna sites are employed in radars such as  Jindalee, JORN, and ROTHR, usually in a quasi-monostatic arrangement where the  ch20.indd   24 12/20/07   1:15:39 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	HF Over-the-Horizon Radar  HF OVER-THE-HORIZON RADAR  20.256x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 20 intersite separation is about 50–100 nautical miles, much less than the range to the  target zone but sufficient to prevent self-jamming when using continuous waveforms  and to separate the transmit and receive range ambiguity zones in azimuth.
Transmit radiating element choice is driven primarily by the range of frequencies  to be radiated and the waveform bandwidth, but it must also take into account the  range and azimuth coverage required, the associated coverage rate, and concerns  about clutter, especially spread-doppler clutter.
The vertical radiation pattern con - trols these issues.
The power-handling capabilities of the antenna elements are also  a consideration.
A lower bound on the transmit array aperture is set by the need to achieve adequate  directivity and hence power density on the target; the sensitivity required depends  on the size of the targets of interest.
The upper bound is often set by the revisit  requirement—in general, the radar will step over a wide arc, but it must sample  each region frequently to maintain tracks on maneuvering targets, so the transmit  beamwidth should not be too narrow.
The need to keep VSWR to modest levels is  usually addressed by having 2 to 6 arrays addressing subbands of about one octave  of frequency each.
Some of these considerations are influenced by the advantages that attach to employ - ing multiple simultaneous receive beams, so a broad but well-shaped transmit beam  that can be filled by perhaps 10 to 30 narrow receive beams is a popular choice.
In the  limiting case, the transmit array may floodlight the entire sector of coverage, which is  filled with receive beams that stare continuously.
The nonuniformity of clutter sources  can cause serious problems with any design that does not have control over the array  pattern.
Further, HF antennas seldom achieve high front-to-back ratios, so the risk of  signal masking by backlobe clutter cannot be ignored.
For linear arrays, offsetting the  transmit and receive array boresights is a moderately effective measure that must be  traded off against the concomitant reduction in main beam overlap.
Linear arrays of  vertically polarized log-periodic antennas, vertical planar arrays of horizontal dipoles,  stacked Yagi antennas, elevated rhombic elements, linear arrays of tilted monopoles,  and a two-dimensional array of biconical antennas have all been used in skywave radar  transmit systems, in some cases, with backscreens to improve the otherwise mediocre  front-to-back ratios.
In the elevation plane, desirable radiation angles run between 0 ° and 40 ° for com - mon values of range and reflection height.
The vertical beamwidth needs to be suf - ficient to illuminate the required range depth; in general, this is automatically satisfied  owing to the cost and complexity of an antenna able to form a beam narrower than  this in the vertical plane.
For most scenarios, any sensitivity gained by directivity  in elevation directly improves radar performance, since instantaneous range depth is  generally limited by ionospheric effects.
This is in contrast with azimuth directivity  for transmitting, where an increase in directive gain is accompanied by a decrease in  area coverage.
For noise-limited detection, this can be compensated by a reduction in  dwell time, but for clutter-limited detection there may be a penalty for coverage rate.
 Some radars use horizontal two-dimensional arrays with up to ~ 100 receive channels  to achieve quite high vertical directivity on both transmit and receive.
In the past,  others, such as MADRE and some former Soviet Union skywave radars, employed  vertical two-dimensional arrays, up to 143 m high and 500 m wide in the case of the  Soviet radars.
At low elevation angles, the antenna pattern is strongly influenced by the electri - cal and magnetic properties of the ground around and in front of the array.
To achieve  ch20.indd   25 12/20/07   1:15:40 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	HF Over-the-Horizon Radar 20.26  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 20 gain at low-angles, it is standard practice to install a ground mesh screen; this has the  secondary benefit of avoiding pattern distortion due to inhomogeneities in the soil.
For  example, the Jindalee transmit arrays sit on ~ 80 hectares (~ 200 acres) of steel mesh,  extending ~ 200 m in front of the arrays.
Notwithstanding the merits of vertical directivity, most skywave radars do not  employ steerable directivity in elevation but cover all necessary radiation angles with  one broad elevation beam.
This choice permits the antenna to have a relatively small  vertical dimension, and hence reduced cost, though demands on antenna radiation  efficiency impose a lower limit.
Another issue is the choice of transmit polarization.
Nearly all operational skywave  radars radiate with vertical polarization, based on the ease of achieving good verti - cal coverage at moderate cost by means of the widely used log-periodic broadband  antenna.
The large curtain arrays of the former Soviet radars used horizontal dipole  elements whereas the USAF AN/APS-118 used inclined dipoles to adapt to ground  conditions.
The potential benefits of full polarization control on transmit have been  assessed and a number of experimental studies carried out, but no operational system  has gone down this path.
The antennas and power amplifiers used in HF broadcast stations have much in  common with HF radar, that is, to maintain a specified level of illumination over a  designated area.
To achieve this goal, many multiband and steerable broadcast anten - nas66–68 employ large vertical apertures.
Antennas used for HF radar have an additional  severe constraint: the need to minimize mechanical motion due to the wind ( Aeolian  vibration ) that would cause signal phase modulation that would then be imposed on  the transmitted signals; this requirement is easier to meet with low-antenna-height  designs.
An under-exploited advantage of broad beams in elevation is the ability to  illuminate an extended range depth when conditions permit, providing clutter maps  outside the range band of immediate interest for target detection; these can be used to  schedule subsequent surveillance tasks.
20.7 RADAR CROSS SECTION The radar scattering properties of targets determine both their detectability and the  prospects for target classification; therefore, much effort has gone into establishing  precisely how to describe those properties for a given radar context.
In the HF skywave  radar case, the inevitability of Faraday rotation that occurs during ionospheric propa - gation has been used to argue that a fully polarimetric treatment is unnecessary, so it  is common practice to represent the scattering behavior in terms of scalar radar cross  section (RCS).
Fully polarimetric formulations are relevant when modeling complex  scattering processes69,70 and for target classification studies.71 In general, aircraft and ships have dimensions that put them within the resonant  scattering regime, though the smallest aircraft and cruise missiles will lie in the  Rayleigh scattering regime for the lower half of the HF band.
Here, the RCS displays  limited aspect sensitivity and a strong dependence on the target’s gross dimensions.
 For an aircraft, the span of the wings, the fuselage length, the tail and elevator span,  the vertical stabilizer and rudder height, and their relative locations are the main  features that influence the RCS.
Target shaping on a scale size much less than a  wavelength will have little effect.
Accurate measurements of radar scattering at HF  frequencies is challenging, but facilities for making scale model measurements are  ch20.indd   26 12/20/07   1:15:40 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	HF Over-the-Horizon Radar  HF OVER-THE-HORIZON RADAR  20.276x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 20 widely available, including anechoic chambers, indoor compact ranges, and outdoor  test fields.72 Full-scale experimental measurements can be made in some circum - stances by means of calibrated reference scatterers or transponders deployed in the  target zone and modulated to separate their returns from the target and clutter echoes.
 For bodies with highly conductive surfaces, the scattering cross section can be calcu - lated quite accurately by numerical methods, such as the method-of-moments code  NEC.73.
As a rule of thumb, the HF RCS of aircraft can usually be computed to an  accuracy of about 2 or 3 dB (with respect to measured values) without resorting to  highly sophisticated techniques.
When precise RCS information is not essential, rough but useful RCS estimates  can be made by examining the scattering behavior of a few “canonical” shapes.
 Figure 20.7 is a family of plots giving RCS versus radar frequency for an oblong- shaped conducting body.
The straight line marked 90 ° λ/2 dipole gives the RCS of a  resonant, conducting half-wavelength rod, where the rod is parallel with the electric  field.
This geometry gives the maximum RCS for the rod.
The upper scale of the  abscissa gives the one-half-wavelength dimension of the frequency given on the  lower scale.
The curve marked 90 ° is the RCS of the oblong-shaped conducting body  of 11 m length and 1 m thickness; again, the target long dimension is aligned with  the electric field.
The maximum RCS coincides with the nominal half-wavelength  dimension or with the first resonance.
FIGURE 20.7  The frequency dependence of the RCS for an 11 m long by 1 m diameter, perfectly  conducting cylinder, presented for various illumination geometries.
The E vector and the 11 m dimen - sion are in the same plane; 0 ° (nose-on), 45 °, and 90 ° (broadside) curves are shown.
The top (dashed)  curve is for a resonant dipole at 90 °.
The small sketches at the first, second, and third resonances show  the RCS angular pattern near these frequencies.
ch20.indd   27 12/20/07   1:15:41 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	HF Over-the-Horizon Radar 20.28  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 20 The curves marked 45, 15, and 0 ° give the RCS as the target is rotated to these  angles in the plane that contains the electric vector.
The little sketches give, at the left,  the body shape, and then the RCS patterns at nominal 1/2 wavelength, 1 wavelength,  and 3/2 wavelength, in order to help visualize how the RCS will change as the aspect  angle is varied.
For targets of other lengths with approximately the same shape factor,  the response can be determined by sliding the curve along the λ/2 line and making the  first resonance coincide with the line at the 1/2 wavelength point.
As has been men - tioned, Faraday rotation results in varying incident polarization, so over time a target  will experience both favorable and mismatched polarization, with resultant fading of  the scattered signal.
Of course, additional fading of the scattered signal occurs due to  time-varying polarization mismatch at the receiving antenna.
Figure 20.8 gives the vertical-polarization RCS of a rod and a hemisphere mounted  on a perfectly conducting surface.
With these canonical shapes, an estimate of RCS  can be made for surface craft by matching L and R to the principle dimensions to the  target.
For small vessels, the mast height will be of most importance.74 For surface  targets, where the maximum RCS occurs with vertical polarization, a 12 dB skywave  RCS enhancement results from the image field.
To illustrate the RCS behavior of a typical aircraft in more detail, Figure 20.9  shows the RCS of the F-18 fighter, as computed here by NEC2 applied to a wire- grid representation of the aircraft derived from a plastic kit model.
The RCS shown  is for monostatic (backscatter) geometry and horizontal copolar (HH) polarization.
 Calculations are presented for frequencies of 12, 18, and 30 MHz.
Although the fidelity of such RCS calculations of conventional platforms has been  confirmed on many occasions, it is not clear that standard computational methods  are applicable to the problem of estimating the RCS of aircraft targets that cannot be  modeled as simple perfect electrical conductors (PEC) or to small “go-fast” boats in  dynamic interaction with the sea surface.75FIGURE 20.8  RCS frequency dependence of a rod (monopole) and a hemisphere on a perfectly conducting  plane for vertical incident and scattered polarization ch20.indd   28 12/20/07   1:15:41 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	HF Over-the-Horizon Radar  HF OVER-THE-HORIZON RADAR  20.296x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 20 20.8 CLUTTER: ECHOES FROM   THE ENVIRONMENT Earth Surface Clutter.
 The geometry of skywave illumination ensures that tar - get echoes will be immersed in returns from the Earth’s surface, that is, clutter.
In order  to detect the targets, the properties of this clutter need to be understood so that the  choice of frequency, waveform, and signal processing are compatible with the need to  separate target echoes from clutter, and also so that the required dynamic range of the  radar can be correctly specified.
Early HF radar experiments established that the strong ground clutter observed  via skywave provided an indication of the physical characteristics of the illuminated  terrestrial surface.
Extensive observations made at the Naval Research Laboratory  viewing alternately Atlantic Ocean areas and central United States areas indicated  that, averaged over a wide area, sea clutter power levels were usually about an order of  magnitude higher than those from an area of similar size in the central United States.
 Later observers noted extremely low backscatter from ice-covered areas of Greenland.
 These results are consistent with predicted scattering coefficient variations based on  the topography and the electrical properties of the surfaces.
Subsequently, observa - tions over the Indian Ocean with the Jindalee radar, employing carefully calibrated  transponders, revealed ~25 dB variations in the ocean scattering coefficient, depend - ing on sea state.76 Land Clutter.
 Mapping of skywave backscatter from terrestrial (land) surfaces  is of interest for two main reasons.
First, a localized area of enhanced backscatter,  such as a city in the central plains of the U.S.
or a mountain rising from a tropical FIGURE 20.9  Monostatic RCS of the F-18 fighter aircraft at 12, 18, and 30 MHz, computed for HH polar - ization at a look-down angle of 5º ch20.indd   29 12/20/07   1:15:42 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	HF Over-the-Horizon Radar 20.30  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 20 rainforest, provides a geographical reference that can assist with the ever-present  problem of coordinate registration77 (uncertainties in the ray path traversed by the  radar signals can lead to target positioning errors of over 100 km under some circum - stances).
Second, some regions experience strong seasonal variations in vegetation  and soil moisture content, which may be reflected in measurable changes to scattering  behavior.
It is also important to understand the effect of the ground scattering coef - ficient and the topography when interpreting echoes from targets above the ground.
Sea Clutter.
 In contrast with the abrupt changes in scattering behavior that  occur at coastlines or over complex terrain, the magnitude of the radar echo from  the open ocean, that is, the scattering coefficient s ° tends to vary slowly with range  and azimuth as a consequence of the scale lengths of typical oceanic meteorological  systems and the response time of the ocean surface to varying wind stress.
Moreover,  much of the time, to a reasonable approximation, the echo power is proportional   to the resolution cell area and can be used as an absolute amplitude reference  when care is exercised.
The reason for this is explained later in the discussion of   radar oceanography.
Of far greater interest than the average magnitude of the sea echo is the wealth  of information embedded in its doppler spectrum.78 The waves on the sea surface  introduce a complex modulation on the reflected radar signal, which is manifested in  the signal’s doppler spectrum.
Estimation and interpretation of this modulation yields  information on the time-varying sea surface geometry with major implications for ship  detection as discussed below.
It transpires that a relatively simple model accounts for the observed properties of  sea clutter with remarkable fidelity, provided the sea is not too rough.
This model is  based on two assumptions: 1.
The sea surface can be represented to a good approximation as a superposition or  spectrum S( )k of surface gravity waves satisfying the dispersion relation  w k k2=g dtanh( ) (20.3)  where w is the wave angular frequency, g is the acceleration due to gravity, k  is  the wave number of the water wave, and d is the water depth.
For deep water, this  reduces to  w k2=g (20.4)  from which the water wave phase velocity can be written  vgL≡ =  w k 21 2 π/  (20.5)  where L is the wavelength of the water wave.
2.
In terms of HF wavelengths, the sea surface can be regarded as only slightly rough,  therefore admitting an approximate solution for the scattered field in the form of a  perturbation series expansion in the parameter ka, where k is the radio wavenum - ber and a is a representative ocean wave amplitude.
This approach, formulated by  Rice79 for the case of a static surface and extended by Barrick80,81 to the case where  the surface is evolving according to the dispersion relation (Eq.
20.4), leads to an  equation for the doppler spectrum of the reflected radiowaves: ch20.indd   30 12/20/07   1:15:52 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	HF Over-the-Horizon Radar  HF OVER-THE-HORIZON RADAR  20.316x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 20  s w d ww ( ) ( ( ))( ( ) = − − − =±∑ 26 04 1πk S m k k mB  scat inc + + ∫∫26 04 1 1 2 22 1 1 2 2 1πk m m S m S m mΓ( , ) ( ) ( )   k k k k , ,m m g m g d d21 1 1 2 2 1 2= ±∑ − −( ) d w k k k k  (20.6)  where  kinc and  kscat are the incident and scattered radio wave vectors, k k0=| | inc,  w is the doppler frequency, S( )k is the sea directional wave spectrum, d (.) is the  Dirac delta function, and the Bragg frequency wB is given by wBg k k = −  scat inc.
The  kernel Γ k k1 2,( )  is discussed below.
Eq.
20.6 reveals that the Barrick-Rice solu - tion has a simple interpretation in terms of spatial resonance or Bragg scattering.
 Although the disorganized-looking ocean surface is represented as the Fourier sum  of an infinite number of sinusoidal wave trains, each with its characteristic wave - number and direction, the principal “first-order” contributions to the scattered field  arise from only two ocean wave trains,82 namely those whose wave vectors satisfy  the relation    k±= ± − ( )k kscat inc (20.7) For the simple case of backscatter at grazing incidence, the geometry for mono - static surface wave radar,   k kscat inc = − , so these resonant ocean waves have a wave - length equal to one-half of the radar wavelength, with one solution corresponding  to a wave directly approaching the radar and the other receding from it.
The corre - sponding doppler shifts are those associated with the phase velocity of the resonant  waves, that is  fg g f cf MHzd= ± = ± ≈ ±π πl0102.
( ) (20.8) where the doppler shift fd is in Hz;  g is the gravitational acceleration (9.8 ms-2), f is the  radar frequency, and c the velocity of light.
With this insight, the second-order term in Eq.
20.6 can be interpreted as “double- bounce” processes involving Bragg scatter from first one and then another wave train,  with the twice-scattered radiowave directed toward the receiver.
Of course, there are,  in principle, infinitely many pairs of wave trains that can satisfy this condition, hence,  the integral.
And there is another complication.
The individual ocean wave trains are  not completely independent—they interact weakly and produce evanescent nonlinear  product waves that, while not freely propagating, change the geometry of the sea  surface and contribute to the scattered field at second order, also via Bragg scattering.
 Thus, as shown first by Barrick,81 the second-order scattering kernel is made up of  electromagnetic and hydrodynamic terms, Γ Γ Γ = +EM HYD.
The resulting piecewise  continuous second-order doppler spectrum is usually some 20–30 dB weaker than the  first-order Bragg peaks but, being spread in doppler, has the potential to mask ship  echoes over much more of doppler space.
Figure 20.10 is an example of the numerical  evaluation of Eq.
20.6 for a specific ocean wave spectrum.
Polarization dependence arises through Γ.
For a highly conducting medium such  as seawater, viewed at typical HF radar geometries, the copolar surface scattering  ch20.indd   31 12/20/07   1:16:16 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	HF Over-the-Horizon Radar 20.32  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 20 coefficient, or RCS per unit surface area, is much larger for vertical than for horizontal  polarization, with the crosspolar scattering coefficients typically assuming intermedi - ate values for moderate bistatic scattering geometries, s °vv  s °hv ≈ s °vh > s °hh, as  illustrated in Figure 20.10.
Eq.
20.6 is of fundamental importance to many HF radar applications, including ship  detection, remote sensing (see following section), waveform selection, and other radar  management functions.
For example, Figure 20.11 shows a measured doppler spec - trum and, superimposed, representative estimates of the magnitudes of the echoes that  might be received from a number of different ship types for the same radar design and  waveform parameters.
Also shown, at left, are the speed bands within which the ship  echoes would be obscured by the clutter.
The ability to predict these obscured bands by  means of Eq.
20.6 can be exploited for HF radar design and siting and for scheduling  ship detection operations.
Thus combining Eq.
20.6 with an ocean wave climatology  for any region enables the statistical prediction of radar ship detection performance.83  FIGURE 20.10  Computed doppler spectra of sea clutter for various polarizations; the radar frequency  here is 15 MHz while the directional wave spectrum adopted is a Pierson-Moskowitz wave-number  spectrum combined with a cos4 (j /2) angular spreading pattern.
ch20.indd   32 12/20/07   1:16:17 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	HF Over-the-Horizon Radar  HF OVER-THE-HORIZON RADAR  20.336x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 20 Similarly, choice of the waveform frequency and bandwidth can be guided by calcula - tion of the clutter power spectral density as a function of these parameters for any given  sea state, taking into account any information about target course, speed, and RCS.
A very important operational consideration here is the potential for an adversary  to exploit the sea clutter spectrum by contriving to place his ship echo at the Bragg  frequency where it would be obscured by sea clutter.
The adversary can achieve this  by choosing any combination of course and speed that makes the velocity component  toward the radar equal to the equivalent phase velocity of the Bragg peak.
The radar  operator must counter this by exploiting his understanding of the detailed structure of  the spectrum and its variation with radar frequency to unmask the tar get.
Radar Oceanography.
 The existence of the relation expressed in Eq.
20.6  between the sea surface representation as a directional wave spectrum S( )k and the  doppler spectrum measured by an HF radar provides an opportunity to determine the  detailed state of the sea surface by remote sensing with skywave (or surface wave)  radar.
In order to extract sea parameters from radar doppler spectra, and to optimize  the choice of radar parameters for the radar’s surveillance missions, it is helpful to  understand some elementary oceanography.
The ocean waves that contribute most to the HF radar returns have wavelengths in  the range of 5–100 m; these waves are excited by the surface winds.
If a wind blows at  a constant velocity long enough and over sufficient fetch (the distance over which the  wind is blowing), a steady-state condition will be achieved where the wind provides  just enough energy to the waves to balance that lost by breaking and other dissipation  mechanisms.
Moreover, in this state of dynamic equilibrium, energy will be transferred FIGURE 20.11  Schematic representation of blind speed bands in which ship echoes are obscured  by sea clutter−20−10 −36−30−20−100 10 20 30 3 60 10 2 0 RADIAL SPEED (kt) RADIAL SPEED (kt)BLIND SPEEDS CARRIER CRUISER DESTR OYER FRIGA TE PATROL BO ATCLUTTER POWER ch20.indd   33 12/20/07   1:16:21 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	HF Over-the-Horizon Radar 20.34  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 20 predominantly to waves whose velocities are fairly closely matched to the wind veloc - ity and undergo redistribution across wavenumber space through the mechanism of  nonlinear wave interactions to preserve the equilibrium spectral form.
There are a number of models that have been proposed to describe the equilibrium  spectral form, and indeed, models that attempt the more ambitious task of modeling  nonequilibrium spectra.
Most of these models are based on experimental measure - ments, illustrated here by Figure 20.12, which shows an example of the frequency  spectrum derived from wave buoy measurements.
A common feature of such wave  spectra is that waves of a given wavelength tend to reach a limiting spectral density,  beyond which the processes of dissipation and nonlinear transfer of energy to other  wavenumbers prevents further growth.
This condition—known as saturation, or being  fully developed—is reached at quite modest wind speeds for those waves responsible  for first-order scatter at HF, that is 5–10 knots.
Of the various nondirectional ocean wave models reported in the literature, that  of Pierson and Moskowitz has been most widely used by the radar community.
They  derived the following relation for a fully developed nondirectional spectrum based  upon empirical data84:  Fe c( ) exp kb kk k= −      242 πν  (20.9)FIGURE 20.12  Nondirectional waveheight power spectral density, as measured with a wave buoy, show - ing power law behavior.
The straight line is the original Phillips saturation asymptote, which is approached  at high frequencies in this example.
The scale marked “wind velocity” can be used to deduce that winds up  to 40 kt have excited waves with frequencies as low as 0.08 Hz, but that either the duration or fetch, or both,  have not been sufficient for full development.
The scale across the top gives the radar frequency correspond - ing to resonant backscatter.
ch20.indd   34 12/20/07   1:16:24 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	HF Over-the-Horizon Radar  HF OVER-THE-HORIZON RADAR  20.356x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 20 or equivalently, in terms of wave frequency,  Fg g ue( ) exp wb w w= −      2 54 ν  (20.10) where  u = wind speed  kc = g/u2  n = 0.74 and be = 0.0081 The exponential term approximates the decay in the spectrum for wave speeds  above the wind maximum velocity.
Models that take account of the consequences of  finite fetch and finite duration of the wind stress include the JONSWAP spectrum85  and the model of Elfouhaily et al.86; such effects can lead to substantial changes in the  HF doppler spectrum and hence target detectability, so these models should be used  when applicable.
The decrease of wave spectral density with wavenumber is observed to lie close  to a κ–4 power law, as adopted by most models, and by a natural coincidence, this is  balanced by the k04 factor in the first-order scattering coefficient in Eq.
20.6, so the  resulting σ0 is roughly independent of frequency over the range of frequencies for  which the power law behavior is observed.
An important consequence is that with such  a reference, propagation path losses may be estimated.
To test this idea, the magnitude and variability of svv° was examined with the San  Clemente Island HF surface wave radar.78 This radar facility had several valuable and  unique features: a transmission path out over the open sea, multiple-frequency operation  within a repetition period, calibrated antennas, known transmitter power, and ground  truth in the form of ocean waveheight recordings.
When looking into an approximately  20 knot wind, values of svv° were found to be constant within a few decibels for operat - ing frequencies where the ocean wave spectrum was approximately fully developed;  these observations provided a confirmation of Barrick’s first-order theory.80 By using  the antenna gain conventions stated earlier and assuming a semi-isotropic sea directional  spectrum, the value of svv° was calculated as –29 dB; the measured values were grouped  between −7 and +3 dB of this value over a 5 to 20 MHz frequency span.
This experiment  provided the first direct measurements of the sea surface scattering coefficient.
Of course, when the Bragg resonant waves are not fully developed, the scattering  coefficient will be proportionately less, as shown in Figure 20.13, compiled from data  sets recorded looking upwind or downwind with the Jindalee radar.76 Occasions when  the wind speed was insufficient to arouse the Bragg resonant waves to saturation levels  yielded scattering coefficient values up to 20 dB below the peak values.
Low scattering coefficient values can also arise because the angular spectrum of  the wave system is not being sampled along a direction that presents the maximum  amplitude component at the Bragg resonant wavenumber.
The directional wave spec - trum can be written as  S k S k F k G k ( ) ( ,) ( ).( ,) ≡ =f f  (20.11) where F (k) is the nondirectional spectrum,  F k S k d ( ) ( ,) =∫f f 02π  ch20.indd   35 12/20/07   1:16:32 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	HF Over-the-Horizon Radar 20.36  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 20 and G(f , k) is the normalized angular spreading function that describes how the wave  energy is distributed in azimuth,  G kd ( ,)f f 021π∫=  The non-zero wave spectrum is not confined to directions having a component par - allel to the wind direction f = 0, i.e., G(f , k) for π π 23 2≤ ≤f , nor is it semi-isotropic,  G k( ,)f =1 π for −≤ ≤π π 2 2f .
In general, the angular spectrum is non-zero through 360 °,  with the spreading function depending on many variables, including the recent surface  wind history.
HF radar has sufficient sensitivity to measure the relative amplitude of  the waves running against the wind, even though they may have a power spectral  density (and hence an RCS) several orders of magnitude below those running with  the wind.
These upwind-propagating ocean waves are caused predominantly by third- order nonlinear wave-wave interactions, reflection processes, wave-current interac - tions, and propagation from neighboring regions with different wind stress.
They are  very important for remote sensing and impact strongly on target detection because the  second-order scattering processes are heavily dependent on G(f , k).
They also serve  as a sensitive indicator of backscatter coefficient estimation since, taking account of  only the first-order scattered field,  s f f f f0∝ − + − + [ ( , ) ( ) ] G k GW Wπ  where f W is the wind direction.
To quantify this, if the wave angular spectrum model  of Long and Trizna87 is used, the maximum value of s ° for a saturated sea is –27 dB in  the upwind or downwind direction (longitudinal sea) and only –39 dB in the crosswind  direction (transverse sea).
Figure 20.14  shows the scattering coefficient for this and  some simple parametric angular spreading functions versus angle with respect to wind  direction, as computed from the first-order contributions.FIGURE 20.13  Calibrated measurements of the ratio of the measured scattering coefficient to the  saturated sea scattering coefficient, plotted as a function of the ratio of wind speed to the phase speed of  the Bragg-resonant waves for upwind/downwind observations00.20.40.60.8 1 1.21.41.61.8 25 0 −5 −10 −15 −20 −25Wave saturation (dB) Wind speed saturation factor ch20.indd   36 12/21/07   10:43:12 AMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	HF Over-the-Horizon Radar  HF OVER-THE-HORIZON RADAR  20.376x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 20 In summary, the sea echo power in a resolution cell (1) is generally the largest echo  signal; (2) generally exists in the open ocean even in relative calm; (3) varies as the  square of resonant waveheight, which is frequently saturated at the higher frequen - cies; and (4) varies with direction, being greatest for seas running toward or away  from the radar.
The doppler spectrum of the echo has sharp variations that require  careful processing to preserve.
The receiver and processor must be able to handle  both the high-level signal due to this large RCS and those much smaller signals due  to targets, especially when the latter are adjacent to the strongest clutter components.
 An HF radar must be designed to accommodate such clutter levels; even though, they  will not exist all the time, or at any one time, over all areas, especially at the lower  operating frequencies.
Estimation of Sea State, Wave Spectra, and Surface Winds.
 Techniques for  extracting ocean wave field information from measured doppler spectra have been  reported by numerous authors, working in almost all cases from the Barrick solution  for the scattered field and dealing almost exclusively with HF surface wave radar  data, uncorrupted by ionospheric propagation.
Inversion of the relation in Eq.
20.6  to obtain an estimate of S( )k is mathematically nontrivial, requiring some additional  assumptions to obtain a unique, stable solution.
Some of these methods address the  problem of full directional wave spectrum estimation,88–90 whereas others propose  estimators for integrated measures of sea roughness such as significant waveheight.91 Scattering coefficient (dB) Radar bearing with respect to wind direction (deg)−20 −25 −30 −35 −40 −45 −50Peak spectral bac kscatter coefficient 0 1 0 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 9 0semi-isotropic cos2 (f/2) cos4 (f/2) cos6 (f/2) Long and Trizna FIGURE 20.14  Variation of the peak backscatter coefficient as a function of wind direction relative to the  radar look direction for various spreading functions, assuming a sea fully developed at the Bragg-resonant  wave frequency ch20.indd   37 12/20/07   1:16:47 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	HF Over-the-Horizon Radar 20.38  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 20 Ocean currents can be determined when a zero doppler reference (such as an island)  is in the radar footprint.92 The NOAA Wavewatch website93 provides access to  archived maps of significant waveheight, dominant wave period, and other param - eters; such information is extremely helpful when designing a radar for remote sens - ing applications.
In addition to providing information about the sea surface, HF radar can be used  to infer surface wind speed and direction.87,94 Wind direction is commonly estimated  by taking the ratio of the first-order resonant Bragg peaks and employing an empirical  relationship between this ratio and the wind direction relative to the radar look axis, as  pioneered by Long and Trizna.87 By scanning over a radar’s coverage area, a map of  inferred wind direction can be constructed; surface-wind direction maps are a routine  byproduct of the Jindalee radar.76 While waveheight and wave spectrum estimates can, in principle, be extracted  from higher-order features of skywave radar sea-echo spectra, a major difficulty  arises due to the myriad forms of contamination and distortion introduced by the  ionosphere.
This has led to the development of numerous techniques for estimating  and removing the various forms of signal corruption.95–97 As an alternative, Trizna98  and Pilon and Headrick99 have reported a method for estimating s ° from simple mea - surements made directly on the corrupted radar echo spectrum.
While this approach  may be relatively insensitive to some forms of corruption, it is not applicable to seas  far from equilibrium.
All the methods for estimating sea state or scattering coefficients require long  coherent integration times, usually combined with noncoherent averaging of a number  of CITs in order to achieve a distinct and stable spectrum.
This type of radar operation  will frequently be incompatible with other radar missions.
But because the sea echo  is generally a very large signal, it may be obtained with an adjunct oblique sounder  operating in an appropriate radar mode.
Scattering from Meteor Trails and Other Irregularities in the  Ionosphere.
 Clutter from ionospheric irregularities such as those mentioned in  Section 20.4 can severely limit radar performance.
Unlike the terrestrial or ocean  environments where velocities of natural scatterers tend to be low, the ionosphere is  home to phenomena with apparent speeds of 102–103 ms–1 and more, obscuring much  of the relevant doppler domain where manmade targets might be found.
Many of these  scatterers have a transient existence, much less than the coherent integration time, so  conventional signal processing causes their echoes to appear spread in doppler, as well  as doppler shifted.
The generic term spread-doppler clutter  is used to cover all these  phenomena where the scatterers responsible for the clutter do not have a well-defined  doppler shift.
The same term is used to describe the entirely different mechanism  where clutter smearing in doppler occurs as a consequence of rapid variations in the  propagation path rather than in the motion of the scatterer.
Meteors and their trails are the most ubiquitous source of transient echoes.100–103  They display a reasonably well-defined diurnal and geographical distribution specific  to any given radar site, but they can cause problems over a wide range extent because  they can be illuminated by a variety of propagation modes,19 as shown schematically in  Figure 20.15.
Normal incidence as shown yields the largest echo, but oblique incidence  echoes and scattering from the meteor “head” are also observed.
Figure 20.16 compares  a simple predictive model with measurements, confirming that the observed behavior is  understood and thus can be taken into account in radar design and operations.
ch20.indd   38 12/20/07   1:16:48 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	HF Over-the-Horizon Radar  HF OVER-THE-HORIZON RADAR  20.396x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 20 Meteors are usually classified as sporadic , occurring more or less randomly as the  Earth moves around the sun, and showers , such as the Leonids and the Eta Aquarids,  which occur on predictable dates where their orbits intersect the Earth’s orbit.
 Modes 0+ 1− 1+Meteor trails Ionosphere Radar FIGURE 20.15  Meteor trail specular scattering geometry for several propaga - tion modes FIGURE 20.16  Predicted range dependence of meteor echo strength compared with measurements; ground  clutter returns are also shown.
The distribution of meteor radiants determines this variation.
Predicted ver sus measured c lutter distrib utions 30 20 10Echo power (dB)0 −20 −30−10Surface bac kscatter Mode 0+ 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400 Range (km)1600 1800 2000 2200 2400Mode 1+ Mode 1−Meteor bac kscatter1985 da y 293  0130 local time frequency 6.8 MHz ch20.indd   39 12/20/07   1:16:50 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	HF Over-the-Horizon Radar 20.40  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 20 On these occasions, the flux of meteors can be so high that they can cause serious  obscuration of target echoes.
As radars become more sensitive, they register smaller  and smaller meteors, which are far more abundant, so at times, the flux of countless  small meteor trails sets the effective detection threshold.
Meteor echo suppression can be attempted in the spatial domain if the receiving  array has vertical directivity, but for most radars, the only option is rejection by signal  processing, exploiting the transient nature of the echoes to detect and censor them in  the time domain.
Echoes from the aurorae similarly involve transient scattering processes that appear  in the radar data as highly doppler-spread echoes with the potential to obscure targets.
 Scattering from the auroral region has been studied extensively using the SuperDARN  HF radar network initiated by Greenwald,17 and an auroral echo-scattering model has  been developed by Elkins104; this can be used to predict target obscuration when the  transmission path is through the auroral region.
Provided the radar is well removed  from the auroral zone, the waveform can often be chosen so as to manipulate the clut - ter echoes within range-doppler space, unmasking targets hitherto obscured.
Often  several waveforms with different repetition frequencies are interleaved to achieve this.
 For radars close to the auroral zone, the options are generally more limited.
Ionospheric irregularities that scatter back to the radar receiver occur much more often  at night than by day at any latitude.
Sensible siting of the radar, ensuring good front-to- back ratios on the antennas, employing vertical nulling if available, and using adaptive  signal processing techniques (or at least maintaining low receive array sidelobes) are all  effective tools for mitigating auroral, meteor, and other ionospheric clutter.
20.9 NOISE, INTERFERENCE,   AND SPECTRUM OCCUPANCY In the HF band, the average noise power spectral density at mid-band, near 15 MHz,  say, may exceed –150 dBW/Hz and will generally exceed –175 dBW/Hz, compared  with typical receiver internal noise spectral densities of perhaps –195 dBW/Hz.
Thus,  unlike the microwave radar case, external noise is almost always dominant.
This has  fundamental implications for receiving system design and signal processing.
Another  critical issue is the observed systematic variation of the external noise level, which has  a direct impact on radar performance.
The major source of quasi-continuum background noise at the lower frequencies  is lightning discharges ionospherically propagated from all over the world (sferics).
 At the high-end of the band, extraterrestrial or galactic noise may be greater than that  due to sferics.
Receive sites in an area of extensive electrical equipment use can find  anthropogenic noise dominant.
But most importantly, the HF band is densely occupied  by other users, especially powerful HF broadcasters relying on the prevailing fre - quency window for satisfactory propagation.
Even out-of-band signal levels are a con - sideration in receiver front-end design, where it is common to have bandwidths much  wider than that of the radar signal.
There are a large number of broadcast stations that  have 500-kW transmitters and antennas with more than 20-dB gain.
Measurements  made on the middle Atlantic coast of the United States show HF broadcast-band sig - nals with strengths of 5 to 10 mV/m.
These ambient levels must be accommodated  in receiver design because a wideband front end is desirable for rapid and frequent  frequency changes.
ch20.indd   40 12/20/07   1:16:50 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	HF Over-the-Horizon Radar  HF OVER-THE-HORIZON RADAR  20.416x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 20 The practice in allocations for HF radar operation is to permit use of broad bands  of the spectrum with a requirement to cause no discernible interference to an existing  service and to provide a lockout feature for channels that need protection.
Thus, an  integral part of an HF radar is a channel occupancy analyzer that provides a real-time  description of spectrum availability, as illustrated in Figures 20.17 and 20.18.
FIGURE 20.17  A snapshot of the HF spectrum at noon in summer and at a low sunspot number, zoom - ing in progressively to show a section of the spectrum where a 20 kHz clear channel is evident, centered  on 15.640 MHz.
The data was recorded at latitude 23.6 S, longitude 133.1 E.
ch20.indd   41 12/20/07   1:16:51 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	HF Over-the-Horizon Radar 20.42  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 20 Almost without exception, HF radars have operated on this principle of noninter - ference, making do with “clear” channels between other users.
Patterns in Spectrum Occupancy.
 When the HF band is scanned with a spec - trum analyzer, it can be seen that the gross features of occupancy at any particular hour  are remarkably stationary over the days of a season.
This is due to broadcast stations,  fixed-service point-to-point transmitters, and many other spectrum users having regular  schedules, as is evident from Figure 20.18, which plots the power spectral density at  2kHz resolution for high and low solar activity, summer and winter, day and night.
FIGURE 20.18  HF activity over the 5–45 MHz for low and high sunspot numbers (l, h), summer and  winter (s, w), and day and night (d, n), as measured at latitude 23.6 S, longitude 133.1 E.
The data is  taken from Julian days 180 and 360 of 2000 and 2005.
ch20.indd   42 12/20/07   1:16:52 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	HF Over-the-Horizon Radar  HF OVER-THE-HORIZON RADAR  20.436x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 20 As remarked earlier, the maximum frequency that will reflect energy back to the  Earth during the day may be more than twice that at night; therefore, the occupancy  tends to be denser at night than during the day—a problem compounded by the lower  absorption and, hence, reception of more distant signals.
Looked at over longer timescales, various patterns and trends emerge.
Most obvi - ously, the 11-year solar cycle forces changes to spectrum usage and the density of users,  with a resultant impact on HF radar channel selection.
Another trend that has become  apparent in recent years is the gradual reduction in HF users as services move to satel - lite communications, microwave links, fiber optics, and other media.
Nevertheless, the  increased number of HF radars has led to a new challenge: inter-radar interference and  the need for frequency arbitration.
Noise Models.
 The widely used reference on noise is the International Radio  Consultative Committee (CCIR) Report 322.105 This report is based upon mea - surements made at 16 locations throughout the world.
The measurement and data  analysis were performed to exclude individual collection site local thunderstorm con - tributions.
Spaulding and Washburn106 added data from the former U.S.S.R.
for two  revised CCIR reports.105 Noise-level medians as a function of frequency are given in  the form of worldwide maps by season and 4-h time blocks.
Lucas and Harper107 have  provided a numerical representation of CCIR Report 322-1, which is useful for com - puter computations, and this has been revised by adding the work of Spaulding and  Washburn.
The maps of median values are accompanied by decile values to indicate  distributions over days of the season.
(CCIR Report 322-3 (1988) has a significant  discrepancy, as pointed out by Sailors,108 so it should be used with caution.) These  noise maps provide the level that an omnidirectional antenna would receive.
Even  though assuming isotropic CCIR noise has limitations, it does provide a reference  level for initial radar design.
A number of operational and experimental HF systems  have accumulated their own noise databases and compared them with CCIR model  data; the report of Northey and Whitham gives a detailed analysis.109 An HF radar is generally designed to take advantage of what the environment per - mits; that is, the receiver noise figure should be good enough to make environmental  noise the limitation.
An example of the CCIR Report 322 data will now be discussed.
Figure 20.19  was drawn from Lucas and Harper.107 Noise power in a 1-Hz band relative to 1 W  (dBW) is given as a function of frequency for three different sources of noise: galactic,  atmospheric, and anthropogenic.
The practice in use is to select the largest.
This is a  winter daytime example at a United States east coast location.
The three straight lines  are estimates of anthropogenic noise for three different types of sites.
The shape of the  anthropogenic curves is described by the equations  No = – 136 – 12.6 ln ( f /3) residential   No = – 148 – 12.6 ln ( f /3) rural   No = – 164 – 12.6 ln ( f /3) remote (20.12) where the frequency f is in megahertz and ln indicates the natural logarithm.
These frequency trends approximate many measurements of human-made noise  but ideally the curve would be based on measurements at the particular radar site.
The  galactic-noise curve should be selected when it is the largest and when there is a path  through the ionosphere; the path will not exist for the lower operating frequencies in  the daytime.
The atmospheric noise rises from low frequencies to about 12 MHz and  ch20.indd   43 12/20/07   1:16:52 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	HF Over-the-Horizon Radar 20.44  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 20 then rapidly falls.
Figure 20.19 b is for nighttime.
All the curves are the same as in  Figure 20.19 a except for atmospheric noise.
At 10 MHz, the night and day levels are  the same; below 10 MHz, the noise decreases with decreasing frequency in daytime  and increases at night.
Above 10 MHz, daytime levels are greater than those at night.
 These effects can be partially explained by the very lossy long-range paths in day  that attenuate the long-range noise at the lower frequencies and by there being few  or no skywave paths to noise terrestrial sources at the higher frequencies at night.
In  general, nighttime noise will be greater than daytime noise for skywave illumination  of a selected range.
This is evident in Figure 20.20, recorded at time zone UT + 9½.
 The general trends of atmospheric noise in other seasons are similar to those in winter.
 However, there can be large differences in levels at other locations on the Earth.
For more detailed analysis and system optimization, it is no longer acceptable to  treat the noise as an isotropic field.
Strong azimuth- and elevation-angle dependence  of the sferics field is inevitable: examination of maps produced by satellites 110 indi- cates that tropical rain forests and other regions of concentrated thunderstorm activity  are major sources of noise, and these regions are connected with a given radar site  by the constraints of skywave propagation.
Coleman111 combined the thunderstorm  activity maps of Kotaki110 with numerical ray-tracing and modeled antenna patterns  to demonstrate that the directional variability of noise, coupled with the directional  characteristics of different antennas, can lead to marked changes in noise outcomes  and hence in optimal radar design.
Another important issue is the behavior of the external noise field as a function of  time, that is, within the coherent integration interval since this impacts strongly on  signal processing for interference rejection.112 Other effects that can influence radar  performance are sometimes mistaken for the  additive noise discussed above.
One of  FIGURE 20.19  Noise power per hertz is given for 38.65' north latitude and 76.53' west longitude in winter:  (a) 1800 UTC is given as a daytime example and ( b) 0800 UTC is given as a nighttime example.
ch20.indd   44 12/20/07   1:16:53 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	HF Over-the-Horizon Radar  HF OVER-THE-HORIZON RADAR  20.456x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 20 these is the spread doppler clutter discussed in Section 20.8, sometimes referred to as  active or multiplicative  noise .
The occurrence of this type of clutter is greater at night  and is much more prevalent in the auroral zones and around the magnetic equator .
20.10 THE RECEIVING SYSTEM The receiving system is defined here to embrace only the receiving antenna array and  the receivers that convert the antenna outputs to discrete time series, usually at base - band.
For ease of reference, the conventional signal processing stages responsible  for transforming the receiver outputs into standard radar products are discussed in  Section 20.11, together with more specialized techniques.
Antennas.
 From the reception viewpoint, it is desirable to have fine azimuthal  resolution for several reasons, including (i) to improve target location accuracy and  tracking performance, (ii) for detailed clutter mapping, and (iii) to reduce the clutter  amplitude levels to values permitted by system dynamic range and slow-target detec - tion requirements.
As mentioned earlier, most HF skywave radars employ a broad  transmit beam to illuminate a zone of interest, and then process the echoes via a num - ber of much higher resolution simultaneous “finger” beams.
It is well known that the  classical resolution of an array improves linearly with aperture up to some limiting  value determined by the environment.
Horizontal apertures of 2–3 km and even greater FIGURE 20.20  Diurnal variation of HF noise, measured in dBW/Hz, at latitude 23.6 S, longitude   133.1 E, 5 November 1995 Frequency (MHz)40 35 30 25 20 15 10 ++++ +++++ +++ −180−185 −170 −165 −160 −160−155−165−175 −175 −180 −185 0 5 10 15 20 Time of da y (UT) ch20.indd   45 12/20/07   1:16:55 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	HF Over-the-Horizon Radar 20.46  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 20 have been shown to support spatially coherent processing.113,114 Hence, the receiving  array apertures of skywave radars may range from ~ 0.3 km for systems concerned  only with aircraft and ballistic missiles to more than 4 km in systems designed for ship  detection and tracking.
Taking 3 km as a receive aperture, conventional beamwidth  at 15 MHz is ~ 0.5°, so 20 simultaneous beams span ~ 10°, which sets the required  transmit aperture in this example at 120–150 m, depending on the variation in gain  that can be tolerated across the set of receive beams.
The most versatile beamform - ing techniques rely on having a receiver for each array element, but as the number of  elements may approach 500, the cost of such a solution may be prohibitive.
It is then  advantageous to configure the array elements into subarrays, possibly overlapped or  sharing elements, with one receiver per subarray.
For instance, the original Jindalee  radar grouped 462 elements spanning 2.766 km into 32 overlapped subarrays.115 While  this constrains the resultant beams to lie within the subarray angular response pattern,  it has the advantage of reducing receiver dynamic range requirements by suppressing  interference from other angular sectors.
Linear arrays provide the most economical route to high spatial resolution in azi - muth, but the existence of multiple paths for signal reception, typically via the E, F1,  and F2 layers, has motivated some designers to employ two-dimensional arrays, hori - zontally or, at greater cost, vertically deployed.
The relative merits of these designs  can be measured only with respect to the priorities accorded to the various missions  assigned to a given radar.
The choice of receiving antenna element has traditionally been based on the precept  that, at HF, the external noise almost always exceeds the internal noise by a substantial  margin.
On this logic, improving antenna efficiency increases the output external noise  and interference amplitude at the same rate that it improves the wanted signals, thereby  gaining no advantage in SNR.
Selection of antenna element type, such as monopoles,  dipoles, Beverage antennas, phased endfire rows of monopoles, or biconical anten - nas, for instance, can then be based on frequency response over the anticipated band  of interest and suitability for the chosen array geometry, as well as terrain constraints  such as the soil conductivity.
Studies have shown that this argument is not neces - sarily valid when advanced adaptive spatial and temporal processing techniques are  employed because interference rejection efficacy is enhanced by higher interference- to-internal noise ratios.
It has been widely argued that the inevitability of time-varying polarization trans - formation in the course of ionospheric propagation greatly reduces the possible utility  of being able to measure the polarization state of the signals arriving at the receiving  array.
This is an open question at this time, though experiments aimed at assessing  skywave radar polarimetry are underway.116 Receivers.
 There are many demands on the receivers for OTH radar, including  high dynamic range, linearity, wide bandwidth, and uniformity between receivers  when used in multireceiver systems.
For most civil aircraft and ships, target radar  cross section (RCS) at HF is roughly of the same order as the microwave RCS, that is,  ~10–20 dBsm for aircraft and ~30–50 dBsm for ships, but the range is 10–100 times  greater, so the extra loss associated with R–4 is in the range 40–80 dB.
Moreover, each  target echo is immersed in clutter from the illuminated footprint, which may have  an area of many thousands of square kilometers.
Further, the HF signal environment  includes (one-way) transmissions from powerful radio stations around the world, as  discussed in the previous section.
Imperfections in the receiver result in some of this  ch20.indd   46 12/20/07   1:16:55 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	HF Over-the-Horizon Radar  HF OVER-THE-HORIZON RADAR  20.476x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 20 noise and clutter energy being superimposed on the wanted radar echoes, either addi - tively or multiplicatively.
Hence, careful attention to receiver design is imperative if  the radar designer wishes to avoid self-inflicted performance limitations.117 Attempts to reduce contamination from external broadcast signals by inserting nar - row-band filters at the receiver front-end sacrifice the high agility that is needed when  the radar is changing frequency, typically by several MHz, second by second, as it  jumps between tasks.
There are also penalties from (i) filter switching time, (ii) set - tling time, (iii) distortion caused by group delay dispersion, and (iv) reduced reliability  when there are hundreds of receivers.
Further, each channel will need to account for  the gain and phase variation for each filter, increasing the overheads on band switch - ing.
It is better to zero in on the bandwidth of interest by nonswitched filters later in the  receiver, using a variable frequency local oscillator to position the desired subband(s)  over the selective filters.
Of course the switched LO can also suffer from imperfec - tions, but only one local oscillator is needed, as opposed to hundreds of receivers.
 Whichever design path is followed, the demands on receiver linearity and spurious- free dynamic range are extreme.
There are five dominant mechanisms known to degrade HF radar receivers: the  nonlinear processes of analog-to-digital conversion, out-of-band inter-modulation  (IMD), cross-modulation, and in-band inter-modulation, and the pseudo-linear pro - cess of reciprocal mixing.
Analog-to-digital Conversion.
 Analog-to-digital conversion involves two stages—   sampling and quantization—each with potential for distorting the received signal.
 The received signals must be sampled with sufficient precision and uniformity to  preserve the inherent spectral content across the dynamic range spanned by the sig - nal components—target echoes, clutter, and external noise—after taking account of  the artifacts introduced by quantization and timing jitter, especially in multi-receiver  systems.118,119 Out-of-band Inter-modulation.
 Out-of-band IMD arises from nonlinear mixing  of two (or more) strong interferers such as broadcast stations, where the powerful  signals enter the front end of the receiving system and generate IMD products within  the radar signal bandwidth before they, the original interferers, are rejected by selec - tive filtering.120,121 Cross-modulation.
 Cross-modulation involves nonlinear mixing of a strong  interferer with the received radar echoes, transferring the interferer modulation onto  the radar signal.120,121 In-band Inter-modulation.
 A single resolution cell in the radar footprint may  have an area of 50–500 square kilometers, and there may be hundreds of cells  in the radar footprint, so using representative values of target RCS (Figure 20.9)  and surface scattering coefficient σ° (Figure 20.14), the signal-to-clutter ratio in  an OTH radar receiver may be as low as –80 dB for systems employing FM-CW  waveforms.
Nonlinearity at any stage has the potential to mask target echoes by  mixing the clutter echo with itself, generating IMD products that extend beyond  the intrinsic doppler band of the clutter.
Unlike the out-of-band IMD, in-band IMD  can occur at any stage through the receiver, and hence even second-order products  may cause problems.122 ch20.indd   47 12/20/07   1:16:55 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	HF Over-the-Horizon Radar 20.48  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 20 Reciprocal Mixing.
 Analog receivers of heterodyne design generally involve a  number of local oscillators for signal mixing and perhaps a waveform generator used  to implement a matched filter.
These ancillary sources are inevitably of finite spectral  purity, with a phase noise floor that may extend over a wide band of frequencies, albeit  at a very low level.
Any powerful interfering signals entering the first mixer stage of  the receiver will combine with the phase noise floor and potentially generate products  in the radar signal bandwidth.123,124 In the case of digital receivers, sampling noise will  have an equivalent effect.
Digital Receiver Technology.
 HF receivers can employ direct digital conver - sion at RF, avoiding some of the limitations of analog devices.
Issues such as recip - rocal mixing are still present, though in slightly modified form.
Comparisons with  analog receivers have demonstrated that little or no penalty is incurred with such  designs if a band preselector filter is installed at the front-end.
On the other hand,  there are major advantages to be had, such as simultaneous reception of several  radar signals on different frequencies, so a single receiver can service more than  one radar transmitter.
Calibration.
 The conventional beamforming process in an ideal multi-channel  receiving system should deliver a single output, assigned to the correct direction, for a  plane wave incident on the antenna array.
Inevitable variations in gain and phase aris - ing from small antenna positioning errors, ground screen inhomogeneities, differences  between preamplifiers, mutual coupling, cable mismatch, thermal and other variations  of cable characteristics, and all the analog stages of the receiver result in distortion of  the beam shape (and hence degraded radar resolution), elevated sidelobes (and hence  vulnerability to clutter and interference), pointing errors (and hence increased tracking  errors), and interferer wavefront geometry perturbations (and hence wasted degrees of  freedom in adaptive beamforming).
To mitigate these effects, HF radars must employ sophisticated calibration schemes.
 Several approaches have been tried: • Use of an external radiating element in the near-field in front of the array.
This  scheme is vulnerable to variations in the soil electrical and magnetic properties, such  as those resulting from seasonal changes in soil moisture levels.
• Injection of a calibration waveform at the antennas, or at the receiver inputs behind  the antenna array, by means of an independent “open loop” signal feeder network.125  This scheme cannot calibrate the antennas and initial feeders; it applies only from  the point where the signal is injected.
• Use of a distant radiating source that illuminates the array via skywave or even  a discrete target echo.
This scheme presumes that the arriving signal wavefronts  are essentially planar or smooth after ionospheric reflection, which is not always  the case.126 • Joint analysis of multiple discrete meteor echoes.127,128 This scheme is appealing but  relies on having enough identifiable discrete echoes.
For a 32-element array it may  be generally viable, but less frequently for a 500-element array .
• Receiver and plane wave rejection tests applied to injected broadband noise.129  This approach provides useful metrics of calibration performance and relative  performance, but does so only downstream from the receiver inputs, as with  (ii) above.
ch20.indd   48 12/20/07   1:16:56 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	HF Over-the-Horizon Radar  HF OVER-THE-HORIZON RADAR  20.496x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 20 Each of these approaches has its advantages and drawbacks in the context of con - ventional (Fourier) beamforming.
When adaptive processing techniques are being  employed, it is also important that the effective look direction matches the array steer - ing vector or else cancellation of the wanted signal will occur.
20.11 SIGNAL PROCESSING AND TRACKING Signal Analysis and Target Detection.
 The objective of signal processing is to  detect and characterize echoes from scatterers of interest, either discrete (aircraft or  ships) or extended (the sea surface), and this is customarily achieved by decompos - ing the time series data from the receivers into the natural radar domain dimensions  of group range (based on time delay), direction of arrival (beam space), and doppler  frequency, hopefully separating the echoes of interest from unwanted clutter and noise.
 The standard tool for this decomposition is the FFT, at least in operational skywave  radars, in part because it is computationally quite feasible to analyze the incoming sig - nal into typically ~102 range bins, 101 – 102 beams, and ~102 doppler cells, in perhaps  ~100 seconds, using general purpose computing hardware.
Thus, the FFT (or DFT for  short transforms) is commonly used for the three dimensions of analysis.
Alternative  analysis techniques have been implemented in some systems for applications such as  detection of accelerating targets,130–132 the detection of harmonically related signals,133  and when high doppler resolution is required but only short coherent integration times  can be accommodated in the radar timeline.134 Some important processor design considerations emerge from an analysis of  high quality HF radar data, as illustrated by the following example.
Figure 20.21  shows a sequence of sea clutter doppler spectra from the AN/FPS-118 radar, pre - sented as received power amplitude versus doppler frequency.
To generate this plot,  15 power spectra from a single range bin were computed from nonoverlapping time  intervals, and then grouped into blocks of five and averaged noncoherently.
The  waveform repetition frequency (WRF) in this case was 20 Hz, with a coherent inte - gration time of 12.8 s, resulting in a nominal doppler filter bandwidth of 0.08 Hz.
 Noise ( N) samples were taken from the maximum doppler bin, target samples ( T)  on the target peak, and Bragg line amplitudes ( A) and ( R) from the clutter peaks  corresponding to the approaching and receding resonant ocean waves, as described  in Section 20.8.
N, T, A, and R are plotted in Figure 20.22 a.
The sub-clutter vis - ibility (SCV), widely used in HF radar as a measure of sensitivity and defined as  R/N, is 76 dB in this example.
(In microwave radar, the term sub-clutter  visibility  is sensibly defined as the ratio by which the target echo power may be weaker than  the clutter power and still be detected.
In the HF radar literature, historically the  detection threshold component has not been included, so SCV is essentially the  clutter-to-noise ratio.) For a representative effective clutter RCS of 65 dBsm per resolution cell, the target  RCS can be estimated as  RCS = 65 − R(dB) + T(dB) = 65 − 76 + 34 = 23 dBsm  and supposing that the SNR required for registering a detection is 15 dB, the minimum  detectable RCS (MDRCS) in this example can be computed as  MDRCS = 65 − R + N + 15 = 65 − 76 + 15 = 4 dBsm  ch20.indd   49 12/20/07   1:16:56 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	HF Over-the-Horizon Radar 20.50  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 20 This is a quite low RCS at HF, indicating that when conditions are favorable, very  small targets are potentially detectable.
The experimental demonstration that, on occasion, the environment supports   ~80 dB sub-clutter visibility obliges the radar designer to ensure that the receiving  system and signal processing operations do not unwittingly degrade the radar perfor - mance.
Some appropriate design considerations are • An analog-to-digital (A/D) converter of at least 16-bit precision is in order for HF  radars with high power-gain products, PavGT GR.
• Receiving apertures, waveform bandwidths, and coherent integration times should  provide enough samples and high enough sampling rates to resolve unambiguously  distinct features of the clutter spectrum where such resolution impacts on target  detectability or the extraction of important information.
• The window functions used to control leakage during conventional spectrum analy - sis must have sufficiently low sidelobes when transforms are to be applied directly  to high dynamic range data.
The basic steps of range, azimuth, and doppler analysis are not the only stages of  signal processing.
As explained in Section 20.4, HF skywave radar signals are subject   FIGURE 20.21  Noncoherently averaged power spectra from three contiguous time intervals, plotted with  an offset for clarity.
The target lies well outside the clutter region where the Bragg lines are clearly visible, so  the signal-to-noise ratio, not the signal-to-clutter ratio, determines detectability.
Note the ~10 dB variation  in target echo strength due to changes in the ionosphere over 128 seconds.
ch20.indd   50 12/21/07   10:43:54 AMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	HF Over-the-Horizon Radar  HF OVER-THE-HORIZON RADAR  20.516x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 20 to various forms of contamination and distortion, many ionospherically induced,  so methods to deal with these have long been part of the radar signal processing   toolbox.135,136 Moreover, the need to deal with these deleterious effects has become  more pressing as the achievable dynamic range of receiving systems has increased,  revealing a greater variety of signal distortion mechanisms.
Hence, in addition to per - forming the basic decomposition described above, and calibrating the receiver chain  for the current waveform, the signal processing stage may be tasked with a number of  signal conditioning operations.
Signal conditioning here refers to filtering and scaling  processes aimed at removing contamination and distortion that, if left on the signal,  would degrade the results of the primary processing operations, such as doppler analy - sis, and be more difficult to remove after that primary processing.
Typically, there are  (optional) processing algorithms available to remove impulsive noise originating from  lightning, transient echoes from meteors, and field-aligned irregularities in the iono - sphere, strong directional interference, and clutter echoes from beyond the maximum  unambiguous range.
In addition, the radar designer now has the option to compensate  for signal path fluctuations in both spatial and temporal domains, within limits, by  employing processing schemes that diagnose the nature of the signal corruption on a  first pass and then reprocess with algorithms that compensate for the observed corrupt - ing mechanisms.96,97 The signal processing stage may also be tasked with extracting  environmental information from the radar echoes, as mentioned in Section 20.8.
This  includes remote sensing of ocean winds and sea state, land-sea mapping for coast - line recognition to assist with coordinate registration, measurements of the ionosphere  for assimilation into ionospheric models, extraction of echoes from remote beacons  deployed to assist with coordinate registration and calibration, and many other byprod - ucts of the basic detection mission.
FIGURE 20.22  (a) Temporal fading and ( b) distribution properties of the target, clutter peaks, and noise  features in the doppler spectrum of Figure 20.21, computed from an extended data sequence ch20.indd   51 12/20/07   1:16:58 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	HF Over-the-Horizon Radar 20.52  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 20 At present, the most powerful tools for dealing with additive interference, as well  as some classes of spread-doppler clutter, are the techniques of adaptive processing.
 Originally, these techniques were developed for airborne microwave radars, but they  have been shown to have wide applicability in HF radar.135–138 The primary domain  where major performance gains are realized is spatial analysis, that is, beamforming.
 In this context, a “snapshot” of the outputs from the all the receivers across the array  is taken and used to compute a set of complex-valued weights for each desired beam  direction; these are then applied to the receiver outputs before summing to form the  adapted beams.
The reason for the efficacy of adaptivity here is that, as remarked  previously, HF radars are almost always external noise–limited.
The azimuthal dis - tribution of noise from thunderstorms, industrial sites and other sources is far from  uniformly distributed.
Furthermore, even so-called clear channels selected for radar  operations are contaminated with directional noise of natural or industrial origin, albeit  at a much lower level.
Conventional FFT-type beamforming makes no allowance for  this, so a lot of noise energy leaks into each computed beam through those of its (regu - larly spaced) sidelobes that are pointing toward strong noise sources.
Spatially adap - tive processing (SAP) reduces this problem by adjusting the amplitude and phase of  the sampled receiver outputs in such a way as to minimize the integrated noise power  leakage, while preserving the gain/sensitivity of the beam being synthesized.
Figure 20.23 compares conventional processing and SAP applied to the same block  of radar data.
A reduction of some 20 dB is achieved in this example, where noise,  not clutter, is the problem.
The pattern here has adapted to minimize the total energy  collected in the doppler bands [–5,–1] Hz and [1,5] Hz, whilst maintaining the array  FIGURE 20.23  Comparison of doppler spectra estimated by (i) conventional beam - forming (CBF) and (ii) spatially adaptive processing designed to minimize energy out - side the low-doppler clutter.
The noise (and any fast clutter) has been reduced by ~ 20 dB,  which improves detectability of fast targets; note that the sea clutter spectrum changes  as a consequence of the new array pattern, i.e., the clutter spectrum does not necessarily  represent the clutter spectrum from the cell of interest.
ch20.indd   52 12/20/07   1:16:59 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	HF Over-the-Horizon Radar  HF OVER-THE-HORIZON RADAR  20.536x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 20 response in the specified direction.
Of course, depending on the angular distribution  of the noise sources, the array response pattern may have very high sidelobes, but they  will lie in directions where the noise levels are lowest.
The same may not be true of  the clutter that occupies the low doppler band, [–1,1] Hz, which has not been used to  guide the adaptation of the array response.
Indeed, the resultant clutter spectrum may  well have characteristics very different from those found in the steer direction.
This is  the case in the example shown in Figure 20.23, where the Bragg line ratio has changed  dramatically and even reversed in sign.
In the example just given, the SAP weights were kept fixed for the entire CIT.
 When the external noise field is changing rapidly, as happens when the ionosphere  is disturbed, it is necessary to adapt the weights during the CIT to maintain effective  rejection of the noise as its azimuthal distribution changes, even for short (~1 s) dwells  as used for aircraft detection.
This is the province of space-time adaptive processing or  STAP.136 Here, the data used to determine the weights requires not just a single snap - shot or average of snapshots but a number of snapshots of the array outputs; this block  of data is then used to construct weights that are applied to the block of data before  beamforming and doppler analysis.
STAP is of particular importance to ship detection,  where the external noise field almost invariably changes substantially during the long  CIT.
The complexity of STAP in this context arises from the fact that each time the  weights are changed according to the SAP rules, the main beam experiences a phase  shift, even though its amplitude gain/sensitivity is preserved.
Thus, over the entire  CIT, a sequence of phase shifts is applied, that is, a modulation, which is imposed on  the received signal.
As a consequence, the strong clutter echoes are spread in doppler,  masking targets.
To overcome this problem, Abramovich et al.139 developed a tech - nique known as the method of stochastic constraints,  which uses different rules for  weight adjustment, preserving not only the gain but also, to a good approximation, the  phase of the clutter received via the main beam response.
Although these modern spatio-temporal adaptive processing techniques have been  proven to be highly effective,136 the computational and data requirements are so high  that most of them cannot be implemented in their most powerful forms for real-time  processing.
Instead, simplified algorithms with impressive but nonetheless subopti - mum performance are employed.137,138 In view of the number of simultaneous spatial cells to be considered, detection  is generally based on a constant false alarm rate (CFAR) algorithm adapted to the  particular clutter environment.
In most implementations, the CFAR detection thresh - old is computed for each resolution cell as a linear combination of order statistics  extracted from ranked sample values over a window spanning neighboring range  bins, antenna beams, and doppler cells, with provisions for adapting the window  shape near strong variations in noise or clutter power.
Often the results are similar to  those predicted by the log-normal distribution, as evidenced by the experimental data  shown in Figure 20.22 b, which gives the power-level distributions for the example  shown in Figure 20.21.
These approximately log-normal distributions are typical for  benign conditions.
Tracking.
 Perhaps the most fundamental difference between skywave radar  and other radars is the existence of multiple propagation paths, with distinct time  delays, angles of incidence, doppler shifts, and fluctuation properties.
The tracking  stage must deal with the multiplicity of echoes associated with each individual target  and, by extracting and assimilating information about the prevailing ionosphere,  infer the number of genuine targets, their true locations and velocities, and perhaps  ch20.indd   53 12/20/07   1:16:59 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	HF Over-the-Horizon Radar 20.54  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 20 other information such as target altitude.140 (Estimates of aircraft target altitude are  very useful, but skywave radar has not proved to be a reliable means of obtaining  accurate estimates.) The problem of converting from radar coordinates to geographical coordinates is  referred to as coordinate registration (CR).
 Dozens of CR techniques have been explored,  including (i) inference from a regional ionospheric model, (ii) deploying a network of  repeaters or beacons in the radar footprint, (iii) correlating coastlines with land clutter—   sea clutter boundaries in the radar data, (iv) correlating other parameters such as scatter - ing coefficient, (v) using known target information such as reports from ships and com - mercial airline flights, and (vi) registering airports, where tracks originate or terminate.
 The key to robust CR is the fusion of all available information in a consistent probabilis - tic framework.141 Most radars implement target tracking as a separate stage that operates  on the candidate targets after they have been registered, initiating, updating, or terminat - ing tracks, as appropriate.
Experience with many different types of tracking schemes  has led a number of operational radars to converge on algorithms based on variants of  probabilistic data association (PDA),142 sometimes generalized to maintain multihypoth - esis models.143 Unlike traditional tracking filters such as the Kalman filter, which selects  a single detection (i.e., peak or plot) to associate with each maintained track, PDA filters  combine the influence of all the candidate peaks within a prescribed radius to compute a  track update.
In the skywave radar context, this has yielded superior results.
An important decision relates to where the coordinate registration is implemented.
 Some systems establish tracks in radar coordinates and then pass the tracks, including  multiple tracks from a single target, to the CR system, which must identify and recon - cile any multiple tracks as well as perform the registration.
Alternatively, the problem  of target tracking can be integrated with the problem of determining the ionospheric  propagation paths.
By augmenting the state vector used for representing a target with  additional parameters that characterize the propagation path structure, a joint estima - tion problem can be formulated and solved.144–147 In this way, the targets contribute to  registering their own coordinates.
20.12 RADAR RESOURCE MANAGEMENT The complexity of the HF radar operating environment—the ionosphere, clutter,  noise, and other users of the band—necessitates a commensurate complexity in sys - tem design so that the radar can adapt to prevailing conditions by selecting the best  frequency (or combination of frequencies148), waveform, signal processing, detection  thresholds, and so on, for the task at hand.
Achieving this optimum control is important  because experience has shown that HF skywave radar performance may degrade dra - matically with only modest departures from optimum settings.
Thus, there is a demand  for two ingredients: (i) information about the environment and (ii) a mechanism, or at  least a strategy, for using that information to control the radar parameters.
At the very minimum, HF skywave radars must maintain a real-time awareness of  propagation conditions as a function of frequency, range, and bearing (azimuth), as  well as a detailed knowledge of spectrum occupancy.
This is usually achieved by pro - viding auxiliary facilities, including some or all of the following: (i) Conventional ion - ospheric sounders (vertical and oblique incidence), which determine the ionospheric  electron density profile by measuring the time of flight of reflected radiowaves over  a range of frequencies; this electron density profile information is assimilated into  ch20.indd   54 12/20/07   1:16:59 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	HF Over-the-Horizon Radar  HF OVER-THE-HORIZON RADAR  20.556x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 20 local real-time ionospheric models.
(ii) A wideband backscatter sounder, that is, a low- power, low-resolution radar that sweeps across the HF band, measuring echo strength  versus time delay (group range), to see which frequencies are illuminating any given  region.
(iii) A mini-radar, similar to a backscatter sounder, that employs a narrowband  waveform to study the doppler structure of the echoes as a function of group range  for selected frequencies.
(iv) A network of remote beacons or transponders to provide  coordinate registration.
(v) Spectrum monitoring receivers to locate clear channels for  possible use and to assess their properties.
A detailed description of the suite of auxil - iaries for the Jindalee radar can be found in Earl and Ward.149,150 Traditionally, the control mechanism has been the expert radar operator.
For many  reasons, this is not wholly satisfactory, so various alternatives have been explored,  including packaged “recipes” that can be invoked by less skilled operators and expert  systems implemented with artificial intelligence constructs.
Apart from the need to adapt to the changing ionosphere and noise environment,  HF radars are frequently tasked with a variety of missions to be conducted more or  less concurrently, with time-varying priorities.
These will generally involve different  waveforms, task-specific constraints on frequency (in addition to propagation con - siderations), differing requirements in terms of acceptable propagation quality, and  so on.
A common example is the desire to search for ships and aircraft concurrently.
 Accordingly, optimization of the allocation of resources becomes a critical issue, with  significant implications for the way skywave radars operate.
One approach to fitting more tasks into the time available is to partition the radar  transmit and receive arrays, together with the transmitter modules and receivers, so  that when conditions are favorable, the partitions can operate as independent radars  with reduced sensitivity and resolution.
For example, the Jindalee and JORN radars  are dynamically reconfigurable as full or half radars.
Alternatively, it may be accept - able to employ a dual-purpose waveform, able to support two distinct missions, though  with suboptimal performance, or for the transmit system to radiate multiple orthogonal  waveforms for simultaneous reception and processing at a proportional loss of average  power on each transmission but without loss of spatial directivity.
But even if these  approaches are sometimes applicable, it is almost always necessary to schedule the  various tasks such that acceptable revisit times are maintained on important missions,  with low priority tasks, such as weather monitoring, activated less frequently, and  challenging tasks activated when suitable propagation conditions occur .151 One other important issue arises with resource management and that is the abil - ity to diagnose faults and failures as soon as they occur.
Not only is this necessary   to hasten the repair procedure, but also it enables the radar to adapt its configuration to  do the best it can with impaired equipment.
For example, if the receiver connected to  the middle element in an antenna array were to fail, beamforming would be more seri - ously degraded than if the failure were to occur in a receiver connected to an element  at the end of the array.
Automatic detection of such a failure and reallocation of an end  element receiver to the middle element of the array would minimize the degradation.
20.13 RADAR PERFORMANCE MODELING Modeling is an essential part of the radar design process and also as a means to predict  the performance of existing or proposed radars to which one does not expect access.
 In these roles, the emphasis is on fidelity.
In HF skywave radar systems, modeling has  ch20.indd   55 12/21/07   10:44:32 AMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	HF Over-the-Horizon Radar 20.56  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 20 another role—as a real-time monitor of what is expected under the prevailing condi - tions, so as to alert the radar operator if a discrepancy emerges, which might be indica - tive of natural, equipment-related, or intentional events warranting attention.
An issue one encounters when discussing radar performance is the choice of  performance criterion.
From the user’s perspective, it may seem logical to measure  performance in terms of time taken to establish a track on a given target, averaged  over time and coverage, since tracks are the essential product delivered to users  by the radar.
Of course, this places the onus on the tracking system, so one might  step back a little and choose instead SNR achievable on a given target, again aver - aged over time and coverage.
But this ignores the precision of the measurement,  associated with both resolution, which may impact on the utility of the detections,  and accuracy, in the sense of registration in absolute (geographical) coordinates.
 And what of the smallest detectable target? Coverage and coverage rate? Ship  detection capability versus aircraft detection capability? Clearly, there is no single  preferred metric.
The measure adopted here for illustrative purposes is the achievable signal- to-noise ratio (SNR) as defined by the radar equation (Eq.
20.2).
The constituent  variables that appear in the equation have been discussed in Sections 20.4–20.11,  emphasizing the unique considerations that arise with HF skywave radar, so the tools  for performance modeling and analysis are available.
By considering the case of  noise-limited detection, as applies especially to aircraft targets, the additional com - plications of clutter-limited detection are avoided.
In the following paragraphs, two  different approaches to performance modeling for the case of noise-limited detection  are described in some detail.
The NRL-ITS Radar Performance Model.
 The NRL-ITS Radar Performance  Model developed by Lucas et al.152 provides a number of tools for radar per - formance estimation.
It does not employ full 3D ray-tracing, such as the code  described by Jones and Stephenson,50 which can provide paths in three dimensions,  including delays and losses for both ordinary and extraordinary rays (see Section  20.4).
Arguing that such comprehensive calculations are excessive when there are  significant uncertainties in the electron density distribution, NRL Memorandum  Report 2500152 describes the basic technique used for path determinations.
A simple  closed-form virtual path trace, Snell’s law for a spherically symmetric medium,  is sequenced through elevation radiation angles in 1 ° increments.
This process is  incremented in 1-MHz steps over the radar’s operating band.
In the present exam - ple, a vertical sounding of the ionosphere 700 km downrange has been used as the  electron distribution for all one-hop paths, and a sounding 1400 km downrange is  used for two-hop paths.
Figure 20.24 gives night and day examples of ionograms  showing the ionosphere 700 km downrange from a radar located at 38.65 °N and  76.50 °W looking east, in summer at a median sunspot number of 50.
The cor - responding winter case is presented in Figure 20.25.
Such plots can be used to  determine the maximum frequency that will propagate to a given range; in most  cases, the optimum frequency is just below the maximum frequency.
For the little  tables shown in Figure.
20.24 and 20.25, FC is the critical frequency, in megahertz;  HC is the height of maximum ionization or the nose of the parabola, in kilometers;  and YM is the semilayer thickness, in kilometers.
Es describes the statistical range  of variation of sporadic-E as M (median), L (lower decile), and U (upper decile)  critical frequencies, in megahertz.
ch20.indd   56 12/20/07   1:17:00 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	HF Over-the-Horizon Radar  HF OVER-THE-HORIZON RADAR  20.576x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 20 FIGURE 20.24  The virtual (solid line) and true (dashed line) reflection heights are given  for July, SSN = 50, and a mid-Atlantic coast refraction area: ( a) 1800 UT is a daytime  example, single hop and ( b) 0800 UT is a nighttime example.
See text for an explanation of  the table in the lower right of the figure.
ch20.indd   57 12/20/07   1:17:01 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	HF Over-the-Horizon Radar 20.58  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 20 Constant plasma-frequency contours versus range from the radar for 0800 UTC,  SSN 50, January (night) and 1800 UTC (day) are presented in Figures 20.26 and  20.27 to illustrate the tilt of the ionosphere.
For the night case, the concentric FIGURE 20.25  Predicted ionograms as in Figure 20.24, but for January: ( a) 1800 UTC  for day and ( b) 0800 UTC for night.
See text for an explanation of the table in the lower  right of the figure.
ch20.indd   58 12/20/07   1:17:02 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	HF Over-the-Horizon Radar  HF OVER-THE-HORIZON RADAR  20.596x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 20 FIGURE 20.26  Plasma-frequency contours are given in MHz, extending from the radar  to a point east 3000 nmi downrange, for a January night example.
FIGURE 20.27  Plasma-frequency contours are given in MHz, extending from the radar  to a point east 3000 nmi downrange, for a January day example.
ch20.indd   59 12/20/07   1:17:03 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	HF Over-the-Horizon Radar 20.60  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 20 spherical assumption from the 700-km downrange position will give paths that are  slightly long for one-hop ranges.
In the two-hop ranges, the no-gradient assump - tion causes more distortion.
In general, errors of this nature have little impact on  performance prediction.
However, near-real-time analysis for virtual range and  azimuth correction to great-circle distance and bearing (grid registration) requires  that tilt or gradient effects be taken into account.
The daytime example has little  horizontal gradient, and the simplifying assumption makes little difference.
When  better accuracy is desired, the correct vertical profile can be used for each radiation  angle; also, gradients can be simulated by making the ionosphere nonconcentric  with the Earth.
A more complete path analysis should be used in radar performance  assessment and management, but these plasma density contours can be used to  estimate the magnitude of the errors introduced by the assumption of a spherically  symmetric ionosphere.
Figure 20.28 shows a performance prediction for a hypothetical radar in the form  of an oblique sounding.
A typical skywave radar is supported by one or more verti - cal sounders and oblique backscatter sounders for transmission-path analysis and to  aid in radar-frequency management.
Of course, the radar itself is an oblique sounder,  but its sounding data is restricted to the frequency, waveform, and scan program of  its primary surveillance task.
An adjunct oblique sounder can provide information in  FIGURE 20.28  The numbers in this figure show the SNR in dB as a function of frequency and range in  the form of a typical oblique backscatter sounding: January, 1800 GMT (day), SSN 50, location 38.65 °N and   76.53 °W, bearing 90 °.
See the text for a description of radar parameters.
ch20.indd   60 12/20/07   1:17:03 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	HF Over-the-Horizon Radar  HF OVER-THE-HORIZON RADAR  20.616x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 20 the form of Figure 20.28 on Earth backscatter echo power.
Estimates for noise power  spectral density are derived from CCIR Report 322-3, as described in Section 20.9.
 In this prediction, SNR in decibels is plotted as a function of operating frequency and  great-circle time delay or ground range.
The numbers just above the abscissa (at 1-ms  delay) are the noise powers in decibels below 1 W/Hz.
For this plot, the UTC time is  1800, SSN = 50, Pav = 200 kW, GtGr = 50 dB, T = 1 s, and s = 20 dBsm.
Figure 20.29  gives the corresponding night plot.
The shape of these displays is quite similar to what would be seen with a diagnostic  oblique sounding; the levels would generally be greater because the resolution cell area  times the surface scattering coefficient is generally much larger than 20 dBsm.
Some  of the night-day contrasts, such as available frequencies and difference in noise level  for the same range, are evident.
Also note that at night the 5-MHz lower frequency  limit does not provide coverage closer than about 900 km.
It should be remembered  that this is a median SSN 50 calculation, and if consistent performance for ranges as  close as 900 km is required during nights, a lower frequency limit should be selected  to deal with periods of lower solar activity and the critical frequency distribution.
The  plots show that operation on a single frequency may experience less than ±3 dB varia - tion over a range interval of 1000 km.
Also, if frequency selection had been made with  a 2-MHz granularity instead of the 1 MHz used, the SNR would be reduced by only  a decibel or so.
FIGURE 20.29  The numbers in this figure show the SNR in dB as a function of frequency and range in  the form of an oblique sounding, as in Figure 20.28, but for 0800 GMT (night).
See the text for a description  of radar parameters.
ch20.indd   61 12/20/07   1:17:04 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	HF Over-the-Horizon Radar 20.62  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 20 The performance estimation charts that follow come from analyses as described  above.
After performing oblique sounding calculations, a range-indexed table of  propagation and noise parameters is compiled.
Parameter selections are made on the  basis of the best SNR in each nominal 50-nmi interval, but the selection is adjusted to  come from the adjacent lower frequency to avoid an optimistic bias.
Then parameter  plots are generated as a function of range.
The variables adopted here as parameters  are propagation losses, frequency, noise, and elevation radiation angle.
The choice of  range as the independent variable may seem artificial, but it is a useful approach for  performance examination.
With these curves, the impact on radar SNR performance  can be estimated for selected antenna gain patterns, transmitted powers, target RCS,  and coherent integration times (CIT).
Figure 20.30 is an example for January with moderate solar activity, SSN = 50, in  daytime.
The R4 loss is the fourth power of range to the target in meters, expressed in  decibels.
R4 + L adds nondeviative absorption, deviative absorption, sporadic-E obscu - ration, and ground-reflection losses if there is more than one hop.
The sharp increase in  loss just before 2000 nmi is caused by transition from one to two hops; for two hops,  the lossy D region is transited twice as many times, ground-reflection loss is added, and  required operation at a lower frequency increases loss.
The jagged curve in the transi - tion region is due to the parameter selection process; in radar operation, the frequency  would be selected to minimize transition effects.
The frequency, radiation angle, and  noise power per hertz that go with this site and look direction are also plotted.
FIGURE 20.30  Radar performance-controlling variables plotted as a function of  range for January, 1800 UTC, SSN 50.
ch20.indd   62 12/20/07   1:17:05 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	HF Over-the-Horizon Radar  HF OVER-THE-HORIZON RADAR  20.636x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 20 An example will serve to illustrate the use of such plots.
Select 1000 nmi as the  range.
Then, the frequency is 20.5 MHz (wavelength = 14.6 m and λ2 = 23 dB), noise  power = –182 dB, and R4 + L = 260 dB.
Choose 53 dBW for Pav, 20 dB for Gt, 30 dB  for Gr, 0 dBs for T, 20 dBsm for RCS, and 6 dB for Fp.
Substituting in Eq.
20.2,  SNR dB = + + + + + + − − − − = 532030230 20 6 33260 182 41 ( )   Figure 20.31 shows the performance indicated with these assumptions for all ranges.
 A path factor enhancement of 6 dB has been chosen as a representative value of construc - tive multipath interference for an aircraft target.
The beamwidth has been taken to be  5.7° and the surface scattering coefficient to be –35 dB, and with a 12 dB path enhance - ment, the clutter level has been plotted.
The clutter-to-noise ratio (CNR) at 1000 nmi is  about 88 dB.
For the constant beamwidth assumed, the clutter-to-signal ratio increases  with range and is 47 dB at 1000 nmi.
Large clutter-to-signal ratios are typical of HF  radar; some form of doppler filtering is used to separate targets from clutter.
In Figures 20.32, 20.33, 20.34, and 20.35, performance estimation curves are given  for winter and summer seasons, night and day, and low solar activity.
The permis - sible frequency selection is set between 5 and 28 MHz, and antenna radiation is not  considered below an elevation angle of 1 °.
The analyses were made for a radar off  the mid-Atlantic coast of the United States and should be a good approximation for  any location where transmission paths are through the middle magnetic latitudes.
 FIGURE 20.31  A specific example of SNR and clutter-to-noise ratio (CNR)  as determined by using Figure 20.30.
The target RCS is labeled “size” and is  treated as constant.
ch20.indd   63 12/20/07   1:17:07 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	HF Over-the-Horizon Radar 20.64  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 20 FIGURE 20.32  Radar performance estimate for January 0800 UTC,  SSN = 10 FIGURE 20.33  Radar performance estimate for January 1800 UTC,  SSN = 10 ch20.indd   64 12/20/07   1:17:08 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	HF Over-the-Horizon Radar  HF OVER-THE-HORIZON RADAR  20.656x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 20 FIGURE 20.34  Radar performance estimate for July 0800 UTC,   SSN =10 FIGURE 20.35  Radar performance estimate for July 1800 UTC,   SSN = 10 ch20.indd   65 12/20/07   1:17:09 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	HF Over-the-Horizon Radar 20.66  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 20 These performance estimation curves can be used to show extremes in SNR variation,  antenna elevation angles required, and expected clutter-to-noise ratios.
The expected  performance of a particular radar design can be explored with these graphs because  summer and winter do give good coverage of the important variables.
The perfor - mance curves have been limited in almost all examples to the case of low solar activity,  since, in general, this is the most difficult time.
The higher frequency availability and  performance afforded at high solar activity is illustrated in Figure 20.36, which treats  the case of July 1800 UTC for SSN = 100.
Analysis of performance estimation curves for all combinations of (i) the four  seasons, (ii) day and night, and (iii) high and low solar activity153 reveals consistent  behavior: (i) Summer shows much greater losses than winter.
(ii) Except for summer, night losses are only slightly less than day losses.
(iii) Night noise is much greater than day noise.
(iv) For a specific range, optimum frequencies vary by 3:1.
This OTH performance presentation format can be used to decide on the antenna  patterns and powers required for specific targets and missions, or it can be used to  exhibit periods of enhanced or degraded performance for an existing design.154 FIGURE 20.36  Radar performance estimate for July 1800 UTC, SSN = 100 ch20.indd   66 12/20/07   1:17:09 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	HF Over-the-Horizon Radar  HF OVER-THE-HORIZON RADAR  20.676x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 20 Several qualifiers should be kept in mind.
At other geographic locations, the appro - priate CCIR noise should be selected or, better yet, noise measurements made in situ.
 For radars that use auroral zone paths, specific analyses are required and target obscura - tion by spread-in-doppler clutter must be considered.
The performance estimates shown  in the figures assume that the radar design and waveforms are such that external noise is  the control.
The use of a single description for night and day gives a fair representation,  but the transition from night to day is very abrupt and requires careful frequency man - agement in radar operation.
The ionospheric description that has been used is for what  has been termed the quiet ionosphere,  conditions that apply most of the time.
Under  disturbed conditions, performance may be markedly inferior to that predicted.
The Jindalee Radar Performance Model .
The Jindalee Radar Performance  Model draws on several unique databases.
Since 1984, oblique backscatter sound - ings have been recorded on a 10 minute cycle, scanning from 5 to 30 or (optionally)  45 MHz.149,150 Eight simultaneous beams spanning a 90 ° arc are formed.
Prior to 1991,  the system used a single receiver scanning the 8 receive beams, servicing each receive  beam for 25 kHz of each 200 kHz portion of a backscatter ionogram.
Post-1991, each  beam has been serviced continuously with its own receiver.
Background noise data  used in conjunction with the backscatter data for the Excess Power analysis is col - lected using the same eight directional beams as the backscatter sounder .
While there are a few significant gaps in these time series, they span two solar  cycles; further, integrity has been maintained by extensive vetting before entering  new data into the database.
The unique advantage of this database is that the noise and  propagation data are recorded under identical ionospheric conditions, whereas com - bining independent clutter and noise statistical models such as IRI-2001 with CCIR  322-3 preserves no correlations, however strong they may be.
Several forms of data analysis and display are accessible, but perhaps the most use - ful are the maps of (i) Excess Power and (ii) Optimum Frequency .
The Excess Power  parameter is constructed as follows.
Consider a specific target whose RCS is known  or estimated as a function of frequency.
Suppose a prediction of median radar detec - tion performance is required for a specific month of the year and a particular sunspot  number or year of solar cycle.
Analysis is initiated by selecting from the database a month that matches the  requirements.
Individual backscatter ionograms are paired with the concurrent back - ground noise data and the ratio taken to yield a population of estimates of true sub- clutter visibility (SCV) for each frequency step, each beam, and each range bin.
Next,  using a specified time granularity—typically one hour—median values of SCV are  calculated for each spatial cell and time interval from the statistical population of  individual SCV estimates.
Note again that these median values are the median values  of the SCV population, not a statistic derived by combining median values of clutter  with median values of noise.
The median SCV values are related directly to the backscatter sounder transmit  power and the transmit antenna gain.
From the radar equation (Eq.
20.2), the SCV can  be scaled to that which would be expected for the main radar, with its different radiated  power PT, aperture, radar bandwidth, etc.
Combining these scaled SCV values with  (i) a model of the surface backscattering coefficient versus frequency (almost all the  OTH radar coverage is ocean, so based on regional wave statistics, the constant value  –23 dB is used); (ii) the target RCS versus frequency model; and (iii) an estimate of  the target echo signal processing loss, typically ~ 12 dB, which arises predominantly  from FFT analysis, yields the predicted median target SNR at each spatial location as  ch20.indd   67 12/20/07   1:17:10 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	HF Over-the-Horizon Radar 20.68  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 20 a function of frequency.
This can be used directly, but it is convenient to define the  Excess Power at each frequency as follows.
Suppose: • An SNR threshold of M dB is required before the signal processing will register a  detection and • The SNR calculated for a particular range-azimuth cell in the coverage is SNR( f )  dB (which may be negative) Then, in dB,  Excess Power ( f ) = M − SNR( f ) + PT − PREF  is the amount of extra power, relative to any chosen reference power PREF , needed to  achieve detection as a function of frequency.
A negative value indicates that the radar  has greater sensitivity than required.
Figure 20.37 shows an example presented as a  contour plot.
The second parameter of special interest is optimum frequency, defined  as the value of the frequency at each range-time location that maximizes the SNR for  the given target, taking all radar equation factors into account.
Again, a contour plot  format is used here in Figure 20.38.
Other Modeling Approaches.
 The models described above are formulated in the  context of the radar equation (Eq.
20.2).
An alternative is to employ a coherent “pro - cess model,” in which the field amplitude and phase are tracked from transmitter to  receiver.
This approach has been used to simulate the effects of multipath, diffuse scat - tering, polarization effects, and nonlinearity.69,70,155 For example, Figure 20.39 shows  FIGURE 20.37  Range-time map of power required, relative to a PREF of 100 kW, to detect a specific  target, as a function of range and time-of-day, for a particular month and level of solar activity6000 5000 4000Range (km)30001510 15 10 5 55 0 −5 −10 −15 −20 −2510 5 2000 10000 6 12 Time of Day (local)18 24 ch20.indd   68 12/20/07   1:17:11 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	HF Over-the-Horizon Radar  HF OVER-THE-HORIZON RADAR  20.696x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 20 the predicted distribution of the resultant radar cross section when multipath and  Faraday rotation are taken into account.
The relevant physics—rough surface forward  scattering coefficient, bistatic (in the vertical plane) free-space target scattering cross 6000 5000 4000Range (km)30008 2000 10000 6 12 Time of Day (local)18 2410 18 20 20 20 26 24 22 20 18 16 14 1212 10 8 8 8 6 FIGURE 20.38  Range-time map of optimum frequency in MHz to detect a specific target, as a  function of range and time-of-day, for a particular month and level of solar activity 20,000 SAMPLES TARGET: TYPE 1MEAN: 21.5 SDEV : 8.0 MED  : 23.0 MAX  : 37.0 10%   : 10.0 90%   : 30.0 PEAK : 26.0 FREQ : 25.0 ELEV : 5.0 −50−40−30−20−10 0 RCS (dbsqm)10 20 30 40 50030060090012001500FREQUENCY OF OCCURRENCE FIGURE 20.39  Predicted distribution of effective RCS for the Aermacchi MB326H trainer jet  aircraft viewed nose-on at a height of 1000 feet when ground-reflection multipath and Faraday rota - tion are taken into account.
ch20.indd   69 12/20/07   1:17:12 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	HF Over-the-Horizon Radar 20.70  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 20 section for hybrid multipath, Faraday rotation, and differential Faraday rotation—are  incorporated via parametric models derived from measurements or computational  electromagnetics and the distribution obtained by Monte Carlo simulation.
APPENDIX: HF SURFACE WAVE RADAR General Characteristics and Capabilities.
 Although skywave propagation  provides the unique capability of low altitude target detection at ranges of thousands  of kilometers, other forms of propagation at HF can be exploited in radar applications.
 By far the most common of these is ground wave  or surface wave  propagation, which  is most effective for vertically polarized radiowaves traveling over highly conductive  surfaces such as seawater.
In addition, there are applications for which line-of-sight  or spacewave propagation is appropriate, such as measurement of the HF RCS of  aerospace vehicles.
Furthermore, in many instances, bistatic configurations can be  employed, with the possibility of using different propagation mechanisms for trans - mitter-target and target-receiver paths.
In view of the familiarity of space wave propa - gation and the preceding discussion of skywave systems, it suffices here to address the  main features of HF surface wave (or ground wave) radar (HFSWR).
HFSWR systems tend to fall into two categories: (i) low-power radars intended  primarily for oceanographic remote sensing, especially of ocean currents, and   (ii) larger and more powerful systems with target detection as their primary mission.
 The former are in widespread operation around the world; only a few of the latter are  operational in surveillance roles.
The ability of the low-power remote sensing radars  to detect ships at over-the-horizon ranges, although modest, has been exploited in  some dual-purpose deployments.
The principal virtue of HFSWR as an ocean surveillance radar lies in its ability to  detect small surface vessels and low-flying aircraft at ranges far beyond the visible  horizon.
As with skywave radar, performance depends strongly on environmental and  target parameters, as well as radar design; the detection ranges cited in Table 20.3  provide some indication of capability against surface vessels and low-flying aircraft,  as claimed or reported for several established HFSWR systems.
TABLE 20.3  Nominal or Claimed Maximum Detection Ranges (kilometers) of Some HFSWR  Systems   (SeaSonde is a compact low-power radar designed primarily for remote sensing; it is available with  an upgraded performance option.
The other radars shown were designed for surveillance.
In all  cases, performance may fall far short of the cited values under inclement environmental conditions.) TARGET TYPE SWR 503    Raytheon   CanadaHFSWR BAE Systems   UKSECAR    Daronmont   AustraliaPodsolnukh-E    Niidar RussiaSeaSonde    Codar US Frigate 520 > 200 > 400 260 190 Offshore trawler 450   85 > 250 180 120 Small fishing boat   120  65 Go-fast speed boat    70  35  Rigid inflatable boat   22 Low-flying fighter- sized aircraft  75 > 200 ch20.indd   70 12/20/07   1:17:12 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	HF Over-the-Horizon Radar  HF OVER-THE-HORIZON RADAR  20.716x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 20 Much of the discussion relating to skywave radar carries over directly to HFSWR,  but there are a few areas where differences are significant: • The antennas must be designed and positioned to achieve high efficiency in  coupling to the surface wave mode.
Experiments have shown that higher field  strengths are generated at over-the-horizon ranges when the transmitting antenna  is located close to sea level, rather than in an elevated position; placing the antenna  even just one or two wavelengths above sea level can introduce several dB of  additional loss.156 • Most HFSWR systems use a very broad “floodlight” transmit beam to illuminate the  entire coverage arc; multiple simultaneous receive beams are formed to fill the arc  and update all tracks simultaneously.
This reduces cost and complexity but incurs  some loss of sensitivity for noise-limited target detection.
• Coherent integration times may extend to hundreds of seconds, as HFSWR is not  reliant on the ionosphere as a medium for propagation.
• Only vertically polarized electromagnetic waves propagate effectively in the surface  wave mode over the sea, so the HFSWR signal-receiving antennas are necessarily  vertically polarized.
On the other hand, unwanted signals and interference arriving  by skywave may have any polarization.
This presents a means for rejection of inter - ference by filtering in polarization space: any signals correlated with those received  on an auxiliary horizontally polarized receive antenna can be cancelled from the  outputs of the vertically polarized array.
• The increasingly rapid attenuation of propagation to ranges beyond about 200 km,  as shown in Figure 20.40, means that at longer ranges, relatively little detection  performance improvement is gained by large increases in transmitted power.
• The rate of decay of the surface waves rises sharply with increasing frequency, as  shown in Figure 20.40, whereas the RCS of small targets tends to increase rapidly  and external noise decreases.
It follows that radar design is sensitive to the classes  of targets to be detected.
• While HFSWR does not rely on the ionosphere, echoes from irregularities in the  ionosphere may appear at ranges in excess of ~100 km, Similarly, ground reflec - tions received via oblique skywave propagation may appear at ranges in excess of  ~200 km.
Such echoes may be spread in doppler and can constitute a serious prob - lem for HFSWR systems.
Accordingly, antennas should be designed with low gain  at higher elevation angles.
The main design parameters of a representative HFSWR system—the Daronmont  SECAR radar—are listed in Table 20.4.
(The corresponding values for skywave radars  can be found in Table 20.2.) Propagation Considerations in HFSWR Systems.
 To a good approximation,  when a target of interest is above the optical horizon of an HFSWR, the field inci - dent on the target can be decomposed into terms that correspond to (i) direct line-of- sight, (ii) sea-surface reflection, and (iii) a lateral or “surface-attached” wave.
Beyond  the horizon, the surface wave is the dominant contributor, but at shorter ranges, all  three mechanisms must be taken into account.
Accordingly, the relationship between  (i) target echo strength and (ii) the range and altitude of the target is not a simple  one.
Moreover, the calculation of the field distribution is computationally expensive if  ch20.indd   71 12/20/07   1:17:13 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	HF Over-the-Horizon Radar 20.72  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 20 accurate predictions are required.
The difficulties are compounded when mixed paths  are involved; that is, when part of the propagation path lies over land, as happens  where islands are present in the coverage area.
Focusing attention here on over-the-horizon detection, Figure 20.40 shows how the  surface wave decays with range, parametric in frequency for the case in which both  the radar antenna and the target are near the sea surface.
These curves are for a smooth  surface and use a 4/3 earth radius to approximate atmospheric refraction effects.
The  propagation code used here is due to Berry and Chrisman,157 and it is quite flexible,  permitting antenna and target altitudes, surface conductivity and permittivity, polariza - tion, and frequency to be specified.
The key points to be drawn from this example are  (i) the apparent advantage to be gained by operating at low frequencies where propaga - tion losses are minimized, though this benefit must be balanced against antenna size,  the higher noise environment, and (often) reduced target RCS; and (ii) the rapidly  accelerating fall-off in signal strength at ranges beyond a few hundred kilometers,  where 10 dB of extra transmit power may buy only on the order of 10 kilometers of  additional detection range.
A more widely used propagation code is GRWA VE,158 which employs different  mathematical representations for the field, depending on range and other parameters, so  as to maximize computational efficiency.
Some indication of the accuracy of this model TABLE 20.4 Specifications of  SECAR, an HF Surface Wave Radar Designed for Surveillance of  the 200 nmi Exclusive Economic Zone Radar SECAR Manufacturer Daronmont Technologies Type Bistatic HF surface wave radar Tx-Rx site separation (km) 50–150 Power (average) (kW) 5  Power (peak) (kW) 5  Frequency band (MHz) 4–16 Waveform linear FM-CW Bandwidth (kHz) 10–50 Waveform repetition frequency (Hz) 4–50 Tx antenna design Single vertical log-periodic antenna with  ground screen Rx antenna design 16 or 32 endfire monopole doublets with  ground screen Rx aperture (m) 200 – 500 Beamwidth    4 MHz                       16 MHz> 9° > 2° No.
of simultaneous beams 16 or 32 Instantaneous range depth (km) 100–500 No.
of range bins 10–200 Coherent integration time  (CIT) (s) 1–120 No.
of doppler cells 32–512 Max.
velocity resolution (ms–1) < 0.5 Primary mission Ship detection Revisit time for entire coverage area Equal to CIT Secondary missions Aircraft detection Remote sensing Number of simultaneous targets tracked > 200 ch20.indd   72 12/20/07   1:17:13 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	HF Over-the-Horizon Radar  HF OVER-THE-HORIZON RADAR  20.736x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 20 can be found in Figure 20.41, which compares GRWA VE predictions with experimen - tal measurements of the signal strength received at a shore-based HFSWR when the  transmitter was carried by a small boat traveling out to a range of ~110 km.156 To avoid  peripheral issues concerning antennas, the GRWA VE curves have been arbitrarily nor - malized here to align with the measurements at a range of 40 km.
It is clear that, with  this normalization, the predictions match reasonably well over the whole range extent,  with small but systematic departures.
GRWA VE seems to underestimate attenuation  slightly at 7.72 MHz but over-estimate at 12.42 MHz.
The sea roughness in this case  was low (sea state 1–2).
The impact of sea roughness on signal amplitude can be taken  into account by using the expressions for roughness loss derived by Barrick.159 Another surface wave propagation modeling code has been developed by Sevgi,160  paying particular attention to the calculation of propagation over hybrid paths with  multiple islands.
The effect of the time-varying sea roughness on the signal phase and wavefront  structure, manifested in the time delay, doppler spectrum, and direction-of-arrival  spectrum of the received signal, can be computed using the multiple scattering theory  of Anderson et al.161 FIGURE 20.40  Curves of propagation loss versus range, as used for esti - mating surface wave radar performance.
The surface is assumed to be smooth,  target and antenna heights are 2 m, conductivity is taken as 5 S/m, and the  dielectric constant is 80.
ch20.indd   73 12/20/07   1:17:14 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	HF Over-the-Horizon Radar 20.74  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 20 Scattering: Targets and Clutter.
 The discussion of HF RCS and sea clutter in  Sections 20.7 and 20.8 applies equally to HFSWR; indeed, the absence of the cor - rupting effects of the ionosphere provides even greater scope for exploiting the scat - tered signals.
Furthermore, although the increased rate of decay of the surface wave at  higher frequencies imposes a limit on the range of frequencies that might be used to  detect a target at a given range, the situation is by no means as restrictive as for sky - wave propagation.
This raises the possibility of exploiting multiple frequencies more  effectively, so as to extract additional target and sea-state information and unmask  targets hidden in clutter.
A compelling example is presented in Figure 20.42, where a range cell containing a  ship target traveling at a speed of 13 knots has been interrogated at eight radar frequen - cies and the resulting doppler spectra plotted in a nested display .
The two columns of plots show received power versus doppler frequency for the  eight operating frequencies as labeled, and for the target approaching (right col - umn) and receding (left column).
The abscissa units are in doppler normalized to GROUND WAVE PROPAGATION GRWAVE MODEL ILUKA DATAPOL = V NORMALISED AT 40 km ANTENNA  HEIGHT (m) 090100110120FIELD STRENGTH (dB)130140150 20 40 60 DISTANCE (km) REFRACTIVITY = 1.02  REL PERMITTIVITY = 80.00SCALE HEIGHT = 7.30  CONDUCTIVITY = 5.0080 100 120TX  0.0RX  0.0FREQ1 = 7.72 MHz FREQ2 = 12.42 MHz FIGURE 20.41  Experimental measurements of one-way surface wave attenuation,  compared with GRWA VE predictions.
Note the fluctuations due to scalloping loss as the  source moved through FFT range bins.
ch20.indd   74 12/20/07   1:17:15 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	HF Over-the-Horizon Radar  HF OVER-THE-HORIZON RADAR  20.756x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 20 the resonant wave or Bragg frequency; therefore, the resonant wave responses peak  at ±1.
The amplitude range for each plot is 60 dB.
The narrow peaks at zero doppler  frequency are due to land in an antenna sidelobe.
The target doppler and Bragg line  frequency coincide at a radar frequency of 4.93 MHz; the target doppler lies between  the Bragg lines for radar frequencies below that frequency and outside them for FIGURE 20.42  Multifrequency HFSWR doppler spectra showing the  different frequency dependence of (i) target and (ii) clutter spectrum charac - teristics.
The target T is shown when approaching (right) and receding (left)  in the presence of the sea echo, with Bragg peaks marked A for approach - ing and R for receding.
The curves plot received power versus normal - ized doppler (i.e., in units of the Bragg frequency) for eight radar operating  frequencies.
The peak at zero frequency is due to a stationary target in an  antenna sidelobe.
ch20.indd   75 12/20/07   1:17:15 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	HF Over-the-Horizon Radar 20.76  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 20 frequencies above.
The positive doppler resonant wave peak is about 20 dB larger  than the negative doppler peak, indicating a sea driven by winds blowing toward  the radar.
The processing used in developing these displays was 200-s CIT and   30-min averaging.
Performance Modeling.
 Examples of HFSWR system performance model - ing160,162 generally follow the precepts described in Section 20.12.
The main difference  here is the availability of path-loss descriptors such as those shown in Figure 20.40.
 For example, consider a radar at 5 MHz with an average power of 10 kW (40 dBW), a  transmit-receive antenna gain product of 15 dB, and a target at 100 nmi with an RCS  of 20 dBsm; then the received power is  P dBWr= + + − = − 401520222 147   By using the January nighttime noise as given in Figure 20.19 b,  SNR P dBr= − = − + = N 147 153 6   and if 10 s coherent processing time is used,  SNR dB =16   As noted earlier, propagation loss accelerates rapidly with distance, especially at  higher frequencies, while atmospheric and surface roughness effects will accumu - late and contamination of the surface wave return with echoes received via skywave  paths will become increasingly severe, so quantitative performance predictions at long  ranges, beyond ~200 km, should be treated with caution.
REFERENCES  1.
A.
H.
Taylor and E.
O.
Hulbert, “The propagation of radio waves over the earth,” Physical Review ,  vol.
27, February 1926.
 2.
L.
A.
Gebhard, “Evolution of naval radio-electronics and contributions of the Naval Research  Laboratory,” Naval Res.
Lab.
Rept.
8300, 1979.
 3.
J.
M.
Headrick and M.
I.
Skolnik, “Over-the-Horizon Radar in the HF Band,” Proc.
IEEE , vol.
62,  pp.
664–673, June 1974.
 4.
D.
A.
Boutacoff, “Backscatter radar extends early warning times,” Defense Electronics ., vol.
17,  pp.
71–83, May 1985.
 5.
Guest editorial and invited papers in special issue on high-frequency and ice mapping and ship  location, IEEE J.
Oceanic Eng ., vol.
OE-11, April 1986.
 6.
J.
R.
Barnum, “Ship detection with high resolution HF skywave radar,” ibid., pp.
196–210,  April 1986.
 7.
J.
M.
Headrick, “Looking over the horizon,” IEEE Spectrum , vol.
27, pp.
36–39, July 1990.
 8.
D.
H.
Sinnott, “The Jindalee over-the-horizon radar system,” Conf.
Air Power in the Defence  of Australia , Australian National University, Research School of Pacific Studies, Strategic and  Defence Studies Centre, Canberra, Australia, July 14–18, 1986.
 9.
J.
Wylder, “The frontier for sensor technology,” Signal , vol.
41, pp.
73–76, 1987.
10.
V .
A.
Yakunin, F.
F.
Evstratov, F.
I.
Shustov, V .
A.
Alebastrov, and Y .
I.
Abramovich, “Thirty years  of eastern OTH radars: history, achievements and forecast,” L’Onde Electrique , vol.
74, no.
3,  May–June 1994.
ch20.indd   76 12/20/07   1:17:22 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	HF Over-the-Horizon Radar  HF OVER-THE-HORIZON RADAR  20.776x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 20 11.
C.
Goutelard, “The NOSTRADAMUS project: French OTH-B radar design studies,” 47th  AGARD Symposium on ‘Use or Reduction of Propagation and Noise Effects in Distributed  Military Systems’ , AGARD CP-488 (Supp.), Greece, October 1990.
12.
C.
Goutelard, “STUDIO father of NOSTRADAMUS.
Some considerations on the limits  of detection possibilities of HF radars,” Int.
Conf.
HF Radio Systems and Techniques , IEE  Conference Publication no.
474, July 2000.
13.
V.
Bazin, J.
P.
Molinie, J.
Munoz, P.
Dorey, S.
Saillant, G.
Auffray, V.
Rannou, and M.
Lesturgie,  “A general presentation about the OTH-Radar NOSTRADAMUS,” IEEE Radar Conference ,  Syracuse, NY, May 2006.
Also reprinted in IEEE AES Systems Magazine , vol.
21, no.
10,  pp.
3–11, October 2006.
14.
Zhou Wenyu and Mao Xu, “Bistatic FMCW OTH-B experimental radar,” Proc.
Int.
Conf.
Radar  ICR-91 , China Institute of Electronics, 1991, pp.
138–141.
15.
Guest editorial and invited papers reviewing OTH radar technology, with emphasis on recent  progress, Radio Science , vol.
33, July–August 1998.
16.
A.
A.
Kolosov (ed.), Fundamentals of Over-the-Horizon Radar , in Russian, Radio i svyaz, 1984.
 Also a translation by W.
F.
Barton, Norwood, MA: Artech House, 1987.
17.
R.
A.
Greenwald, K.
B.
Baker, R.
A.
Hutchins, and C.
Hanuise, “An HF phased array radar for  studying small-scale structure in the high latitude ionosphere,” Radio Science , vol.
20, pp.
63–79,  January–February 1985.
18.
P.
A.
Bernhardt, G.
Ganguli, M.
C.
Kelley, and W.
E.
Swartz, “Enhanced radar backscatter from  space shuttle exhaust in the ionosphere,” J.
Geophys.
Res ., vol.
100, pp.
23,811–23,818, 1995.
19.
R.
M.
Thomas, P.
S.
Whitham, and W.
G.
Elford, “Response of high frequency radar to meteor  backscatter,” J.
Atmos.
Terr.
Phys ., vol.
50, pp.
703–724, 1988.
20.
A.
Cameron, “ The Jindalee operational radar network: its architecture and surveillance  capability,” Proc.
IEEE Int.
Radar Conf ., 1995, pp.
692–697.
21.
K.
Davies, Ionospheric Radio,  London: P.
Peregrinus, 1990.
22.
J.
Thomason, G.
Skaggs, and J.
Lloyd, “A global ionospheric model,” Naval Res.
Lab.
Rept.
8321,  August 20, 1979.
23.
K.
Hocke and K.
Schlegel, “A Review of atmospheric gravity waves and travelling ionospheric  disturbances: 1982–1995,” Annales Geophysicae , vol.
14, pp.
917–940, 1996.
24.
A.
Bourdillon, J.
Delloue, and J.
Parent, “Effects of geomagnetic pulsations on the doppler shift  of HF backscatter radar echoes,” Radio Science , vol.
24, pp.
183–195, 1989.
25.
B.G.
Fejer and M.
C.
Kelley, “Ionospheric irregularities,” Rev.
Geophys.
and Space Phys ., vol.
18,  pp.
401–454, 1980.
26.
C.-S.
Huang, M.
C.
Kelley, and D.
L.
Hysell, “Nonlinear Rayleigh-Taylor instabilities, atmospheric  gravity waves, and equatorial spread F,” J.
Geophys.
Res ., vol.
9, pp.
15,631–15,642, 1993.
27.
D.
L.
Lucas and G.
W.
Haydon, “Predicting statistical performance indexes for high fre - quency telecommunications systems,” ESSA Tech.
Rept.
 IER 1 ITSA 1 , U.S.
Department of  Commerce, 1966.
28.
A.
L.
Barghausen, J.
W.
Finney, L.
L.
Proctor, and L.
D.
Schultz, “Predicting long-term opera - tional parameters of high-frequency sky-wave communications systems,” ESSA Tech.
Rept .
 ERL 110-ITS 78, U.S.
Department of Commerce, 1969.
29.
J.
M.
Headrick, J.
F.
Thomason, D.
L.
Lucas, S.
McCammon, R.
Hanson, and J.
L.
Lloyd, “Virtual  path tracing for HF Radar including an ionospheric model,” Naval Res.
Lab.
Memo.
Rept.
 2226,  March 1971.
30.
L.
R., Teters, J.
L.
Lloyd, G.
W.
Haydon, and D.
L.
Lucas, “Estimating the performance of  telecommunication systems using the ionospheric transmission channel—ionospheric commu - nications analysis and prediction program users manual,” Nat.
Telecom.
Inf.
Adm.
NTIA Rept .
 83–127, July 1983.
31.
V.
E.
Hatfield, “HF communications predictions 1978 (An economical up-to-date computer  code, AMBCOM),” Solar Terrestrial Production Proc ., vol.
4, in Prediction of Terrestrial  Effects of Solar Activity , R.
F.
Donnelley (ed.), National Oceanic and Atmospheric  Administration, 1980.
ch20.indd   77 12/20/07   1:17:23 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	HF Over-the-Horizon Radar 20.78  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 20 32.
D.
Lucas, G.
Pinson, and R.
Pilon, “Some results of RADARC-2 equatorial spread doppler clutter  predictions,” Proc.
7 th Int.
Ionospheric Effects Symp ., Alexandria, Virginia, pp.
2A5-1–2A5-8,  May 1993.
33.
D.
L.
Lucas, “Ionospheric parameters used in predicting the performance of high frequency  skywave circuits,” Interim Report on NRL Contract N00014-87-K-20009, Account 153-6943,  University of Colorado, Boulder, April 15, 1987.
34.
D.
C.
Miller and J.
Gibbs, “Ionospheric analysis and ionospheric modeling,” AFCRL Tech.
Rept.
  75-549, July 1975.
35.
D.
Bilitza, “International reference ionosphere,” http://modelweb.gsfc.nasa.gov/ionos/iri.html.
36.
Index of /models/ionospheric/iri/iri2001, http://nssdcftp.gsfc.nasa.gov/models/ionospheric/iri/iri2001.
37.
A.
G.
Kim, Z.
F.
Zumbrava, V.
P.
Grozov, G.
V.
Kotovich, Y.
S.
Mikhaylov, and A.
V.
Oinats,  “The correction technique for IRI model on the basis of oblique sounding data and simulation  of ionospheric disturbance parameters,” Proc.
XXVIIIth URSI General Assembly , New Delhi,  October 2005.
38.
R.
E.
Daniell, Jr.
and D.
N.
Anderson, “PIM model 1995,” http://modelweb.gsfc.nasa.gov/ ionos/pim.html.
39.
Parameterized Ionospheric Model, Computational Physics, http://www.cpi.com/products/pim/.
40.
R.E.
Daniell, L.D.
Brown, D.
N.
Anderson, M.
W.
Fox, P.
H.
Doherty, D.
T.
Decker, J.
J.
Sojka,  and R.
W.
Schunk, “Parameterized ionospheric model: A global ionospheric parameterization  based on first principle models,” Radio Science , vol.
30, pp.
1499–1510, 1995.
41.
R.
E.
Daniell, “PRISM: assimilating disparate data types for improved low latitude ionospheric  specification,” presented at the Ionospheric Determination and Specification for Ocean Altimetry  and GPS Surface Reflection Workshop at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, CA, 2–4  December 1997.
42.
D.
N.
Anderson, J.
M.
Forbes, and M.
Codrescu, “A fully analytical, low- and middle-latitude  ionospheric model,” J.
Geophys.
Res.
vol.
94, pp.
1520–1524, 1989.
43.
Global Assimilation of Ionospheric Measurements, Park City, Utah, 2001, http://gaim.cass.usu   .edu/GAIM/htdocs/present.htm .
44.
Global Assimilative Ionospheric Model, JPL, http://iono.jpl.nasa.gov/gaim/index.html .
45.
J.
D.
Huba, G.
Joyce, and J.
A.
Fedder, “SAMI2 (Sami2 is another model of the ionosphere),  A new low-latitude ionosphere model,” J.
Geophys.
Res ., vol.
105, 23,035–23053, 2000.
46.
B.
Khattatov, M.
Murphy, M.
Gnedin, T.
Fuller- Rowell, and V .
Yudin, “Advanced modeling of  the ionosphere and upper atmosphere,” Environmental Research Technologies Report , A550924,  June 2004.
47.
J.
K.
Hill, “Exact ray paths in a multisegment quasi-parabolic ionosphere,” Radio Science , vol.
14,  pp.
855–861, 1979.
48.
T.
A.
Croft and H.
Hoogasian, “Exact ray calculations in a quasi-parabolic ionosphere with no  Magnetic Field,” Radio Science , vol.
3, pp.
69–74, 1968.
49.
R.
J.
Newton, P.
L.
Dyson, and J.
A.
Bennett, “Analytic ray parameters for the quasi-cubic  segment model of the ionosphere,” Radio Science , vol.
32, pp.
567–578, 1997.
50.
R.
M.
Jones and J.
J.
Stephenson, “A versatile three-dimensional ray tracing computer program  for radio waves in the ionosphere,” Office Telecom.
Rept.
 75–76, October 1975.
51.
C.
J.
Coleman, “A general purpose ionospheric ray-tracing procedure,” DSTO Technical Report   SRL-0131-TR, 1993.
52.
Jari Perkiömäki, “High-frequency (HF) ionospheric communications propagation analysis and  prediction,” VOACAP Quick Guide, http://www.voacap.com/.
53.
“Advanced stand alone prediction system,” IPS Radio and Space Services, The Australian Space  Weather Agency, http://www.ips.gov.au/Products_and_Services/1/1.
54.
PROPLAB-PRO version 2.0, http://www.spacew.com/www/proplab.html.
55.
B.
T.
Root and J.
M.
Headrick, “Comparison of RADARC High-frequency radar performance  prediction model and ROTHR Amchitka data,” Naval Res.
Lab.
Rept .
NRL/MR/5320-93-7181,  July 1993.
ch20.indd   78 12/21/07   10:46:35 AMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	HF Over-the-Horizon Radar  HF OVER-THE-HORIZON RADAR  20.796x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 20 56.
J.
M.
Headrick, B.
T.
Root, and J.
F.
Thomason, “RADARC model comparisons with Amchitka  radar data,” Radio Science , vol.
30, pp.
729–737, May–June 1995.
57.
“New wind model,” HWM 93, http://nssdcftp.gsfc.nasa.gov/models/atmospheric/hwm93/hwm93.txt.
58.
J.
A.
Secan, R.
M.
Bussey, E.
J.
Fremouw, and Sa.
Basu, “An improved model of equatorial  scintillation,” Radio Science, 30,  607–617, 1995.
59.
A.
V .
Gurevich, Nonlinear Phenomena in the Ionosphere,  New York: Springer-Verlag, 1978.
60.
V .
A.
Alebastrov, A.
T.
Mal’tsev, V .
M.
Oros, A.
G.
Shlionskiy, and O.
I.
Yarko, “Some characteristics  of echo signals,” Telecomm.
and Radio Eng ., vol.
48, pp.
92–95, 1993.
61.
V .
G.
Somov, V .
A.
Leusenko, V .
N.
Tyapkin, and G.
Ya.
Shaidurov, “Effect of nonlinear and  focusing ionospheric properties on qualitative characteristics of radar in the decametric-wave  band,” J.
Comm.
Technology and Electronics , vol.
48, pp.
850–858, 2003.
62.
ITT Avionics Division, Electro-Physics Laboratories, EPL Model ATL-75 Transmitter for  Radar and Communication, IR&D Project Rept.
274, Results of performance measurements,   January 1975.
63.
D.
J.
Hoft and Fuat Agi, “Solid state transmitters for modern radar applications,” CIE Int.
Radar  Conf.
Record, Beijing, November 4–7, 1986, pp.
775–781.
64.
F.
A.
Raab, P.
Asbeck, S.
Cripps, P.
B.
Kenington, Z.
B.
Popovic, N.
Pothecary, J.
F.
Sevic, and  N.
O.
Sokal, “Power amplifiers and transmitters for RF and microwave,” IEEE Trans.
Microwave  Theor.
and Tech.
, vol.
50, pp.
814–826, March 2002.
65.
D.
J.
Netherway and Carson, C.
T., “Impedance and scattering matrices of a wideband HF phased  Array,” J.
Electron.
Eng.
Aust ., vol.
6, pp.
29–39, 1986.
66.
Guest editorial and invited papers in special issue on shortwave broadcasting, IEEE  Trans.
 Broadcast., vol.
34, June 1988.
67.
R.
C.
Johnson and H.
Jasik (eds.), Antenna Engineering Handbook,  3rd Ed., New York: McGraw-Hill  Book Company, 1993.
68.
A.
G.
Kurashov (ed.), Shortwave Antennas,  2 Ed., in Russian, Radio i svyaz, January 1985.
69.
S.
J.
Anderson, “Limits to the extraction of information from multi-hop skywave radar signals,”  Proc.
Int.
Radar Conf ., Adelaide, September 2003, pp.
497–503.
70.
S.
J.
Anderson, “The doppler structure of diffusely-scattered skywave radar echoes,” Proc.
Int.
 Radar Conf ., Toulouse, October 2004.
71.
S.
J.
Anderson, “Target classification, recognition and identification with HF radar, proc.
NATO  Research and Technology Agency,” Sensors and Electronics Technology Panel Symposium  SET- 080/RSY17/RFT ‘TARGET IDENTIFICATION AND RECOGNITION USING RF SYSTEMS’ ,  Oslo, Norway, October 2004.
72.
E.
K.
Walton and J.
D.
Young, “The Ohio State University compact radar cross section measurement  range,” IEEE Trans.
Ant.
Prop., vol.
AP-32, pp.
1218–1223, November 1984.
73.
G.
J.
Burke and A.
J.
Poggio, “Numerical electromagnetic code (nec)-method of moments,”  NOSC Tech.
Doc.
 116, 1981.
74.
R.
W.
Bogle and D.
B.
Trizna, “Small boat radar cross sections,” Naval Res.
Lab.
Memo.
Rept.
  3322, July 1976.
75.
R.
Dinger, E.
Nelson, S.
Anderson, F.
Earl, and M.
Tyler, “High frequency radar cross section  measurements of surrogate go-fast boats in Darwin, Australia,” SPAWAR System Center Tech.
 Rept.
1805 , September 1999.
76.
S.
J.
Anderson, “Remote sensing with the Jindalee Skywave Radar,” IEEE J.
Ocean.
Eng.,  vol.
OE- II, pp.
158–163, April 1986.
77.
J.
R.
Barnum and E.
E.
Simpson, “Over-the-horizon radar target registration improvement by  terrain feature localization,” Radio Science , vol.
33, pp.
1067, July–August 1998.
78.
D.
E., Barrick, J.
M.
Headrick, R.
W.
Bogle, and D.
D.
Crombie, “Sea backscatter at HF:  Interpretation and utilization of the echo,” Proc.
IEEE, vol.
62, pp.
673–680, June 1974.
79.
S.
O.
Rice, “Reflection of electromagnetic waves from slightly rough surfaces,” in Theory   of Electromagnetic Waves,  M.
Kline (ed.), New York: Interscience Publishers, 1951,   pp.
351–378.
ch20.indd   79 12/20/07   1:17:23 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	HF Over-the-Horizon Radar 20.80  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 20  80.
D.
E.
Barrick, “First order theory and analysis of MF/HF/VHF scatter from the sea,” IEEE  Trans., vol.
AP-20, pp.
2–10, January 1972.
 81.
D.
E.
Barrick, “Remote sensing of sea state by radar,” Chapter 12 in Remote Sensing of the  Troposphere , V .E.
Derr (ed.), Boulder, CO: NOAA/Environmental Research Laboratories, 1972,  pp.
12.1–12.6.
 82.
D.
D.
Crombie, “Doppler spectrum of the sea echo at 13.56 Mcs,” Nature, vol.
175,   pp.
681–682, 1955.
 83.
J.
W.
Maresca, Jr.
and J.R.
Barnum, “Theoretical limitation of the sea on the detection of low  doppler targets by over-the-horizon radar,” IEEE Trans.
Ant.
Prop ., vol.
AP-30, pp.
837–845,  1982.
 84.
W.
J.
Pierson and L.
Moskowitz, “A proposed spectral form for fully developed wind seas  based on the similarity theory of S.
A.
Kitaigordskii,” J.
Geophys.
Res., vol.
69, no.
24,   pp.
5181–5190, 1964.
 85.
K.
Hasselmann, D.
B.
Ross, P.
Muller, and W.
Sell, “A parametric wave prediction model,”   J.
Phys.
Oceanogr,  vol.
6, pp.
200–228, 1976.
 86.
T.
Elfouhaily, B.
Chapron, K.
Katsaros, and D.
Vandemark, “A unified directional spectrum for  long and short wind-driven waves,” J.
Geophys.
Res.,  vol.
102, pp.
15782–15796, 1997.
 87.
A.
E.
Long and D.
B.
Trizna, “Mapping of North Atlantic winds by HF radar sea backscatter  interpretation,” IEEE Trans.
Ant.
Prop., vol.
AP-21, pp.
680–685, September 1973.
 88.
L.
R.
Wyatt, “A relaxation method for integral inversion applied to HF radar measurement of the  ocean wave directional spectrum,” Int.
J.
Remote Sens.,  vol.
11, pp.
1481–1494, August 1990.
 89.
Y .
Hisaki, “Nonlinear inversion of the integral equation to estimate ocean wave spectra from HF  radar,” Radio Science, vol.
31, pp.
25–39, 1996.
 90.
N.
Hashimoto and M.
Tokuda, “A Bayesian approach for estimation of directional wave spectra  with HF radar,” Coastal Eng.
J.
, vol.
41, pp.137–149, 1999.
 91.
D.
E.
Barrick, “Extraction of wave parameters from measured hf radar sea-echo spectra,” Radio  Science, vol, 12, no.
3, p.
415, 1977.
 92.
T.
M.
Georges, J.
A.
Harlan, R.
R.
Leben, and R.
A.
Lematta, “A test of ocean surface cur - rent mapping with over-the-horizon radar,” IEEE Trans.
Geosci.
and Rem.
Sens.
, vol.
36.
  pp.
101–110, 1998.
 93.
H.
L.
Tolman, WA VEWATCH III, National Weather Service, http://polar.ncep.noaa.gov/waves/ wavewatch/wavewatch.html.
 94.
J.
L.
Ahearn, S.
R.
Curley, J.
M.
Headrick, and D.
B.
Trizna, “Tests of remote skywave measure - ment of ocean surface conditions,” Proc.
IEEE, vol.
62, pp.
681–686, June 1974.
 95.
D.
B.
Trizna and J.
M.
Headrick, “Ionospheric effects on HF over-the-horizon radar,” in  Goodman, J.
M.
(ed.), Proc.
Effect Ionosphere on Radiowave Systems, ONR/AFGL-sponsored,  April 14–16, 1961, pp.
262–272.
 96.
J.
Parent and A.
Bourdillon, “A Method to correct HF skywave backscattered signals for iono - spheric frequency modulation,” IEEE Trans.
Ant.
Prop.
, vol.
AP-36, pp.
127–135, 1987.
 97.
S.
J.
Anderson and Y.I.
Abramovich, “A unified approach to detection, classification and  correction of ionospheric distortion in HF skywave radar systems,” Radio Science , vol.
33,  pp.1055–1067, July–August 1998.
 98.
D.
B.
Trizna, “Estimation of the sea surface radar cross section at HF from second-order doppler  spectrum characteristics,” Naval Res.
Lab.
Rept.
8579, May 1982.
 99.
R.
O.
Pilon and J.
M.
Headrick, “Estimating the scattering coefficient of the ocean surface for  high-frequency over-the-horizon radar,” Naval Res.
Lab.
Memo.
Rept.
5741, May 1986.
100.
J.
Jones and P.
Brown, “Sporadic meteor radiant distributions: orbital survey results,” Mon.
Not.
 Roy.
Astr.
Soc ., vol.
265, pp.
524–-532, 1993.
101.
M.
A.
Cervera and W.
G.
Elford., “The meteor response function: theory and application to nar - row beam MST radar,” Planet.
Space Sci.
, vol.
52, pp.
591–602, 2004.
102.
P.
Brown and J.
Jones, “A determination of the strengths of the sporadic radio-meteor sources,”  Earth, Moon and Planets , vol.
68, pp.
223–-245, 1995.
ch20.indd   80 12/20/07   1:17:24 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	HF Over-the-Horizon Radar  HF OVER-THE-HORIZON RADAR  20.816x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 20 103.
M.
A.
Cervera, D.
A.
Holdsworth, I.
M.
Reid, and M.
Tsutsumi, “The meteor radar response func - tion: Application to the interpretation of meteor backscatter at medium frequency,”  J.
Geophys.
 Res., vol.
A109, pp.
11309, 2004.
104.
T.
J.
Elkins, “A model for high frequency radar auroral clutter,” RADC Rept.
TR -80-122,  March 1980.
105.
“World distribution and characteristics of atmospheric radio noise,” CCIR Rept.
 322, CCIR  (International Radio Consultative Committee), International Telecommunications Union, editions  1964, 1983, and 1988.
106.
A.
D.
Spaulding and J.
S.
Washburn, “Atmospheric radio noise: Worldwide levels and other char - acteristics,” NTIA Rept.
 85-173, National Telecommunications and Information Administration,  April 1985.
107.
D.
L.
Lucas and J.
D.
Harper, “A numerical representation of CCIR Report 322 high frequency  (3-30 Mcs) atmospheric radio noise data,” Nat.
Bur.
Stand.
Note  318, August 5, 1965.
108.
D.
B.
Sailors, “Discrepancy in the International Radio Consultative Committee Report 322-3  radio noise model: The probable cause,” Radio Science , vol.
30, pp.
713–728, 1995.
109.
B.
J.
Northey and P.
S.
Whitham, “A comparison of DSTO and DERA HF background Noise  measuring systems with the International Radio Consultative Committee (CCIR) model data,”  DSTO Technical Report DSTO-TR-0855, November 2000.
110.
M.
Kotaki and C.
Katoh, “The global distribution of thunderstorm activity observed by the  ionosphere satellite (ISS-b),” J.Atmos.
Terr.
Phys ., vol.
45, pp.
833–850, 1984.
111.
C.
J.
Coleman, “A direction-sensitive model of atmospheric noise and its application to the  analysis of HF receiving antennas,” Radio Science , vol.
37, pp.
3.1–3.10, 2002.
112.
Yu.
I.
Abramovich, N.
K.
Spencer, and S.
J.
Anderson, “Experimental study of the spatial  dynamics of environmental noise for a surface-wave OTHR application,” Proc.
8th Int.
 Conf.
HF Radio Systems and Techniques , IEE Conference Publication no.
474, Guildford,  UK, July 2000, pp.
357–362.
113.
L.
E.
Sweeney, “Spatial properties of ionospheric radio propagation as determined with half- degree azimuthal resolution,” Stanford Electron.
Lab.
Tech.
Rept.
155 SU - SEL-70-034, Stanford  University, June 1970.
114.
J.
T.
Lynch, “Aperture synthesis for HF radio signals propagated via the F-layer of the ion - osphere,” Stanford Electron.
Lab.
Tech.
Rept.
 161 SU-SEL-70-066, Stanford University,  September 1970.
115.
D.
H.
Sinnott and G.
R.
Haack, “The use of overlapped subarray techniques in simultaneous  receive beam arrays,” Proc.
Antenna Appl.
Symp.
, University of Illinois, 1983.
116.
S.
J.
Anderson, Y .
I.
Abramovich, and W-M.
Boerner, “Measuring polarization dynamics of the  generalized HF skywave channel transfer function,” Proc.
Int Symp.
Ant.
and Prop.
, ISAP 2000,  Japan, August 2000.
117.
T.
H.
Pearce, “Receiving array design for over-the-horizon radar,” GEC J.
Technology , vol.
15,  pp.
47–55, 1998.
118.
G.
F.
Earl and M.
J.
Whitington, “HF radar ADC dynamic range requirements,” 3rd Int.
Conf.
on  Advanced A/D and D/A Conversion Techniques , July 1999.
119.
G.
F.
Earl, “FMCW waveform generator requirements for ionospheric over-the-horizon radar,”  Radio Science , vol.
33, pp.
1069–1076, 1998.
120.
G.
F.
Earl, “Receiving system linearity requirements for HF radar,” IEEE Trans.
Instrum.
Meas .,  vol.
40, pp.
1038–1041, 1991.
121.
G.
F.
Earl, P.
C.
Kerr, and P.
M.
Roberts, “OTH radar receiving system design using synoptic  HF environmental database,” Proc.
5 th Int.
Conf.
HF Radio Systems and Techniques , July 1991,  pp.
48–53.
122.
S.
J.
Anderson, “Simulation and modeling for the Jindalee over-the-horizon radar,” Math.
and  Comp.
in Simulation , vol.
27, pp.
241–248, 1985.
123.
G.
F.
Earl, “Consideration of reciprocal mixing in HF OTH radar design,” Proc.
7 th Int.
Conf.
HF  Radio Systems and Techniques , IEE Conference Publication no.
441, July 1997, pp.
256–259.
ch20.indd   81 12/20/07   1:17:24 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	HF Over-the-Horizon Radar 20.82  RADAR HANDBOOK 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 20 124.
G.
F.
Earl, “HF radar receiving system image rejection requirements,” Proc.
6 th Int.
Conf.
HF  Radio Systems and Techniques , September 1995, pp.
128–132.
125.
T.
H.
Pearce, “Calibration of a large receiving array for HF radar,” Proc.
Int.
Conf.
HF Radio  Systems and Techniques , IEE Conference Publication No.
411, July 1997, pp.
260–264.
126.
D.
M.
Fernandez J.
Vesecky, and C.
Teague, “Calibration of HF radar systems with ships of  opportunity,” Proc.
of the 2003 IEEE Int.
Geoscience and Remote Sensing Symp ., New York,  July 2003, pp.
4271–4273.
127.
I.
S.
D.
Solomon, D.
A.
Gray, Y .
I.
Abramovich, and S.
J.
Anderson, “Over-the-horizon radar array  calibration using echoes from ionized meteor trails,” IEE Proc.
Radar, Sonar, and Navigation ,  vol.
145, pp.
173–180, June 1998.
128.
I.
S.
D.
Solomon, D.
A.
Gray, Y .
I.
Abramovich, and S.
J.
Anderson, “Receiver array calibration  using disparate sources,”  IEEE Trans.
Ant.
Prop.
, vol.
47, pp.
496–505, March 1999.
129.
G.
J.
Frazer and Y .
I.
Abramovich, “Quantifying multi-channel receiver calibration,” DSTO  Technical Report DSTO-TR-1152, 2001.
130.
G.
J.
Frazer and S.
J.
Anderson, “Wigner-Ville analysis of HF radar measurements of an accelerat - ing target,” Proc.
5 th Int.
Symp.
Signal Proc.
Appl ., Brisbane, August 1999, pp.
317–320.
131.
Y.
Zhang, M.
G.
Amin, and G.
J.
Frazer, “High-resolution time-frequency distributions  for maneuvering target detection in over-the-horizon radars,” IEE Proc.
Radar, Sonar, and  Navigation , vol.
150, pp.
299–304, 2003.
132.
T.
Thayaparan and S.
Kennedy, “Detection of a maneuvering air target in sea-clutter using  joint time-frequency analysis techniques,” IEE Proc.
Radar, Sonar, and Navigation , vol.
151,  pp.
19–30, February 2004.
133.
G.
J.
Frazer and S.
J.
Anderson, “Estimating the frequency interval of a regularly spaced multi- component harmonic line signal in colored noise,” in Defence Applications of Signal Processing ,  D.
A.
Cochran, B.
Moran, and L.
White (eds.), New York: Elsevier, 2001, pp.
76–86.
134.
G.
Fabrizio, L.
Scharf, A.
Farina, and M.
Turley, “Ship detection with HF surface-wave radar  using short integration times,” Proc.
Int.
Conf.
Radar 2004 , Toulouse, 2004.
135.
D.
O.
Carhoun, J.
D.
R.
Kramer Jr., and P.
K.
Rashogi, “Adaptive cancellation of atmospheric  noise and ionospheric clutter for high frequency radar,” MITRE Report, MTR 95B0000112,  September 1995.
136.
Y .
I.
Abramovich, S.
J.
Anderson, A.
Y .
Gorokhov, and N.
K.
Spencer, “Stochastically con - strained spatial and spatio-temporal adaptive processing for nonstationary hot-clutter cancella - tion,” in Applications of Space-time Adaptive Processing , R.
K.
Klemm (ed.), London: Springer,  2004, pp.
603–697.
137.
Y .
I.
Abramovich, S.
J.
Anderson, A.
Y .
Gorokhov, and N.
K.
Spencer, “Stochastic constraints  method in nonstationary hot clutter cancellation, part I: Fundamentals and supervised training  applications,” IEEE Trans.
AES , vol.
34, pp.
1271–1292, October 1998.
138.
Y .
I.
Abramovich, S.
J.
Anderson, and N.
K.
Spencer, “Stochastic-constraints method in nonsta - tionary hot clutter cancellation, part II: Unsupervised training applications,” IEEE Trans.
AES ,  vol.
36, pp.
132–149, January 2000.
139.
Y .
I.
Abramovich, V .
N.
Mikhaylyukov, and I.
P.
Malyavin, “Stabilisation of the autoregressive  characteristics of spatial clutters in the case of nonstationary spatial filtering,” Sov.
J.
Commun.
 Technol.
Electron ., vol.
37, pp.
10–19, 1992, translation of Radioteknika I Electronika .
140.
R.
Anderson, S.
Kraut, and J.
L.
Krolik, “Robust altitude estimation for over-the-horizon radar using  a state-space multipath fading model,” IEEE Trans.
AES , vol.
39, pp.
192–201, January 2003.
141.
D.
J.
Percival and K.
A.
B.
White, “Multipath coordinate registration and track fusion for over- the-horizon radar,” in Defence Applications of Signal Processing,  D.
A.
Cochran, B.
Moran, and  L.
White (eds.), Amsterdam: Elsevier, 2001, pp.
149–155.
142.
Y .
Bar-Shalom and T.
E.
Fortmann, Tracking and Data Association , New York: Academic Press,  January 1988.
143.
S.
B.
Colegrove and S.
J.
Davey,  “PDAF with multiple clutter regions and target models,” IEEE  Trans.
AES , vol.
39, pp.
110–124, January 2003.
ch20.indd   82 12/20/07   1:17:24 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	HF Over-the-Horizon Radar  HF OVER-THE-HORIZON RADAR  20.836x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 20 144.
J.
L.
Krolik and R.
H.
Anderson, “Maximum likelihood coordinate registration for over-the- horizon radar,” IEEE Trans.
Sig.
Proc ., vol.
45, pp.
945–959, 1997.
145.
M.
G.
Rutten and D.
J.
Percival, “Joint ionospheric and track target state estimation for multipath  othr track fusion,” Proc.
SPIE Conf.
on Signal and Data Processing of Small Targets , 2001,   pp.
118–129.
146.
R.
H.
Anderson and J.
L.
Krolik, “Track association for over-the-horizon radar with a statistical  ionospheric model,” IEEE Trans.
Sig.
Proc ., vol.
50, pp.
2632–2643, November 2002.
147.
G.
W.
Pulford, “OTHR multipath tracking with uncertain coordinate registration,” IEEE Trans.
 AES, vol.
40, pp.
38–56, 2004.
148.
S.
J.
Anderson, F.
J.
Mei, and J.
Peinan, “Enhanced OTHR ship detection via dual frequency  operation,” Proc.
China Institute of Electronics Int.
Conf.
on Radar , Beijing, October 2001.
149.
G.
F.
Earl and B.
D.
Ward, “Frequency management support for remote sea-state sensing  using the JINDALEE skywave radar,” IEEE J.
of Oceanic Engr ., vol.
OE-11, pp.
164–173,  April 1986.
150.
G.
F.
 Earl and B.
D.
Ward, “The frequency management system of the Jindalee over-the-horizon  backscatter HF radar,” Radio Science , vol.
22, pp.
275–291, 1987.
151.
R.
Barnes, “Automated propagation advice for OTHR ship detection,” IEE Proc.
Radar, Sonar,  and Navigation , vol.
143, pp.
53–63, February 1996.
152.
D.
L.
Lucas, J.
L.
Lloyd, J.
M.
Headrick, and J.
F.
Thomason, “Computer techniques for planning  and management of OTH radars,” Naval Res.
Lab.
Memo.
Rept.
2500,  September 1972.
153.
J.
M.
Headrick, “HF over-the-horizon radar,” Chapter 24 in Radar Handbook , M.
I.
Skolnik  (ed.), 2nd Ed., New York: McGraw-Hill, 1990.
154.
J.
M.
Hudnall and S.
W.
Der, “HF-OTH radar performance results,” Naval Res.
Lab.
Tech.
Rept.
 NRL/MR/5325-93-7326, 1993.
155.
R.
Fante and S.
Dhar, “A model for target detection with over-the-horizon radar,” IEEE Trans.
 AES, vol.
26, pp.
68–83, January 1990.
156.
L.
A.
Berry and M.
E.
Chrisman, “A FORTRAN program for calculation of ground wave  propagation over homogeneous spherical earth for dipole antennas,” Nat.
Bur.
Stand.
Rept .
 9178, 1966.
157.
S.
Rotheram, “Ground wave propagation, parts 1 and 2,” IEE Proc., Pt.
F , vol.
128,   pp.
275–295, 1981.
158.
S.
J.
Anderson, P.
J.
Edwards, P.
Marrone, and Y .
I.
Abramovich, “Investigations with SECAR— A bistatic HF surface wave radar,” Proc.
IEEE Int.
Conf.
on Radar, RADAR 2003 , Adelaide,  September 2003.
159.
D.
E.
Barrick, “Theory of HF and VHF propagation across the rough sea, pts.
I and 2,”  Radio  Science, vol.
6, pp.
517–533, May 1971.
160.
L.
Sevgi, Complex Electromagnetic Problems and Numerical Simulation Approaches,   Hoboken, NJ: IEEE Press, 2003.
161.
S.
J.
Anderson, J.
Praschifka, and I.
M.
Fuks, “Multiple scattering of HF radiowaves propagat - ing across the sea surface,” Waves in Random Media , vol.
8, pp.
283–302, April 1998.
162.
G.
H.
Millman and G.
Nelson, “Surface wave HF radar for over-the-horizon detection,” Proc.
 IEEE Int.
Radar Conf ., 1980, pp.
106–112.
ch20.indd   83 12/20/07   1:17:25 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	HF Over-the-Horizon Radar 6x9 Handbook  / Radar Handbook / Skolnik / 148547-3 / Chapter 20   blind folio 20.84 ch20.indd   84 12/20/07   1:17:25 PMDownloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com) Copyright © 2008 The McGraw-Hill Companies.
All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.	HF Over-the-Horizon Radar 