SPACE    THREAT   ASSESSMENT  2020MARCH 2020 Authors TODD HARRISON KAITLYN JOHNSONTHOMAS G. ROBERTS TYLER WAY MAKENA YOUNG Foreword MARTIN C. FAGAA REPORT OF    THE CSIS   AEROSPACE   SECURITY   PROJECT. 
SPACE    THREAT    ASSESSMENT  2020MARCH 2020 Authors TODD HARRISON KAITLYN JOHNSONTHOMAS G. ROBERTS TYLER WAY MAKENA YOUNG Foreword MARTIN C. FAGA A REPORT OF THE  CSIS AEROSPACE SECURITY PROJECT. 
SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2020II ABOUT CSIS The Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS) is a bipartisan, nonprofit policy  research organization dedicated to advancing practical ideas to address the world’s greatest challenges. Thomas J. Pritzker was named chairman of the CSIS Board of Trustees in 2015, succeeding  former U.S. 
Senator Sam Nunn (D-GA). Founded in 1962, CSIS is led by John J. Hamre, who has served as president and chief executive officer since 2000. 
CSIS’s purpose is to define the future of national security. We are guided by a distinct set of  values—nonpartisanship, independent thought, innovative thinking, cross-disciplinary schol-arship, integrity and professionalism, and talent development. CSIS’s values work in concert toward the goal of making real-world impact. 
 CSIS scholars bring their policy expertise, judgment, and robust networks to their research,  analysis, and recommendations. We organize conferences, publish, lecture, and make media appearances that aim to increase the knowledge, awareness, and salience of policy issues with relevant stakeholders and the interested public.  CSIS has impact when our research helps to inform the decisionmaking of key policymakers and  the thinking of key influencers. 
We work toward a vision of a saferand more prosperous world.  CSIS is ranked the number one think tank in the United States as well as the defense and  national security center of excellence for 2016-2018 by the University of Pennsylvania’s annual think tank report.  CSIS does not take specific policy positions; accordingly, all views expressed herein should be  understood to be solely those of the author(s). 
© 2020 by the Center for Strategic and International Studies. All rights reserved. ABOUT ASP The Aerospace Security Project (ASP) at CSIS explores the technological, budgetary, and policy  issues related to the air and space domains and innovative operational concepts for air and space forces. 
Part of the International Security Program at CSIS, the Aerospace Security Project is led by Senior Fellow Todd Harrison. ASP’s research focuses on space security, air dominance, long-range strike, and civil and commercial space. Learn more at aerospace.csis.org. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This report is made possible by general support to CSIS. No direct sponsorship contributed to this report. The authors would like to thank Martin C. 
Faga, Brian Weeden, Victoria Samson, Emily Tiemeyer, Jeeah Lee, and Jacque Schrag for their support of this project.  Center for Strategic & International Studies  1616 Rhode Island Avenue, NW Washington, DC 20036 202-887-0200 | www.csis.org. III CONTENTS IV FOREWORD 1 INTRODUCTION 2 TYPES OF COUNTERSPACE WEAPONS  3 Kinetic Physical  3 N on-Kinetic Physical  4 Electronic  4  Cyber 5 Threat Characteristics  8 CHINA  10 Space Organization and Doctrine  11 Counterspace W eapons  18 Summary 19 RUSSIA  20 Space Organization and Doctrine  21 Counterspace W eapons  28 Summary 29 IRAN  31 Space Organization and Doctrine  31 Counterspace W eapons  34 Summary 35 NORTH KOREA 37 Space Organization and Doctrine  38 Counterspace W eapons  40 Summary 41 INDIA 43 Space Organization and Doctrine  45 Counterspace W eapons  46 Summary 47 OTHERS  47 France 50 Israel 51 Japan 52 United Kingdom 52 N on-State Actors 53 Summary 54 WHA T TO WATCH  56 ABOUT THE AUTHORS 57 APPENDIX I 59 ENDNOTES. 
SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 2020IV FOREWORD MUCH IS SAID THESE DAYS  about the possibility of conflict in  space during, before, or perhaps, instead of conflict on land, at  sea, or in the air. Why is this the case? The subject is discussed as though it emerged in the last 13  years since the Chinese demonstration of a kinetic ASAT in 2007.  In fact, the  United States was concerned in 1957 that Sputnik represented a precursor to space-based nuclear weapons. 
An ASAT program started in the United States in 1958, and the Soviets did similarly. Both superpowers deployed several ASAT systems and performed orbital tests.   Nonetheless, fear on both sides of a serious threat of conflict in space did  not emerge until recently. 
 Both the Soviets and the United States under - stood that the satellites of “National Technical Means” were stabilizing and were keys to de-escalation should a conflict occur. This view changed after the First Gulf War, when space systems moved from being primarily stra - tegic systems to tactical ones providing near real-time support to tactical forces. By that time, the satellites of the Department of Defense and of the Intelligence Community operated and reported almost instantly, and the military services developed the equipment and techniques to acquire, ana - lyze, and distribute space system information very quickly. 
  Following the First Gulf War, a Russian analysis of the rapid American suc - cess noted the efficacy of precision weapons and real-time intelligence.  Much of this capability depended on space systems and spurred the Rus - sians and Chinese to a sustained program to develop ASAT capabilities--not only those for physical attack but cyber and electronic attacks as well. In recent years, we have read Russian and Chinese doctrine explaining the im - portance of ASAT capabilities, and we have seen systems deployed to carry them out. 
The situation we confront today was inevitable. Capability is always met  with counter-capability. In recognition of this need to defend and to in - crease our space power in the face of such threats, the United States has wisely created the Space Force and the U.S. 
Space Command. This is where the people who will design, build, and operate our military space systems reside and where personnel will be trained, careers managed, doctrine de - veloped, and a myriad other elements of a military force undertaken. Several years ago, an Army general gave a speech where he said, “every  company commander depends on space, and takes it for granted. 
” What a challenge for our Space Force and Space Command to assure that our mili - tary is served at every level of command without failing. MARTIN C. FAGA Former Assistant Secretary of the Air Force for Space and Director of  the National Reconnaissance Office. 
1 INTRODUCTION THE PAST YEAR WAS A TRANSFORMATIONAL ONE for space pol- icy in several respects. On December 20, 2019, President Trump  signed into law the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2020, creating the Space Force and ushering in what is ar - guably the most significant reorganization of the U.S. military since the Goldwater Nichols Act of 1986. 
While the newly created Space Force is re - sponsible for organizing, training, and equipping space forces for the U.S. military, the newly re-established United States Space Command is the geographic combatant command responsible for space operations. France also made significant organizational changes in 2019 with the is - suance of its Space Defense Strategy. 
It calls for the creation of a Space  Command within the Air Force and the renaming of the Air Force to the Air and Space Force. The French defense minister publicly stated that France would develop space control capabilities and active defenses, such as small bodyguard satellites and space-based laser defenses to protect im - portant space assets. Other countries continue to develop and test counterspace capabilities and  conduct suspicious or threatening activities in space. 
India became the fourth country to successfully test a direct-ascent anti-satellite (ASAT) missile, as well as the only country to conduct a debris-producing test since 2008. Rus - sia continued its co-orbital activities in geostationary orbit (GEO) and caught the attention of many in the space community with its proximity operations around a classified U.S. government satellite in low Earth orbit (LEO). 
  In commercial space, both SpaceX and OneWeb began deployment of mega  constellations in LEO to deliver high-speed internet access globally. OneWeb launched its first set of six satellites in February 2019, and SpaceX launched its first batch of 60 satellites in May 2019. Both companies have conducted additional launches since then, with SpaceX beginning to deploy at a steady pace in early 2020. 
As of February 17, 2020, SpaceX has launched a total of 302 Starlink satellites, 297 of which are operational. In comparison, the total number of operational satellites in LEO was roughly 1,500 in 2019—a number that could double by the end of 2020. These commercial developments pres - ent both opportunities and challenges in what is already a diverse, disruptive, disordered, and dangerous space environment. 
The purpose of this annual report from the CSIS Aerospace Security Project  is to aggregate and analyze publicly available information on the counter - space capabilities of other nations. It is intended to raise awareness and un - derstanding of the threats, debunk myths and misinformation, and highlight areas in which senior leaders and policymakers should focus more attention. While the report focuses on the capabilities of China, Russia, Iran, North Ko - rea, and India,  this year’s report places relatively more emphasis than previ - ous years on the counterspace capabilities of select other countries, includ - ing some allies and partners of the United States. 
This report is not a comprehensive assessment of all foreign counterspace  capabilities because much of the information on what other countries are doing is not publicly available. The information in this report is current as of February 22, 2020.. SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 20202 COUNTERSPACE WEAPONS TYPES OF   COUNTERSPACE WEAPONS SPACE IS AN INCREASINGLY IMPORTANT ENABLER  of economic  and military power. 
The December 2017 United States National  Security Strategy prioritizes maintaining U.S. leadership and free - dom of action in this critical domain, but it notes that: Many countries are purchasing satellites to support their own strategic military activities. Others believe that the ability to attack space assets offers an asymmetric advantage and as a result, are pursuing a range of anti-satellite (ASAT) weapons. 
The United States considers unfettered ac - cess to and freedom to operate in space to be a vital interest. Any harmful interference with or an attack upon critical components of our space ar - chitecture that directly affects this vital U.S. interest will be met with a de - liberate response at a time, place, manner, and domain of our choosing. 
1 Counterspace weapons vary in the types of effects they create, and the level of technological sophistication and resources required to develop and field them. They also differ in how they are employed and how difficult they are to detect and attribute. The effects of these weapons can be temporary or permanent, depending on the type of system and how it is used. 
The coun - try-by-country assessments that follow this section group counterspace weapons into four broad categories: kinetic physical, non-kinetic physical, electronic, and cyber.Illustration  A ballistic  missile can be used  as a kinetic phys - ical counterspace  weapon. 3 KINETIC PHYSICAL KINETIC PHYSICAL COUNTERSPACE  weapons attempt to strike directly or detonate a warhead near a satellite or  ground station. A direct-ascent ASAT  weapon attempts to strike a satellite us - ing a trajectory that intersects the target satellite without placing the interceptor into orbit. 
Ballistic missiles and missile defense interceptors can be modified to act as direct-ascent ASAT weapons pro - vided they have sufficient energy to reach the target satellite’s orbit. A co-orbital ASAT weapon differs from a direct-ascent weapon because it is first placed into or - bit. When commanded, the satellite then maneuvers to strike its target. 
Co-orbital ASATs can remain dormant in orbit for days or even years before being activated. A key technology needed to make both di-rect-ascent and co-orbital ASAT weapons effective is the ability to detect, track, and guide the interceptor into a target satel - lite. An onboard guidance system requires a relatively high level of technological so - phistication and significant resources to test and deploy. 
2 Ground stations are vulnerable to kinetic physical attacks by a variety of conven-tional military weapons, from guided mis - siles and rockets at longer ranges to small arms fire at shorter ranges. Because they are often highly visible, located outside of the United States, and are more accessi - ble than objects in space, ground stations can be an easier target for adversaries  seeking to disrupt or degrade space sys - tems. Even if the ground stations them - selves are difficult to attack directly, they  can be disrupted indirectly by attacking the electrical power grid, water supply, and the high-capacity communications lines that support them. 
Kinetic physical attacks generally have  irreversible effects on the satellites and ground stations targeted. These counter - space weapons are likely to be attributa-ble because the United States and others can identify the source of a direct-ascent ASAT launch or ground attack and can, in theory, trace a co-orbital ASAT’s orbit - al data back to its initial deployment. In both cases, the attacker is likely to know  whether its attack is successful almost immediately because the effects would be publicly visible through orbital debris  or a damaged ground station. 
  NON-KINETIC PHYSICAL NON-KINETIC COUNTERSPACE weap - ons, such as lasers, high-powered micro - wave (HPM) weapons, and electromag-netic pulse (EMP) weapons, can have physical effects on satellites and ground  stations without making physical con- tact. These attacks operate at the speed  of light and, in some cases, can be less  visible to third-party observers and more  difficult to attribute.   High-powered lasers can be used to dam - age or degrade sensitive satellite com - ponents, such as solar arrays. 
Lasers can also be used to temporarily dazzle or per - manently blind mission-critical sensors on satellites. Targeting a satellite from Earth with a laser requires high beam quality, adaptive optics, and advanced pointing control to steer the laser beam as it is transmitted through the atmos - phere—technology that is costly and re - quires a high degree of sophistication. 3 A  laser can be effective against a sensor on a satellite if it is within the field of view of  the sensor, making it possible to attribute  the attack to its approximate geograph - ical origin. 
The attacker, however, will have limited ability to know if the attack was successful because it would not likely produce debris or other visible indicators. An HPM weapon can be used to disrupt  a satellite’s electronics, corrupt data  stored in memory, cause proces - sors to restart, and, at higher  Illustration A laser is an  example of a non-kinetic  counterspace weapon. SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 20204 COUNTERSPACE WEAPONS power levels, cause permanent damage  to electrical circuits and processors. 
A front-door HPM attack uses a satellite’s own antennas as an entry path, while  a backdoor HPM attack attempts to en- ter through small seams or gaps around electrical connections and shielding. 4  Because electromagnetic waves disperse and weaken over distance and the atmos - phere can interfere with transmission at high power levels, an HPM attack against  a satellite is best carried out from anoth- er satellite in a similar orbit. Both front-door and back-door HPM attacks can be difficult to attribute to an attacker, and as  with a laser weapon, the attacker may not  know if the attack has been successful. 
The use of a nuclear weapon in space can  be an indiscriminate form of non-kinetic physical attack. While a nuclear detona - tion would have immediate effects for satellites within range of its EMP , it also creates a high radiation environment that accelerates the degradation of satellite components over the long term for un - shielded satellites in the affected orbital regime. 5 ELECTRONIC ELECTRONIC ATTACKS TARGET  the  means through which space systems transmit and receive data by jamming or spoofing radio frequency (RF) signals. 
Jamming is a form of electronic attack that interferes with RF communications  by generating noise in the same frequen - cy band and within the field of view of  the antenna on the targeted satellite or receiver. An uplink jammer interferes with  the signal going from the Earth to a sat - ellite, such as the command and control uplink. Downlink jammers target the sig - nal from a satellite as it propagates down  to users on the Earth. 
User terminals with  omnidirectional antennas, such as many  GPS receivers and satellite phones, have a wider field of view and thus are suscep - tible to downlink jamming from a wider range of angles on the ground. 6 The technology needed to jam many  types of satellite signals is commercial- ly available and relatively inexpensive. Jamming is a reversible form of attack  because once a jammer is turned off,  communications return to normal. 
 Jam - ming can also be difficult to detect or  distinguish from accidental interference,  making attribution and awareness more  difficult. In 2015, General John Hyten, then-commander of Air Force Space Com - mand, noted that the U.S. military was unintentionally jamming its own commu - nications satellites an average of 23 times  per month. 
7 Spoofing is a form of electronic attack  where the attacker tricks a receiver into  believing a fake signal, produced by the  attacker, is the real signal it is trying to re - ceive. Spoofing the downlink from a satel-lite can be used to inject false or corrupted  data into an adversary’s communications  systems. If an attacker successfully spoofs the command and control uplink signal to  a satellite, it could take control of the sat - ellite for nefarious purposes. 
  Through a type of spoofing called “mea - coning, ” even the encrypted military GPS signals can be spoofed. Meaconing does  not require cracking the GPS encryption  because it merely rebroadcasts a time-de - layed copy of the original signal without  decrypting it or altering the data. 8 Like  jammers, once a spoofer is developed, it  is relatively inexpensive to produce and  deploy in large numbers and can be pro - liferated to other state and non-state ac - tors. 
CYBER UNLIKE ELECTRONIC ATTACKS, which interfere with the transmission of RF sig - nals, cyberattacks target the data itself and the systems that use this data. The antennas on satellites and ground sta - tions, the landlines that connect ground stations to terrestrial networks, and the  Illustration  A truck-mounted  jammer is a type of electronic  counterspace weapon.. 5 user terminals that connect to satellites  are all potential intrusion points for cy- berattacks. 
Cyberattacks can be used to  monitor data traffic patterns (i.e., which  users are communicating), to monitor the  data itself, or to insert false or corrupted data in the system. While cyberattacks  require a high degree of understanding of  the systems being targeted, they do not necessarily require significant resources to conduct. Cyberattacks can be contract - ed out to private groups or individuals,  which means that a state or non-state ac - tor that lacks internal cyber capabilities  may still pose a cyber threat. 
9 A cyberattack on space systems can re - sult in data loss, widespread disruptions,  and even permanent loss of a satellite.  For example, if an adversary can seize control of a satellite through a cyberat - tack on its command and control sys - tem, the attack could shut down all com - munications and permanently damage the satellite by expending its propellant supply or damaging its electronics and  sensors. Accurate and timely attribution  of a cyberattack can be difficult, if not impossible, because attackers can use a variety of methods to conceal their iden - tity, such as using hijacked servers to launch an attack. 
THREAT   CHARACTERISTICS The types of counterspace threats de - scribed above have distinctly different  characteristics that make them more  suitable for use in some scenarios than others. As shown in Table 1, some types of counterspace threats are difficult to  attribute or have fully reversible effects,  such as mobile jammers. High-powered lasers, for example, are “silent” and can carry out an attack with little public  awareness that anything has happened. 
 Other types of counterspace weapons produce effects that make it difficult for the attacker to know if the attack was  successful, and some produce collateral  damage that can affect space systems  other than the one being targeted.Counterspace weapons that are reversi- ble, difficult to attribute, and have limited public awareness are ideally suited for sit - uations in which an opponent may want to signal resolve, create uncertainty in the mind of its opponent, or achieve a fait ac - compli without triggering an escalatory response. For example, an adversary that wants to deter the United States from in - tervening in a situation may believe that such attacks will stay below the threshold for escalation (i.e., not trigger the very thing it is trying to prevent) while creating significant operational challenges for the United States that make the prospect of intervention more costly and protracted. Conversely, counterspace weapons that have limited battle damage assessment or that risk collateral damage may be less useful to adversaries in many situations. 
Without reliable battle damage assess - ment, for example, an adversary cannot plan operations with the confidence that its counterspace actions have been suc - cessful. Furthermore, weapons that pro - duce collateral damage in space, such as large amounts of space debris, run the risk of escalating a conflict and turning other nations against the attacker.  Illustration    Cyberattacks can be  used to take control  of a satellite and  damage or destroy it.. 
SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 20206 Kinetic Physical Non-Kinetic PhysicalTypes of AttackGround   Station AttackDirect-Ascent   ASATCo-Orbital ASATHigh Altitude  Nuclear   DetonationHigh-  Powered LaserLaser Dazzling   or BlindingHigh-  Powered   MicrowaveAttributionVariable   attribution,  depending on  mode of attackLaunch site can  be attributedCan be   attributed by  tracking previous - ly known oribtLaunch site can  be attributedLimited   attributionClear attribution  of the laser’s   location at the  time of attackLimited   attributionReversibilityIrreversible IrreversibleIrreversible or re - versible depend- ing on capabilitiesIrreversible IrreversibleReversible or   irreversible;  attacker may or  may not be able  to controlReversible or   irreversible;   attacker may or  may not be able   to controlAwarenessMay or   may not be   publicly   knownPublicly known  depending on  trajectoryMay or   may not be   publicly   knownPublicly knownOnly satellite  operator will be  awareOnly satellite  operator will be  awareOnly satellite  operator will be  awareAttacker Damage   AssessmentNear real-time  confirmation of  successNear real-time  confirmation of  successNear real-time  confirmation of  successNear real-time  confirmation of  successLimited   confirmation of  success if satellite  begins to drift  uncontrolledNo confirmation  of successLimited   confirmation of  success if satellite  begins to drift  uncontrolledCollateral DamageStation may  control multi- ple satellites;  potential for loss  of lifeOrbital debris  could affect  other satellites in  similar orbitsMay or may not  produce orbital  debrisHigher radiation  levels in orbit  would persist for  months or yearsCould leave  target satellite  disabled and  uncontrollableNoneCould leave target  satellite disabled  and uncontrol- lableTable 1 TYPES OF COUNTERSPACE WEAPONS. 7 Electronic CyberTypes of AttackUplink   JammingDownlink   JammingSpoofingData Interccept   or MonitoringData   CorruptionSeizure   of ControlAttributionModest attribution  depending on mode  of attackModest attribution  depending on mode  of attackModest attribution  depending on mode  of attackLimited or   uncertain   attributionLimited or   uncertain   attributionLimited or   uncertain   attributionReversibilityReversible Reversible Reversible Reversible ReversibleIrreversible or   reversible, depending  on mode of attackAwarenessSatellite operator  will be aware; may  or may not be  known to the publicSatellite operator   will be aware; may   or may not be known  to the publicMay or may not be  known to the   publicMay or may not be  known to the   publicSatellite operator   will be aware; may   or may not be known  to the publicSatellite operator   will be aware; may   or may not be known  to the publicAttacker Damage   AssessmentNo confirmation   of successLimited   confirmation of   success if monitoring  of the local RF   environment is  possibleLimited   confirmation of  success if effects   are visibleNear-real time   confirmation of  successNear-real time   confirmation of  successNear-real time   confirmation of  successCollateral DamageOnly dirupts the  signals targeted and  possible adjacent  frequenciesOnly disrupts the  signals targeted and  possible adjacent  frequenciesOnly corrupts the  specific RF signals  targetedNone NoneCould leave target  satellite disabled   and uncontrollable. SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 20208 CHINA32Number of Successful  Orbital Launches in 201910  “No force will stop  or shake China or its people from achieving its goals” PRESIDENT XI JINPING, 201911IN THE PAST DECADE, China has been barreling toward its lofty space  goals. 
In the 2010s alone, China conducted over 200 successful orbital launches. 12 China’s civil, military, and commercial capabilities are rapid- ly growing, and its 2020 plans show that the country aims to launch over  60 satellites into orbit via 40 launches over the coming year.13  China’s civil space program is focused on its network of BeiDou position - ing, navigation, and timing (PNT) satellites, similar to the U.S. Global Posi- tioning System (GPS). 
China plans on launching two BeiDou satellites into geostationary orbit (GEO) in 2020 as well as further developing its Gaofen  remote sensing satellite constellation. Since early 2019, Chang’e-4, the Chi- nese lunar lander mission that delivered a successful lunar rover called  Yutu-2, has been conducting an exploration mission on the far side of the  Moon. China plans to follow up this mission in late 2020 with Chang’e-5, a  mission that aims to return samples from the Moon back to Earth for further  study. 
To support its growing space capabilities, China has “built an expan- sive ground support infrastructure to support its growing on-orbit fleet and  related functions including spacecraft and space launch vehicle (SLV) man - ufacture, launch, C2 [command and control], and data downlink. ” 14 China also intends to send a mission to Mars with an orbiter and probe.  This mission will include 13 science payloads and is on track for a July 2020  launch.15 Three different launch vehicles are also scheduled to make their first  flight in 2020: the Long March-5B, the Long March-7A, and the Long March-8. 
CHINA. 9 The Long March-5B will be China’s heavy- lift workhorse, supporting future explora - tion missions as well as the planned Chi - nese Space Sta tion (CSS).16 The first test  launch of the -5B will likely take place in April 2020. If successful, it will be used to launch the first section of the modular CSS. 
The Long March-8 is planned to be China’s first rocket with a reusable first stage and is planned to support China’s growing com - mercial space sector. 17 Furthermore, “Chi - na aspires for a 2036 first human mission to the moon. ” 18  Figure 2: Chinese Orbital Space Launches (1957-2019). 
China had more successful orbital  space launches in 2019 than any other nation.   space-track.org / csis aerospace security19CHINA INDIA USA RUSSIA OTHERSSUCCESSFUL ORBITAL LAUNCHES PER YEAR BY COUNTRY (1957-2019) 020406080100120 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010 2019China is continuing to move forward  with a new modular space station. China  has successfully operated two previous space labs in LEO, Tiangong 1 and Tian- gong 2, through its Project 921 program,  which began in 1992. 
20 The new space  station will consist of three modules.  The core module of the CSS passed final  review but is facing possible launch de - lays. Currently, it is expected to launch in 2020, while the two additional modules  are planned for launch between 2022  and 2024. 
21 Three or four manned mis - sions and several cargo missions are also  planned, but launch delays have caused  schedules to slip for the entire program.22  The station is estimated to have a 10-year lifespan, with the possibility of an  extension. 23  China is also expanding its international cooperation. China hosted a selection  process for opportunities to host scien - tific payloads on the CSS. 
The final selec - tion was announced in 2019 and includes  nine projects, involving “23 institutions  from 17 Member States of the United Nations in Asian-pacific, European, Af - rican, North American and South Amer - ican regions. ” 24 China has furthered its  space partnership with Russia through  cooperating to develop “Russia’s future  Luna-26 lunar orbiter, China’s Chang’e-7  lunar polar lander, and a joint lunar and deep space data center with a hub in  each country. ” 25 China’s busiest launch site, the Xichang Satellite Launch Center, hosted 19 of Chi - na’s 32 launches in 2019. 
26 Located in the  south of China, Xichang is currently ex - panding by adding another launch pad in order to keep pace with China’s grow - ing national and commercial launch de - mands.27 Active InactiveOrbital Human  Launch 136Cumulative Launches 432 XICHANG SPACE CENTERJIUQUAN SATELLITE LAUNCH CENTER TAIYUAN SATELLITE LAUNCH CENTER WENCHANG SATELLITE  LAUNCH CENTER cial space companies grew from around  30 in 2017 to over 100 in 2018. This growth  has led to the introduction of new com - mercial policies in 2019 in order to better regulate the growing commercial space launch sector. 29 These regulations have  had a relatively positive response from Chinese commercial companies. 
30 Figure 1: Chinese National Spaceports. China currently has four active spaceports, which  have collectively launched hundreds of satellites and several taikonauts, or Chinese astronauts.  space-track.org / csis aerospace security28 After a 2014 decree to allow private compa - nies to develop SLVs, several new nominal - ly private (though typically state-backed)  Chinese companies began to develop and test new launch vehicles. 
China’s commer -. SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 202010 CHINA SPACE ORGANIZATION  AND DOCTRINEThis also builds on the 2015 Chinese white  paper, which stated that “outer space and cyberspace have become new com - manding heights in strategic competition among all parties. ” 35 Many scholars inter - preted this statement as a formal desig - nation of both space and cyberspace as new warfighting domains. 
36 To this end,  the PLA founded the SSF to centralize and manage the military’s space, cyber, and electronic warfare missions. Before the  2015 reorganization, responsibilities for  cyber, space, and electronic warfare were  scattered across at least four different PLA departments. The establishment of the SSF indicates the PLA’s prioritization of these critical areas of warfare. 
37 In 2018, China published an Outline of  Training and Evaluation doctrine, which  emphasized joint warfare training be - tween the different military services fo - cused on combating “strong military op - ponents. ”38 For the space domain, this is  likely directed against the United States.  Originally, the SSF was not assessed to  have full control over China’s ASAT ca- pabilities. 
Experts believed that the re - sponsibility for direct-ascent ASATs may lie with either the PLA’s Rocket Force,  which manages China’s nuclear arsenal,  or the PLA’s Air Force. 39 However, recent  records show that the SSF has begun  training specialized units with direct-as - cent ASAT weapons capable of targeting satellites in LEO. 40 According to the U.S-China Economic and Security Review Commission, Beijing has “sought to leverage military-civil fu- sion to commercialize its existing space  technology. 
” Utilizing civil or commercial  technologies to bolster or disguise its military space systems is a recognizable theme throughout China’s counterspace weapons program. “The goal of mili - tary-civil fusion in China’s space sector is not primarily to develop cutting-edge technology but to produce existing tech - nology that meets most customers’ needs at a lower cost and at greater commercial scale and efficiency. ” 41THE SSF  HAS BEGUN TRAINING SPECIALIZED UNITS WITH DIRECT-ASCENT ASAT WEAPONS.The Chinese government operates sepa - rate civil and military space organizations. 
 The China National Space Administration  (CNSA) falls within the State Council’s State Administration for Science, Tech - nology, and Industry for National Defense  (SASTIND) and is the primary organization  for China’s civil space activities. The main developer of national civil space technol- ogies is the China Aerospace Science and  Technology Corporation (CASC), a state-owned aerospace corporation. Meanwhile,  military space activities are run through  the People’s Liberation Army (PLA). 
How- ever, each of these entities collaborate  with one another on developing space technologies. 31 In July 2019, China released its first offi - cial defense white paper since 2015. Prior to this four-year gap, China had released similar white papers about every two  years. 
Analysts acknowledge that the 2019  document “adds little to previous official  reports on the details of recent reforms. ” 32  In line with how China views the space  domain, the 2019 white paper references  “outer space, electromagnetic space and  cyberspace” all as one national defense aim. 33 China established the Strategic Sup - port Force (SSF) in 2015 to bring the man - agement of these strategic areas under one entity. 
Unlike the United States and even Russia, the PLA appears to view these  three domains as inherently intertwined.  There is only one paragraph in the 2019  white paper that focuses solely on the  space domain. It touts China’s activity in international fora on space-related issues,  such as the UN Office for Outer Space Af - fairs. 
The white paper recognizes space as  of strategic importance to the nation and  states that “space security provides strate - gic assurance for national and social devel- opment. ” 34 This rhetoric is consistent with  other statements and posturing that China has demonstrated in recent years.. 11 COUNTERSPACE  WEAPONSTable 2 DIRECT-ASCENT ASAT OR DUAL-USE TESTS Kinetic Physical China has very capable kinetic physical  counterspace capabilities and has proven this several times with a range of direct-as - cent ASAT weapons tests. 
Thus far, China’s  primary focus has been targets in LEO, but recent tests indicate China also has a direct-ascent capa - bility able to reach GEO. It does not appear that China has successfully tested a co-orbital ASAT capability, although it has demonstrated sever - al of the technical capa - bilities required to con - struct such a weapon.  China had its first suc - cessful test of a kinetic  physical ASAT weapon in 2007, after two  previous failed tests. 
43 This test of a di - rect-ascent SC-19 missile system targeted  and destroyed an aging Chinese meteor - ological satellite, producing over 3,000 trackable pieces of debris in LEO. Around 2,800 trackable pieces of debris from this test remain in orbit, with 11 pieces deor - biting in 2019. 44 This debris threatens the  safe operation of hundreds of other sat - ellites in LEO, including the International Space Station (ISS). 
45 China has not conducted a debris-pro - ducing direct-ascent ASAT test since 2007. However, analysts believe several other ki - netic physical tests—or suspected tests—have occurred since then. 46 These suspect - ed tests have not to date produced orbital debris or threatened any orbiting satellite. 
47  Table 2 summarizes several Chinese ASAT , or suspected ASAT , tests. The missile tests are harder to judge because they could also function as a counterspace capability during times of conflict.Type YearWeapons  SystemCommentsKinetic  Impact? ASAT test 2005 SC-19Failed intercept of target.  First recorded test for a  direct-ascent ASAT .No. 
ASAT test 2006 SC-19 Failed intercept of target. No. ASAT test 2007 SC-19 Successful intercept of target.Yes, and  created  thousands  of debris  on-orbit. 
Missile de - fense test  (suborbit - al)482010 SC-19Reported successful technol- ogy test against a suborbital  target. Likely “an effort to  understand the homing per - formance of the interceptor. ”49 Yes. 
Missile de - fense test  (suborbital)2013Possibly  SC-1950Reported successful technol- ogy test against a suborbital  target. Likely another tech- nology demonstration test.51Yes. ASAT test 2013 DN-2China declared the test as a  high-altitude science mis - sion. 
U.S. military assessed  the test as proof Chinese  direct-ascent ASATs could  reach targets up to GEO.52No. ASAT test 2014 SC-1953 China claimed it was a  land-based missile intercep - tor test, while the United  States assessed the test as a  non-destructive ASAT test.54No. 
Possibly  done to test  timing ca- pabilities.55 ASAT test 2015 DN-356China claimed it was a  land-based missile intercep - tor test, while the United  States assessed the test as a  non-destructive ASAT test.57No. Missile de - fense test2017 DN-3Unsuccessful test of the DN-3  missile interceptor.58 No. Missile de - fense test2018DN-3 DN-3 midcourse interceptor  successfully intercepted its  DF-21 target.59Yes. 
China has also developed and launched several satellites which are testing tech-nologies that could be used for co-orbital counterspace capabilities. None of these tests have resulted in a verifiable destructive incident. Primarily, China has  been testing its rendezvous and proximity operations (RPO) capabilities, a  dual-use technology used to maneuver satellites in orbit near one another. 
Whether this maneuvering is for nefarious purposes, possibly making it a co-orbital ASAT , or for peaceful purposes, such as for on-orbit servicing or active debris removal missions, is unclear. Distinguishing the intent of the RPO movements is critical to determining whether or not a satellite is “China continues  development of multiple counterspace capabilities designed to degrade and deny adversary use of space-based assets during a crisis or conflict.” U.S. OFFICE OF THE   SECRETARY OF DEFENSE 42 . 
SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 202012 a counterspace weapon, but determin- ing intent is almost impossible until a hostile action takes place. According to the U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, “China’s testing of RPOs has been similar to past U.S. tests, and no country has criticized RPOs carried out by China as illegal or violating any norm. 
” China, Russia, and the United States all have satellites in GEO perform-ing RPO activities around other satellites in orbit. 60China has been testing these technol - ogies for over a decade. For example,  in 2008, a Chinese spacecraft deployed  a miniature imaging satellite, the BX- 1, that was jettisoned from its mother  spacecraft. 
It appears that the satellite was unable to be actively controlled un-til after it had passed the International Space Station. It is estimated that the  uncontrolled satellite came within 25  kilometers of the station. Despite many  reports in the United States claiming  that this was the first co-orbital ASAT  test from China, the maneuver appears  to have been unintentional. 
62  SJ-12, a Chinese satellite in LEO, conduct - ed a series of remote proximity maneuvers with an older Chinese satellite, SJ-06F, in 2010. The maneuvers appeared to be slow, methodical, and intentional and occurred  over several weeks in the summer of 2010. 63  Some have speculated that this mission was designed to test co-orbital jamming  or other counterspace capabilities, how-ever this has not been definitively proven  in an unclassified setting. 
64 At one point,  SJ-12 made contact with SJ-06F at low  speed; however, this incident was “unlike - ly to have resulted in debris or significant  damage to either satellite. ”65 Testing RPO  capabilities may have been a test run for the 2011 docking of the Shenzhou space capsule with the Tiangong-1 space station,  but the SJ-12 maneuver could have serious  counterspace implications as well. 66  China has also been testing satellites with robotic arms, a dual-use technology that  could be used as a test bed for docking op - erations for China’s future space station,  active debris removal missions, or a co-or - bital ASAT . 
In 2013, China claimed that  three new satellites were “conducting sci- entific experiments on space maintenance technologies. ” 67 However, U.S. officials re - ported that the one satellite was equipped  with a robotic arm, which tested its ability  to grapple and seize another satellite.68  Three years later, in 2016, China launched  the Aolong-1 spacecraft, which included a  robotic arm and a sub-satellite that would CHINA be released and recovered during its mis - sion. 
According to official statements, the  Aolong-1 was intended to test technolo - gies needed to collect and deorbit space debris. Experts have debated the success of this test. 69  The South China Morning Post reported in 2019 about recently declassified govern - ment documents which showcased how decade-old Chinese satellite technology has provided a base for “the development of new weapon systems powered by arti - ficial intelligence. 
” It is unclear how AI is utilized, but the article reports that the new small satellites can be equipped with robotic arms for active debris-removal missions. This technology is, of course, dual-use and could theoretically be used on a range of objects in orbit. The declas - sified document states that China has been developing and testing this tech - nology since 2008. 
Without elaborating further, the document claims that the ro - botic arm technology has also been incor - porated into “drones, smart weapons and robots. ” The article also claims that these satellites could remain attached to the debris it collects “to avoid being tracked from the ground. ” 70 On the same mission as Aolong-1, China also deployed the Tianyuan-1 spacecraft,  which according to Chinese press ac - counts successfully tested the ability to refuel other satellites while in orbit. 
71 This  test, as well as the Aolong-1 test, received significant media coverage in the United States due to its potential dual-use as ASAT weapons.  “China has engaged in dual-use activ - ities such as rendezvous and proxim - ity operations (RPO)—which demon - strate co-orbital capabilities—that,  while not prohibited, create problems for U.S. national security.”  U.S.-CHINA ECONOMIC AND   SECURITY REVIEW COMMISSION61While none of China’s RPO activities in  LEO or GEO appear to have damaged  other satellites, these technological ad - vancements in RPO have many experts  concerned about China’s intent. 
And un - like Russian RPO activity, China’s RPO  activities have been primarily focused on  other Chinese satellites. China can also pose a threat to space  systems through its ability to attack the  ground stations that control satellites . 13 JAN 2017 JUL 2017 JAN 2018 JUL 2018 JAN 2019 JUL 2019200˚E 150˚E 100˚E 50˚E 0˚E1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8SJ-17 Nearest  Neighbors  (2016-2019) 1 2Chinasat 5A (China) Chinasat 6A  (China) 3Telkom 3S  (Indonesia) 4Chinasat 20 (China) 5 6 7Ekran 4 (Russia) 8Chinasat 6B (China)Chinasat 2C (China) Chinasat 1C (China) /L.sc /O.sc /N.sc /G.sc /I.sc /T.sc /U.sc /D.sc /E.sc ˚  /D.sc /A.sc /T.sc /E.scTaking a Break, SJ-17’s  Lack of Movement  SJ-17, A CHINESE SATELLITE  in geosta - tionary orbit known for its unusual be - havior, appears to have put a pause on  its rendezvous and proximity operations  in 2019. 
Compared to its first two years  of operation, when the satellite appears  to have performed close approaches and rendezvous operations with four Chi - nese satellites—Chinasats 5A, 6A, 20, and  1C—the lack of movement in 2019 is no - table.  According to CSIS analysis, SJ-17   restarted RPO maneuvers with another  Chinese satellite in GEO, Chinasat 6B, in  late December 2019 and was still in an un - usually close orbit in late January 2020.  In the past, SJ-17’s RPOs have lasted an- ywhere from a few weeks to over three months. 
72 New analysis of SJ-17’s  on-or - bit activity also found that the satellite spent significant time near an Indonesian communications satellite, Telkom 3S, in  late 2017 and early 2018, but there has been no public statement from Indone - sia on SJ-17’s maneuvering within 10km  of its satellite. In a 2015 paper published  in a Chinese research journal, scientists speculated that a small satellite could be  used to approach a large satellite in GEO  in order to take high-quality pictures and  quickly retreat or pass the target satellite  to minimize detection. 73 While SJ-17 is by  no means a small satellite, it is possible that China is developing the skills and  technology to accomplish such intelli - gence-gathering missions. 
74 Figure 3: Chinese Rendezvous and Prox - imity Operations in GEO. Publicly availa- ble orbital positioning data suggests that  Chinese satellite SJ-17 has made several  close approaches and inspections in GEO.  Learn more about SJ-17’s behavior, includ- ing a list of the satellite’s nearest neighbors. 
 at aerospace.csis.org/SJ17. space-track.org / csis aerospace securitywith its conventional forces. China has the  largest standing army of any nation, and over the past decade it has significantly increased its military budget and mod-ernized its conventional military forces. 
75  In a conflict, China could be capable of striking an adversary’s satellite ground stations with ballistic missiles, cruise mis - siles, or long-range strike aircraft. As Chi - na’s military reach continues to expand, it will be able to use its conventional forces to hold ground stations at risk over pro - gressively greater distances. Non-Kinetic Physical“The [People’s Liberation Army]  is also deploying directed-energy weapons, and we expect them to field a ground-based laser system aimed at low-orbit space sensors by next year.”  THEN-ACTING SECRETARY OF   DEFENSE PATRICK SHANAHAN76 In 2018, then-U.S. 
Director of National In- telligence Dan Coats assessed that China is making advances in directed-energy technology that can “blind or damage sensitive space-based optical sensors, such as those used for remote sensing or missile defense. ” 77 While this may sound  like a major announcement of Chinese capabilities, China had already demon - strated its ability to dazzle American sat - ellites in the mid-2000s. In 2006, reports surfaced that U.S. 
imaging satellites were illuminated by lasers over Chinese territo - ry. 78 Then-Director of the National Recon- naissance Office (NRO) Donald Kerr ac - knowledged that U.S. imagery satellites were dazzled while passing over China but stated that it did not “damage the U.S. 
satellite’s ability to collect information. ” 79  This incident demonstrates that China had much of the technology necessary to field an operational capability to dazzle . SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 202014 CHINA or blind a satellite back in 2006.80 Recent  statements indicate that China has con - tinued to build and field more capable  directed-energy systems. 
As one China expert highlighted, “the only fundamen - tal barrier to learning these abstract ele - ments [directed-energy] and achieving a practical weapon capability is effort—time, will, and money. ” 81 Recently appointed Chief of Space Op - erations, General John J. Raymond not - ed in public remarks that, “we’re pretty comfortable [in asserting] that they are  developing directed energy weapons  — probably building lasers to blind our satellites. 
” 82 In early 2019, the Defense In- telligence Agency made a similar claim, stating “China likely is pursuing laser weapons to disrupt, degrade, or damage satellites and their sensors and possibly  already has a limited capability to employ  laser systems against satellite sensors. ” 83  Chinese military and technical writings have often referenced directed-energy weapons as a key technology in a suc - cessful counterspace strategy. 84 The SSF  is comprised of both Chinese space forc - es and electronic warfare-focused forces,  likely indicating that the PLA sees inter - operability between these two areas of warfare. 
Expert Mark Stokes testified that  “The PLASSF Network Systems Depart - ment is central to China’s counterspace mission. ” Stokes went on to explain that  “Technical articles published . suggest  the unit, at least in part, is responsible overseeing research, development, and  acquisition of electronic counterspace  systems. 
” These same units may also be responsible for research and develop - ment and testing of high-powered micro - wave systems. 85 In 2019, China surprisingly released an an-nouncement alongside images of a new directed-energy system. This Chinese  laser gun is reportedly designed to focus  on small boats or drones. 
86 While not di - rectly a counterspace weapon, some of  the technology would likely be similar  for a higher-powered system that could CHINA IS LIKELY  ALREADY DEVELOPING LASER WEAPONS AS PART OF ITS COUNTERSPACE STRATEGY . affect a satellite in orbit. Furthermore, a  top Chinese weapons firm is developing  synthetic diamonds, also likely for use  in directed-energy weapons. 
Diamonds can amplify and focus energy outputs to better ensure that the energy beam is in - tense enough to damage targets. 87   Satellite imagery analysts speculated in early 2019 that China had been develop - ing significant satellite lasing facilities. 88  Analysts speculate that China is pursu - ing these efforts in at least five different  locations across the country, due to the  nature of the buildings and surrounding infrastructure. 
One image even depicts a suspected electro-magnetic pulse (EMP)  simulator suspended between two struc - tures. 89 However, no other analysts appear  to have corroborated these assessments. China also announced an airborne laser  in early 2020. 
While the details were con - fidential, the titles of two defense pro - curement bid requests may give insight on the PLA’s plans. The two bids request  the “procurement plan for airborne laser attack pod” and a “price inquiry on pro - curement plan for controlling software  module of laser attack platform. ” The  system appears to be intended to target other aircraft or missiles, but similar tech - nology could be used to target satellites. 
90  While details from the PLA have been minimal and no public test has occurred on orbit, China has also shown inter - est in developing HPM weapons for air and missile defense. In January 2017, Chinese media celebrated the work of  expert Huang Wenhua, who developed  a miniaturized HPM weapon capable of being placed on a ship. 91 However,  adding a mobile HPM system to a satel - lite would require further reductions in size, weight, and power in addition to a number of other integration challenges  unique to the space environment. 
As a nuclear power with intercontinental  ballistic missiles (ICBMs), China also has the latent capability to launch a nuclear  weapon into LEO. The resulting EMP from  the detonation would cause indiscrimi -. 15 nate damage to satellites, creating a high  level of radiation in LEO that could last for  years.92 While China has the technology  necessary to field a nuclear-armed ASAT  weapon, it appears to be focusing its ef - forts in other areas. 
Electronic In the late-1990s, China acquired foreign  ground-based satellite jamming equip - ment from Ukraine and has continued to develop the technology independently in  the ensuing decades. 94 Currently, China  has the ability to jam common satellite  communication bands and GPS signals, and it has made the development and de - ployment of satellite jamming systems a high priority. 95 China is further developing  jamming systems that will be able to tar - get a large range of frequencies of com-mercial SATCOM as well as U.S. 
military protected communication bands. 96 Chinese technical writings have been outspoken on how electronic warfare may increase its advantage in a conflict  with the United States. A paper from  the China Electronic Technology Group Corporation proposed solutions for  “overcoming the high-power require - ments for jamming U.S. 
millimeter wave  (MMW) satellite communications by  using space-based jammers hosted on  small satellites, in a ‘David versus Goli - ath’ attack. ” The authors further identi - fied U.S. satellites that would be particu - larly susceptible to such an attack, like “the Advanced Extremely High Frequen - cy (AEHF), Wideband Global SATCOM (WGS), and Global Broadcast Service (GBS) satellite constellations. 
” 97 Another  Chinese technical paper provides further insight into how China plans to jam GPS signals used by U.S. drones, such as the  RQ-4 Global Hawk, over the Spratly Is - lands and South China Sea. 98  After the early 2020 U.S. 
drone strike on the Iranian general Qasem Soleimani,  a Chinese military analyst commented that China would be able to detect an incoming strike through its early warn - ing radars and anti-access/area denial (A2/AD) systems. He went on to say that  China would be able to shoot down the  drone with its air defenses and, as an “The PLA consid - ers EW [elec - tronic warfare]  capabilities key assets for modern warfare and its doctrine emphasizes using EW weap - ons to suppress or deceive enemy equipment.”  DEFENSE INTELLIGENCE  AGENCY, CHALLENGES TO SECURITY IN SPACE 93added layer of defense, could conduct a “soft kill” by jamming  the drone’s communications and GPS.99  China has deployed military-grade truck-mounted jamming equipment in its buildup of military installations in the man-made islands in the South China Sea. As of April 2018, U.S. 
offi - cials confirmed that there are two islands in the Spratly Island chain that have been equipped with jamming systems for tar - geting communications and radar. This assessment was sup - ported by satellite imagery that shows a suspected jamming system on Mischief Reef in the Spratly Islands. While China has been building military installations across the island chain since 2014, this is the first visual evidence of jamming equipment there. 
100 Shortly after the identification of the jammers, Vietnam  condemned China’s continued militarization and weaponization of the South China Sea and the Spratly Islands, also stating that the jamming equipment violates international law. 101  In 2018, the SSF even carried out advanced military exercises simulating a complex electronic warfare environment with the “SSF base pitted against five PLA Army, Air Force, and Rocket Force units. ” 102 China also reportedly developed a J-16D aircraft equipped with jamming systems. 
This aircraft, which suspiciously looks like the U.S. Navy’s EA-18G Growler electronic attack fighter, is equipped with “several new antennas and conformal electron-ic-warfare arrays along the fuselage. ” According to the Nation- al Interest, the “D” in J-16D comes from “diànzǐ, ” the Chinese  word for electronic. 
103 Spoofing in the Port of Shanghai INCIDENTS WERE REPORTED SPORADICALLY THROUGHOUT  2018 and 2019 of the GPS signals for Automatic Identification  System (AIS) transponders being inaccurate in the main port of  Shanghai. AIS signals broadcast the location, speed, and direc - tion of a ship, as required by international maritime law.104 Doc - umented by a U.S. container ship, the Manukai, spoofing activi - ties caused nearby ships’ signals to be misrepresented in ways that could have caused a serious disaster. 
For example, a nearby docked ship’s signal was reported as traveling down the channel  toward the Manukai at significant speed. However, the captain of  the Manukai could visually identify the ship in question as clearly  docked and unmoving in a nearby slot at port. The incident did not  stop there throughout the day, while the Manukai was securely  docked at port, its AIS signals were reporting the ship being over three miles away from its actual location. 
The Manukai reported  the incident to the U.S. Coast Guard which determined that there were “no known anomalies that might affect GPS signal integrity  at the time and vicinity of the reported problem. ” 105 Stunning for researchers is the peculiar circular shape of the plot  of the spoofed ships and other GPS receivers in the area. 
Dubbed  “crop circles” by confused researchers, this shape is unusual for  GPS spoofing. According to Todd Humphries, a leading authority . SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 202016 CHINA on GPS jamming and spoofing, of the Radi- onavigation Laboratory at the University of  Texas, Austin, declared “To be able to spoof  multiple ships simultaneously into a circle  is extraordinary technology. 
” It is extraor - dinary because a single attack appears to have been able to spoof several vessels  simultaneously, each to a different inac - curate location. 106 Furthermore, the D.C.- based research organization C4ADS also  confirmed that civilian GPS was affected. ChinaSouth KoreaJapan East China Sea Locations where GPS interference  was detected in 2019Figure 4 (above): GPS Crop Circles Near Dalian China. 
Research organization Skytruth found  that two GPS interference locations around an oil terminal were active and had a dramatic  effect on scrambling vessel positions in the area on September 5, 2019. Some vessels were  even shown to be far inland. “On the water many positions are appearing with very high speeds  (over 25 knots, red) and it’s not possible to distinguish true and false locations. 
However, some  slow speed positions (green) are appearing at dock where they would be expected, so some AIS  broadcasts appear to be unaffected. ”   skytruth / ais data courtesy of global fishing watch / orbcomm / spire.While the source of the spoofing remains  unconfirmed, one expert traced the epi-center of the crop circle pattern to a non - operational smokestack near the port and speculates that it could be the origin of these GPS attacks. 107 GPS jamming and  spoofing requires a direct line of sight to  the target receiver. 
Therefore, to max - imize impact and distance, many jam - ming devices are mounted on something  with great height. For example, most mil - itary-grade truck-mounted jammers are mounted on a tall radio tower that maxi - mizes the range of the effects.  Who is responsible? Again, this remains  unclear. 
 Early sources speculated that the  attacks are actually GPS hacking caused by a non-state actor: sand smugglers. 108 How - ever, the technology appears to be quite advanced, which researchers believe indi - cates that the Chinese government may be  behind these attacks.  Another analyst, Bjorn Bergman, was in- trigued by the reports and found similar  crop circle phenomena in at least 20 other  locations along the Chinese coast. 
Berg - man assessed that 16 of these identified  sites were oil terminals. A few of the other  sites were Chinese government installa - tions. Bergman assed that the oil termi - nals suggest that this could be an effort by  the Chinese government to support Iran through importing Iranian crude oil in vio - lation of sanctions. 
109 Due to the proximity to oil terminals, Berg - man similarly assesses that the spoofing  signals are being broadcast by the Chi - nese government.110 Similarly, Humphries  believes it is unlikely that a non-state ac - tor could have developed this highly ad- vanced technology.111  Figure 5 (below): Map of Reported AIS Outages Depicting the Crop Circle Patterns.   skytruth / ais data courtesy of global fishing watch / orbcomm / spire. 17 2005 2010 20202015LANDSAT-7  Caused 12 minutes or more of interferrence LANDSAT-7  Caused 12 minutes or more of interferrence JUNE TERRA EARTH  Took full control of the satellite  but did not execute any commands OCTOBER TERRA EARTH  Took full control of the satellite but did not execute any commands UNIDENTIFIED  Attack forced NOAA to take down the system and stop transmitting satellite images to the National Weather Service for two days VIDEO CHAT  Took control of secure satellite video link for four to five minutes  U.S.-BASED SATELLITE & GEOSPATIAL IMAGERY COMPANIES  Hackers infiltrated satellite control systems but did not execute any commandsU.S. 
Geological Survey NASANOAAIndian GovernmentPrivate IndustryCyber “The PLA unit responsible for con - ducting signals intelligence has sup - ported cyberespionage against U.S.  and European satellite and aerospace industries since at least 2007.” DEFENSE INTELLIGENCE AGENCY,   CHALLENGES TO SECURITY IN SPACE112 Through the SSF,  China has been integrating its  advanced cyber capabilities with  its counterspace and electronic warfare operations. The U.S. 
Defense Intelligence  Agency assessed that: “The PLA could em - ploy its cyberattack capabilities to estab - lish information dominance in the early  stages of a conflict to constrain an adver - sary’s actions, or slow its mobilization and deployment by targeting network-based  command, control, communications,  computers, intelligence, surveillance, and  reconnaissance (C4ISR), logistics, and  commercial activities. ” 113  Chinese hacks against secure govern - ment networks to steal personal informa - tion and technical data are well known, but the country’s efforts to attack and  infiltrate space systems has received  relatively less attention. 114 Chinese writ - ings and research efforts indicate that in a conflict it would attempt to conduct cyberattacks against U.S. 
satellites and  ground stations. 115 Specifically, “PLA mil - itary writings detail the effectiveness of information operations and cyberwarfare  in modern conflicts, and advocate target - ing an adversary’s Command and Control and logistics networks to affect the adver - sary’s ability to operate during the early stages of conflict. ” 116  China has already been implicated or suspected in several cyberattacks against  U.S. 
satellites. 117 In October 2007 and  again in July 2008, cyberattacks believed to originate in China targeted a remote  sensing satellite operated by the U.S. Ge - ological Survey called Landsat-7. 
These  attacks are believed to have occurred  through a ground station in Norway. 118  Each attack caused 12 or more minutes  of interference with ground station com - munications, but the attackers did not  gain control of the satellite. In June and  October of 2008, hackers also believed to be from China attacked the National  Aeronautics and Space Administration’s  (NASA) Terra Earth observation satellite. 
 In these attacks, the hackers “achieved all steps required to command the satellite  but did not issue commands. ” 119  A 2019 NASA Inspector General report ref - erences several Chinese cyber intrusions into NASA, including a 2009 Chinese cy - berattack on the Joint Propulsion Labora - tory (JPL) which resulted in 22 gigabytes of data being transferred to a Chinese IP address. Another transfer of data to Chi - nese IP addresses occured in 2011 when  “intruders gained full access to 18 servers  supporting key JPL missions, including the DSN [Deep Space Network] and Ad - vanced Spaceborne Thermal Emission and Reflection Radiometer mission, and Figure 6: Timeline of Suspected Chinese  Cyber Interference with Space Systems. 
 various sources compiled by the   aerospace security project. SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 202018 CHINA sensitive user accounts. ” The Advanced  Spaceborne Thermal Emission and Re - flection Radiometer mission is a joint pro - ject between NASA and Japan’s Ministry of Economy, Trade, and Industry. 
120 In September 2014, Chinese hackers at - tacked National Oceanographic and At - mospheric Administration’s (NOAA) sat - ellite information and weather systems. The attack forced NOAA to take down the system and stop transmitting satellite im-ages to the National Weather Service for two days before the organization was able to seal off the vital data. 121 After the attack  was made public almost two months lat - er, U.S. 
Representative Frank Wolf (R-VA) announced that NOAA had informed him that China was responsible for the hack on its systems. Chinese officials denied these claims, asserting that cyberattacks are common in today’s world. 122 Anonymous sources in India leaked in October 2017 that a “high-profile govern - ment meeting last month involving video chat via satellite was compromised by Chinese hackers” . 
The video was in Chi - nese control for four to five minutes be - fore Indian cybersecurity teams were able to launch a counterattack and neutralize the breach. The sources also claimed that the attack was able to breach the nation’s “most sophisticated and secret link. ” However, the sources note that the Indian response team was unable to con - clusively identify if the attack came from the Chinese government or non-state cy-bercriminals. 
123 On June 19, 2018, several researchers at Symantec—a U.S. software company — reported that a “sophisticated hacking campaign launched from computers in China burrowed deeply into satellite operators, defense contractors and tel - ecommunications companies. ” The two targeted companies were U.S.-based satellite companies, a DoD submarine contractor, and a U.S. 
geospatial imag - ing company. 124 The researchers could  not determine exactly which systems had been accessed in the breach, but they did admit that “the hackers infected comput - ers that controlled the satellites, so that they could have changed the positions of the orbiting devices and disrupted data traffic. ” While Symantec did not directly blame the Chinese government for the at - tack, the company made it clear that the well-coordinated attack originated from the Chinese mainland. 
125  Later in 2018, the United States charged two Chinese nationals for their involve - ment in a decade-long cyber theft pro - gram, sponsored by the Chinese govern - ment. The program targeted aerospace industry companies, as well as NASA’s Goddard Center and JPL. However, spe - cific details of attacks by this group re - main classified. 
126 SUMMARY Overall, there appears to be an interest - ing shift in Chinese counterspace de - velopments in 2019. Through the open-source assessment above, it appears that China has paused, or at least slowed, de - velopment and testing of its kinetic phys - ical counterspace capabilities. This could be because its kinetic ASAT capabilities are well developed or because kinetic physical counterspace weapons are overt weapons that would likely draw a strong international condemnation if ever used. 
However, beginning in late December 2019 and through early January 2020, there is evidence that China’s inspector satellite, SJ-17, was moving around in  GEO, possibly signaling a return to opera - tions after a hiatus of nearly a year. 127  China is greatly increasing its develop - ment, testing, and fielding of non-kinet - ic physical and electronic counterspace weapons. The operational deployment of lasers capable of dazzling or blinding U.S. 
satellites seems imminent, if it has not occurred already. Furthermore, Chi-na is growing bolder with its electronic jamming and spoofing capabilities and may be using these technologies to hide illegal activities on its own coast or in the South China Sea. In 2020, it is likely that satellite jamming and spoofing capabil-ities will continue to be deployed and used in areas of gray zone conflict, such as the South China Sea and perhaps even to deter protests in Hong Kong. 
China’s cyberattacks against space sys - tems have either not been publicly dis - cussed or did not occur in 2019. However,  this does not mean China is incapable of using cyber means to attack vulnerable space systems or has abandoned this line of effort.. 19 19 25 RUSSIA RUSSIA “[Russian] leader - ship must be re - stored [in the space  domain]. 
This is not just a question of prestige, but of national security.” DMITRY MEDVEDEV, FORMER  RUSSIAN PRIME MINISTER129WITH THE DISSOLUTION OF THE SOVIET UNION IN 1991,   Russia inherited both the majority of the former state’s vast  space infrastructure and its place among the global space powers. 130 Since then, Russia has maintained a leading role  in the global space community by operating the third-largest number of satellites on orbit, serving as a critical partner in international human spaceflight, and managing several of the world’s busiest spaceports—all while facing an inconsistent federal budgetary environment and claims of widespread internal corruption. 131 By some metrics, Russia’s space  activity pales in comparison to the Soviet Union, which launched more payloads to orbit than all other countries combined before its collapse. 
132  Other measurements, however, such as launch vehicle reliability and hu - man spaceflight achievements, describe a formidable space actor with remarkable resilience in a rapidly changing space domain. As the only ISS partner agency with a human-rated launch vehicle, Russia  is responsible for ferrying all astronauts to and from the space station us - ing its Soyuz rocket. 133 Since the U.S. 
Space Shuttle’s final flight in 2011,  Russia has launched 53 foreign astronauts to the ISS, including 34 Amer - icans.134 At over $80 million per seat, carrying passengers to orbit makes  up 17 percent of the Russian space agency’s annual budget, according to leaked budget documents from 2018. 135 For decades, NASA has had plans  to develop a U.S. launch vehicle capable of transporting its astronauts to the ISS, lowering its dependence on the Russian Soyuz launch vehicle. 
With the first crewed flight test of the SpaceX Dragon capsule expected later this year as part of the U.S. Commercial Crew Program, the Russian space agency may soon find itself with many fewer human spaceflight customers compared to the past decade. 136Number of Successful Orbital Launches in 2019 128 . 
SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 202020 CHINA INDIA USA RUSSIA OTHERSSUCCESSFUL ORBITAL LAUNCHES PER YEAR BY COUNTRY (1957-2019) 020406080100120 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010 2019Despite the geopolitical tensions on  Earth, Russia has pursued robust inter - national partnerships in the space do - main in addition to its commitments as  part of the ISS agreement. For example, the Russian space agency has entered into discussions with the China National Space Administration to pursue coopera - tive lunar exploration missions beginning in 2020. 137 Since 2011, Russia has used the  low-latitude Guiana Space Centre oper - ated by the European Space Agency to  launch Soyuz rockets, making it the only  country in the world to launch a native or - bital launch vehicle from a spaceport op - erated by another space agency.138 Russia  has also indicated its interest in continu-ing its partnership with the United States  after the ISS retires. 
139  While largely successful, the Russian space industry has also been plagued  with serious corruption scandals. In  2018, Russia’s principal federal investi - gation authority discovered that fraud cases within the country’s space and  defense industry reached $1 billion. 140  Roscosmos, the Russian space agency,  has been particularly wrought with cor - ruption. 
Last year, a high-level agency  official—who was likely linked to an in - ternal embezzlement scheme—fled the  country to Europe while he was under investigation. 141 Also in 2019, 58 peo - ple received jail sentences after $172 million was stolen from the Vostoch-ny spaceport in the Russian Far East. 142  Only a fraction of the monies lost had been recovered as of November 2019. 
 When asked about the culture of cor - ruption at Roscosmos, the director of  the Russian Investigative Committee said “there is no end in sight. ” 143 In light of these issues, Roscosmos has announced extravagant spaceflight plans for the upcoming decade. In a presenta - tion to students at Moscow University in May 2019, the agency’s director an - nounced the country’s plans to invest in a new crewed space vehicle with flights to the ISS by 2023, develop a new heavy-When the Russian Ministry of Defense was  created in 1992, Russia established the  world’s first space force. 
149 Now known as  the Russian Space Forces subbranch—a  part of the broader Russian Aerospace  Forces—the Russian Space Force is re - sponsible for launching military satellites,  maintaining space-based assets, moni- toring space objects, and identifying po - tential attacks against the Russian home - land from space.150  Russia considers the “intention to place weapons in outer space” a main exter - nal military danger and describes estab - lishing “an international treaty on [the]  prevention of placement of any types  of weapons in outer space” as a princi - pal task for the Russian state in its mil - itary doctrine. 151 Although Russia and  China co-submitted the “Treaty on the  Prevention of the Placement of Weap - ons in Outer Space, the Threat or Use of Force Against Outer Space Objects” to  the Conference on Disarmament in 2008,  the United States dismissed the propos - al as a “diplomatic ploy, ” and refused to  support it. 152 In 2014, Russia and China  reintroduced the treaty, prompting a  similarly chilly reaction from the United States. 
In response to the Indian ASAT RUSSIA lift launch vehicle, and even land cosmo - nauts on the Moon by 2030.144 The scale  of these new missions would almost cer - tainly require the country to increase its  budget for space activities, likely putting the space agency at odds with other fed-eral spending priorities. 145 SPACE ORGANIZATION  AND DOCTRINE Most state-sponsored space activities  in Russia are linked to one of two gov - ernment organizations: Roscosmos, the country’s civilian space body, and the Russian Aerospace Forces, the branch of the Russian armed services tasked with military operations in the space domain. Roscosmos, known as the Russian Fed - eral Space Agency until 2015, inherited significant space infrastructure from its predecessor, the Soviet space program. 
146  Tasked with the pursuit of international cooperation with space partners around the world, Roscosmos is one of five prin-cipal partners that support the ISS, along with civilian space agencies in the United States, Japan, Canada, and Europe. 147 Figure 7: Russian Orbital Space Launches (1957-2019).  spacetrack.org / csis aerospace security148 . 
21 weapon when it destroyed a domestic  satellite in LEO using a co-orbital ASAT .  Called Istrebitel Sputnikov (IS), mean- ing “satellite destroyer” in Russian, the first Soviet co-orbital ASAT was tested 20  times between 1963 to 1982, destroying  several targets launched as part of the  program. 158 A follow-on version of the IS  system, known as IS-MU, was operational from 1991 to 1993. 
159 Prior to the fall of the Soviet Union, the  country began developing a much more  capable co-orbital ASAT known as the Naryad. Reportedly designed to reach al - titudes as high as 40,000 km and contain  multiple warheads in a single launch, the  Naryad would likely have posed a serious  threat to satellites in GEO. 160 The system  saw limited testing—with just one launch in 1994—and no confirmed intercepts. 
161 Unlike the Soviet Union, Russia’s kinetic physical counterspace arsenal includes ground-launched direct-ascent ASAT missiles. In December 2018, Russia con- ducted its seventh test of the PL-19/ Nudol  direct-ascent ASAT system. 162 The PL-19/ Nudol completed its first successful flight test in November 2015, after two unsuc - cessful attempts. 
163 Unclassified U.S. re - ports suggest that both this launch, and a previous test in March 2018, used a mo - bile transporter erector-launcher (TEL)  within the Plesetsk Cosmodrome com-plex instead of a static launch pad. 164 Al- though at least six of the seven launches are verified to have originated from Ple - setsk, a mobile launch system would the - oretically allow the ASAT to be launched outside of the Cosmodrome facility, en - suring greater flexibility to target LEO sat - ellites in inclinations above 40 degrees as they transit over Russian territory. 
165  Although not specifically designed as di- rect-ascent ASAT weapons, Russian mo - bile-launched S-400 surface-to-air mis - siles—capable of reaching a maximum altitude of 200 km—could potentially  reach a satellite in LEO. The follow-on  surface-to-air missile system, the S-500, is  expected to reach altitudes up to 300 km if launched directly upward. 166 Oleg Osta - penko, Russia’s former deputy minister  of defense, once stated that the S-500  will be able to intercept “low-orbital test in March 2019, the Russian Ministry  of Defense acknowledged India’s other - wise strong dedication to preventing an arms race in space while simultaneously blaming the United States for creating an  environment in which developing space  actors are compelled to test anti-satel - lite weapons on orbit—a clear jab at U.S. 
 opposition to Russia and China’s failed  treaties. 153  Although Russia’s military doctrine has not  been publicly updated since December  2014, some analysts expect a new version may be released later this year. 154 Since the  last military doctrine was released, Dmitry Rogozin—the Roscosmos director general and former deputy prime minister for de - fense—has stated that Russia does not use satellites to damage other space objects. 
155  More recently, Russian military leaders  have suggested that the Trump adminis - tration’s support of the U.S. Space Force  warrants new “reciprocal and asymmetri- cal measures” from Russia in the space do - main.156 In a December 2019 address, Rus - sian President Vladimir Putin stated that the creation of a U.S. Space Force requires  Russia to further invest in its own military space industry. 
157 COUNTERSPACE  WEAPONS Kinetic Physical Evidence suggests that Russia has in- vested in a sweeping range of kinetic physical counterspace capabilities over  the past decade, including ground- and  air-launched direct-ascent ASAT missiles capable of targeting satellites in LEO and  co-orbital ASAT weapons that could oper - ate in any orbital regime. Russia’s kinetic  physical counterspace activities often  closely resemble previously operation - al Soviet-era ASAT programs, suggesting  that the country has benefited from dec - ades of ASAT weapons research conduct - ed by the Soviet Ministry of Defense. On October 20, 1968, the Soviet Union be - came the second country in the world to  successfully demonstrate a counterspace . 
SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 202022 satellites and space weapons. ”167 First  tested in 2018, the new missile’s pro - duction timeline has since slipped, and  “there has been no indication of when an actual S-500 will be made availa - ble. ” 168 Like the PL-19/ Nudol system,  using the S-400 or eventually the S-500 as a direct-ascent ASAT would require a high-precision targeting capability that has yet to be demonstrated via a de - structive test. 
169 A modified Russian MiG-31 fighter jet was  photographed in September 2018 carry- ing an unidentified missile that some re - ports suggest could be a “mock-up” of an air-launched ASAT weapon. 170 Although  this development follows a 2013 state - ment from the Russian Duma express - ing the Russian government’s intent to  build an air-to-space system designed  to “intercept absolutely everything that  flies from space, ” the system depicted in  the September 2018 photo would almost certainly be limited to targeting objects in LEO, due to its size. 171 In 2017, a Rus - sian Aerospace Forces squadron com - mander confirmed that an ASAT missile had been designed for use with the MiG-31BM aircraft—the same variant spotted  with the mysterious missile. 
172 Citing  several sources familiar with a U.S. re - port on the new weapons system, CNBC  reported that the missile may become operational as soon as 2022. 173 Russia has not publicly announced the development of a new co-orbital ASAT program since the fall of the Soviet Un - ion. 
In the past few years, however, the  Russian Aerospace Forces has launched  a series of small “inspector” satellites in  LEO that have demonstrated some of the technologies required to operate such a system. In 2017 and 2018, three small Rus - sian satellites—Cosmos 2519, 2521, and 2523—engaged in RPO in LEO, prompting a statement of concern from the U.S. State Department. 
174 Although a June 2017 Rus - sian Soyuz launch appeared to place just one satellite in LEO—Cosmos 2519—a sec - ond satellite was detected two months lat -RUSSIA MiG-31BM “Foxhound” Aircraft on Septem- ber 14, 2018. Photographed at the Zhuk - ovsky airfield outside of Moscow, the aircraft  is carrying what has since been identified as a  potential anti-satellite weapon.  shipsash / jetphotos.com er, likely deployed from the first as a sub - satellite.175 The Russian Ministry of Defense  made a statement saying that the second  satellite was designed to “inspect the state of a Russian satellite. 
” 176 In October 2017,  a third satellite was deployed from either Cosmos 2519 or its subsatellite, resulting  in three independent satellites in orbit.  Over the course of several months, the satellites engaged in a series of maneuvers and RPO exercises, including slow flybys,  close approaches, and rendezvous. In  February 2020, Chief of Space Operations  of the U.S. 
Space Force General John Ray- mond appeared to refer to one of these three satellites when he said that Russian inspector satellites have “exhibited char - acteristics of a weapon. ” 177 Analysis published in Jane’s Intelligence Review used Russian procurement doc - umentation and contractor reports to connect Cosmos 2519, 2521, and 2523 with the program name Nivelir. 178 Con- tracts signed in 2016 between the Nivelir  program and a Russian company known for developing radiation-absorbing ma - terials suggest that future Nivelir satel - lites—such as Cosmos 2535, 2536, 2537, or 2538, all launched in July 2019—may  be coated with a protective film to avoid  being tracked by optical or infrared sen - sors from the ground or in space. 
179. 23 COSMOS 2542 USA 245 AntarcticaSpying on a Spy Satellite  ON NOVEMBER 25, 2019 , Russia  launched a small satellite, Cosmos 2543,  into what the Russian Ministry of De - fense described as a “target orbit from which the state of domestic satellites can  be monitored. ” 180 Two weeks later, the  ministry announced that a subsatellite, Cosmos 2542, had been deployed from  Cosmos 2543. 
181 Three days after its deployment, Cosmos  2542 performed an orbital maneuver  to synchronize its orbit with USA 245, what is believed to be a U.S. National Reconnaissance Office (NRO) satellite.  Amateur satellite observers who record  and share satellite observations online  noticed that USA 245 performed its own  maneuver soon thereafter, possibly to  steer clear of Cosmos 2542. 
182 In January  2020, Cosmos 2542 maneuvered toward the American spy satellite again, this time coming as close as 50 km. 183 A day  later, USA 245 made another maneuver, further distancing itself from the Russian inspector satellite. 184 In an interview with SpaceNews, Gener - al John Raymond, the Commander of  U.S. 
Space Command and Chief of Space  Operations of the U.S. Space Force, con-firmed the close approach, adding that  he believed it was intentional. 185  Figure 8: Orbital Trajectories for Cosmos 2542 and USA 245 on January 23, 2020. 
  Since orbital parameters for classified satellites do not appear in the U.S. Space Com- mand’s public catalog of space objects, analysts use observations from amateur astrono - mers to calculate USA 245’s orbital trajectory.  nico janssen / satobs.orgRussia’s newest co-orbital system may  be designed to target satellites in GEO.186  Designated Burevestnik, this program will  likely employ low-thrust but highly-effi - cient electric propulsion to maneuver  lightweight satellites—possibly similar to those from the Nivelir program—around  the GEO belt. 
187 A report published in  2019 indicated that a new ground con-trol center was being built for Nivelir and  Burevestnik at the same site the Soviets used to control the Istrebitel Sputnikov  missions in the 1960s. 188  Although there is no evidence yet of light - weight Russian satellites maneuvering in the GEO belt, a larger satellite has been observed engaging in suspicious RPO ac - tivity in the regime. The satellite—known as Olymp-K or Luch—has attracted atten- tion for shifting its position within the geo - synchronous belt on a relatively frequent  basis, occupying at least 19 different posi - tions since its launch in September 2014. 
189  Luch first attracted attention when it  repositioned itself between two satellites  operated by Intelsat, a U.S. satellite com- munications company.190 Approaching  satellites in GEO in this manner could al - low for close inspection or potentially in - terception of their communication links.191  In September 2015, Luch approached  a third Intelsat satellite.192 The interna - tional response escalated in September 2018, when French Minister of the Armed Forces Florence Parly accused Russia of committing “an act of espionage” after it  approached a French-Italian military sat - ellite “a bit too closely” in October 2017. SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 202024 Analysis of Luch’s on-orbit behavior since  its launch in 2014 suggests that the sat - ellite has approached 11 unique Intelsat  satellites, four Eutelsat satellites, two SES  satellites, and at least nine other satellites operated by Russia, Turkey, Pakistan, the  United Kingdom, and the European Space  Agency. 
193 Although Luch appears to be  maneuvering around the GEO belt in a  systematic, deliberate manner, no public  reports suggest it has damaged any of the neighboring satellites along the way. Non-Kinetic Physical“We have achieved significant  progress in laser weapons.” VLADIMIR PUTIN, RUSSIAN PRESIDENT 194RUSSIA JAN FEB MAR APR MAY JUN JUL AUG SEPT OCT NOV DEC75˚E 70˚E65˚E60˚E55˚E 50˚E 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8Luch’s Nearest  Neighbors in 2019 1 2NSS 12 (SES)Astra 1G (SES) Intelsat 33E 3Intelsat 906 4Raduga 5 (Russia) 5Intelsat 906 6Intelsat 17 7Intelsat 20 8Eutelsat 70B /L.sc /O.sc /N.sc /G.sc /I.sc /T.sc /U.sc /D.sc /E.sc ˚  /D.sc /A.sc /T.sc /E.sc  /I.sc /N.sc  /two.sc /zero.sc /one.sc /nine.sc Figure 9: Luch Continues to Explore  the GEO Belt. The Russian satellite has  stopped at 19 different positions in the  geostationary belt since its launch in  2014, including those depicted here in  2019. 
Learn more about Luch’s behavior,  including a list of the satellite’s nearest  neighbors at aerospace.csis.org/luch.  space-track.org / csis aerospace security Evidence suggests that Russia has both  maintained its non-kinetic physical coun-terspace capabilities from the Soviet era—including detonating nuclear weapons at high altitudes, using nano-sized obscu - rants on orbit, and placing laser weapons on aircraft—and built upon them over the past 10 years.In 1962, the Soviet Union detonated  three nuclear warheads about 400 kilo - meters above the Earth’s surface—near the altitude of the U.S. Starfish Prime  test that same year—in a series of tests  known as Operation K. 
195 As suspected  by the Soviet engineers who planned the tests, Operation K demonstrated the devastating effects of an EMP weap - on in LEO. Though nuclear warheads  were tested as part of the early Istrebitel  Sputnikov tests, the program’s success - ful intercepts used conventional war - heads instead, which lowered the risk  of inadvertently damaging Soviet sat - ellites on orbit during testing. 196 Thirty  years later, Vladimir Lukin, a senior Rus - sian legislator, reminded the interna - tional community of Russia’s retained EMP capabilities when he threatened a  delegation of U.S. 
congressmen during  an official visit in May 1999, saying: Hypothetically, if Russia really want - ed to hurt the United States . [it] could fire a submarine launched ballistic missile and detonate a sin - gle nuclear warhead at high-alti - tude over the United States. The re - sulting electromagnetic pulse would massively disrupt U.S. 
communica - tions and computer systems, shut - ting down everything. No internet. Nothing. 
197. 25 Academic articles, government contracts,  and patent documentation suggest that Russia is sponsoring scientific research  into on-orbit aerosol obscurants—nano - particles that can block radiofrequency and optical signals to and from a satel- lite—which could be used to hide Russian satellites from space situational aware - ness sensors on the ground or as part of an offensive co-orbital attack. 198 According to  analysis published by the website Space  Review, Russia’s Scientific Research Insti - tute of Applied Chemistry (NIIPKh), known  for its previous work in aerosol particle  development, was awarded a contract from the previously-discussed Burevest - nik program in 2015. 
Although there is no evidence that particle obscurants have  been tested on orbit, an article written by  NIIPKh affiliates in 2016 suggested that the technology could be installed on sat - ellites, where it could be used to defend  assets from kinetic physical attacks but  also for “disabling” satellites from a close distance. 199 If deployed from a nearby sat - ellite, particle obscurants could be used to  temporarily degrade a target satellite by  obstructing optical sensors or interfering with radio communications to and from its  ground stations.  Leaked photos, statements from Russian  defense contractors, and Russian news reports suggest that a Soviet-era laser  weapon from 1965 has been revived to  target satellites in LEO. 
200 In 2011, pho - tos of a modified Ilyushin Il-76MD cargo  plane, known as the Beriev A-60 , featur - ing what appears to be an upward-fac - ing laser on the fuselage and a targeting system built into its nose cone, were up - loaded to an online forum for Russian  plane enthusiasts. The system, known as  Sokol Eshelon, was likely tested two years  earlier to illuminate a Japanese satellite  on orbit at an altitude of 1,500 km. 201 In  2017, the general director of Almaz-An - tey, a weapons manufacturer with ties to the program, told a Russian news outlet that his company had been ordered to  develop a system capable of “direct func - tional destruction of those elements de - ployed in orbit. 
” 202 A year later, however,  Interfax reported that Almaz-Antey had  finished work on a new air-based laser ASAT system that would most likely rely  on a “fundamentally new aircraft [that is] not based on the Il-76MD. ” 203 Regardless  of the aircraft on which the laser weap - on is mounted, such a weapon could be capable of damaging its targets’ optical sensors and solar arrays from anywhere in Russia’s vast airspace. In a presidential address in March 2018,  Russian President Vladimir Putin an - nounced the development of a new di - rected-energy weapon. 
204 Russian news  outlets later reported that the ground-based laser weapon, known as Peresvet ,  was first delivered to Russian troops in July 2017 and had been placed on “ex - perimental combat duty” in December 2018. 205 A video released by the Russian  Ministry of Defense shows the weapon mounted on a trailer, suggesting some degree of mobility. 206 Russian officials  told reporters that the system is distrib - uted over two platforms, with the second responsible for the laser’s power source. 
Yury Borisov—former Russian deputy minister of defense, now the country’s deputy prime minister—commented that Peresvet would be made more com- pact over the next two to three years. 207  President Putin recently announced that the weapon would be placed “on stand - by alert” in December 2019. 208 Although  the most critical details about Peresvet  remain unknown.209 Electronic“GNSS [Global  Navigation Satellite System] spoofing activities in the Russian Federation, its occupied territories, and its overseas military facilities are larger in scope, more geographically diverse, and started earlier than any public reporting has suggested to date.”  CENTER FOR ADVANCED   DEFENSE STUDIES210The Russian government has been ac - cused of widespread GPS jamming and  spoofing since 2014, affecting civilian and military vessels near Russian terri-tory, commercial and civilian aircraft in the Arctic Circle, and handheld consum - er devices in downtown Moscow and St. 
Petersburg. 211 Despite overwhelming  evidence that Russia has employed the use of mobile, ground-based electronic counterspace weapons on a regular ba - sis both within its borders and abroad, the Russian state has repeatedly denied any wrongdoing. 212 Since the beginning of the 2014 Crimean conflict, Russia has used a variety of jam - ming and radio-monitoring platforms—. 
SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 202026 RUSSIA including the truck-mounted R-330Zh  jammer and the R-381T2 radio monitor - ing system—to deny Ukrainian forces ac - cess to consistent GPS and satellite com - munication services.213  Similarly, Russia reportedly deployed a Krasukha-4 truck-mounted jamming sys - tem in Syria, another conflict region, and  supplied the Syrian army with R-330P  radio jammers. 214 Using sensor data  from the International Space Station, analysts at the Center for Advanced De - fense Studies (C4ADS) and the University  of Texas at Austin identified “potential  military-grade EW systems” likely de -exercises in the region, including a Rus - sian-Belarusian joint exercise in Russia  in 2017, a NATO exercise in Norway, Swe - den, and Finland in 2018, and a nearby British exercise in 2019. After Norway an-nounced that Russia was responsible for the regional jamming incidents, the Nor - wegian Communications Authority made plans to establish a satellite signal meas - urement station to better understand the GPS jamming environment in the region. 
221 In 2017, over 20 ships operating in the  Black Sea reported gross GPS position  errors as they sailed near the Russian coast. 222 The incidents were first report - ed by the U.S. Maritime Administration. 
A C4ADS report from March 2019 identified hundreds more “denial-of-service” occur - rences in the region from both before and  after the original report where onboard  GPS devices were calculating false coor - dinates for the vessels. 223 In many cases,  GPS devices calculated ships’ positions as  being at a nearby Russian airport, and not in the Black Sea. The report—a collabora - tive study between C4ADS, the University of Texas at Austin, and Palantir Found - ry—also suggested a specific location for at least one of the spoofing devices re - sponsible: “a multi-million dollar ‘palace, ’  formerly owned by family members of  senior Federal Protective Service officers and previously reported to be built for President Putin. 
” 224 The FSO is the Rus - sian counterpart of the Secret Service in the United States, a federal agency re - sponsible for senior government leaders’ personal security. The C4ADS report suggests that the FSO’s  relationship with Russia’s use of electron - ic counterspace weapons does not stop at  the seaside palace. The report identified 12 occurrences in which evidence of one-off PNT spoofing events corresponded with the movements of Russian President Vladimir Putin, his senior advisers, or FSO officers, suggesting that “some devices used to conduct this activity are mobile and can be temporarily deployed at a location to create local areas of effect. 
” 225  The Trailer-Mounted  Peresvet Laser Weapon System. Some observers suspect that the  laser’s power levels will allow it to target satellites in LEO. russian defense ministry A $4,000 Taxi to the Kremlin  IN JUNE 2016,  visitors to downtown Moscow began noticing a problem with their  mobile devices’ mapping services.216 When driving or walking near the Kremlin, at  the center of the city, users reported being directed to follow implausibly inefficient  routes. 
In some cases, mapping software suggested a detour of just a few blocks. In  others, mobile device users were directed as far away as the Vnukovo Airport, almost 50 kilometers southwest of the Kremlin. 217 Visitors were particularly affected when  using ride-sharing services, complaining on Twitter about $3,000 to $4,000 fare esti - mates due to the mapping errors.218 These map users were likely receiving false positioning signals, leading them to specific, incorrect locations away from the Kremlin. 
Residents of St. Petersburg began reporting  similar issues during a visit from President Vladimir Putin in December 2016. 219 signed for “airspace denial purposes” at  Khmeimim airbase, a Russian-operated  air base in western Syria.215 Russia’s use of electronic counterspace  weapons is not restricted to conflict  zones. 
Starting in late 2017, civilian and  commercial aircraft operators in the  northernmost region of Norway—Fin - nmark County, which borders Russia’s  Murmansk Oblast—began reporting re - curring GPS signal outages during flight.220  Analysis of notice to airmen (NOTAM)  alerts distributed from September 2017  to January 2019 shows a correlation be - tween GPS signal outages and military . 27 Ukraine RussiaSea of Azov Kerch StraitCrimean  PeninsulaCrimean Bridge In two of those cases, the Russian presi - dent was visiting the newly-constructed  Crimean Bridge, which physically con-nects Crimea with the Russian mainland. On May 15, 2018, the second of those two visits, President Putin celebrated the pro - ject’s completion by driving across the bridge in a motorcade of construction ve - hicles. 
Based on the locations of the ships experiencing GPS spoofing at the time—which typically must be within the line of sight of the spoofing device feeding them false coordinates—it is possible that the spoofing device was contained in one of the vehicles in Putin’s motorcade.Navy Commander Ihor Voronchenko  accused Russia of spoofing GPS signals  and jamming access to the Iridium sat - ellite communications network. 226 In 2016, Russia announced plans to  install GPS jammers on the country’s  250,000 cell phone towers.227 The sys - tem, called Pole-21, is aimed at provid - ing more widespread GPS jamming to  protect Russian assets against cruise  missiles, drones, and precision-guided  munitions. In November 2019, the Rus - sian military confirmed that the first units have been delivered. 
228 Russian electronic counterspace ac - tivities may not be limited to ground- based systems. Late last year, Russian  news reports suggested that the Rus - sian Aerospace Forces may upgrade its   Porubshchik electronic warfare aircraft,  which could be used to jam satellite signals across wider regions than a truck- or tower-mounted jamming de - vice. 229 Although there is no evidence in  the public domain that Russia employs  space-based electronic counterspace  weapons, analysis of Russian procure -Figure 10: Russian President  Vladimir Putin Visiting the  Newly Constructed Crimean  Bridge Connecting Crimea to  Mainland Russia on May 15,  2018. 
Denial-of-service reports  from vessels near the bridge  at the time of the visit suggest  that a spoofing device may  have been contained in one of  the orange construction trucks  that made up the president’s  motorcade. alexander nemenov / afp /  getty images Several months after Putin’s visit, the  Crimean Bridge was the site of a military conflict in which Russia was accused of using electronic weapons. In November 2018, the Russian Coast Guard opened fire on three Ukrainian Navy ships as they attempted to pass underneath the  Crimean Bridge from the Black Sea into  the Sea of Azov, in what became known as the Kerch Strait incident. 
A month after the incident, which injured six sailors according to Ukraine, Ukrainian . SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 202028 RUSSIA ment documentation from 2014 points  to a new program called Ekipazh that  may feature a nuclear-powered jam - ming device on orbit.230 Early reports  from the program’s manufacturers sug- gest that test flights could begin as early  as 2021.  Cyber Foreign governments regularly accuse Russia of widespread international cy - berwarfare. 
231 In the space domain, a  group of hackers with links to the Rus - sian Federal Security Service called T urla has been hijacking the internet  services of older commercial satellites since 2007. 232 More recently, from 2017  to 2019, T urla infiltrated government  agencies and private companies in more than 20 countries according to reports from the British National Cyber Secu - rity Centre and U.S. National Security  Agency. 
233 During the attacks, the group  attempted to disguise themselves as  an Iranian hacking organization by first gaining access to computer infrastruc - ture previously associated with Iranian cyberattack operations. In April 2015, a French satellite TV network was pulled off the air in an attack linked to another  Russian hacker group known as APT 28. 234  Later that year, APT 28 gained access to a  British television station’s computer net - work, but did not tamper with any of its broadcasted programming. 
235 Russian cyberattacks on state govern - ments and international organizations  extend well outside of the space domain,  earning criticisms from Estonia, Ukraine, the United States, the United Kingdom,  France, Germany, Kyrgyzstan, and the  Netherlands. 236 In August 2019, NATO  Secretary General Jens Stoltenberg spe - cifically addressed Russia’s nefarious  activities in the cyber domain in an edi-torial about NATO’s renewed cybersecu - rity efforts. No other state perpetrators  were mentioned. 
237 Russia’s Ministry of  Foreign Affairs has developed a consist - ent pattern of denying accusations of  wrongdoing in the cyber domain, calling the negative attention “stage-managed  propaganda campaign[s]” and “Western spy mania. ” 238 SUMMARY While the Soviet Union developed weap - ons in just two of the four counterspace categories—kinetic and non-kinetic physical weapons—Russia has invested in all four over the past 10 years. Evidence suggests that Russia is developing an air-launched direct-ascent ASAT missile, has already tested a ground-based direct-as - cent ASAT , and is reinvigorating an array of co-orbital counterspace technologies more than 50 years after the Soviet Un - ion became the first and only country to successfully destroy a target satellite using a co-orbital ASAT weapon. 
Russia has built off of the Soviet Union’s arsenal of non-kinetic counterspace weapons by reviving a Soviet-era air-based laser weapon and unveiling a new ground-based trailer-mounted laser weapon. In just the past few years alone, Russia has become one of the world’s greatest perpetrators of electronic counterspace warfare, jamming and spoofing PNT and communications satellite signals in con - flict zones, nearby territories, and with-in its own borders. Although difficult to verify, Russia is also almost certainly ca-pable of targeting satellites and associ - ated ground stations through vulnerable computer networks. 
With new weapons added to the Russian counterspace arse - nal each year since 2018, it is clear that the country has renewed its focus on developing and maintaining its ability to disrupt, degrade, or destroy adversaries’ assets on orbit. 239 . 29 29 0 Number of Successful Orbital  Launches in 2019240 IRAN OFTEN CITED AS A THINLY VEILED COVER  for its ballistic missile  program, Iran’s space capabilities are relatively minimal.242 Iran’s  space and ballistic missile systems are likely based on Russian and North Korean programs. 
This analysis is supported by the  weak aerospace industrial base in the country, suggesting that Iran is un - likely to have the technical and industrial capability to develop complex  launch technology from scratch. 243 In 2009, Iran successfully launched its  first domestically-manufactured satellite on a Safir-1 rocket, making it the  ninth country at the time to have launched an indigenous satellite.244 The  Iranian Space Agency (ISA) continues to claim to have sent various living creatures into space in the last decade, including a monkey two times in 2013. 245 The agency had previously aimed to put a human in space by 2025,  but human spaceflight aspirations were put on hold in 2017 due to budget constraints, likely linked to U.S.-imposed sanctions. 
However, the ISA  has  continued to focus on improving its SLVs. 246 Iran’s main launch facility, the Imam Khomeini Spaceport, is located in a  larger domestic space facility, the Imam Khomeini Space Center, in the  Semnan Province east of Tehran. The site is also used as one of eight mis - sile test and launch sites in the country.247 Iran had four successful launch - es from 2009 to 2015 that put various operational satellites into orbit,  none of which stayed in orbit longer than a few months.248 In 2014, Iran  reportedly signed an agreement with Russia for its assistance in the devel - opment and launch of Iranian satellites and possibly the training of future Iranian astronauts. 
249“The United  States will not allow Iran to use its space launch program as cover to advance its ballistic missile programs,”  MIKE POMPEO, U.S.   SECRETARY OF STATE241 IRAN. SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 202030 IRAN The U.S. 
Intelligence Community has  assessed that “Iran recognizes the stra-tegic value of space and counterspace capabilities” and that continued work to develop space launch vehicles will  shorten the timeline to create a suc - cessful ICBM. 250 Iran is an unusual case  as countries have historically construct - ed space launch capabilities from mili - tary ballistic missile programs, not the  other way around.251 In addition to SLVs,  Iran has also developed space capabili - ties with military applications such as a space monitoring center announced in June 2013 that uses radar, electro-opti-cal, and radio tracking. 252 Iran continues  to focus on space situational awareness monitoring, announcing in 2018 that “Iran recognizes the strategic value of  space and counterspace capabilities.”  U.S. 
DEFENSE INTELLIGENCE AGENCYexperts built radars which can monitor  satellites in LEO.253 Iran currently has two known launch ve - hicles, the Safir-1 and Safir-2, the latter  of which is commonly known as the Si- morgh.254 While the Safir-1 has had suc - cessful orbital launches, the Simorgh has yet to complete a fully successful mission. 255 In July 2017, Iran announced  a successful test launch of the Simorgh,  although the success of the test has not been confirmed outside of state media. 256  For the Iraninan space program, 2019 proved to be a difficult year, with three failed orbital launches in January, Febru - ary, and August, which used alternately the Safir-1 and Simorgh launch vehicles. 
257  Failed Launch Attempt  ON AUGUST 25, 2019, the head of the Iran  Space Agency was quoted in state media  saying that the agency planned to launch  three satellites into orbit by March of 2020. The goal of these three satellites would be  to help aid civilians through improving  navigational, agricultural, and environ-mental monitoring services. 258 Four days  later, on August 29, satellite imagery from  the Earth-imaging company Maxar Tech - nologies showed a launch pad at the Imam  Khomeini Space Center that appeared  to be the aftermath of a failed launch at - tempt. 
Satellite imagery analysts were  able to note that the pad had been recent - ly painted, likely for the launch itself and  to cover up previous damage from failed  launches, with smoke billowing from the ground, indicative of a failed launch. An  anonymous Iranian official admitted to  Reuters that the incident was caused by technical issues but would not go into fur - ther detail. 259 President Trump tweeted a high resolu - tion image of the scarred launch pad, un- derscoring that the United States was not  involved.260 Although Iran has continued  to claim its space program is peaceful, that  has not always been the belief of the U.S. 
 government, whose officials often remark that the space program may be a front  for developing Iranian ballistic missiles.261  Days after this third failed launch attempt of the calendar year, the Trump adminis - tration added the Iran Space Agency, the  Iranian Astronautics Research Institute,  and the Iran Space Research Center to the  U.S. sanctions list. 262  New satellite images surfaced in January 2020 which showed the launch pad be - ing repaired, possibly in preparation for another launch attempt with a Simorgh  launch vehicle. 
263 This timing coincided  with statements from the Iranian Minis - ter of Information and Communications Technology, who announced that the pro - gram had six satellites ready to launch. He  announced that two are communications  satellites,  named Zafar-1 and Zafar-2, were   reportedly ready for a launch in early Feb - ruary. 264 On February 9, 2020, the Simorgh  rocket launched with a satellite on board, but the satellite did not reach high enough  velocity to stay in orbit. 
A spokesman for  the Iranian defense ministry’s space pro - gram claimed that the Simorgh functioned  properly, calling it a “remarkable” feat for  the space program. The minister of Infor - mation and Communications Technology  continued by saying the program is “UN - STOPPABLE! We have more Upcoming  Great Iranian Satellites!” 265  . 31 SPACE ORGANIZATION  AND DOCTRINE  Iran was one of the founding members of  the UN Committee on the Peaceful Uses of  Outer Space in 1958; however, the coun - try is one of many that has signed but not ratified the Outer Space Treaty. 
266 The  Iranian Space Agency was established in 2004 ostensibly to coordinate peaceful  applications of space activities and tech- nology development for the country. 267  The agency is under the oversight of the Ministry of Information and Communi- cations Technology, but takes direction  from the Supreme Space Council, which  is chaired by the president of Iran. The  head of the space agency serves as the  secretary of the Supreme Space Council,  which is overseen by the president and  focuses on making policy for peaceful  space technologies, approving state and  private space programs, and promoting domestic, private, and international co - operation in space issues. 
268  The Iranian Space Agency also runs the  Iranian Space Research Center and re - portedly has planned to establish a “space park, ” a space-themed center that focus - es on education, culture, recreation, and amusement. The park would be run in  partnership with the Sharif University of  Technology (SUT), a well-known research university that supports the government in ballistic missile-related projects. 269 Lit- tle is publicly known about Iran’s doctrine for space and counterspace operations, but evidence suggests that Iran believes the capability “to deny the United States the ability to use space in a regional con-flict” is critical to its security. 
270 Although  the country often uses aggressive rhetoric when discussing ballistic missile activi-ties, Iran consistently claims that its space program is peaceful. 271  Budgets for the Iranian Space Agency have risen in the last decade. In 2010, the space agency had a reported budget of  $1.5 million, which the minister of Com - munications and Information Technology enthusiastically reported saying “being in space is one of the key factors in the pow - er of governments. 
” 272 In 2017, the budget  for the space agency was reported to be $4.6 million. 273 The space agency’s budget  is separate from Iran’s military spending, which has increased by over 50 percent in the last five years, swelling to 7.5 per - cent of its total national budget for 2018–2019. 274 Though Iranian leadership takes  steps to obscure the specifics of its mili - tary budget, priorities include improving domestic missile production capabilities. 
Because of limited domestic capability to  produce reliable components, Iran con - tinues to rely on imported components  and materials for their missiles. Iran is not  a major space power in terms of proven  space capabilities, but it continues to in - vest in and develop significant counter - space capabilities.  COUNTERSPACE  WEAPONS Kinetic Physical  While currently available open-source  information does not indicate that Iran  is attempting to develop either direct-as - cent or co-orbital ASAT weapons, Iran has  some of the ballistic missile technology  on which a future direct-ascent kinetic  ASAT capability could be based. 
In ad - dition to a diverse set of ballistic missile  programs with varied ranges, Iran has  substantial conventional forces, with an estimated 523,000 active personnel. 275  Iran’s ballistic missile capabilities include the Shahab-3, which is believed to be de - rived from the North Korean No Dong-1  missile. 276  The Simorgh SLV is similarly  based on the North Korean Taepo Dong-2,   including modeling  No Dong-1 engines.277  Iran appears to have been able to repro - duce these missiles in quantity, which led U.S. 
Secretary of State Mike Pompeo to  publicly assert that “Iran has the largest  ballistic missile force in the Middle East. ” 278  Smoke  Likely post-fire runoﬀPaint burnt oﬀProbably transporter  erector Fueling trucks Figure 11: Satellite Image of Iranian Launch Attempt on August 25, 2019. csis / maxar technologies. 
SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 202032 IRAN Iran has demonstrated the rudimentary  ability to launch and operate primitive  satellites for short periods of time, and its  space monitoring center gives it the abil - ity to track objects and have better space  situational awareness.279 Having a relia- ble understanding of where objects are in  space is required for targeting many ca - pabilities. However, there are many oth - er technological hurdles to tackle before Iran could field a direct-ascent kinetic  ASAT weapon, such as precise onboard  sensors that could guide a warhead into a target satellite.  Realistically, Iran could construct a crude  direct-ascent ASAT capability by mod-ifying an existing ballistic missile and  launching it within the vicinity of a target  satellite with an unguided warhead. 
It would not likely be able to hit a specific  satellite but could create a debris hazard  in the space environment that threatens the safety of numerous other satellites in  similar orbits.  During a military parade in late 2019,  Iran unveiled a new indigenous ballistic  missile kit design, the Labbayk-1, which  aims to modify unguided short-range Zelzal and Fateh-110 ballistic missiles into  guided weapons. 280 This new capability  could lead to an increase in accuracy, as demonstrated in recent Iranian surface- to-air and air-to-air missile attacks in the  Middle East. 
281 This increased capability  may pose a threat to space systems by be - ing able to more reliably attack satellite ground stations  throughout the Middle East and Europe. 282  Non-Kinetic Physical  There are few reports of Iranian non-kinet - ic physical weapons, but the country may  have acquired and used a laser dazzling  or blinding counterspace system on a U.S. satellite. 
In 2011, an unnamed European  intelligence source was quoted stating  that Iran managed to “blind” a U.S. satel - lite by “aiming a laser burst quite accurate - l y.” 283 The technology necessary to do this,  particularly the adaptive optics needed to steer and focus a laser as  it passes through the Earth’s  atmosphere, is quite sophisti - cated, indicating that Iran may  have obtained this technology  from Russia or China. Its ca - pabilities in this area remain  highly uncertain based on the limited publicly available infor - mation. 
If Iran were to continue pursu- ing a breakout nuclear capa- bility, it is conceivable that it  could launch a nuclear weap - on into orbit as a nuclear ASAT  capability. In the 1990s, Iran  entered into agreements with  both China and Russia to help jumpstart its nuclear program. China agreed to include the  training of Iranian personnel  and contribute various reactor  technologies. 
284 Iran has also  entered into a bilateral nu - clear cooperation agreement with Russia to provide nuclear  experts, information, and aid in the completion of Iran’s first  nuclear power plant.  285 Recently, the program has leaned most heavily on North  Korean cooperation. In 2012, Iran and North Korea signed the Civilian Scientific and Tech - nological Cooperation Agree - ment, which established joint facilities and a “transfer [of]  technology” in multiple fields. 
286  Former Special Coordinator for  the State Department’s North  Korea Group, David Asher, add - ed “the last time North Korea  signed an agreement like this it led to the largest act of nu-clear proliferation in modern  history. ” Development of Iranian nucle - ar capability was temporarily slowed in 2015 by the Joint  Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA).287 The United States pulled out  of the JCPOA in 2018, and after a series of  international events which increased ten - sions between the two nations, Iran also  stated it would no longer adhere to the deal. 288 The remaining countries involved  in the JCPOA, including Russia and Chi-na, hope to reimplement the agreement. 
289  Despite pulling out of the JCPOA, Presi - dent Trump reiterated as recently as Janu - ary 2020 that Iran would “never be allowed to have a nuclear weapon. ” 290 However,  the aim of Iran’s nuclear program has his - torically been to develop a nuclear-armed ICBM to deter the United States, not a nu - clear counterspace ASAT weapon.  Electronic  Jamming and spoofing are regular tools  in Iran’s weapons arsenal. 
In 2003, Voice  of America (VOA) broadcasts into Iran be - gan to experience interference with its transmissions over the Telestar-12 sat - ellite. The uplink jamming of this com-mercial satellite originated from the area around Havana, Cuba. The U.S. 
State Department notified Cuba of the issue, and subsequently  determined that the source of  the jamming was from a com - pound belonging to the Irani - an Embassy. Cuban authori-ties promptly shut down the facility and issued a note of  protest to the Iranian govern - ment. 291 Similar attacks ema - nated from Bulgaria and Libya  from 2005 to 2006. 
Though Iran’s role went unconfirmed, “international pressure even- tually brought this to a halt  and satellite jamming against Persian-language program-ming now emanates exclu- sively from Iranian territory. ” 292  “We have been  equipped with electronic warfare sys - tems in order not to remain just a defending force, and rather become able to jam the enemy’s communication systems,”  BRIGADE GENERAL AH - MAD REZA POURDASTAN293 Iran has also jammed several interna - tional and regional television broadcasts  in the Middle East. In 2010, Iran jammed BBC and VOA satellite signals transmit - ting into Iran. 
At first, the jamming tar -. 33 geted BBC and VOA broadcasts on the  Hot Bird 6 commercial satellite, but when the broadcasts were moved to transmit through other commercial satellites, the jamming targeted those satellites as well. 294 In the same year, the head of the  Islamic Republic of Iran Broadcasting publicly acknowledged that the Iranian  government engaged in the jamming of  foreign broadcast satellites. 
295 Al Jazeera faced targeted attacks in Janu - ary 2012 after its coverage of the conflict in Syria. The origin of the attacks was traced to two locations in Iran. 296 Later  that year, Iran was supported by the Syri - an government in a coordinated jamming effort against approximately 25 interna - tional broadcasters, “including the BBC, France 24, Deutsche Welle and the Voice of America. 
” 297 A similar report in July  of 2019 stated Iran International, a Lon - don-based TV station, believed its signals were being blocked via uplink jamming originating from Iran. 298 Iran has publicly claimed the ability to spoof GPS receivers. In 2011, Iran claimed to have forced a U.S. 
RQ-170 drone to land inside its borders by jamming its sat - ellite communications links and spoof - ing the GPS receiver. An Iranian engineer was quoted at the time as saying that the drone landed “where we wanted it to, without having to crack the remote-con - trol signals and communications. ” 299  Though a former Pentagon spokesper - son claimed there was “no indication the drone was brought down by hostile ac - tivity of any kind, ” President Obama did acknowledge that Iran had possession of the drone. 
300 If Iran’s claims of electronic  jamming are true, they represent a signif - icant counterspace capability that could be used to thwart U.S. precision-guided weapons and aircraft in the future. In 2019, there were similar reports of GPS  spoofing of commercial U.S. 
ships in the Gulf of Oman. Several ships reported a loss of GPS signal and were captured in Iranian territorial waters. After 11 report - ed incidents, the U.S. 
Maritime Adminis - tration issued a warning to U.S. vessels to be aware of GPS interference in the ar - ea. 301 The advisory warned of Iranian GPS  jammers operating on an island near the Strait of Hormuz with the goal of causing  ships and aircraft to “inadvertently wan- der into Iranian waters or airspace in  order to justify a seizure. 
” The warning also mentioned instances of “spoofed”  communications from ships claiming to  be U.S. or other countries’ warships.  302  Similar GPS interference was reported by  British ships, prompting British media re - ports that intelligence services were con - cerned that Iran had used Russian GPS spoofing technology to guide the vessels into Iranian waters. 
303 In 2019, numerous  oil tankers from varying regions reported  seizures in the Strait of Hormuz, followed  by an Iranian shoot-down of a remotely  piloted U.S. Navy aircraft over the inter - national waters in the region.304 Also in 2019, the commander-in-chief of  the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps  (IRGC) announced the creation of a new mounted hardware unit called Sepehr  110 to protect its systems from electronic  warfare. 305 State media credits the system  as being developed by IRGC experts and “invulnerable to hacks, eavesdropping, radio jamming, and electromagnetic dis - turbance” but there has been no external verification of the system. 
306  Later that year, the Research and Self-Suf - ficiency Jihad Organization of the Iranian army unveiled a portable jamming sys - tem attachable to vehicles and report - edly capable of detecting and disrupting  drone flights.307 These announced up - grades of counterdrone capabilities, in-cluding a system capable of participating in electronic warfare and radar evasion,  have not been corroborated outside of  state-sponsored media. 308    Cyber Iran began developing its cyber capabil - ities through independent hackers who gained notoriety in the early 2000s. The  Iranian government often encourages its  hackers through recruiting into its own cyber forces or supporting independent  operations against its enemies, repre - senting a somewhat unique approach. 
309  Though initially modest, Iranian cyber  capabilities have grown significantly in the last decade, becoming “notable play - ers” in the cyber realm. 310 Iran has devel-IRAN HAS  DEMONSTRATED ITS CYBER   CAPABILITIES BY ATTACKING U.S. INFRASTRUC - TURE.. 
SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 202034 IRAN oped advanced offensive cyber capabil- ities that could potentially target U.S. space systems in the future. With three separate branches of the Iranian military contributing to cyber infrastructure, Iran claims over 100,000 cyberwar volunteers and recently established a Joint Chiefs of Staff Cyber Command to better organize its efforts. 
311 This increase in cyber activity has been mirrored in the country’s budget; in 2017, the budget of the National Center for Cy-berspace reportedly increased by 45 per - cent in one year, swelling to $1.2 million.  312 Iranian willingness to employ cyber - attacks against targeted defense compa - nies, media conglomerates, and adver - saries also appears to be increasing.313  Iran has demonstrated its cyber capa - bilities by attacking U.S. infrastructure, though it has often targeted private com - panies as opposed to government sys - tems. 
In 2012, Iran launched a distributed denial of service (DDOS) attack against U.S. banks and telecommunications com - panies, which resulted in monetary losses in the millions. 314 This particular incident  prompted a public statement by then-Sec - retary of Defense Leon Panetta warning that the imminent threat of a cyberat - tack that could cause significant property damage or kill U.S. 
citizens would be suf - ficient justification for a pre-emptive mil-itary strike. 315 In 2019, the FBI was made  aware of attempts, likely originating from Iran, to gain access to the systems of U.S. satellite technology companies. 
316  Various malware programs, including the destructive Shamoon virus with the ability to fully wipe computer systems, have been tied to Iranian state-sponsored hacking groups. The director of the U.S. Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Securi - ty Agency issued a warning describing a similar type of destruction, citing a “rise in malicious cyber activity” from Iranian actors. 
 317 As tensions rise worldwide with  Iran, so do hacking attempts. In a 48-hour time period in January 2020, attacks from Iranian IP addresses were recorded at up to 500 million attempts per day globally. 318  Although there are few confirmed in - stances of Iran using cyberattacks against space systems, Iran’s increasingly sophis - ticated cyber capabilities suggest that it could employ such attacks on space sys - tems if needed. 
  SUMMARY  Iran is still far from developing direct-as - cent ASAT weapons, even with its in - creased focus on launch vehicle devel - opment and continued development of ballistic missile capabilities. Similarly, with only four successful satellites that have reached orbit and a growing string of failed launches, Iran is unlikely to de - velop a co-orbital ASAT capability in the near future. To make significant progress on kinetic and non-kinetic counterspace systems, Iran would likely need to ac - quire technology and resources from a major counterspace actor, such as Rus - sia or China. 
However, Iran has growing electronic and cyber counterspace ca-pabilities and continues to demonstrate successful jamming and hacking attacks against foreign governments and civil-ian systems. 35 35 Number of Successful Orbital  Launches in 2019319  0NORTH KOREA NORTH  KOREA “North Korea has been  building new missiles, new capabilities, new weapons as fast as anybody on the planet,”  GENERAL JOHN E. HYTEN  VICE CHAIRMAN OF THE JOINT CHIEFS OF STAFF , UNITED STATES AIR FORCE 320NORTH KOREA SUCCESSFULLY ORBITED ITS FIRST SATELLITE   in December 2012 after three failed attempts in July 2006, April  2009, and April 2012. 
Its fifth attempt, in February 2016, success - fully placed a second satellite in orbit. Both successful orbital  launches from North Korea have been on the Unha-3 SLV, whose milita - rized adaptation is likely the same vehicle outfitted with a reentry vehi-cle in place of an orbital satellite. 321 Like many other spacefaring nations  around the globe, North Korea’s space capabilities are closely tied to its ballistic missile development. 
 A North Korean law journal referenced the close relationship between  space capabilities and ballistic missiles, stating “it is an undeniable truth that satellites launched into orbit by many countries around the world were made possible by rocket propulsion. ” While defending the country’s satel - lite launching program, the article continued to state that the main differ - ence between a peaceful space launch and a ballistic missile is whether the launch vehicle is furnished “with a satellite or a bomb. ” 322 Although reaching orbit is a significant achievement, many experts doubt that the two successfully launched satellites perform all of the functions the North Korean government claims. 
323 In a 2016 interview with the Asso - ciated Press, the head of the North Korean space agency stated his intent . SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 202036 to continue launching Earth  observation satellites, and his aspirations to send a mission to the moon around 2026. He  was quoted as saying, “Even though the U.S. 
and its allies try to block our space devel - opment, our aerospace scien-tists will conquer space and definitely plant the flag of the DPRK on the moon. ” 324  There is little indication that North Korea is making substan - tial efforts to build or sustain a space industrial base, but its missile program is advancing. There were 11 separate North Korean missile tests in 2019 alone, which involved as many as 20 rockets in total. 
325 Addi- tional satellite footage taken in early 2020 showed increased activity at a known missile launch site, possibly signaling more tests in the near future. 326 Satellite Imagery of the Sohae  Satellite Launching Ground  After a Test on December 7,  2019. Differences include scarred  vegetation and the moving of  equipment. 
The facility hosted  rocket engine tests on December  7 and December 13, 2019.  planet / beyond parallelNORTH KOREA Space Launch Facilities NORTH KOREA HAS TWO ESTABLISHED LAUNCHING AREAS for  space capabilities: the Tonghae Satellite Launching Ground and  the Sohae Satellite Launching Ground. The Tonghae Satellite  Launching Ground is North Korea’s oldest ballistic missile and space launch facility, although a successful orbital launch has  never been achieved at the facility. 
According to December 2019  satellite imagery, there was increased activity at the site, includ - ing a group of people and possibly crates, but no sign of major renovations that would have to take place to prepare the facility for a vehicle test. However, North Korea has used mobile launch - ing platforms for all recent land-based ballistic missile tests, which could be conducted in the grounds of Tonghae. 327 The Sohae Satellite Launching Ground showed initial steps of dis - assembly in satellite imagery in the summer of 2018, but reassem - bly began again after U.S - North Korea Summits in Singapore and Hanoi. 
328 In late 2019, North Korea conducted two engine tests at  the Sohae Satellite Launching ground, believed to be modified  liquid-fueled engines for long-range missiles.329 While the specif - ics of the tests were unconfirmed, KCNA state media referred to the successful tests as “defence science achievements” that will  “have an important effect on changing the strategic position” for  the country. 330  Although conducted at a satellite launching pad,  experts assess that it was likely another missile test or a step to - wards ICBM development, rather than a space vehicle launch.331 . 37 SPACE ORGANIZATION  AND DOCTRINE  North Korea keeps its doctrine and op - erational concepts largely under wraps,  including what is released about its coun - terspace capabilities. 
The absence of discussion about counterspace capabili - ties that could threaten the U.S. military is unusual given the aggressive rhetoric  used by the regime in touting its nuclear  and missile programs. 332 The country con - tinues to advocate internationally for its right to a sovereign space program. 
333  When the regime has spoken about its space program at the United Nations, del - egates speak of respect of international norms to maintain peaceful development and use of outer space, including the North  Korean space program’s right to help the  country grow economically. 334 In March  2009, North Korea became a signatory to two major UN space treaties: the Outer  Space Treaty of 1967 and the Convention on Registration of Objects Launched into  Outer Space of 1974. 335 Four years later,  in April 2013, the country’s Supreme Peo - ple’s Assembly established the National Aerospace Development Administration (NADA), the official North Korean space agency. 
336 Additionally, space has often  been included in five-year plans that the regime has put forward. 337  In October 2017, a delegate to the United Nations was reported in state media as saying “peaceful development of outer space is actively conducted in accordance with the 2016-2020 plan for national out - er space development. ” 338 As reported,  this plan included an aim to launch a ge - ostationary satellite—a much more chal - lenging feat which would require a more powerful launch vehicle. 
339 State media  reported a successful ground test of a new launch vehicle for this purpose, but it has not noted any attempts at an actual launch. 340 The regime hopes to use satel - lites to monitor crop and forestry growth as well as to improve communication ca -Satellite Imagery of the Tonghae Satellite  Launching Ground on December 16, 2019.  Analysis shows one launch pad, a second un- finished launch pad, and missile storage for  the No-dong medium range ballistic missile,  and Taepo-dong SLV. 
Both noted missiles are  capable of reaching LEO.  airbus / beyond parallel . SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 202038 pabilities.341 The plan expressed a goal to  field a satellite communication system by  2019, though there is no indication that  goal was achieved.342  COUNTERSPACE  WEAPONS Kinetic Physical  Current space launch vehicles and ballis - tic missiles demonstrated by North Korea  could serve as the basis for a kinetic ASAT  capability, but many technological hur - dles remain. 
To date, North Korea has not  tested, or indicated that it is attempting to  develop, a direct-ascent or co-orbital ASAT  capability. It is unlikely that North Korea  could quickly gain the technology for an  effective direct-ascent or co-orbital ASAT  weapon, as it has only succeeded in plac - ing two satellites into orbit, the operation of which are not confirmed outside state  media. This additional capability would also require onboard sensors (e.g., optical,  infrared, radar) and a guidance system to steer the weapon into a target satellite. 
 It is conceivable that North Korea could  field a crude direct-ascent ASAT capability  in the near term in the form of an adapt - ed ballistic missile. This would be possible with the launch of an unguided warhead  set to detonate in the vicinity of a target  satellite. Rather than directly strike a satel - lite, it could create a debris field that would  complicate future operations for satellites  in a similar orbit. 
For example, the North  Korean No Dong-1  medium-range ballistic  missile would likely be able to carry a 1200 kg payload to a maximum altitude of 600  to 750 km—well within the LEO regime. 343  Missiles launched from North Korean terri - tory could more easily be used in a conven - tional attack on nearby ground stations that support satellite operations, such as  the U.S.-operated GPS monitoring station  in South Korea and other ground stations  as far away as Guam. 344 Non-Kinetic Physical  The technology necessary to develop di - rected energy weapons, such as lasers that  are able to dazzle or blind the sensors on satellites, requires a level of sophistication that North Korea likely does not possess. 
345  It is possible, however, that North Korea could develop a crude EMP weapon for use against space assets. In 2017, North Korea successfully tested a hydrogen bomb un - derground, a claim that was confirmed by  South Korea and Japan. 346 Officials from  Pyongyang released a photo of the hydro - gen bomb and asserted  that the bomb is able to fit on an ICBM. 
347 Kim Jong-un has  called for further improvements in nuclear  bombs similar to this test in the “Songun” spirit, which places the military first. 348 In  January 2020, KCNA reported that Kim Jong-un declared the world would soon see a new strategic weapon, adding that there will never be denuclearization on the Korean peninsula. 349 A nuclear weapon on a long range missile would theoretically give North Korea the capability to create a high-altitude EMP effect. 
350 In 2018, The Daily NK—a South  Korean news site—obtained North Ko - rean internal propaganda documents aimed to inform citizens that the country has the capability to damage enemies’ military and civilian electronic systems beyond repair as a result of a nuclear EMP attack. 351 North Korea is not a signatory of  the 1963 Partial Test Ban Treaty, and the country has not tested a nuclear weapon at high altitudes. 352 Electronic  North Korea has acquired and is constant - ly using electronic forms of attack against varying space systems. 
In 2010, South  Korean Defense Minister Kim Tae-young  said in a speech to parliament that “North  Korea has imported vehicle-mountable  devices capable of jamming GPS signals  from Russia. ” These downlink jamming  systems reportedly have an effective ra - dius of 50 to 100 km. North Korea began  using this jamming equipment against NORTH KOREA. 
39 NORTH KOREA  HAS BEEN CARRYING OUT CYBERATTACKS BY PLACING INDIVIDUALS IN SCATTERED FOREIGN COUNTRIES IN AN ATTEMPT TO DISGUISE THE ORIGIN OF THE ATTACKS.South Korea in August 2010, but South  Korean forces could not pinpoint the loca - tion of the jammers at that time because the jamming lasted just 10 minutes in  each instance. 353 In the decade since, North Korea has repeatedly used its GPS jamming capa - bilities against South Korea. More GPS jamming occurred in December 2010  and again in March 2011, which coincid - ed with a U.S.-South Korean military ex - ercise. 
Jamming occurred again in April 2012, disrupting air traffic at Incheon and Gimpo international airports, forcing flights to use alternative navigation sys - tems. 354 In March and April 2016, over 250  South Korean fishing boats lost access to  GPS, forcing them to return to shore.355 A  few days later, South Korea complained  to the UN Security Council that North  Korea was jamming GPS signals across  the border, with the jamming coming from five areas in North Korea: Pyong - yang, Kaesong, Haeju, Yonan county, and  Mount Kumgang. 356 Documents state that  in 2016, 2,143 aircraft disclosed GPS inter - ference, likely due to North Korean jam - ming operations.357  The South Korean Defense Ministry has  said it believes the jamming attacks orig - inate from “a regiment-sized electronic warfare unit near the North Korean cap - ital Pyongyang, and battalion-sized units closer to the inter-Korean border. 
” 358 The  jammers are mounted on mobile plat - forms and are operated intermittently, which could be difficult to locate and  neutralize in a conflict. North Korea ap - pears to be gaining operational experi - ence using these systems in peacetime.  Because the GPS jammers were acquired from Russia, it is possible that North Ko - rea could also have acquired other types  of jamming capabilities that can target  different satellite systems, such as uplink jammers that can disrupt military satel - lite communications. 
 Additionally, AIS spoofing has been used  in shipping vessels during 2019 likely in  an attempt to hide what is assumed to be coal smuggling operations. A report details the suspicious behavior of one of  North Korea’s largest bulk ships, the Tae  Yang, which North Korea relies on for im -ported goods and revenue. The Tae Yang  consistently broadcasted a unique identi - fication number assigned to another ves - sel to disguise its own illicit movements,  while still transmitting AIS data. 
Another report by the UN Panel of Experts has  uncovered additional examples of AIS  spoofing techniques used by North Kore - an ships to avoid sanctions. 359  According to minutes from a 2008 meet - ing about network surveillance capa - bilities, North Korean officials inquired  about a satellite jamming system to two groups of internationally contracted engineers. The meeting ended with an agreement that “the number of jamming systems that prevents interception by sat - ellite should be increased. 
” However, ana - lysts believe it is possible that the inquiry was an excuse to get imported German  cellular detection equipment, which was  subsequently used to catch North Korean citizens with Chinese cell phones. 360  Cyber  Under the Kim Jong-un regime, North Korea has used its cyber forces frequent - ly, first launching attacks on South Korea and the United States, then branching out to others. According to CrowdStrike, North Korean hackers have the sec - ond-fastest breakout time (the time need - ed for hackers to achieve their objectives in an attack) of any hacking organization  in the world, behind Russia. 
North Korea’s  malicious cyber activity tends to focus on financial targets or inter-Korea issues. A majority of the cyberattacks stemming from North Korea are “linked to curren - cy generation and economy-bolstering efforts for the Kim regime. ” 361 Experts believe there are around 6,000 - 7,500 military personnel conducting cy - ber warfare for the North Korean state. 
Cybersecurity defector and founder of North Korea Intellectuals Solidarity, Kim  Hueng-kwang, said most cyber opera - tions in the country are organized in a unit directly under North Korea’s main  overseas intelligence agency, the Recon - naissance General Bureau (RGB). 362 He  emphasized that North Korea was “in-spired by the Chinese cyberwar units and learned from them. ” 363 According to Kim, . 
SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 202040 NORTH KOREA members of an elite North Korean hack - ing group go on covert missions overseas,  generally to places with better internet  than the notoriously shielded country, to lower the risk of being caught. South Ko - rea’s vice foreign minister confirmed this report, telling Reuters that North Korea has been carrying out cyberattacks by placing individuals in scattered foreign  countries in an attempt to disguise the or - igin of the attacks.  364  A leaked report sent to the UN Security Council’s North Korea sanctions commit - tee stated that through 35 separate cyber - attacks, North Korea has stolen over $2 billion, which has likely been used to fund  weapons development. 
365 Subsequently,  the U.S. Department of the Treasury an - nounced sanctions for three state-spon - sored cyber groups from the country, naming them responsible for malicious cyber activity on critical infrastructure. 366 North Korean hackers have also been tied to a nuclear power plant in India and pos - sibly the Indian Space Research Organi - zation during its Chandrayaan-2 mission, although Indian space authorities deny they were compromised. 
 367 They are also  suspected to have hacked an Israeli aero - space and defense company.368 Given its  demonstrated cyber capabilities, it is con - ceivable that North Korea could initiate a cyberattack against U.S. space systems or ground stations, although there is no publicly available information to suggest  this has happened to date. SUMMARY North Korea has demonstrated growing capabilities in two counterspace weapons  categories: electronic and cyber. 
It is also developing some of the necessary tech - nologies to field a non-kinetic physical nu- clear EMP counterspace weapon through  its nuclear program, but this does not ap - pear to be the intent of those activities.  Although North Korea has demonstrated  its dedication to increasing the range of its ICBM-class missiles, its limited num - ber of successful orbital launches suggest  that the country is far from developing the capabilities needed to pose a signif - icant kinetic physical threat to foreign satellite systems. The only significant risk of non-kinetic physical attack from North Korea is high altitude nuclear detonation, a devastating, irreversible counterspace attack that would indiscriminately affect systems in the target satellite’s orbital re - gime. 
Importantly, North Korea is improv - ing its electronic warfare capabilities, as demonstrated in continued GPS jamming and spoofing operations, and is continu - ing to use cyberattacks against a variety of targets worldwide.. 41 41 6 INDIA INDIA INDIA JOINED THE WORLD STAGE AS A RISING SPACE POWER by  launching its first satellite from the Satish Dhawan Space Center in 1980.  India has since developed highly successful launch vehicles, a range of communications, imaging, and other critical satellites, and is beginning  serious development of counterspace capabilities. 
While India has no over - arching national space policy yet, the government of India is in the process  of creating one. 371 Currently, it does have various organizations dedicated to  the space domain in both the military and civil sectors, each with support - ing policies and doctrine. Among these organizations is the principal space  organization in India, the Indian Space Research Organization (ISRO), which is responsible for maintaining the SLVs and spaceports of India. 
Currently, India has two operational orbital launch vehicles, the Polar Satel - lite Launch Vehicle (PSLV) and the Geosynchronous Satellite Launch Vehicle  (GSLV). These two vehicles launched six times in 2019, representing only  a small portion of the 67 total Indian launches since 1980 from the Satish  Dhawan Space Centre. 372 India made history in 2017 with the largest num- ber of satellites on any single mission, launching 104 satellites with one  PSLV, breaking the previous record of 37 satellites held by Russia since 2014. 
 All but three of these satellites were foreign owned.373 Number of Successful Orbital  Launches in 2019369  “When India  celebrates [its] 75th year of Independence in 2022, and if possible even before, an Indian son or daughter will undertake a manned space mission on board ‘Gaganyaan’ carrying the national flag.”  PRIME MINISTER   NARENDRA MODI370. SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 202042 INDIA CHINA INDIA USA RUSSIA OTHERSSUCCESSFUL ORBITAL LAUNCHES PER YEAR BY COUNTRY (1957-2019) 020406080100120 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010 2019 The Satish Dhawan Space Center has  been India’s only major spaceport since  it began launching in 1980. Howev - er, due to the anticipated increase in demand for national and commercial  space launch in the coming years, the  Indian government has begun the land acquisition process for the construction of a new spaceport. 
375 The proposed  spaceport, to be located in the south - ern state of Tamil Nadu, is planned to mainly service India’s newest launch vehicle, the Small Satellite Launch Vehicle (SSLV). 376 A derivative of the  PSLV, this new Indian launch vehicle is rated to carry “up to 500 kilograms to mid-inclination low Earth orbits and 300 kilograms to [sun-synchronous or - bit (SSO)]. ” 377 The location of the pro - posed spaceport will allow for launch-ing southward into a polar or near-polar  orbit, which is difficult from the Satish  Dhawan Space Center due to the need to maneuver around Sri Lanka. 
Only three countries—China, the So - viet Union, and the United States— have ever “soft-landed” on the lunar surface. 378 In 2009, India successfully  launched the Chandrayaan-1 space - craft, which was designed to orbit the moon and conduct a hard-landing for the purpose of targeting and practic - ing a future soft-landing. 379 In 2019, the  Chandrayaan-2 spacecraft was placed on a GSLV and launched into lunar orbit. 
While on approach to the lunar surface to attempt a soft-landing, the Vikram Lander lost contact with the ISRO and crashed into the lunar surface. 380 After  about  a month of attempting to re-es - tablish contact with the lunar lander,  the Indian government made an offi - cial announcement that they had lost  contact and were unable to recover the spacecraft. 381 However, this failure has  only reinvigorated the Indian space pro - gram and public. 
 In an announcement on January 1, 2020,  Chief Kailasavadivoo Sivan, head of the ISRO, stated that the top priorities for the ISRO in 2020 are a Chandrayaan-3   mission to the lunar surface and the Gaganyaan human spaceflight pro - gram, though it is unlikely that either will launch before 2021. 382 The Chan- drayaan-3 mission will similarly attempt  to conduct a soft-landing on the lunar surface. When asked if a crewed mission  to the moon was in the near future for India, Sivan said, “definitely, but not im-THE TOP   PRIORITIES  FOR THE ISRO IN 2020 ARE A CHAN-DRAYAAN-3  MISSION TO THE LUNAR SURFACE AND THE   GAGANYAAN HUMAN SPACE-FLIGHT  PROGRAM, THOUGH IT IS UNLIKELY THAT EITHER WILL LAUNCH  BEFORE 2021. 
Figure 12: Indian Orbital Space Launches (1957 - 2019). spacetrack.org / csis aerospace security374. 43 mediately. 
”383 Four Indian astronauts will be sent to  Russia for 11 months to receive training in prepa - ration for the Gaganyaan program. Additional pro - gram-specific training will also take place in India.384 ORGANIZATION AND DOCTRINE India does not have an official military department  focused on space. It instead created a separate agen - cy, the Defence Space Agency (DSA), to coordinate between and command the space assets of the Indian Army, Navy, and Air Force, including India’s new di- rect-ascent ASAT capabilities. 
385 According to the two- star general appointed to head the DSA, “the agency will eventually grow into a full-fledged Space Com - mand in the years ahead. ” 386 To date, however, there is  no confirmed timeline for this growth. Within the DSA,  India established the Defence Space Research Organ -Vikram Lander and Pragyan Rover. 
The Vikram lander  was launched on the Chandrayaan-2 mission, but it did  not achieve a successful soft landing on the lunar surface.  isro ization (DSRO) in late 2019 to further develop and test  counterspace systems and related technologies.387  In late July 2019, India’s top strategic planners from several agencies gathered to begin to establish new policies and doctrine for future military and non-mil - itary uses for space. Called IndSpaceEx, the strategic  planners were led through a wargaming simulation  that was meant to assess military assets of other lead-ing space powers—namely the United States, China, and Russia—to better assess the level to which India must counter international space threats. 
388 The ses - sion’s conclusion was that future wars may be dom - inated by activities in the cyber and space domains, . SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 202044 INDIA leading to asymmetric advantages or dis - advantages.389  A 2019-2020 annual report released by  the Government of India’s Department of  Space detailed initial steps of an official  space policy for the country. This policy will “support the pursuance of space activ - ities by various agencies in India including  private sector and start-up companies in the aerospace sector. 
” 390 It is clear through  India’s military space reorganization, re - newed focus on commercial partners, and  it’s test of a direct-ascent ASAT in March  2019 that the Indian leadership views  space as a key operational domain. Mission Shakti ON MARCH 27, 2019,  India successfully  launched a Prithvi Delivery Vehicle Mark-II  (PDV MK-II) missile defense interceptor at  one of its own satellites. Launched in late  January 2019, the target satellite, Micro - sat-R, was specifically placed in a low-alti - tude sun-synchronous orbit as the target  for an ASAT test. 
After the successful test in  March, independent analysts realized that  an earlier attempt to intercept the satellite  on February 12 of the same year failed.391 What was perhaps most notable about the  Indian ASAT test was the muted internation - al outcry that occurred afterward. This was  likely due in part to the minimal amount  of orbital debris created—only about 400  pieces remained in orbit immediately after the test, compared to the over 3,000 pieces  of debris created during the 2007 Chinese  ASAT test. The Indian ASAT test took place at a relatively low altitude, and at the time of impact, the interceptor was on a down - ward trajectory. 
This resulted in much of the debris having a downward trajectory, allowing it to be more quickly deorbited.  DEBRIS ASAT  at highest  altitiudeMICROSAT-R India Bay of BengalFigure 13: Depiction of Kinetic Physical ASAT Test by India in 2019. Muted international out - cry in response to this ASAT test was, in part, due to the low amount of debris created because  of the slight downward trajectory of the missile on impact. 
aerospace security project / emily tiemeyerGiven these factors, it is likely that the Indi - an government was attempting to limit the  potential for long-lasting orbital debris.392  Since the test, a majority of the debris has deorbited, and by the end 2019, just 18  pieces of debris large enough to track re - mained in orbit. 393 The Indian ASAT test did not receive the same level of international outcry as the  Chinese ASAT test, in part because it pro - duced much less orbital debris. The United States, for example, only had one govern - ment official speak out against the test. 
 NASA Administrator Jim Bridenstine de - cried the test because some pieces of debris  were pushed to a higher altitude, threat - ening the astronauts on the International  Space Station. 394 While public international  outcry was minimal, Pakistan was one of  few states to openly denounce the test, urg - ing all countries to “condemn India’s action  and strengthen international laws regard - ing the militarization of space. ”395 Addition- ally, the Union of Concerned Scientists de - nounced the test, expressing  that this test harmed international efforts to prevent further weaponization of outer space. 
396 COUNTERSPACE  WEAPONS Kinetic Physical The Indian government took notice of  China’s successful 2007 direct-ascent  ASAT , causing it to shift focus to pro - tecting its vulnerable space assets from a Chinese threat. As one scholar noted, “It suddenly reminded them that their diverse space assets were now at risk, . 45 hostage to the dangers emanating from their most  formidable regional threat. 
” For years, defense  planners debated the merits of conducting a sim - ilar kinetic ASAT test to signal to China and other  nations that India had the ability to retaliate in  kind if its space assets were attacked.397 The gov - ernment eventually concluded that India should pursue kinetic ASAT weapons. On March 27, 2019, India became the fourth coun- try—behind the United States, China, and Rus - sia—to successfully test a direct-ascent ASAT mis - sile. Named Mission Shakti, meaning “strength” in Hindi, the test was conducted with an Indian-pro - duced ballistic missile which intercepted a small target satellite in LEO. 
398 In a tweet, Prime Minister  Narendra Modi said this test will “have a historic  impact on generations to come. ”399  India does not have any publicly known co-orbit - al ASAT capabilities. However, Defence Research  and Development Organization Chief G. 
Satheesh  Reddy announced in April 2019—less than a month after the success of Mission Shakti—that India was developing co-orbital ASAT capabilities and that  the details remained classified. 401 India is devel - oping, in partnership with France, the technical  capabilities to conduct RPO on orbit as part of its efforts to develop a national space station. 402 RPO  proficiency is a key step toward the fundamental capabilities of building some types of co-orbital counterspace weapons. 
The Indian military also has the ability to direct - ly attack satellite ground stations. Indian special  operations units are specially trained to “to carry  out crippling attacks against critical enemy targets miles away. ” 403 The newly created Armed Forces  Special Operations Division is designed and mod - eled off of the United States Joint Special Opera - tions Command (JSOC).404  Non-Kinetic Physical Thus far, India does not appear to have developed  and tested non-kinetic physical counterspace  weapons. 
However, the 2010 Technology Perspec - tive and Roadmap released by the Ministry of De - fense detailed that ASAT weapons “for electronic  or physical destruction of satellites (2,000 km al - titude above earth’s surface) and geosynchronous  orbits” are a key area of future focus.405 Following  this, a new Technology Perspective and Capability Roadmap  in 2013 noted a focus on developments in electronic weapons, specifically miniaturization of EW elements as payloads on satellites. 406 “In the journey  of every nation there are moments that bring utmost pride and have a historic impact on generations to come.” PRIME MINISTER   NARENDRA MODI400 In its 2018 Technology Perspective and Capability  Roadmap, India detailed investments in a two- phase Tactical High Energy Laser System. The sec - ond phase of this system is intended to play an “anti-satellite role from ground & aerial platform. 
” 407  Following the Mission Shakti test, DRDO Chief Sath - eesh Reddy stated that India was in the process of developing different ASAT technologies, including  directed-energy weapons, lasers, and electromag - netic pulses. 408 However, beyond these general  statements and reports, the government of India  has not divulged any details of these activities. As a nuclear-armed state, India has the ability to  launch a nuclear warhead into space as a coun - terspace weapon. 
Theoretically, in addition to  the kinetic properties of the nuclear weapon, In - dia could use the EMP effect from a high-altitude nuclear detonation to disable satellites. However,  there is no publicly available indication that India  is pursuing a nuclear EMP space weapon.PDV-MK II Missile Lifting Off on Track to Intercept  Microsat-R on March 27, 2019. The missile used by  India during its first ASAT test was an indigenously  manufactured missile.409  government of india. 
SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 202046 INDIA Electronic India’s 2018 Technology Perspective and  Capability Roadmap also shows invest - ment in an integrated EW system with  requirements to “detect, monitor, lo - cate and jam enemy cellular receivers and satellite communication receivers. ” 411  Another planned system has similar re - quirements as the integrated system and is intended to also be able to “carry out jamming & spoofing of satellite based po - sitioning systems. ” 412 However, India has  not yet publicly demonstrated its jam - ming or spoofing capabilities. 
Cyber In 2019, the government of India set up the Defence Cyber Agency (DCA). Similar to the Defence Space Agency, the DCA is meant “to control and coordinate joint cyber operations. ” 413 There have been  questions as to whether India may have some kind of cyber deterrence against enemy satellites with both space- and land-based systems; however, Union Min-ister Shripad Naik has stated that such information is sensitive and therefore is unable to be confirmed or denied. 
414  SUMMARY Although India has had a recent success - ful direct-ascent ASAT test, other types of counterspace weapons are far from devel-oped. As India focuses more on building out its space assets, as well as its counter - space assets, subsequent counterspace weapons tests may occur. While the 2019 ASAT test has certainly caused great de - bate in the international space commu - nity, the muted official international re - sponse sets a different precedence from the Chinese 2007 test. 
With little to no repercussions, India demonstrated that a lower-altitude ASAT test may be accepted by the international community. “India has always  been opposed to the weaponization of space and an arms race in outer space, and this test does not in any way change this position.”  PRIME MINISTER NARENDRA MODI  410 . 47 47 OTHERS OTHERS WHILE THE PREVIOUS CHAPTERS HAVE BEEN DEDICATED  to  the countries making the largest strides in counterspace capa - bilities—China, Russia, Iran, North Korea, and India—they are  not the only ones thinking strategically about the changing  space environment. 
This chapter includes significant discussion and devel - opments related to counterspace capabilities in other countries and non- state actors. FRANCE AS THE THIRD OLDEST SPACE PROGRAM IN THE WORLD,  France has ac - complished much since it first established its national space agency, the Centre national d’études spatiales (CNES), in 1961. France launched its first satellite in 1965, led the development of the Ariane family of launch vehi - cles, and became one of the foremost European space powers through its  strong relationship with the European Space Agency (ESA). 
417  In 2018, the CNES was a key partner of NASA’s Mars Discovery Program, pro - viding the InSight (Interior Exploration using Seismic Investigations, Geod- esy and Heat Transport) mission. InSight deployed a seismometer, named SEIS (Seismic Experiment for Interior Structures), which measures “Mars’ tectonic activity to learn more about its structure, for example the size of its core and the thickness of its mantle. ” 418 InSight landed on Mars in 2018 for  its planned two-year mission, and in April 2019, the SEIS seismometer de - tected and recorded the first “Marsquake, ” allowing scientists to study the slight tremors detected on the Martian surface. 
419 Number of Successful  Orbital Launches in 2019415  13 “I’m convinced that  in the future, if we were to get into a conflict with a peer or near-peer competitor, we’re going to have to fight for space superiority.” GENERAL JOHN RAYMOND,  CHIEF OF SPACE OPERA - TIONS AND COMMANDER OF U.S. SPACE COMMAND 416 . SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 202048 OTHERS Deployment of the SEIS Protection Dome on Mars. 
 nasa / jpl-caltech Recent events have triggered changes in France’s  overall space policy. In September 2018, France publicly charged Russia with interfering with the  operation of one of its satellites in GEO. The Athe - na-Fidus, a jointly operated French-Italian military  satellite, provides broadband military communica-tions. 
France alleged that the Russian satellite,  known as Luch or Olymp-K, maneuvered close  enough to Athena-Fidus in 2017 to intercept mili - tary communications. 420 fense Strategy in 2019. Among other things, the  French strategy calls for the creation of a Space  Command under the Air Force and renaming the  Air Force to the Air and Space Force. 
The strategy notes that “renewed analysis of the space environ - ment and its threats, risks and opportunities, as well as the recognition of the strategic nature of  the space assets for France force our country to re - visit its model in order to remain a leading space  power. ” The Space Defense Strategy further de - clares that France will establish a “space defense capacity” in order to “enable the armed forces to Following this public denunciation of Russian  space activities, France issued a new Space De -. 49 CHINA INDIA USA RUSSIA OTHERSSUCCESSFUL ORBITAL LAUNCHES PER YEAR BY COUNTRY (1957-2019) 020406080100120 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010 2019 impose a peaceful use of space, deter  unfriendly or hostile acts against our  space assets, and be able, as the case  may be, to defend our space-based in - terests. 
”422 France has also committed  to in creasing its military space budget  by 700 million euros between 2019 and  2025 to support the creation of Space  Command and pursue “active defense”  satellite technologies.423 The defense of  space assets appears to be in response to the interference France felt was caused by Luch.  In a speech announcing the new strate - gy, French Minister of the Armed Forces Florecne Parly spoke at length about  the changes. In some of the most direct  and specific language by a government  official from any nation on space de - fense, the defense minister said, “I want to be precise: active defence is not an offensive strategy, what it is about is  self-defence. 
” She went on to add that,  “If our satellites are threatened, we will consider dazzling those of our oppo - nents. We reserve the time and means of the response: this may involve the  use of high-power lasers deployed from  our satellites or from our patrol na - no-satellites. ” 424 Through these remarks  Parly sheds further light on France’s  plans to develop and deploy “body - guard” or “patrol” satellites to protect its space  assets, as well as its plans to  mount lasers on satellites in order to dazzle or blind satellites that may be  threatening French assets. 
 A laser mounted on satellites is theoret - ically possible but faces some techno - logical hurdles. Laura Grego from the  Union of Concerned Scientists ex - plained that “dazzling from accompa- nying satellites (probably not ‘nano’ satellites unless that definition is very  generous) or onboard might stop other  slow moving proximity operations sat - ellites from observing their satellite [targets] or to make it hard for them to  use lidar for getting really close. ” Dr. 
 Grego went on to assert that it would be hard to use lasers on cross-orbit attacks or direct-ascent ASAT weapons. 425  France’s public posture toward protect - ing its space capabilities is shifting. The  country’s leaders are indicating a move  toward active defense in space, which  has contributed to a broader public de - bate on the proper use and develop - ment of counterspace weapons. 
While countries like China and Russia have  been extensively developing offensive  counterspace weapons, such as jam- ming and spoofing capabilities, France  seems to be considering a different  strategy: defensive capabilities on or - bit. However,  the country’s policies ap - pear to be in flux, and there is little pub - lic indication of how quickly France  plans to pursue this new direction.Figure 14: Space Orbital Launches from Oth- er Nations (1957 - 2019). This figure includes  orbital launches from nations such as New  Zealand and Japan, as well as the European  Space Agency. 
 spacetrack.org / csis aerospace  security421. SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 202050 OTHERS ISRAEL In July 2019, the United States and Isra - el jointly tested the Arrow-3 missile in - terceptor. While not publicly listed as a  direct-ascent ASAT weapon, “the Ar - row-3 interceptor successfully demon - strated an engagement capability against the exo-atmospheric target during the test. 
” 426 Speculation of the  Arrow-3 system being used as an ASAT weapon began in 2009 when leading space military experts pointed out that  “Israel’s planned Arrow-3 high-altitude  ballistic missile defense system could relatively easily be adapted to destroy  Iranian spy satellites if and when Tehran  manages to deploy high-resolution or - biting vehicles. ” 427  The Israeli company Regulus claims to have spoofed a Tesla Model 3 using the Navigate on Autopilot (NOA) system. 428  The purpose of the NOA system is to fol- low a predetermined route maintained by using GPS and Google Maps technolo - gy. 
The spoofing targeted the relation - ship between the Tesla Model 3’s NOA  system and the GPS it relied on to main- tain autopilot. The test itself took place  on an interstate and made the car be - lieve it was further along on the route,  causing it to make an incorrect turn into  a rest stop instead of the planned exit further down the road. 429 In response to  these claims, Tesla stated that the test  was only a promotional stunt and that  they have no safety concerns with the Tesla-3’s NOA. 
430 Israeli Missile Interceptor, Arrow-3, was   tested July 2019 out of the Pacific Spaceport in  Alaska.431 Designed to intercept medium-range  ballistic missiles, the Arrow-3 system has been  speculated to also be capable of performing  direct-ascent anti-satellite operations.432  missile defense agency Israel has also begun development of a  ground-based and plane-mounted high-en- ergy laser defense system designed to tar - get threats in the air. Currently it has no stat - ed counterspace implications, but the technology could be adapted to perform  some counterspace operations. With a power level of 50-100kW, this airborne laser  could be capable of da Zzling or even  blinding satellites in LEO. 
433. 51 Mediterranean Sea LibyaTurkeyGreece East of Malta EgyptValletta MisurataTripoliSabratha FieldPireaus Larnaca AlexandriaEl Shaikh Mobarak Port SuezDamietta Port Said THE JAPANESE  GOVERNMENT  IS DEBATING OPTIONS TO DEVELOP A CO-ORBITAL SATELLITE DEFENSE SYSTEM.JAPAN In the past year, Japan has made progress  toward setting up a new Space Domain Mission Unit, a military organization  meant to protect Japanese space assets  as more countries are moving to further  weaponize space through the testing and  development of kinetic and non-kinetic weapons. 434 Citing Japan’s need “to pro - tect itself from potential threats as rivals develop missiles and other technology, ” Prime Minister Shinzo Abe said this new  organization will work closely with its  American counterpart, the United States Space Force. 
The Space Domain Mission  Unit will also cooperate with the newly  re-established U.S. Space Command and Japan’s own civil space agency, the Japan  Aerospace Exploration Agency (JAXA). 435  With a small core established in 2020, the  Space Domain Mission Unit plans to be fully operational in 2022 to “bolster capa- bility and system[s] in order to secure  space superiority. 
” 436 After its establish - ment, the Space Domain Mission Unit will be responsible for operating the ground  u.s. coast guard navigation center / emily tiemeyerSpoofing in the Mediterranean Sea  CIVIL AND COMMERCIAL MARINE GPS USERS  reported consistent loss of GPS signal in  the Mediterranean Sea and surrounding areas throughout 2019. These outages ranged  from the coast of Libya to Greece and Egypt’s Suez Canal. 
The U.S. Maritime Administra - tion issued alerts that specifically mention the possibility of GPS interference in the East - ern and Central Mediterranean regions.441 The increased instances of GPS jamming have  led captains to suppress their AIS data and switch to receive only. This has led to a de - crease in situational awareness on the sea.442  stations necessary to conduct these de - fense operations.437 Japan is also reportedly considering the  development of active defenses to protect its space systems. 
Using robotic arm tech-nology developed by JAXA, the Japanese government is debating options to devel-op a co-orbital satellite defense system to deter attacks on Japanese satellites. This system, which would intercept an attack - ing satellite in order to defend another Japanese space asset, could be launched as early as the mid-2020s. 438 The govern- ment is also reportedly considering op - tions to disable hostile satellites through electronic and cyber means. 
439  In April of 2019, Japan deployed a Hayabu- sa-2 probe system to an asteroid, Ryugu, which  contained a small carry-on impac - tor (SCI). The SCI is an explosive projectile able to be launched at the asteroid to form an artificial crater. This explosive, which created rubble for Hayabusa-2 to collect and bring back to Earth as samples, could be placed on a satellite and be used as a co-orbital anti-satellite weapon. 
440. SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 202052 OTHERS Arabian Sea Atlantic  OceanPacific  Ocean /S.sc/I.sc/N.sc/G.sc/A.sc/P.sc/O.sc/R.sc/E.sc /F.sc/E.sc/B.sc/R.sc/U.sc/A.sc/R.sc/Y.sc /two.sc/zero.sc/one.sc/eight.sc/H.sc/A.sc/M.sc/B.sc/U.sc/R.sc/G.sc/A.sc/P.sc/R.sc/I.sc/L.sc /two.sc/zero.sc/one.sc/seven.sc Route of the container ship used  to detect and record interference  to GPS and other satellite  navigation systemsAFRICA OCEANIAASIAEUROPE UNITED   KINGDOM The United Kingdom has be - gun restructuring its military  space organization, although it does not plan to create a separate military service for space. The current restructur - ing effort should result in a two-star major general be - coming the director of Space within the Ministry of Defence, supported by policy and capa- bilities teams. 
443 This comes  after the U.K. government de - clared space as part of its criti - cal national infrastructure in  2015 and more recently as a  warfighting domain.444 While  the UK has not explicitly en - dorsed the development of  space defense systems and counterspace weapons, the  requisite technology is within  its reach. For example, the United Kingdom is developing its own  high-energy laser for anti-drone and mis - sile defense. 
These lasers, while not di - rectly cited as counterspace weapons, have the potential to be further devel - oped into counterspace capabilities. 445 NON-STATE ACTORS In 2019, reports emerged of position, navigation, and timing (PNT) jamming in northeastern China, disrupting civilian  aircraft flying over the area. Authorities  were able to trace the jamming origin to  a farm in Heilongjiang province near the  city of Harbin. 
Frustrated by a local gang’s hijinks of using drones to suppos - edly infect local farmers’ pigs with Afri - can swine fever—a disease deadly to  pigs, but harmless to humans—the farm - er used PNT signal jamming to protect  his herd. The gangs were infecting local  pigs to force farmers to lower the prices  and then would resell the pork to the  public as “healthy” for the full price. 446Figure 15: The Journey of the  Basle Express. 
The Basle Ex - press was a cargo ship outfitted  with GPS receivers designed to  track and collect GPS interfer - ence. The ship travelled from  Germany to Singapore tracking  and detailing many instances of  GPS interference.  german aerospace center. 
53 In 2018, at Hong Kong’s 10-year celebra - tion of the Wine and Dine Festival, a  drone light show over Victoria Harbor was disrupted by GPS jamming, which caused 46 drones to fall from the sky, re - sulting in $127,500 in damages. 447 In re - sponse to questions about the incident, the board’s executive director, Anthony Lau Chun-hon, said that “the [jamming] signals were so strong that many of them just dropped from the air. ” 448 In April of 2017, a commercial container ship, the Basle Express, left Hamburg,  Germany on a research mission equipped with receivers designed to pick up on in - terference. 
The Basle Express mission was designed to sense levels of jamming and spoofing in different areas of the world. 449 While travelling around Europe,  the Middle East, Africa, and Asia, the ship’s crew detected strong interference “at some of the world’s largest seaports, including Jeddah in Saudi Arabia, Singa - pore, Hong Kong, and Shanghai, and less often, on the open sea. ” 450 With many  commercial vessels poorly suited to op - erating in a world where GPS is not guar - anteed, some experts are recommend - ing that new anti-jamming systems will need to be created to ensure that com-mercial shipping can continue unthreat - ened in an increasingly technology-de - pendent world. 
451 SUMMARY In the last year, more states are consider - ing the development of offensive and de - fensive counterspace capabilities to pro - tect space systems from attacks. Nations are moving to reorganize their national security space enterprise, as the United States did in 2019, to better address the growing uncertainty and threats in the space domain. Jamming and spoofing technologies are also being used around the world by non-state actors in both conflict zones and thriving seaports, to gain military and economic advantage. 
Collectively, these developments are making the space environment more dy - namic and uncertain—a trend that is likely to continue in the coming years.. SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 202054 WHAT TO WATCH WHAT TO  WATCH THIS YEAR’S EDITION OF THE CSIS SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT   finds that threats to space systems are growing as more countries  and non-state actors acquire counterspace capabilities and, in some cases, employ them in more ways. While this report primari - ly details the developments in counterspace weapons that have occured in the last year, some of these developments have been ongoing for several years. 
This section highlights the types of threats and counterspace activi - ties where more developments are expected to occur in the coming months and years. Electronic counterspace weapons continue to proliferate at a rapid pace in  both how they are used and who is using them. Satellite jamming and spoof - ing devices are becoming part of the every-day arsenal for countries that want to operate in the gray zone—i.e., below the threshold of overt conflict. 
The jamming and spoofing of satellites has become somewhat common, and without strong repercussions these adverse activities could gradually become normalized. The fact that Russian President Vladimir Putin appears to travel with GPS jamming devices in his motorcade and that China ap - pears to be spoofing GPS signals to conceal illicit activities in its own ports demonstrate how important and integrated these capabilities have become at all levels. One should expect that the rate of satellite jamming and spoof - ing incidents will only increase as these capabilities continue to proliferate and become more sophisticated in the coming years.. 
55 One of the most significant counterspace  developments in the past year was the In - dian test of a direct-ascent ASAT weapon. This incident proved that a kinetic test done in a way that minimizes orbital de - bris may not generate the same degree of diplomatic backlash as the Chinese ASAT test in 2007. Moreover, the Indian test and how it was received could incentivize other nations, such as Pakistan, to devel-op and demonstrate ASAT capabilities of their own. 
Russia also continued to step up its co-or - bital activities in the past year. The Rus - sian Luch satellite continued its close  inspection of satellites in geostationary  orbit, despite international denuncia - tion of its activities. Russia also placed a widely-reported inspector around a clas - sified U.S. 
Government satellite in low Earth orbit. Both the Indian ASAT test and Russia’s co-orbital activities may provide further incentive for nations to develop and deploy defensive counterspace capa-bilities of their own, as France announced it intends to do. Nations may also seek to draw distinctions between offensive and defensive counterspace weapons in order to justify the latter while delegitimizing the former. 
As nations reevaluate the threats to their  space systems, some have moved to reor - ganize existing space organizations or cre - ate new military organizations to better focus on space as a warfighting domain. France is creating a Space Command within its military and renaming its Air Force the Air and Space Force, while the United Kingdom may not be far behind in reorganizing its space forces. In the com - ing years, more nations may continue to reorganize and elevate space forces with - in their militaries both to focus attention internally and to signal externally. 
A final area to watch in the coming year is  how the United States continues to adapt to face threats in the space domain. The U.S. military is in the midst of what is ar - guably the most significant reorganiza-tion since the Goldwater-Nichols Act of 1986. 
With the re-establishment of United States Space Command as a geographic combatant command for space and the new establishment of the Space Force as an independent military service for space, many things are in flux within the military space community. While there is great opportunity in this reorganization process, there are many risks as well. A chief concern is that an excessive focus on building bureaucracy (and attempts to limit bureaucracy) could distract sen-ior leaders’ attention from the evolving threats to space systems and the U.S. 
military’s efforts to counter these threats. Key developments to watch within the United States are updates to space doc - trine, strategy, and policy and invest - ments in new space capabilities and missions. Developments in these areas would be a clear indication that the reor - ganization efforts put in place in 2019 are part of a fundamental shift in the U.S. 
mil - itary’s overall approach to making space more defendable.. SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 202056 ABOUT THE AUTHORS TODD HARRISON is the director of the Aerospace Security Project and the director of  Defense Budget Analysis at CSIS. As a senior fellow in the International Security Program, he leads the Center’s efforts to provide in-depth, nonpartisan research and analysis of space security, air power, and defense funding issues. 
Mr. Harrison joined CSIS from the Center for Strategic and Budgetary Assessments, where he was a senior fellow for de - fense budget studies. He previously worked at Booz Allen Hamilton where he consulted for the U.S. 
Air Force on satellite communications systems and supported a variety of other clients evaluating the performance of acquisition programs. Prior to Booz Allen, he worked for a small startup (AeroAstro Inc.) developing advanced space technologies and as a management consultant at Diamond Cluster International. Mr. 
Harrison served as a captain in the U.S. Air Force Reserves. He is a graduate of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology with both a BS and an MS in aeronautics and astronautics. 
KAITLYN JOHNSON is an associate fellow and associate director of the CSIS Aerospace  Security Project. Ms. Johnson manages the team’s strategic planning and research agenda. 
Her research specializes in topics such as space security, military space sys - tems, commercial space policy, and U.S. air dominance. Previously, Ms. 
Johnson has written on national security space reorganization, threats against space assets, the commercialization of space, escalation and deterrence dynamics, and defense acqui - sition trends. Ms. Johnson holds an MA from American University in U.S. 
foreign policy and national security studies, with a concentration in defense and space security, and a BS from the Georgia Institute of Technology in international affairs. THOMAS G. ROBERTS is an adjunct fellow with the CSIS Aerospace Security Project, a  graduate researcher at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) Space Systems Laboratory, and an SM candidate in MIT’s Department of Aeronautics and Astronautics and Technology and Policy Program. 
His research interests include orbital mechanics, astrodynamics, and international space policy. Previously, Mr. Roberts has written on space-based missile defense, threats against space-based assets, and human space - flight programs. 
His work has appeared in The Atlantic, War on the Rocks, The Bulletin of  the Atomic Scientists, and other publications. Mr. Roberts holds a BA in astrophysical sciences with honors and an undergraduate certificate in Russian studies from Prince - ton University. 
In 2015, he was named a Harry S. Truman Scholar. TYLER WAY is a research intern for the CSIS Aerospace Security Project. 
His research  focuses on the applications of space within national security as well as the role of space in socioeconomic development. He is currently a graduate student at George Washington University’s Elliott School, pursuing an MA in International Science and Technology Policy in the Space Policy Institute. Tyler holds a BA in International Stud - ies from Bowling Green State University in Bowling Green, Ohio. 
MAKENA YOUNG is a research associate with the CSIS Aerospace Security Project. Her  research interests include international collaboration, space security, and orbital de - bris. Prior to joining CSIS, Ms. 
Young worked for the Federal Aviation Administration as an aerospace engineer, focusing on automatic dependent surveillance-broadcast cer - tification and integration in small aircraft. She holds a BS in aeronautical and astronau - tical engineering from Purdue University with minors in international relations and environmental engineering.. 57 APPENDIX I LIST OF ACRONYMS USED A2/AD Anti-Access/Area Denial AEHF Advanced Extremely High Frequency AIS Automatic Identification System APT 28 Russian Hacker Group ASAT Anti-Satellite BBC British Broadcasting Corporation C4ADS Center for Advanced Defense Studies C4ISR Command, Control, Communications, Computers (C4), Intelligence, Surveil- lance, and Reconnaissance (ISR) CASC China Aerospace Science and Technology Corporation CHEOS China High-resolution Earth Observation System CNES National Centre for Space Studies (France) CNSA China National Space Administration CSS Chinese Space Station DCA Defence Cyber Agency (India) DDOS Distributed Denial of Service DIA Defense Intelligence Agency DoD U.S. 
Department of Defense DPRK Democratic People’s Republic of Korea DSA Defence Space Agency (India) DSN Deep Space Network DSRO Defence Space Research Organization (India) EMP Electromagnetic Pulse ESA European Space Agency EW Electronic Warfare FSO Federal Protective Service GBS Global Broadcast Service GEO Geosynchronous Orbit GNSS Global Navigation Satellite System (Russia) GPS Global Positioning System GSLV Geosynchronous Satellite Launch Vehicle HPM High Powered Microwave ICBM Intercontinental Ballistic Missile IRGC Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps  IS Istrebitel Sputnikov (Russia) ISA Israel Space Agency ISRO Indian Space Research Organization ISS International Space Station. SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 202058 JAXA Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency JCPOA Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action JPL Jet Propulsion Laboratory JSOC Joint Special Operations Command KCNA Korean Central News Agency (North Korea) LEO Low Earth Orbit MEO Medium Earth Orbit MMW Millimeter Wave NADA National Aerospace Development Administration (North Korea) NASA National Aeronautics and Space Administration NIIPKh Scientific Research Institute of Applied Chemistry (Russia) NOA Navigate on Autopilot NOAA National Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration NOTAM Notice to Airmen NRO U.S. National Reconnaissance Office PDV-Mk II Prithvi Delivery Vehicle Mark-II (India) PLA People’s Liberation Army (China) PNT Positioning, Navigation, and Timing PSLV Polar Satellite Launch Vehicle RF Radio Frequency RGB Reconnaissance General Bureau (North Korea) RPO Rendezvous and Proximity Operations SASTINDState Administration for Science, Technology, and Industry   for National Defense SATCOM Satellite Communications SCI Small Carry-On Impactor SEIS Seismic Experiment for Interior Structures SLV Space Launch Vehicle SSF Strategic Support Force (China) SSLV Small Satellite Launch Vehicle (India) SSO Sun-Synchronous Orbit TEL Transporter erector-launcher UH Ultra High Frequency UK United Kingdom VOA Voice of America WGS Widespread Global SATCOM (Satellite Communications). 
59 ENDNOTES TYPES OF COUNTERSPACE WEAPONS 1 Offic e of the President of the United States, National Security Strategy (Washington, DC: December 2017), 31, https://www.whitehouse.gov/ wp-content/uploads/2017/12/NSS-Final-12-18-2017-0905.pdf . 2 Offic e of Technology Assessment, Anti-Satellite Weapons, Countermeasures, and Arms Control (Washington, DC: Government Printing  Office, September 1985), 7, https://apps.dtic.mil/dtic/tr/fulltext/u2/a335693.pdf. 3 Brian Garino and Jane Gibson, “Space System Threats, ” . 
in AU-18 Space Primer (Maxwell Air Force Base: Air University Press, September  2009), 277, http://space.au.af.mil/au-18-2009/au-18_chap21.pdf. 4 David Wright, Laura Grego, and Lisbeth Gronlund, The Physics of Space Security: A Reference Manual (Cambridge, MA: American Acad- emy of Arts and Sciences, 2005), 131-132, https://www.amacad.org/sites/default/files/publication/downloads/Physics_of_Space_ Secu rity.pdf.  5 Steven James Lambakis, On the Edge of Earth: The Future of American Space Power (Lexington, KY: University Press of Kentucky, 2001), 123. 
6 Garino and Gibson, “Space System Threats, ” 274-275. 7 Sydney J. Freedberg, Jr., “US Jammed Own Satellites 261Times; What If Enemy Did?, ” Breaking Defense, December 2, 2015, http:// break   ingdefense.com/2015/12/us-jammed-own-satellites-261-times-in-2015-what-if-an-enemy-tried/. 
8 Richard B. Langley et al., “Innovation: GNSS Spoofing Detection, ” GPS World, June 1, 2013, http://gpsworid.com/innovation-gnss   -spoofing-detection-correlating-carrier-phase-with-ra pid-antenna-motion/. 9 Allie Sanchez, “Cyber Attacks Available for Hire, ” Insurance Business America, April 3, 2017, https://www.insurancebusinessmag. 
com/us/ news/cyber/cyber-attacks-available-for-hire-64287.aspx. CHINA 10 “ Space Environment: Total Launches by Country, ” Aerospace Security Program, last updated January 2, 2020, https://aerospace.csis.org/ data/space-environment-total-launches-by-country/. 11 Dav e Makichuk, “China’s Bold Space Program Flourishing: Article, ” Asia Times, November 5, 2019, https://www.asiatimes.com/2019/11/ article/chinas-bold-space-program-flourishing. 
 12 “ Space Environment: Total Launches by Country, ” Aerospace Security Program. 13 “China r eveals space plan for 2020, ” Xinhua News Agency, January 17, 2020, http://www.xinhuanet.com/english/2020-01/17/c_138713906.htm. 14 Offic e of the Secretary of Defense, Annual Report to Congress: Military Power of the People’s Republic of China 2019  (Washington, DC: U.S. 
De - partment of Defense, May 2019), 49, https://media.defense.gov/2018/Aug/16/2001955282/-1/-1/1/2018-CHINA-MILITARY-POWER-REPORT .PDF .  15 Andr ew Jones, “China’s First Mars Spacecraft Undergoing Integration for 2020 Launch, ” SpaceNews, May 29, 2019, https://spacenews.com/ chinas-first-mars-spacecraft-undergoing-integration-for-2020-launch; Andrew Jones, “Rocket Nears Spaceport for Chinese Space Station Test Launch, ” SpaceNews, January 31, 2020, https://spacenews.com/rocket-nears-spaceport-for-chinese-space-station-test-launch/.  16  Xinhua Ne ws Agency “China’s Long March-5B carrier rocket arrives at launch site, ” China.org, February 6, 2020, http://www.china.org.cn/ china/2020-02/06/content_75677139.htm. 
17 Jones, “R ocket Nears Spaceport for Chinese Space Station Test Launch. ”  18 Namr ata Goswami, “China’s Future Space Ambitions: What’s Ahead?, ”  Diplomat, November 4, 2019, https://thediplomat.com/2019/11/chi o- nas-future-space-ambitions-whats-ahead/. 19 “ Space Environment: Total Payloads Launched by Country, ” accessed February 12, 2020. 
20 “ What’s driving China’s race to build a space station?, ” ChinaPower, CSIS, December 7, 2016,  https://chinapower.csis.org/chinese-space-station/.     21 Andr ew Jones, “Chinese Space Station Core Module Passes Review but Faces Delays, ” SpaceNews, September 12, 2019, https://spacenews. com/chinese-space-station-core-module-passes-review-but-faces-delays/. 
 22 Ibid.; Y amei Liwei Yang, “China readying for space station era, ” Xinhua News Agency, July 8, 2018, http://www.xinhuanet.com/en x- glish/2018-07/08/c_137310103.htm. 23 L udovic Ehret, “China Unveils New ‘Heavenly Palace’ Space Station as ISS Days Numbered, ” Phys.org, November 6, 2018, https://phys.org/ news/2018-11-china-unveils-heavenly-palace-space.html.   24 Offic e of Outer Space Affairs, “The United Nations/China Cooperation on the Utilization of the China Space Station, ” United Nations, June  19, 2020, https://www.unoosa.org/oosa/en/ourwork/psa/hsti/chinaspacestation/1st_cycle_2018.html. 
25 U .S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, “2019 Report to Congress of the U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Com - mission” (Washington, DC: U.S. Government Publishing Office, 2019), 368, https://www.uscc.gov/sites/default/files/2019-11/2019%20 Annual%20Report%20to%20Congress.pdf;  Andrew Jones, “China, Russia to Cooperate on Lunar Orbiter, Landing Missions, ” Space News, September 19, 2019, https://spacenews.com/china-russia-to-cooperate-on-lunar-orbiter-landing-missions/.  26  Thomas G. 
R oberts,  Spaceports of the World, Aerospace Security Project, CSIS, accessed February 12, 2020, https://aerospace.csis.org/data/ spaceports-of-the-world/. 27 Andr ew Jones, “China Creates Commercial Space Alliance, Expands Launch Complex, ” SpaceNews, December 20, 2019, https://spacenews. com/china-creates-commercial-space-alliance-expands-launch-complex/. 
SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 202060 28 R oberts, “Spaceports of the World. ” 29 Meng Jing, “China R olls out Rules on Commercial Space Rocket Development, ” South China Morning Post, June 12, 2019, https://www. scmp.com/tech/science-research/article/3014157/china-rolls-out-rules-guide-development-spacex-style. 
 30 Jing, “China R olls out Rules on Commercial Space Rocket Development”; Andrew Jones, “Chinese Commercial Launch Sector Regulations  Released, New Launch Vehicle Plans Unveiled, ” SpaceNews, July 2, 2019, https://spacenews.com/chinese-commercial-launch-sector-regu l- lations-released-new-launch-vehicle-plans-unveiled.  31 Mar co Aliberti, When China Goes to the Moon... (Switzerland: Springer International Publishing, 2015), 7-19, https://www.springer.com/cda/ content/document/cda_downloaddocument/9783319194721-c1.pdf?SGWID=0-0-45-1513274-p177396349. 
 32 Dennis J . Blasko, “Steady as She Goes: China’s New Defense White Paper, ” War on the Rocks, August 9, 2019, https://warontherocks. com/2019/08/steady-as-she-goes-chinas-new-defense-white-paper . 
 33 Li Jiay ao, ed., “China’s National Defense in the New Era, ” Ministry of National Defense of the People’s Republic of China, Xinhua News Agen - cy, July 24, 2019, http://eng.mod.gov.cn/news/2019-07/24/content_4846443.htm.  34 Ibid. 35 The S tate Council Information Office of the People’s Republic of China, China’s Military Strategy (Beijing, China: People’s Republic of China,  May 2015), http://eng.mod.gov.cn/Press/2015-05/26/content_4586805.htm. 
 36 K evin Pollpeter, Michael Chase, and Eric Heginbotham, The Creation of the PLA Strategic Support Force and Its Implications for Chinese Mili - tary Space Operations (Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation, 2017), 3-4, https://www.rand.org/content/dam/rand/pubs/research_reports/ RR2000/RR2058/RAND_RR2058.pdf .  37 Ibid., 7. 38 Offic e of the Secretary of Defense, “Annual Report to Congress: Military Power of the People’s Republic of China 2019, ” 13. 
39 Unit ed States Congress, U.S. - China Economic and Security Review Commission, Hearing on China’s Military Reforms and Modernization:  Implications for the United States, 115th Cong., 2nd sess., February 15, 2018, 40, https://www.uscc.gov/sites/default/files/transcripts/Hear w- ing%20Transcript%20-%20February%2015%2C%202018.pdf .  40 Na tional Air and Space Intelligence Center,  Competing in Space (Wright Patterson Air Force Base: Ohio, December 2018), 21, https://media. 
defense.gov/2019/Jan/16/2002080386/-1/-1/1/190115-F-NV711-0002.PDF . 41 U .S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, 2019 Report to Congress, 375. 42 Offic e of the Secretary of Defense, Annual Report to Congress: Military Power of the People’s Republic of China 2019 , 49. 
43 U .S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, “2015 Report to Congress of the U.S.-China Economic and Security Review  Commission” (Washington, DC: U.S. Government Publishing Office, 2015), 294, https://www.uscc.gov/sites/default/files/annual_re s- ports/2015%20Annual%20Report%20to%20Congress.PDF .  44 Independent analysis b y Kaitlyn Johnson; data from “Space-Track, ” Space-Track, www.space-track.org. 
 45 Brian Weeden and Vic toria Samson, eds., Global Counterspace Capabilities: An Open Source Assessment (Broomfield, Colorado: Secure  World Foundation, 2018), 1–11, https://swfound.org/media/206118/swf_global_counterspace_april2018.pdf .  46 U .S. Defense Intelligence Agency, China Military Power: Modernizing a Force to Fight and Win , (Washington, DC: 2018), 43, http://www.dia.mil/ Portals/27/Documents/News/Military%20Power%20Publications/China_Military_Power_FINAL_ 5MB_20190103.pdf. 
 47 U .S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, 2015 Report to Congress, 294. 48 “ SC-19 Anti-Ballistic Missile Interceptor, ” GlobalSecurity.org, last updated July 25, 2016, https://www.globalsecurity.org/space/world/chi a- na/sc-19-abm.htm. 49 Li Bin, “ What China’s Missile Intercept Test Means, ” Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, February 4, 2013, https://carnegieendow s- ment.org/2013/02/04/what-china-s-missile-intercept-test-means-pub-50833. 
 50 Brian Weeden, “ Anti-Satellite Tests in Space - The Case of China, ” Secure World Foundation, updated May 18, 2015, https://swfound.org/ media/115643/china_asat_fact_sheet_may2015.pdf .  51 “China T ests Missile Intercept System, ” Nuclear Threat Initiative, January 28, 2013, https://www.nti.org/gsn/article/china-tests-missile-inte I- cept-system; Bin, “What China’s Missile Intercept Test Means. ” 52 Mik e Gruss, “Pentagon Says 2013 Chinese Launch May Have Tested Antisatellite Technology, ” SpaceNews, May 14, 2015, https://spacenews. 
com/pentagon-says-2013-chinese-launch-may-have-tested-antisatellite-technology .  53 Weeden, “ Anti-Satellite Tests in Space - The Case of China. ”  54 Gruss, “P entagon Says 2013 Chinese Launch May Have Tested Antisatellite Technology. 
” 55 Mik e Gruss, “U.S. State Department: China Tested Anti-Satellite Weapon, ” SpaceNews, January 30, 2015, https://spacenews. com/41413us-state-department-china-tested-anti-satellite-weapon. 
 56 Bill Gertz, “China T ests Anti-Satellite Missile, ” Washington Free Beacon, November 9, 2015, https://freebeacon.com/national-security/chi s- na-tests-anti-satellite-missile/.  57 Ibid. 58 Bill Gertz, “China Carries Out Flight T est of Anti-Satellite Missile, ” Washington Free Beacon, August 2, 2017, https://freebeacon.com/nation u- al-security/china-carries-flight-test-anti-satellite-missile. 
 59 Ankit P anda, “Revealed: The Details of China’s Latest Hit-To-Kill Interceptor Test, ” Diplomat, February 21, 2018, https://thediplomat. com/2018/02/revealed-the-details-of-chinas-latest-hit-to-kill-interceptor-test .  60 U .S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, 2019 Report to Congress, 382.. 
61 61 Ibid. 62 Brian Weeden, “China ’s BX-1 microsatellite: a litmus test for space weaponization, ” The Space Review, October 20, 2008, http://www.thes “- pacereview.com/article/1235/1.  63 Weeden and Samson, eds ., Global Counterspace Capabilities, 1-2. 
64 U .S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, 2015 Report to Congress, 295.  65 Brian Weeden, “Dancing in the dark : The orbital rendezvous of SJ-12 and SJ-06F, ” The Space Review, August 10, 2010, http://www.thespa - cereview.com/article/1689/1. 66 P ollpeter, et al., The Creation of the PLA Strategic Support Force, 10. 
67 “China Suc cessfully Launches Three Satellites, ” Economic Times, July 20, 2013, https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/china-successful /- ly-launches-three-satellites/articleshow/21187532.cms.  68 U .S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, 2015 Report to Congress, 295; Weeden and Samson, eds., Global Counterspace  Capabilities, 1-2. 69 Ibid.; “China ’s new Orbital Debris Clean-Up Satellite raises Space Militarization Concerns, ” Spaceflight 101, June 29, 2016, http://space 0- flight101.com/long-march-7-maiden-launch/aolong-1-asat-concerns/. 
 70 S tephen Chen, “How China’s Scavenger Satellites Are Being Used to Develop AI Weapons, ” South China Morning Post, April 22, 2019, https:// www.scmp.com/news/china/science/article/3007186/how-chinas-scavenger-satellites-are-being-used-develop-ai.  71 “China announc es success in technology to refuel satellites in orbit, ” Xinhua News Agency, June 30, 2016, http://www.xinhuanet.com/ english/2016-06/30/c_135479061.htm.  72 Int ernal CSIS analysis by Thomas G. 
Roberts; data from “Space-Track, ” www.space-track.org.  73 S tephen Chen, “How China’s Scavenger Satellites Are Being Used to Develop AI Weapons. ” 74 S J-17 is estimated to have a mass around 4,000kg. 
 Gunter Dirk Krebs, “SJ 17, ” Gunter’s Space Page, last updated July 21, 2019, https:// space.skyrocket.de/doc_sdat/sj-17.htm.  75 Int ernational Institute for Strategic Studies, The Military Balance 2017 (London: Routledge, 2017), 19-26, https://www.iiss.org/publications/ the-military-balance/the-military-balance-2017.  76 A aron Mehta, “Chinese Threats Necessitate New Space Structures, Shanahan Warns, ” Defense News, April 9, 2019, https://www.defense t- news.com/space/2019/04/09/chinese-threats-necessitate-new-space-structures-shanahan-warns. 
 77 Daniel R. Co ats, “Worldwide Threat Assessment of the US Intelligence Community, ”  Office of the Director of National Intelligence, February  13, 2018, 13, https://www.dni.gov/files/documents/Newsroom/Testimonies/2018-ATA---Unclassified-SSCI.pdf . 78 V ago Muradian, “China Tried to Blind U.S. 
Sats with Laser, ” Defense News, September 25, 2006, https://www.ar15.com/forums/general/Chi c- na_Tried_To_Blind_U_S__Sats_With_Laser/5-501978/.  79 Andr ea Shalal-Esa, “China Jamming Test Sparks U.S. Satellite Concerns, ” Reuters, October 5, 2006, as quoted in Yousaf Butt, “Effects of  Chinese Laser Ranging on Imaging Satellites, ” Science & Global Security, 17:1, 2009, 20-35. 
 80 E dwin Cartlidge, “Physicists are planning to build lasers so powerful they could rip apart empty space, ” Science, January 24, 2018, http:// www.sciencemag.org/news/2018/01/physicists-are-planning-build-lasers-so-powerful-they-could-rip-apart-empty-space .  81 Timo thy Grayson, “Prepared Statement of Dr. Timothy Grayson, ” Testimony before the U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commis - sion, Hearing on China’s Advanced Weapons, February 23, 2017, 70, https://www.uscc.gov/sites/default/files/transcripts/China%27s%20 Advanced%20Weapons.pdf . 
  82 John J . Raymond, (remarks, Mitchell Institute for Aerospace Studies, Washington, DC), reported by Mandy Mayfield, “JUST IN: Space Com - mander Warns Chinese Lasers Could Blind U.S. Satellites, ” National Defense Magazine, September 27, 2019,  https://www.nationaldefen t- semagazine.org/articles/2019/9/27/space-commander-warns-chinese-lasers-could-blind-us-satellites. 
 83 U .S. Defense Intelligence Agency, Challenges to Security in Space, (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Defense Intelligence Agency, February 2019), 20,  http://www.dia.mil/Portals/27/Documents/News/Military%20Power%20Publications/Space_Threat_V14_020119_sm.pdf . 
 84 David D. Chen, “Opening S tatement of Mr. David Chen, ” Testimony before the U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, Feb - ruary 23, 2017, 75, https://www.uscc.gov/sites/default/files/transcripts/China%27s%20Advanced%20Weapons.pdf . 
 85 Mark S tokes, “Prepared Statement of Mark A. Stokes, ” Testimony before the U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, April  25, 2019, 4, https://www.uscc.gov/sites/default/files/Mark%20Stokes%20USCC%2025%20April.pdf . 86 Dylan Maly asov, “China Discloses New Directed-Energy Weapon Development, ” Defence Blog, April 4, 2019,  87 Liu X uanzun, “Arms Firm Makes Artificial Diamonds That Could Be Used in Laser Weapons, ” Global Times, December 4, 2019, https://www. 
globaltimes.cn/content/1172265.shtml.  88 Vinay ak Bhat, “These Futuristic Chinese Space Denial Weapons Can Disable or Destroy Opposing Satellites, ” The Print, March 23, 2019,  https://theprint.in/defence/these-futuristic-chinese-space-denial-weapons-can-disable-or-destroy-opposing-satellites/210212/.  89 Bill Gertz, “ Satellite Photos Show Chinese Anti-Satellite Laser Base, ” Washington Free Beacon, March 31, 2019, https://freebeacon.com/ national-security/satellite-photos-show-chinese-anti-satellite-laser-base/. 
 90 Liu Zhen, “Chinese Milit ary Hints at Plans for Airborne Laser Attack Weapon, ” South China Morning Post, January 7, 2020, https://www. scmp.com/news/china/military/article/3045066/chinese-military-hints-plans-airborne-laser-attack-weapon.  91 Richar d D. 
Fisher, Jr., “China’s Progress with Directed Energy Weapons, ” Testimony before the U.S.-China Economic and Security Review  Commission, February 23, 2017, 9, https://www.uscc.gov/sites/default/files/Fisher_Combined.pdf . 92 U .S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, 2015 Report to Congress, 298.. SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 202062 93 U .S. 
Defense Intelligence Agency, Challenges to Security in Space, 20. 94 Offic e of the Secretary of Defense, Annual Report to Congress: Military Power of the People’s Republic of China 2018  (Washington, DC: U.S. De - partment of Defense, May 2018), 21, https://media.defense.gov/2018/Aug/16/2001955282/-1/-1/1/2018-CHINA-MILITARY-POWER-REPORT . 
PDF .  95 U .S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, 2015 Report to Congress, 297-298. 96 U .S. 
Defense Intelligence Agency, Challenges to Security in Space, 20; Lin Jinshun et al., “Study on Countermeasure against Satellite  Adaptive Null-Steering Technique, ” Aerospace Electronic Warfare 26, no. 3 (March 2010): 1-4, http://en.cnki.com.cn/Article_en/CJFD-Total-HTDZ201003000.htm; and H. Wang, “Analysis on Anti-jamming Measures of Mobile User Objective System, ” Radio Communica - tions Technology 35, no. 
2 (2009): 46-49. 97  Lin Jin-shun, e t al., “Countermeasure Technology for MMW Satellite Links, ” Aerospace Electronic Warfare, October 2012, 20–22, http:// en.cnki.com.cn/Article_en/CJFDTotal-HTDZ201205006.htm, as quoted in David D. Chen, “Opening Statement of Mr. 
David Chen, ” 82. 98 Bill Gertz, “Inside the Ring: China t argets Global Hawk drone, ” Washington Times, December 11, 2013, https://www.washingtontimes. com/news/2013/dec/11/inside-the-ring-china-targets-global-hawk-drone/. 
99 Liu X uanzun, “China Capable of Defending against Deadly Drone Attacks: Experts, ” Global Times, January 5, 2020, https://www.globaltimes. cn/content/1175804.shtml.  100 Michael R. 
Gor don and Jeremy Page, “China Installed Military Jamming Equipment on Spratly Islands, U.S. Says, ” Wall Street Journal, April  9, 2018, https://www.wsj.com/articles/china-installed-military-jamming-equipment-on-spratly-islands-u-s-says-1523266320.  101 “ Vietnam Demands That China Remove Military Jamming Equipment from Spratly Islands, ” VnExpress International, April 26, 2018, https://e. 
vnexpress.net/news/news/vietnam-demands-that-china-remove-military-jamming-equipment-from-spratly-islands-3741545.html .   102 U .S. Defense Intelligence Agency, China Military Power: Modernizing a Force to Fight and Win, 23 and 49. 
103 Seb astien Roblin, “Why China’s J-16D Electronic Warfare Plane Is a Really Big Deal, ” National Interest, November 20, 2019, https://nation  - alinterest.org/blog/buzz/why-chinas-j-16d-electronic-warfare-plane-really-big-deal-97677.  104 Dana Go ward, “GPS Jamming and Spoofing Reported at Port of Shanghai, ” Maritime Executive, August 13, 2019, https://www.maritime-ex i- ecutive.com/editorials/gps-jamming-and-spoofing-at-port-of-shanghai; Mark Harris, “Ghost Ships, Crop Circles, and Soft Gold: A GPS Mystery in Shanghai, ” MIT Technology Review, November 20, 2019, https://www.technologyreview.com/s/614689/ghost-ships-crop-circles-and-soft-gold-a-gps-mystery-in-shanghai; Joseph Trevithick, “New Type Of GPS Spoofing Attack In China Creates ‘Crop Circles’ Of False Location Data, ” The Drive, November 18, 2019, https://www.thedrive.com/the-war-zone/31092/new-type-of-gps-spoofing-attack-in-china-creates-crop-circles-of-false-location-data.  105  “GP S Problem Report Status, ” U.S. 
Coast Guard Navigation Center, accessed February 13, 2020, https://navcen.uscg.gov/?Do=GPS  ReportStatus#definition.  106 Harris, “Ghos t Ships, Crop Circles, and Soft Gold: A GPS Mystery in Shanghai. ” 107 T yler Rogoway, “China’s Mysterious Spoofed GPS ‘Crop Circle’ Has Something Interesting At Its Center, ” The Drive, November 19, 2019,  https://www.thedrive.com/the-war-zone/31098/chinas-mysterious-spoofed-gps-data-crop-circle-has-something-interesting-at-its-center . 
 108 Harris, “Ghos t Ships, Crop Circles, and Soft Gold: A GPS Mystery in Shanghai. ” 109 Bjorn Ber gman, “Systematic GPS Manipulation Occuring at Chinese Oil Terminals and Government Installations, ” SkyTruth, December 16,  2019, https://skytruth.org/2019/12/systematic-gps-manipulation-occuring-at-chinese-oil-terminals-and-government-installations.  110 Ibid. 
111 Harris, “Ghos t Ships, Crop Circles, and Soft Gold: A GPS Mystery in Shanghai. ” 112 U .S. Defense Intelligence Agency, Challenges to Security in Space, 21. 
113 Ibid., 20-21. 114 The S tate Council Information Office of the People’s Republic of China, China’s Military Strategy (Beijing, China: People’s Republic of China,  May 2015), http://eng.mod.gov.cn/Press/2015-05/26/content_4586805.htm.  115 U .S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, 2015 Report to Congress, 296. 
116 U .S. Defense Intelligence Agency, China Military Power, 46. 117 U .S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, 2015 Report to Congress, 296. 
118  Sui-L ee Wee, “China Denies It Is behind Hacking of U.S. Satellites, ” Reuters, October 31, 2011, https://www.reuters.com/article/   us-china-us-hacking/china-denies-it-is-behind-hacking-of-u-s-satellites-idUSTRE79U1YI20111031. 119 U .S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, 2015 Report to Congress, 296. 
120 NASA Offic e of the Inspector General, Cybersecurity Management and Oversight at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory Washington, DC: 2019), 8-9,  https://oig.nasa.gov/docs/IG-19-022.pdf . 121 Ibid. 122 Mar y Pat Flaherty, Jason Samenow and Lisa Rein, “Chinese hack U.S. 
weather systems, satellite network, ” Washington Post, November 12,  2014, https://www.washingtonpost.com/local/chinese-hack-us-weather-systems-satellite-network/2014/11/12/bef1206a-68e9-11e4-b053- 65cea7903f2e_story.html.  123 Y atish Yadav, “Hackers from China Break into Secret Indian Government Video Chat, ” New Indian Express, November 19, 2017, http://www. newindianexpress.com/nation/2017/nov/19/hackers-from-china-break-into-secret-indian-government-video-chat-1705010.html. 
124 Chris Bing, “Chinese Hacking Gr oup Resurfaces, Targets U.S. Satellite Companies and Systems, ” Cyberscoop, June 19, 2018, https://www. cyberscoop.com/symantec-thrip-satellite-hacking-trojans/.. 
63 125 Joel Schec tman and Christopher Bing, “UAE Used Cyber Super-weapon to Spy on IPhones of Foes, ” Reuters, January 30, 2019, https:// www.reuters.com/article/us-usa-spying-karma-exclusive/exclusive-uae-used-cyber-super-weapon-to-spy-on-iphones-of-foes-idUSKCN- 1PO1AN.  126 Se an O’Kane, “Chinese Hackers Charged with Stealing Data from NASA, IBM, and Others, ” The Verge, December 20, 2018, https://www. theverge.com/2018/12/20/18150275/chinese-hackers-stealing-data-nasa-ibm-charged. 
 127 Int ernal CSIS analysis by Thomas G. Roberts; data from “Space-Track, ” Space-Track, www.space-track.org. RUSSIA 128 “Orbital Launches of 2019, ” Gunter’s Space Page, February 11, 2020, https://space.skyrocket.de/doc_chr/lau2019.htm. 
129 “О Р азвитии Г осударственной Корпорации По Космической Деятельности «Роскосмос», ” Правительство России, Translated by  Thomas G. Roberts, June 13, 2019, http://government.ru/news/36999/#. 130 Maxim V . 
Tarasenko, “Transformation of the Soviet Space Program after the Cold War, ” Science & Global Security 4, no. 3 (1994): 339-361,  https://doi.org/10.1080/08929889408426406, 346). 131 Thomas G. 
R oberts, Spaceports of the World (Washington, DC: CSIS, March 2019), https://aerospace.csis.org/spaceports-of-the-world/; “UCS  Satellite Database, ” Union of Concerned Scientists, accessed February 10, 2020, https://www.ucsusa.org/resources/satellite-database; Simon  Seminari, “Op-Ed: Global Government Space Budgets Continues Multiyear Rebound, ” SpaceNews, November 24, 2019, https://spacenews. com/op-ed-global-government-space-budgets-continues-multiyear-rebound/; and Laurence Peter, “Russia Corruption: Putin’s Pet Space Project Vostochny Tainted by Massive Theft, ” BBC News November 19, 2019, https://www.bbc.com/news/world-europe-50462431. 132  “ Space Environment: Total Payloads Launched by Country, ” Aerospace Security Project, CSIS, accessed February 28, 2019, https://aero - space.csis.org/data/space-environment-total-launches-country/. 
133 “P artners Sign ISS Agreements, ” NASA, October 23, 2010, https://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/station/structure/elements/partners_agreement. html. 134 Thomas G. 
R oberts, “International Astronaut Database, ” Aerospace Security Project, CSIS, accessed February 10, 2020, https://aerospace. csis.org/data/international-astronaut-database/. 135 Ana toly Zak, “Russian space program in the 2010s: decadal review, ” Russian Space Web, February 11, 2019, http://www.russianspaceweb.com/ russia_2010s.html#2019; Mike Wall, “Here’s How Much NASA Is Paying Per Seat on SpaceX’s Crew Dragon & Boeing’s Starliner, ” Space.com, No - vember 16, 2019, https://www.space.com/spacex-boeing-commercial-crew-seat-prices.html. 
136 NASA Offic e of the Inspector General, ‘“NASA’s Commercial Crew Program: Update on Development and Certification Effort, ” September  1, 2016, 27, https://oig.nasa.gov/docs/IG-16-028.pdf; and Christian Davenport, “SpaceX Completes Key Test of Its Dragon Capsule. Its First Human Spaceflight Might Come in Spring, ” Washington Post, January 19, 2020, https://www.washingtonpost.com/technology/2020/01/19/ spacexemergencyabortttest/. 137  Andr ew Jones, “China, Russia to Cooperate on Lunar Orbiter, Landing Missions, ” SpaceNews, September 20, 2019, https://spacenews.com/ china-russia-to-cooperate-on-lunar-orbiter-landing-missions/. 
138 R oberts, Spaceports of the World, 21. 139 Jeff F oust, “Space agencies endorse continued cooperation in lunar exploration, ” SpaceNews, October 21, 2019, https://spacenews.com/ space-agencies-endorse-continued-cooperation-in-lunar-exploration/. 140  “‘No End in Sight’ t o Fraud in Russia’s Space Agency, Top Investigator Says, ” Moscow Times, May 17, 2019, https://www.themoscow- times.com/2019/05/17/no-end-in-sight-russias-space-agency-top-investigator-says-a65618. 
141 Vic toria Loguinova-Yakoleva, “Russian space sector plagued by astronomical corruption, ” Space Daily, May 28, 2019, https://www.spacedai - ly.com/reports/Russian_space_sector_plagued_by_astronomical_corruption_999.html. 142 Madeline R oache, “Putin’s Vostochny Project Meant to Reestablish Russia as a Space Superpower. Now It’s Plagued by Corruption, ” TIME,  November 19, 2019, https://time.com/5732370/putin-vostochny-space-center-theft/. 
143 “‘No End in Sight’ t o Fraud in Russia’s Space Agency, Top Investigator Says, ” Moscow Times.  144 Eric Ber ger, “How Russia (yes, Russia) plans to land cosmonauts on the Moon by 2030, ” Ars Technica, May 28, 2019, https://arstechnica. com/science/2019/05/how-russia-yes-russia-plans-to-land-cosmonauts-on-the-moon-by-2030/. 
145 Michael K ofman, “Russian defense spending is much larger, and more sustainable than it seems, ” Defense News, May 3, 2019, https://www. defensenews.com/opinion/commentary/2019/05/03/russian-defense-spending-is-much-larger-and-more-sustainable-than-it-seems/. 146 No te: Included in the Russian Federal Space Agency’s inheritance from the Soviet Union was an active crewed mission—the Mir  space  station—with a Soviet cosmonaut still in orbit when the Russian Federation was founded; Elizabeth Howell, “Roscosmos: Russia’s Space Agency, ” Space.com, January 29, 2018, https://www.space.com/22724-roscosmos.html; and Eric Betz, “The Last Soviet Citizen, ” Discover Magazine, December 19, 2016, https://www.discovermagazine.com/the-sciences/the-last-soviet-citizen. 
147  “R oscosmos General Information, ” Roscosmos, n.d., accessed February 5, 2020, http://en.roscosmos.ru/119/; and “International Coopera - tion, ” NASA, February 28, 2019, https://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/station/cooperation/index.html.  148 “ Space Environment: Total Payloads Launched by Country, ” accessed February 12, 2020. 149 Ma tthew Bodner, “As Trump Pushes for Separate Space Force, Russia Moves Fast the Other Way, ” Defense News, June 22, 2018, https:// www.defensenews.com/global/europe/2018/06/21/as-trump-pushes-for-separate-space-force-russia-moves-fast-the-other-way/. 
150 Ma tthew Bodner, “Russia Merges AF with Missile Defense, Space Commands, ” Defense News, August 8, 2015, https://www.defensenews. com/2015/08/08/russia-merges-af-with-missile-defense-space-commands/; and Ministry of Defence of the Russian Federation, “Aerospace  Defence Forces, ” Russian Federation, n.d., accessed February 7, 2019, http://eng.mil.ru/en/structure/forces/cosmic.htm.. SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 202064 151 The Milit ary Doctrine of the Russian Federation, ” Embassy of the Russian Federation to the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern  Ireland, press release, December 25, 2014, https://rusemb.org.uk/press/2029. 
152 “Milit arization, Weaponization, and the Prevention of an Arms Race, ” Reaching Critical Will, http://www.reachingcriticalwill.org/resources/ fact-sheets/critical-issues/5448-outer-space. 153 Dip anjan Roy Chaudhury, “Russia Puts Onus on US for Early Outer Space Rules after India’s Test, ” Economic Times, March 29, 2019, https:// economictimes.indiatimes.com/news/defence/russia-puts-onus-us-for-early-outer-space-rules-after-indias-test/articleshow/68626644. cms?from=mdr. 
154 Dar a Massicot, “Anticipating a New Russian Military Doctrine in 2020: What It Might Contain and Why It Matters, ” War on the Rocks, September 9,  2019, https://warontherocks.com/2019/09/anticipating-a-new-russian-military-doctrine-in-2020-what-it-might-contain-and-why-it-matters/. 155 “Р огозин: Россия не использует спутники для повреждения космических аппаратов других стран, ” TASS, October 1, 2018, https:// tass.ru/kosmos/5624853. 156 Jason L emon, “Russia Will ‘Respond’ to ‘New Threats’ Created by Trump’s Space Militarization, Russian Army Official Warns, ” Newsweek,  March 4, 2019, https://www.newsweek.com/russia-respond-threats-trump-space-militarization-1350861. 
157 “Putin Ur ges Greater Attention to Strengthening Orbital Group of Satellites, ” TASS, December 4, 2019, https://tass.com/science/1095757. 158 A sif A. Siddiqi, “The Soviet Co-Orbital Anti-Satellite System: A Synopsis, ” Journal of the British Interplanetary Society 50, no. 
6 (1997): 225- 40, http://faculty.fordham.edu/siddiqi/writings/p7_siddiqi_jbis_is_history_1997.pdf . 159 Ana toly Zak, “IS Anti-Satellite System, ” Russian Space Web, July 31, 2017, http://www.russianspaceweb.com/is.html. 160 Ana toly Zak, “Naryad Anti-Satellite System (14F11), ” Russian Space Web, November 30, 2017, http://www.russianspaceweb.com/naryad.html. 
161 Ibid. 162 No te: “PL-19” is a Western identifier (corresponding to the 19th system in its category observed from the Plesetsk Cosmodrome), while  “Nudol” is a Russian identifier; Amanda Macias and Michael Sheetz, “Russia Conducted Another Successful Test of and Anti-satellite Mis - sile, According to a Classified US Intelligence Report, ” CNBC, January 18, 2019, https://www.cnbc.com/2019/01/18/russia-succeeds-in-mo - bile-anti-satellite-missile-test-us-intelligence-report.html. 163 Bill Gertz, “Russia Flight T ests Anti-Satellite Missile, ” Washington Free Beacon, December 2, 2015, https://freebeacon.com/national-securi - ty/russia-conducts-successful-flight-test-of-anti-satellite-missile/. 
164 “Russia ’s ASAT Development Takes Aim at LEO Assets, ” Jane’s Intelligence Review, 2018, 1 https://www.janes.com/images/as /- sets/591/81591/Russias_ASAT_development_takes_aim_at_LEO_assets.pdf .  165 Ibid. 166 “ S-500 Prometheus, ” Missile Threat, CSIS, September 28, 2017, https://missilethreat.csis.org/defsys/s-500-prometheus/. 
167 Mark B. Schneider , “Russian Nuclear Weapons Policy, ” RealClearDefense, April 28, 2017, https://www.realcleardefense.com/articles/2017/04/28/ russian_nuclear_weapons_policy_111261.html. 168 S teve Lambakis, Foreign Space Capabilities: Implications for U.S. 
National Security (Fairfax, VA: National Institute Press, National Institute  for Public Policy, 2017), http://www.nipp.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/09/Foreign-Space-Capabilities-pub-2017.pdf; “Russia Tests S-500 Air Defense System, ” Missile Threat, CSIS, September 28, 2017, https://missilethreat.csis.org/russia-successfully-tests-s-500-air-defense- system/; and Leonid Khayremdinov, “Обрести Навык Атак в Стратосфере, ” Красная Звезда, March 1, 2019, http://redstar.ru/obresti-na-vyk-atak-v-stratosfere/, quoted in Julian Cooper, “Russia’s ‘Invincible’ Weapons: An Update, ” Changing Character of War Centre, March 27,  2019, http://www.ccw.ox.ac.uk/blog/2019/3/27/russias-invincible-weapons-an-update-by-julian-cooper. 169  “Russia ’s ASAT Development Takes Aim at LEO Assets, ” Jane’s Intelligence Review, 1. 170 “Mik oyan-Gurevich MiG-31BM Foxhound, ” JetPhotos, September 14, 2018, https://www.jetphotos.com/photo/9074544; Amanda Macias, “A  Never-before-seen Russian Missile Is Identified as an Anti-satellite Weapon and Will Be Ready for Warfare by 2022, ” CNBC, October 25, 2018,   https://www.cnbc.com/2018/10/25/russian-missile-identified-as-anti-satellite-weapon-ready-by-2022.html. 
171 James R. Clapper , “Worldwide Threat Assessment of the US Intelligence Community, ” Office of the Director of National Intelligence, Febru - ary 9, 2016, 10, https://www.dni.gov/files/documents/SASC_Unclassified_2016_ATA_SFR_FINAL.pdf . 172 Ale xander Zudin, “Russia to Deploy Anti-satellite Weapon on MiG-31BM, ” IHS Jane’s Missiles and Rockets, February 22, 2017. 
173 “Mik oyan-Gurevich MiG-31BM Foxhound, ” JetPhotos; and Amanda Macias, “A Never-before-seen Russian Missile Is Identified as an Anti-sat - ellite Weapon and Will Be Ready for Warfare by 2022. ” 174 Mik e Wall, “‘Very Abnormal’ Russian Satellite Doesn’t Seems So Threatening, Experts Say, ” Space.com, August 16, 2018, https://www.space. com/41511-weird-russian-satellite-not-so-abnormal.html. 
175 Jona than McDowell, “International Space Station, ” Jonathan’s Space Report, No. 752, August 17, 2018, http://planet4589.org/space/jsr/ back/news.752.txt.  176 Bart Hendrick x, “Russia Develops Co-orbital Anti-satellite Capability, ” Jane’s Intelligence Review, September 27, 2018, 2. 
177 Sandr a Erwin, “Raymond calls out Russia for ‘threatening behavior’ in outer space, ”  SpaceNews, February 10, 2020, https://spacenews. com/raymond-calls-out-russia-for-threatening-behavior-in-outer-space/. 178 Hendrick x, “Russia Develops Co-orbital Anti-satellite Capability, ” 3. 
179 Bart Hendrick x, “OSINT Snapshot: New Russian satellites likely to have inspection role, ” Jane’s Intelligence Review, July 25, 2019, 1; Bart  Hendrickx, “Russia’s Secret Satellite Builder, ” Space Review, May 6, 2019, https://www.thespacereview.com/article/3709/1. 180 “Orbit al Launches of 2019, ” Gunter’s Space Page, 2020, https://space.skyrocket.de/doc_chr/lau2019.htm; and Ministry of Defence of the  Russian Federation, “Russian Aerospace Forces successfully launches Soyuz-2 lanch vehicle from Plesetsk Cosmodrome, ” Russian Federa - tion, November 26, 2019, http://eng.mil.ru/en/news_page/country/more.htm?id=12263690@egNews.. 65 181 Ana toly Zak, “Soyuz-2-1v Launches Classified Payload, ” Russian Space Web, January 29, 2020, accessed on February 2, 2020, http://www. 
russianspaceweb.com/cosmos-2542.html. 182 Ibid. 183 Jona than McDowell, Twitter post, January 31, 2020, 8:37 p.m., https://twitter.com/planet4589/status/1223420130576818176. 
 184 Michael Thompson, T witter post, January 31, 2020, 11:40 p.m., https://twitter.com/M_R_Thomp/status/1223466202967760896. 185 Er win, “Raymond calls out Russia. ” 186 Hendrick x, “Russia Develops Co-orbital Anti-satellite Capability, ” 1. 
187 Ibid., 6. 188 Hendrick x, “Russia’s Secret Satellite Builder. ”  189 “К осмический аппарат ‹Луч› выведен на расчетную орбиту, ” Aviation Explorer, September 29, 2014, https://www.aex.ru/ news/2014/9/29/125060/. 
190 Brian Weeden, “Dancing in the dark r edux: Recent Russian rendezvous and proximity operations in space, ” Space Review, October 5, 2015,  http://www.thespacereview.com/article/2839/2. 191 Ibid.; Laur ence Peter, “Russia Shrugs off US Anxiety over Military Satellite, ” BBC News, October 20, 2015, https://www.bbc.com/news/ world-europe-34581089. 192 “L uch (Olimp-K), ” Gunter’s Space Page, 2019, https://space.skyrocket.de/doc_sdat/olimp-k.htm. 
193 Thomas G. R oberts, “Unusual Behavior in GEO: Luch (Olymp-K), ” Aerospace Security Project, CSIS, accessed March 01, 2020, https://aerospace. csis.org/data/unusual-behavior-in-geo-olymp-k/. 
194 Vladimir Putin, “Pr esidential Address to the Federal Assembly, ” (speech, Manezh Central Exhibition Hall, Moscow, Russia, March 1, 2018),  http://en.kremlin.ru/events/president/news/56957. 195 A sif A. Siddiqi, “The Soviet Co-Orbital Anti-Satellite System: A Synopsis, ” Journal of the British Interplanetary Society 50, no. 
6 (1997), 225- 40, http://faculty.fordham.edu/siddiqi/writings/p7_siddiqi_jbis_is_history_1997.pdf . 196 William R. Gr aham and Peter Vincent Pry, “Statement for the Record, ” U.S. 
Congress, House, Committee on Homeland Security, Subcom - mittee on Oversight and Management Efficiency, October 12, 2017, 6, http://docs.house.gov/meetings/HM/HM09/20171012/106467/HHRG- 115-HM09-Wstate-PryP-20171012.pdf ; Jerry Emanuelson, “Soviet Test 184: The 1962 Soviet Nuclear EMP Tests over Kazakhstan, ” Future M- science LLC, http://www.futurescience.com/emp/test184.html; and ibid., 230. 197 “T ranscript On Vienna Conference, ” House Armed Services Committee, U.S. Congress, May 2, 1999, quoted in Peter Vincent Pry, “Nuclear  EMP Attack Scenarios and Combined-Arms Cyber Warfare, ” Commission to Assess the Threat to the United States from Electromagnetic Pulse (EMP) Attack, July 2017, 3,  https://michaelmabee.info/wp-content/uploads/2019/01/2017-Nuclear-Electromagnetic-Pulse-At 7- tack-Scenarios-and-Combined-Arms-Cyber-Warfare.pdf . 
 198 Bart Hendrick x, “Self-Defense in Space: Protecting Russian Spacecraft from ASAT Attacks, ” Space Review, July 16, 2018, https://www.thes - pacereview.com/article/3536/1. 199 A. Ant onov et al., “История и перспективы развития низкотемпературных пиротехнических генераторов, ” Известия Тульского  государственного университета, 2016,  https://cyberleninka.ru/article/n/istoriya-i-perspektivy-razvitiya-nizkotemperaturnyh-piroteh r- nicheskih-generatorov, quoted in ibid. 
200 “Наук а и Техника: Россия Создаст Лазер Для Подавления Разведки Противника, ” Lenta.ru, August 8, 2010, http://lenta.ru/ news/2010/08/19/laser . 201 P avel Podvig, “Russia Has Been Testing Laser ASAT , ” Russian Strategic Nuclear Forces, October 8, 2011, http://russianforces.org/ blog/2011/10/russia_has_been_testing_laser.shtml. 202 “В РФ Р азрабатывается Противоспутниковая Система РЭБ, ” Военное Обозрение, April 25, 2017,  https://topwar.ru/114285-v-rf-razraba в- tyvaetsya-protivosputnikovaya-sistema-reb.html, quoted in Patrick Tucker, “Russia Claims It Now Has Lasers To Shoot Satellites, ” Defense One, February 26, 2018, https://www.defenseone.com/technology/2018/02/russia-claims-it-now-has-lasers-shoot-satellites/146243/. 
203  P atrick Tucker, “Russia Claims It Now Has Lasers To Shoot Satellites, ” Defense One, February 6, 2018, https://www.defenseone.com/ technology/2018/02/russia-claims-it-now-has-lasers-shoot-satellites/146243/; “Источник узнал о перспективах создания в РФ нового  самолета с лазерным оружием, ” Interfax, February 25, 2018, translation by author, https://www.interfax.ru/russia/601331. 204 Vladimir Putin, “Pr esidential Address to the Federal Assembly. ” 205 Ant on Nikitin, “Боевые Лазеры «Пересвет» Заступили На Опытно-Боевое Дежурство, ” Взгляд, December 5, 2018, https://vz.ru/ news/2018/12/5/953800.html. 
 206 “P eresvet combat laser system, ” Russian Ministry of Defense, YouTube video, 0:42, Russian Ministry of Defense, July 19, 2018, https://www. youtube.com/watch?v=ghDvDFb3lM0. 207  Isk ander Batyrov, “Добьет Ли «Пересвет» До Цели, ” Независимая, December 5, 2018, http://www.ng.ru/armies/2018-12-05/2_7456_ target.html. 
208 Vladimir Putin, “Pr esidential Address to the Federal Assembly, ” (speech, Gostiny Dvor, Moscow, Russia, February 20, 2019), http://en.krem - lin.ru/events/president/news/59863. 209 Julian Cooper , “Russia’s ‘Invincible’ Weapons: An Update, ” Changing Character of War Centre, March 27, 2019, http://www.ccw.ox.ac.uk/ blog/2019/3/27/russias-invincible-weapons-an-update-by-julian-cooper . 210 Cent er for Advanced Defense Studies (C4ADS), Above Us Only Stars (Washington, DC: March 2019), 3, https://www.c4reports.org/aboveusonlystars. 
211 Dana Go ward, “Mass GPS Spoofing Attack in Black Sea?”  Maritime Executive, July 11, 2017, https://maritime-executive.com/editorials/ mass-gps-spoofing-attack-in-black-sea#gs.QGC4kZ8; Alexandra Coultrup, “GPS Jamming in the Arctic Circle, ” Aerospace Security Project, . SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 202066 CSIS, April 4, 2019, https://aerospace.csis.org/data/gps-jamming-in-the-arctic-circle/; and ibid., 14. 212 “Russia Denies R ole in Israeli Airport GPS Jamming, ” BBC News, June 27, 2019, https://www.bbc.com/news/technology-48786085; Thomas  Nilsen, “Norway Tired of Russia’s Electronic Warfare Troubling Civilian Navigation: ‘Unacceptable and Risky’ , ” Barents Observer, January  20, 2019, https://thebarentsobserver.com/en/security/2019/01/norway-tired-russian-military-gps-jamming-unacceptable-and-risky ;  and “Russia Denies Disrupting GPS Signals during Nato Arctic Exercises, ” Guardian, November 12, 2018, https://www.theguardian.com/world/2018/nov/12/russia-denies-blame-for-arctic-gps-interference. 
213  Ser gey Sukhankin, “Russian Electronic Warfare in Ukraine: Between Real and Imaginable, ” RealClearDefense, May 26, 2017, https://www. realcleardefense.com/articles/2017/05/26/russian_electronic_warfare_in_ukraine_111460.html; “It is official, Russian army deployed R-330Zh jammer in the battle of Debaltseve, ” Inform Napalm, May 14, 2016,  https://informnapalm.org/en/r-330zh-jammer-battle-debalt l- seve/; and “Russian R-330Zh jammer detected 7 km from the contact line in Donbas, ” Inform Napalm, November 16, 2017, https://inform s- napalm.org/en/russian-r-330zh-jammer-detected-7-km-from-the-contact-line-in-donbas/. 214 Elias Gr oll, “Spy Planes, Signal Jammers, and Putin’s High-Tech War in Syria, ” Foreign Policy, October 6, 2015, http://foreignpolicy. 
com/2015/10/06/spy-planes-signal-jammers-and-putins-high-tech-war-in-syria; and David Stupples, “How Syria is becoming a test bed for high-tech weapons of electronic warfare, ” The Conversation, October 8, 2015, https://theconversation.com/how-syria-is-becoming-a-test- bed-for-high-tech-weapons-of-electronic-warfare-48779. 215  C4ADS, Above Us Only Stars, 3. 216 Ibid., 14. 
217 Dmitr y Krilov, “Кремль Продолжит Искажать, ” Газета.ru, December 19, 2016, https://www.gazeta.ru/auto/2016/12/16_a_10430909. shtml. 218 “Mosc ow Taxi Users Confusion amid GPS Meddling Claims, ” BBC News, January 10, 2018, https://www.bbc.com/news/technology-42633024. 
219 “ St. Petersburg Drivers Report Strange GPS Problems in City Center, ” Moscow Times, December 27, 2016, https://www.themoscowtimes. com/2016/12/27/drivers-in-st-petersburg-report-gps-problems-in-city-center-a56653. 
220 Coultrup , “GPS Jamming in the Arctic Circle. ” 221 Mark Episk opos, “Russia Jammed GPS Signals During a NATO Military Exercise. That’s a Really Big Deal. 
” , National Interest, December 1,  2018, https://nationalinterest.org/blog/buzz/russia-jammed-gps-signals-during-nato-military-exercise-thats-really-big-deal-37682; and  Harald Tomassen and Allan Klo, “Monterer Målestasjon for å Oppdage GPS-Jamming, ” NRK, March 11, 2019, https://www.nrk.no/finnmark/ monterer-malestasjon-for-a-oppdage-gps-jamming-1.14467017. 222 “ Ships Fooled in GPS Spoofing Attack Suggest Russian Cyberweapon, ” New Scientist, August 10, 2017, https://www.newscientist.com/arti- cle/2143499-ships-fooled-in-gps-spoofing-attack-suggest-russian-cyberweapon/. 223 C4ADS, Above Us Only Stars, 20. 
224 Ibid., 3. 225 Ibid., 18, 23. 226 P atrick Tucker, “US and Russia Regard Each Other Warily in the Baltic and Black Seas, ” Defense One, January 24, 2019, https://www. 
defenseone.com/threats/2019/01/us-and-russia-eye-each-other-warily-baltic-and-black-seas/154404/; and Andrew Roth, “Kerch strait con- frontation: what happened and why does it matter?, ” Guardian, November 27, 2018, https://www.theguardian.com/world/2018/nov/27/kerch-strait-confrontation-what-happened-ukrainian-russia-crimea. 227  Brian W ang, “Russia will place GPS jammers on 250,000 cellphone towers to reduce enemy cruise missile and drone accuracy in the event  of large scale conventional war, ” Next Big Future, October 18, 2016, https://www.nextbigfuture.com/2016/10/russia-will-place-gps-jam 2- mers-on-250000.html.  228 “La test jamming system arrives for electronic warfare troops in central Russia, ” TASS, November 13, 2019, https://tass.com/de s- fense/1088451. 
229 Michael P eck, “Why Russia’s New Anti-Satellite Plane Is Very Bad Idea, ” National Interest, October 20, 2019, https://nationalinterest.org/ blog/buzz/why-russias-new-anti-satellite-plane-very-bad-idea-89716. 230 Bart Hendrick x, “Ekipazh: Russia’s top-secret nuclear-powered satellite, ” Space Review, October 7, 2019, https://www.thespacereview. com/article/3809/1. 
231 James Landale, “Russia C yber-Plots: US, UK and Netherlands Allege Hacking, ” BBC News, October 4, 2018, https://www.bbc.com/news/ world-europe-45746837. 232 Es tonian Foreign Intelligence Service, International Security and Estonia (Tallinn: 2018), 53, https://www.valisluureamet.ee/pdf/raport- 2018-ENG-web.pdf; Ellen Nakashima, “Russian hacker group exploits satellites to steal data, hide tracks, ” Washington Post, Septem-ber 9, 2015, https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/national-security/russian-hacker-group-exploits-satellites-to-steal-data-hide- tracks/2015/09/08/c59fa7cc-5657-11e5-b8c9-944725fcd3b9_story.html?utm_term=.43d8b0ed4c7f; and “Turla: Spying tool targets  governments and diplomats, ” Symantec Security Response, August 7, 2014,  https://www.symantec.com/connect/blogs/turla-spy s- ing-tool-targets-governments-and-diplomats. 233 Jack S tubbs and Christopher Bing, “Hacking the Hackers: Russian Group Hijacked Iranian Spying Operation, Officials Say, ” Reuters, Octo - ber 21, 2019, https://www.reuters.com/article/us-russia-cyber/hacking-the-hackers-russian-group-hijacked-iranian-spying-operation-offi -- cials-say-idUSKBN1X00AK. 
234 Gor don Corera, “How France’s TV5 Was Almost Destroyed by ‘Russian Hackers’ , ” BBC News, October 10, 2016, https://www.bbc.com/news/ technology-37590375. 235 Na tasha Lomas, “UK Says Russia’s GRU Was behind a Spate of Chaotic Cyber Attacks between 2015 and 2017, ” TechCrunch, October 4,  2018, https://techcrunch.com/2018/10/04/uk-says-russias-gru-was-behind-a-spate-of-chaotic-cyber-attacks-between-2015-and-2017/ .. 67 236 Damien McGuinness, “Ho w a cyber attack transformed Estonia, ” BBC News, April 27, 2017, http://www.bbc.com/news/39655415; Sergey  Sukhankin, “Russian Electronic Warfare in Ukraine: Between Real and Imaginable, ” RealClearDefense, May 26, 2017, https://www.real i- cleardefense.com/articles/2017/05/26/russian_electronic_warfare_in_ukraine_111460.html; David E. 
Sanger, “Putin Ordered ‘Influence  Campaign’ Aimed at U.S. Election, Report Says, ” New York Times, January 6, 2017, https://www.nytimes.com/2017/01/06/us/politics/ russia-hack-report.html; and James Landale, “Russia Cyber-Plots: US, UK and Netherlands Allege Hacking, ” BBC News, October 4, 2018, https://www.bbc.com/news/world-europe-45746837. 237  Jens S toltenberg, “Nato Will Defend Itself, ” Prospect Magazine, December 27, 2019, https://www.prospectmagazine.co.uk/world/na g- to-will-defend-itself-summit-jens-stoltenberg-cyber-security; and Michael Imeson, “Russia Cyber Aggression Fuels Tensions with West, ”  Financial Times, October 14, 2019, https://www.ft.com/content/0aa7a6e0-ca52-11e9-af46-b09e8bfe60c0. 
238 James Landale, “Russia C yber-Plots: US, UK and Netherlands Allege Hacking, ” BBC News, October 4, 2018, https://www.bbc.com/news/ world-europe-45746837. 239 T odd Harrison, Kaitlyn Johnson, and Thomas G. Roberts, Space Threat Assessment 2018 (Washington, DC: CSIS, April 2018), https:// aerospace.csis.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/04/Harrison_SpaceThreatAssessment_FULL_WEB.pdf; Todd Harrison, Kaitlyn Johnson, and Thomas G. 
Roberts, Space Threat Assessment 2019 (Washington, DC: CSIS, April 2019),  https://aerospace.csis.org/wp-content/up p- loads/2019/04/SpaceThreatAssessment2019-compressed.pdf .  IRAN 240 Thomas G. R oberts, Spaceports of the World (Washington, DC: CSIS, January 2020) https://aerospace.csis.org/data/spaceports-of-the-world/. 
241 Mik e Pompeo, “United States Imposes New Sanctions Designations on Iran’s Space Program as Tehran Continues to Use Civilian Space  Agencies to Advance Its Ballistic Missile Programs, ” U.S. Department of State, press release, September 13, 2019, https://www.state.gov/ united-states-imposes-new-sanctions-designations-on-irans-space-program-as-tehran-continues-to-use-civilian-space-agencies-to-ad - vance-its-ballistic-missile-programs/. 242 David E. 
Sang er and William J. Broad, “U.S. Accuses Iran of Using Space Launch as Cover for Missile Program, ” New York Times, January 4,  2019, https://www.nytimes.com/2019/01/03/world/middleeast/iran-spacecraft-pompeo.html. 
243 K evjn Lim and Gil Baram, “Iran Is Mastering the Final Frontier, ” Foreign Policy, March 14, 2019, https://foreignpolicy.com/2019/03/14/iran- is-mastering-the-final-frontier/. 244 F redrik Dahl, “Iran Launches Satellite; U.S. Expresses Concern, ” Reuters, February 3, 2009, https://www.reuters.com/article/us-iran-satel  - lite-idUSTRE5120NN20090203. 
245 “Ir an ‘Sends Monkey to Space for Second Time’ , ” BBC News, December 14, 2013, https://www.bbc.com/news/world-middle-east-25378313. 246 F arzon Nadimi, “Iran’s Space Program Emerges from Dormancy, ” Washington Institute for Near East Policy, August 1, 2017, https://www. washingtoninstitute.org/policy-analysis/view/irans-space-program-emerges-from-dormancy. 
247 “Ir an Missile Sites, ” CIA, n.d. https://www.cia.gov/library/abbottabad-compound/9B/9BF2B1E1B6F60BF4889BE25391570BEB_iran_mis B- sile_sites.pdf . 248 “Ir an, ” Zarya, February 11, 2012, https://www.zarya.info/Diaries/Iran/Iran.php. 
249 “Russia Signs De al to Build & Launch Iran Satellites, ” Iran Times, May 14, 2014, http://iran-times.com/russia-signs-deal-to-build-launch- iran-satellites/. 250 Def ense Intelligence Agency, Iran Military Power (Washington, DC: 2019), https://www.dia.mil/Portals/27/Documents/News/Military  Power Publications/Iran_Military_Power_LR.pdf ; and Daniel R. Coats, “Worldwide Threat Assessment of the US Intelligence Communi e- ty, ” Office of the Director of National Intelligence, February 13, 2018, p. 
10, https://www.dni.gov/files/documents/Newsroom/Testimo - nies/2018-ATA---Unclassified-SSCI.pdf. 251 S tephen M. McCall, “Iran’s Ballistic Missile and Space Launch Programs, ” Congressional Research Service, January 9, 2020, https://fas.org/ sgp/crs/nuke/IF10938.pdf. 
252 “Ir an Announces Security-Oriented ‘Space Tracking Center’ , ” RT International, June 9, 2013, https://www.rt.com/news/iran-space-monitor T- ing-center-429/. 253 “Ir an Claims To Have SSA Radar Capable of Detecting Satellites in LEO, ” Spacewatch, 2018, https://spacewatch.global/2018/12/iran-claims- to-have-ssa-radar-capable-of-detecting-satellites-in-leo/. 254 “Missiles of Ir an, ” Missile Threat, CSIS, Accessed February 5, 2020, https://missilethreat.csis.org/country_tax/iran/. 
255 “ Simorgh, ” Missile Threat, CSIS, June 15, 2018, https://missilethreat.csis.org/missile/simorgh/. 256 T yler Rodgers, “Iran’s Simorgh Rocket Test in Perspective, ” Arms Control Association, January 17, 2017, https://www.armscontrol.org/ blog/2017-07-27/iran-simorgh-rocket-test-in-perspective. 257 Geoff Brumfiel, “Ir anian Rocket Launch Ends In Failure, Imagery Shows, ” NPR, August 29, 2019,  https://www.npr. 
org/2019/08/29/755406765/iranian-rocket-launch-ends-in-failure-images-show; Stephen Clark, “Second Iranian Satellite Launch Attempt  in a Month Fails, ” Spaceflight Now, February 11, 2019, https://spaceflightnow.com/2019/02/11/second-iranian-satellite-launch-attempt-in- a-month-fails/; and Geoff Brumfiel, “Satellite Imagery Suggests 2nd Iranian Space Launch Has Failed, ” NPR, February 6, 2019, https://www. npr.org/2019/02/06/692071812/satellite-imagery-suggests-second-iranian-space-launch-has-failed. 258 “Ir an Space Agency to Launch Three Satellites by March 2020, ” Financial Tribune, August 25, 2019, https://financialtribune.com/articles/sci- tech/99569/iran-space-agency-to-launch-three-satellites-by-march-2020. 
259 Geoff Brumfiel, “Ir anian Rocket Launch Ends In Failure, Imagery Shows. ” 260 Geoff Brumfiel, “T rump Tweets Sensitive Surveillance Image Of Iran, ” NPR, August 30, 2019, https://www.npr.org/2019/08/30/755994591/. SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 202068 president-trump-tweets-sensitive-surveillance-image-of-iran; and Donald Trump, Twitter Post, August 30, 2019, 1:44 pm, https://twitter. 
com/realDonaldTrump/status/1167493371973255170 261 Ma tthew Lee, “US Hits Iran Space Agency with Sanctions over Missile Work, ” Associated Press, September 4, 2019, https://apnews. com/99a41d1896c94d9e967e581b3c2e2d83. 262 “Ir an-related Designations; Non-proliferation Designations; Kingpin Act Designations Update, ” U.S. 
Department of the Treasury, September  3, 2019, https://www.treasury.gov/resource-center/sanctions/OFAC-Enforcement/Pages/20190903_33.aspx. 263 MJ Az ari Jahromi, Twitter Post, January 29, 2020, 1:26 am, https://twitter.com/azarijahromi/status/1222405725651075072 264 2379, “Ir an Makes Six Satellites to Put into Orbit, ” IRNA English, January 26, 2020, https://en.irna.ir/news/83648264/Iran-makes-six-satel - lites-to-put-into-orbit. 265 Amir V ahdat and Jon Gambrell, “Iran Again Fails to Put Satellite into Orbit amid US Worries, ” Associated Press, February 9, 2020, https:// apnews.com/7c8247674c294c23d408b034e9d4ee5a?utm_campaign=SocialFlow&utm_source=Twitter&utm_medium=AP . 
266 “Commit tee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space: Membership Evolution, ” United Nations Office for Outer Space Affairs,  https://www. unoosa.org/oosa/en/ourwork/copuos/members/evolution.html ; and “Treaty on Principles Governing the Activities of States in the Ex  - ploration and Use of Outer Space, Including the Moon and Other Celestial bodies, ” U.S. Department of State, Accessed February 5, 2020, https://2009-2017.state.gov/t/isn/5181.htm#signatory. 
267  P arvis Tarikhi, “More Significant Role for Iran’s Space Administration, ” Parviztarikhi’s Blog, November 22, 2010, https://parviztarikhi.word - press.com/features-2/more-significant-role-for-iran’s-space-administration/. 268 “سازمان فضایی  ایرانIranian Space Agency, July 9, 2016, https://www.isa.ir/find.php?item=1.66.10.fa; and “Space Industry Development  Requires National Willpower: Minister, ” Tehran Times, May 26, 2018, https://www.tehrantimes.com/news/423935/Space-industry-develop i- ment-requires-national-willpower-minister . 269 “Ir an Space Research Center, ” Iran Watch, October 31, 2019, https://www.iranwatch.org/iranian-entities/iran-space-research-center ; and  “Sharif University of Technology, ” Iran Watch, November 18, 2019,  https://www.iranwatch.org/iranian-entities/sharif-university-technology .;  and “Iran Enjoys High-Tech in Building Space-Based Parks, ” IRNA English, September 29, 2019, https://en.irna.ir/news/83496207/Iran-en - joys-high-tech-in-building-space-based-parks. 
270 S tephen Lambakis, Foreign Space Capabilities: Implications for U.S. National Security (Fairfax, VA: National Institutes Press, August 2017),  31, https://www.nipp.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/09/Foreign-Space-Capabilities-pub-2017.pdf. 271 Geoff Brumfiel, “Ir an Is Preparing A Launch. 
But Is It For A Space Rocket Or A Missile?” NPR, January 14, 2019, https://www.npr. org/2019/01/14/684467347/iran-is-preparing-a-launch-but-is-it-for-a-space-rocket-or-a-missile. 272 “ ایران فضایی  سازمان برای تومان  و ۰۶۹ میلیارد  اختصاص ۳ هزار” . 
اخبار آفتابAftabir.com, March 26, 2010, https://www.aftabir.com/news/view/2008/ feb/20/c2c1203499802_economy_marketing_business_information_technology_mobile.php . 273 “C uts and Extensions in Iran’s ICT 2017/18 Budget, ” Financial Tribune, December 13, 2016, https://web.archive.org/web/20161220150555/ https://financialtribune.com/articles/sci-tech/55397/cuts-and-extensions-in-irans-ict-201718-budget . 274 Jennif er Chandler, “Decoding Iran’s defence spending: pitfalls and new pointers, ” International Institute for Strategic Studies, November  13, 2018, https://www.iiss.org/blogs/military-balance/2018/11/decode-iran-defence-spending. 
 275 “Ir an Attack: How Strong Is Iran’s Military?” BBC News, January 9, 2020, https://www.bbc.com/news/world-middle-east-50982743. 276 “ Shahab-3, ” Missile Threat, CSIS, August 9, 2016, https://missilethreat.csis.org/missile/shahab-3/.  277 R obert Einhorn, Vann H Van Diepen, and Kate Hewitt, Constraining Iran’s Missile Capabilities (Washington, DC: Brookings, March 2019),  https://www.brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/2019/03/FP_20190321_missile_program_WEB.pdf. 
278 T om O’Connor, “U.S. Warns ‘Iran Has the Largest Ballistic Missile Force in the Middle East’ and Can Target Europe, ” Newsweek, December  13, 2018, https://www.newsweek.com/us-iran-missile-force-middle-east-target-europe-1255834. 279 “Ir an Opens New Space-Tracking Center, ” RadioFreeEurope/RadioLiberty, June 9, 2013, https://www.rferl.org/a/iran-space-tracking-cen - ter/25011651.html. 
280 Michael P eck, “Bad News for Israel: Iran Has a New Missile, ” National Interest, November 1, 2019, https://nationalinterest.org/blog/buzz/ bad-news-israel-iran-has-new-missile-92556; and Jeremey Binnie, “Iran displays guidance for artillery rockets, ” Jane’s Defence Weekly, October 4, 2019, https://www.janes.com/article/91703/iran-displays-guidance-upgrade-for-artillery-rockets. 281  Ian Williams, “ When Iran Attacks, ” Missile Threat, CSIS, February 4, 2020, https://missilethreat.csis.org/when-iran-attacks/. 282 “Missiles of Ir an. 
” Missile Threat, CSIS, Accessed February 5, 2020. https://missilethreat.csis.org/country_tax/iran/. 283 Sc ott Peterson and Payam Faramarzi, “Exclusive: Iran hijacked U.S. 
drone, says Iranian engineer, ” Christian Science Monitor, December 15,  2011, https://www.csmonitor.com/World/Middle-East/2011/1215/Exclusive-Iran-hijacked-US-drone-says-Iranian-engineer .  284 “Ir an’s Nuclear Program Timeline and History, ” Nuclear Threat Initiative, last updated January 2020,  https://www.nti.org/learn/countries/ iran/nuclear/ 285 Ibid.  286 Unit ed Against a Nuclear Iran, Iran & North Korea - Nuclear Proliferation Partners (New York, NY: February 2019), https://www.unitedagain y- stnucleariran.com/north-korea-iran; and Josh Rogin and Eli Lake, “Iran and North Korea: The Nuclear ‘Axis of Resistance’ , ” The Daily Beast,  January 31, 2014, https://www.thedailybeast.com/iran-and-north-korea-the-nuclear-axis-of-resistance. 
287 Z achary Laub and Kali Robinson, “What Is the Status of the Iran Nuclear Agreement?” Council on Foreign Relations, last updated January 7,  2020, https://www.cfr.org/backgrounder/what-status-iran-nuclear-agreement. 288 John Haltiw anger, “Here’s What’s in the 2015 Nuclear Deal with Iran That the Country Withdrew from amid Heightened Tensions with the  US, ” Business Insider, January 14, 2020, https://www.businessinsider.com/iran-nuclear-deal-explained.. 69 289 Holly Elly att, “Europe Stands by Iran Nuclear Deal for Now, Defying US Calls to Abandon It, ” CNBC, January 13, 2020, https://www.cnbc. 
com/2020/01/13/jcpoa-europe-stands-by-iran-nuclear-deal.html. 290 Uri F riedman, “A New Nuclear Era Is Coming, ” The Atlantic, January 9, 2020, https://www.theatlantic.com/politics/archive/2020/01/solei - mani-iran-north-korea-new-nuclear-age/604618/. 291 Saf a Haeri, “Cuba blows the whistle on Iranian jamming, ” Asia Times, August 22, 2003, http://www.atimes.com/atimes/Middle_East/  EH22Ak03.html. 
 292 Small Media F oundation,  Satellite Jamming in Iran: A War Over Airwaves (London, UK: Small Media Foundation, 2012), 21, https://smallme - dia.org.uk/sites/default/files/Satellite%20Jamming.pdf. 293 Y eganeh Torbati, “Iran says capable of jamming foes’ communication systems, ” Reuters, January 15, 2013,  https://in.reuters.com/article/ iran-military/iran-says-capable-of-jamming-foes-communication-systems-idINDEE90E0DF20130115. 294 Michel de R osen, “Letter to Eutelsat Regarding Iranian Government’s jamming of satellite broadcasts, ” Human Rights Watch, June 25, 2010,  https://www.hrw.org/news/2010/06/25/letter-eutelsat-regarding-iranian-governments-jamming-satellite-broadcasts. 
 295 Ibid.  296 R egan Doherty, “Iran Jamming Al Jazeera Broadcasts: Document, ” Reuters, January 10, 2012, https://www.reuters.com/article/us-iran-ja r- zeera/iran-jamming-al-jazeera-broadcasts-document-idUSTRE80918520120110. 297 R obert Briel, “Syria in Frame on Eutelsat Jamming, ” Broadband TV News, October 22, 2012,  https://www.broadbandtvnews. 
com/2012/10/22/ syria-believed-to-jam-eutelsat/. 298 “L ondon-Based Persian TV To Lodge Complaint Against Iran For Satellite Jamming. ” Radio Farda, November 23, 2019, https://en.radiofar i- da.com/a/london-based-persian-tv-to-lodge-complaint-against-iran-for-satellite-jamming-/30288280.html. 
299 P eterson and Faramarzi, “Exclusive: Iran hijacked U.S. drone, says Iranian engineer. ” 300 L ee Feeran, “Obama: Hey Iran, Can We Get Our Drone Back?” ABC News, December 12, 2011, https://abcnews.go.com/Blotter/obama-asks- iran-rq-170-sentinel-drone-back/story?id=15140133. 
301 “2019-012-P ersian Gulf, Strait of Hormuz, Gulf of Oman, Arabian Sea, Red Sea-Threats to Commercial Vessels by Iran and Its Proxies. ”  MARAD, July 8, 2019, https://www.maritime.dot.gov/content/2019-012-persian-gulf-strait-hormuz-gulf-oman-arabian-sea-red-sea-threats- commercial-vessels. 302 R euters and Haaretz, “Iran Reportedly Jamming Ships’ GPS in Attempt to Trick Them Into Iranian Waters for Seizure, ” Haaretz, August 8,  2019, https://www.haaretz.com/middle-east-news/iran/iran-reportedly-jamming-ships-gps-in-attempt-to-trick-them-into-iranian-wa-ters-1.7652352. 
303  T zvi Joffre,“U.S. Warns of GPS Interference, Communications Spoofing in Persian Gulf. ” Jerusalem Post, August 8, 2019, https://www.jpost. 
com/Middle-East/US-warns-of-GPS-interference-communications-spoofing-in-Persian-Gulf-597998. 304 T racy Cozzens, “Iran jams CPS on ships in Strait of Hormuz, ” GPS World, August 9, 2019, https://www.gpsworld.com/iran-jams-gps-on- ships-in-strait-of-hormuz/. 305 Se th J. 
Frantzman, “Iran Claims to Pioneer New Electronic Warfare Unit, ” Jerusalem Post, July 7, 2019, https://www.jpost.com/Middle-East/ Iran-claims-to-pioneer-new-electronic-warfare-unit-594858. 306 “IRGC Unv eils Military Communication System - Defense News, ” Tasnim News Agency, July 7, 2019, https://www.tasnimnews.com/en/ news/2019/07/07/2048683/irgc-unveils-military-communication-system. 307 Alain Henr y de Frahan, “Iran unveiled armored vehicle, jamming system, drones, smart robot and more, ” Army Recognition, October 4,  2019, https://www.armyrecognition.com/october_2019_global_defense_security_army_news_industry/iran_unveiled_armored_vehicle_jamming_system_drones_smart_robot_and_more.html; and Shi Yinglun, “Iran Unveils New Homemade Military Gears: Report, ” Xinhua, October 3, 2019, http://www.xinhuanet.com/english/2019-10/03/c_138446473.htm. 
308  “Ne w Prototype ‘Farpad’ UAV given to Military Units, ” IRNA English, October 30, 2019, https://en.irna.ir/news/83535778/New-prototype- Farpad-UAV-given-to-military-units; and “Iran’s New Hand-launched Drone has Electronic Warfare Capability, ” DefenseWorld.net, October 31, 2019,  https://www.defenseworld.net/news/25749/Iran_s_New_Hand_launched_Drone_has_Electronic_Warfare_Capability#.XjqAGxd y- KiRu. 309 Dor othy Denning, “Iran’s Cyber Warfare Program Has Reached a Critical Point, ” Newsweek, December 12, 2017, https://www.newsweek. com/irans-cyber-warfare-program-now-major-threat-united-states-745427. 
310 K eith Breene, “Who Are the Cyberwar Superpowers?” World Economic Forum, May 4, 2016, https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2016/05/ who-are-the-cyberwar-superpowers/. 311 James A. L ewis, “Iran and Cyber Power, ” CSIS, Commentary, June 25, 2019, https://www.csis.org/analysis/iran-and-cyber-power ; and Seth  G. 
Jones, Containing Tehran, (Washington, DC: CSIS, January 2020), https://csis-prod.s3.amazonaws.com/s3fs-public/publication/200110_Jones_ContainingIran_WEB_v2.pdf?MiOEbYgRpCYPIeM5sivMoNWJIhFDxrN5. 312  Ibid 313 Collin Ander son and Karim Sadjadpour, Iran’s Cyber Threat: Espionage, Sabotage, and Revenge (Washington, DC: Carnegie Endowment for  International Peace, January 4, 2018) 47, https://carnegieendowment.org/files/Iran_Cyber_Final_Full_v2.pdf . 314 “The Invisible U .S.-Iran Cyber War, ” U.S. 
Institute for Peace, The Iran Primer, updated January 7, 2020, https://iranprimer.usip.org/ blog/2019/oct/25/invisible-us-iran-cyber-war .  315  Elisabe th Bumiller and Thom Shanker, “Panetta Warns of Dire Threat of Cyberattack on U.S., ” New York Times, October 11, 2012, https:// www.nytimes.com/2012/10/12/world/panetta-warns-of-dire-threat-of-cyberattack.html.  316 “The Invisible U .S.-Iran Cyber War, ” U.S. 
institute for Peace. SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 202070 317 “CISA S tatement on Iranian Cybersecurity Threats, ” Department of Homeland Security, October 30, 2019, https://www.dhs.gov/ news/2019/06/22/cisa-statement-iranian-cybersecurity-threats. 318 Brian F ung, “Hacking Attempts Originating in Iran Nearly Triple Following Soleimani Strike, Researchers Say, ” CNN, January 9, 2020,  https://www.cnn.com/2020/01/08/tech/iran-hackers-soleimani/index.html. 
NORTH KOREA 319 Thomas G. R oberts, Spaceports of the World (Washington, DC: CSIS, March 2019), https://www.csis.org/analysis/spaceports-world. 320 “ A Conversation with General John Hyten, Vice Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff” (public event, CSIS, Washington, DC, January 17,  2020), https://www.csis.org/events/conversation-general-john-hyten-vice-chairman-joint-chiefs-staff. 
Filmed [January 17, 2020]. Youtube  video, 18:38. Posted [January 17, 2020], https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=d1v9fpcfi78. 
321 “T aepodong-2 (Unha-3), ” Missile Threat, CSIS, August 8, 2016, last modified June 15, 2018, https://missilethreat.csis.org/missile/ taepodong-2/. 322 Eliz abeth Shim, “North Korea Defends ‘‘Peaceful’’ Satellite Launches, Report Says, ” UPI, January 6, 2020, https://www.upi.com/Top_News/ World-News/2020/01/06/North-Korea-defends-peaceful-satellite-launches-report-says/7681578311980/. 323 R obert E. 
Mccoy, “What are the real purposes of Pyongyang’s new satellites?” Asia Times, December 19, 2017, http://www.atimes.com/arti /- cle/real-purposes-pyongyangs-new-satellites/. 324 Eric T almadge, “AP Exclusive: North Korea Hopes to Plant Flag on the Moon, ” Associated Press, August 4, 2016, https://apnews.com/88fa l- 76909dec40b299658a34b489dc1a/AP-Exclusive:-North-Korea-hopes-to-plant-flag-on-the-moon. 325 “North K orean Missile Launches & Nuclear Tests: 1984-Present, ” Missile Threat, CSIS, December 3, 2019, https://missilethreat.csis.org/ north-korea-missile-launches-1984-present/. 
326 Barb ara Starr and Zachary Cohen, “Satellite Imagery Shows Activity at Critical North Korean Missile Site, ” CNN, January 26, 2020, https:// www.cnn.com/2020/01/26/politics/north-korea-satellite-imagery-missile-site/index.html. 327 Joseph Bermudez, Vic tor Cha, and Dana Kim, “December 2019 Update: Tonghae Satellite Launching Ground, ” Beyond Parallel, CSIS, De - cember 17, 2019, https://beyondparallel.csis.org/december-2019-update-tonghae-satellite-launching-ground/. 328 Ale x Ward, “Why North Korea’s restored rocket site isn’t cause for worry — yet, ” Vox, March 7, 2019, https://www.vox. 
com/2019/3/7/18254589/north-korea-rocket-site-launch-space-trump-vietnam. 329 “North K orea’s Sohae Satellite Launching Station: Post-Engine Test Activity Observed, ” 38 North, December 17, 2019, https://www.38north. org/2019/12/sohae121619/. 
330 Spok esman for Academy of Defence Science of DPRK Issues Statement, ” KCNA Watch, December 15, 2019,  https://kcnawatch.org/new  - stream/1576486826-622749970/spokesman-for-academy-of-defence-science-of-dprk-issues-statement/; “Statement of Spokesman for Academy of National Defence Science Issued, ” KCNA Watch, December 9, 2019, https://kcnawatch.org/newstream/1575882057-292334499/ statement-of-spokesman-for-academy-of-national-defence-science-issued/. 331  Heeky ong Yang, “North Korea Conducts New Test at Rocket Site, Aims to ‘Overpower U.S. Nuclear Threats’ , ” Reuters, December 14, 2019,  https://www.reuters.com/article/us-northkorea-missiles/north-korea-conducts-new-test-at-rocket-site-aims-to-overpower-us-nuclear- threats-idUSKBN1YI05E. 
332 Weeden and Samson, eds., Global Counterspace Capabilities (Washington, DC: Secure World Foundation, April 2019), 5–1, https://swfound. org/media/206408/swf_global_counterspace_april2019_web.pdf. 333 “North K orea Finishes Advanced Recon Satellite, ” Space Daily, December 27, 2017, https://www.spacedaily.com/reports/North_Korea_fin S- ishes_advanced_recon_satellite_999.html. 
334 “ Stronger Rules Must Guarantee Outer Space Remains Conflict-Free, First Committee Delegates Stress, Calling for New Laws to Hold Perpe - trators Accountable, ” United Nations, October 17, 2017, https://www.un.org/press/en/2017/gadis3583.doc.htm. 335 “K CNA Report on DPRK’s Accession to International Space Treaty and Convention, ” KCNA Watch, March 12, 2009, https://kcnawatch.org/ newstream/1451888128-747969205/kcna-report-on-dprks-accession-to-international-space-treaty-and-convention/. 336 “ Seventh Session of 12th SPA of DPRK Held, ” KCNA, April 1, 2013, https://www.google.com/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s& A- source=web&cd=1&ved=2ahUKEwj-3cPX3dnnAhVDKH0KHffLCg0QFjAAegQIARAB&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.kcna.co.jp%2Fitem%2F2013%2F201304%2Fnews01%2F20130401-23ee.html&usg=AOvVaw10gT0npAmRPomIQ9hBgp6b . 
337  Sofia L otto Persio, “North Korea Is Reaching for the Stars with Plans to Conquer Space, ” Newsweek, October 30, 2017, https://www.news - week.com/star-wars-north-koreas-unveils-5-year-plan-conquer-space-695896Y. 338 “DPRK Dele gate Speaks at UNGA Session. ” KCNA Watch, October 21, 2017, https://kcnawatch.org/newstream/1508666429-52873364/dprk- delegate-speaks-at-unga-session/. 
339 Morris Jones, “North K orea’s Space Program Aims Higher, ” Lowy Institute, Interpreter, October 31, 2017, https://www.lowyinstitute.org/ the-interpreter/north-korea-space-program-aims-higher . 340 “ Space Will Bring Greater Well-Being to Mankind: Minju Joson, ” KCNA Watch, April 12, 2017, https://kcnawatch.org/newstream/273151/ space-will-bring-greater-well-being-to-mankind-minju-joson/. 341 “‘ Sanctions Won’t Stop Our Space Race’: North Korea Sets Sights on the Moon, ” Guardian, August 4, 2016, https://www.theguardian.com/ world/2016/aug/04/sanctions-wont-stop-our-space-race-north-korea-sets-sights-on-the-moon. 
342 Ibid.; P ersio, “North Korea Is Reaching for the Stars with Plans to Conquer Space. ”  343 “No Dong 1, ” Missile Threat, CSIS, June 15, 2018, https://missilethreat.csis.org/missile/no-dong/; and Wright, Grego, and Gronlund, The  Physics of Space Security, 77.. 71 344 Na tional Coordination Office for Space-Based Positioning, Navigation, and Timing, “Control Segment. 
” 345 Wright , Grego, and Gronlund, The Physics of Space Security, 125-130. 346 Elise Hu, “North K orea Claims Successful Hydrogen Bomb Test. ” NPR, September 3, 2017, https://www.npr.org/sections/thet - wo-way/2017/09/03/523913820/north-korea-possibly-conducts-sixth-nuclear-test-south-korea-says. 
347 Emma Bo wman, “North Korea Brandishes What It Says Is A Missile-Ready H-Bomb. ” NPR, September 3, 2017, https://www.npr.org/sec r- tions/thetwo-way/2017/09/03/548201793/north-korea-brandishes-what-it-says-is-a-missile-ready-h-bomb . 348 “Kim Jong Un Adv ances Tasks for Effecting Drastic Turn in Implementing Decision of 7th Congress of WPK, ” KCNA Watch, January 1, 2017,   https://kcnawatch.org/newstream/1483266680-358842164/kim-jong-un-advances-tasks-for-effecting-drastic-turn-in-implementing-deci - sion-of-7th-congress-of-wpk/. 
349 “R eport on 5th Plenary Meeting of 7th C.C., WPK, ” KCNA Watch, January 1, 2020, https://kcnawatch.org/new e- stream/1577869229-462791867/report-on-5th-plenary-meeting-of-7th-c-c-wpk  /. 350 Commission t o Assess the Threat to the United States from Electromagnetic Pulse (EMP) Attack,“ Assessing the Threat from Electromagnetic  Pulse (EMP)” (Washington, DC: Department of Defense, July 2017), http://www.firstempcommission.org/uploads/1/1/9/5/119571849/exec .- utive_report_on_assessing_the_threat_from_emp_-_final_april2018.pdf . 351 Mun Dong Hui, “North K orean Propaganda Promotes EMP Attacks Using Nuclear Weapons, ” Daily NK, January 17, 2020, https://www.dai - lynk.com/english/north-korean-propaganda-promotes-emp-attacks-using-nuclear-weapons/. 
352 Bur eau of Arms Control, Verification and Compliance, “Treaty Banning Nuclear Weapon Tests in the Atmosphere, in Outer Space and Under  Water, ” U.S. Department of State, https://www.state.gov/t/isn/4797.htm. 353 “N. 
K orea’s jamming of GPS signals poses new threat: defense minister, ” Yonhap News Agency, October 5, 2010, http://english.yonhap o- news.co.kr/national/2010/10/05/67/0301000000AEN20101005005900315F.HTML. 354 Choe Sang-Hun, “ South Korea: North accused of sending jamming signals to disrupt GPS, ” New York Times, May 3, 2012, http://www.ny- times.com/2012/05/03/world/asia/south-korea-accused-north-accused-of-jamming-signals.html. 355 Ian Wood and S tella Kim, “North Korea Jams GPS Signals to Fishing Boats: South, ” NBC News, April 1, 2016, https://www.nbcnews.com/  news/world/north-korea-jams-gps-signals-fishing-boats-south-n548986. 
356 “ South Korea tells U.N. that North Korea GPS jamming threatens boats, planes, ” Reuters, April 11, 2016, https://www.reuters.com/article/  us-northkorea-southkorea-gps/south-korea-tells-u-n-that-north-korea-gps-jamming-threatens-boats-planes-idUSKCN0X81SN. 357 Mun Dong Hui, “North K orean Propaganda Promotes EMP Attacks Using Nuclear Weapons, ” Daily NK, November 23, 2018, https://www. 
dailynk.com/english/north-korean-propaganda-promotes-emp-attacks-using-nuclear-weapons/. 358 “Massiv e GPS Jamming Attack by North Korea, ” GPS World, May 8, 2012, http://gpsworld.com/massive-gps-jamming-attack-by-north-korea/. 359 Ca therine Dill et all., “On the Trail of the Tae Yang, ” Royal United Services Institute for Defence and Security Studies and Middlebury Insti - tute of International Studies at Monterey, James Martin Center for Nonproliferation Studies, 2019, https://rusi.org/sites/default/files/proj ,- ect_sandstone_on_the_trail_of_the_tae_yang_final_for_web_4.pdf . 
360 Benjamin Ka tzeff Silberstein, Tereza Novotna, and Kenneth B. Dekleva, “North Korea’s Koryolink: Built for Surveillance and Control” 38  North, August 12, 2019, https://www.38north.org/2019/07/mwilliams072219/. 361 Cr owdStrike. 
2019 Global Threat Report: Adversary Tradecraft and the Importance of Speed (Sunnyvale, CA: 2019), https://www.lufsec.com/ wp-content/uploads/2019/06/CrowdStrike_GTR_2019.pdf. 362 Kim Jae won, “A Cybersecurity Defector Warns of North Korea’s ‘Hacker Army’ , ” Nikkei Asian Review, May 25, 2017, https://asia.nikkei.com/ Politics/A-cybersecurity-defector-warns-of-North-Korea-s-hacker-army . 363 S teve Miller, “Where Did North Korea’s Cyber Army Come From?” Voice of America, November 20, 2018, https://www.voanews.com/ east-asia-pacific/where-did-north-koreas-cyber-army-come. 
364 Ju-min P ark, “Exclusive: North Korea’s Unit 180, the Cyber Warfare Cell That Worries the West, ” Reuters, May 22, 2017, https://www. reuters.com/article/us-cyber-northkorea-exclusive/exclusive-north-koreas-unit-180-the-cyber-warfare-cell-that-worries-the-west- idUSKCN18H020. 365 “North K orea ‘Stole $2bn for Weapons via Cyber-Attacks’ , ” BBC News, August 7, 2019, https://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-49259302. 
366 “T reasury Sanctions North Korean State=Sponsored Malicious Cyber Groups, ” Department of the Treasury, press release, September 13,  2019, https://home.treasury.gov/news/press-releases/sm774. 367 Eliz abeth Shim, “North Korean Hackers Suspected in India Space Agency Cyberattack, ” UPI, November 7, 2019, https://www.upi.com/ Top_News/World-News/2019/11/07/North-Korean-hackers-suspected-in-India-space-agency-cyberattack/7371573053505/. 368 Se an Lyngaas, “Lazarus Rises in Israel with Attempted Hack of Defense Company, Researchers Say, ” CyberScoop, June 7, 2019, http://www. 
cyberscoop.com/lazarus-rises-israel-attempted-hack-defense-company-researchers-say/.; and Sherisse Pham, “Here’s a new North Korean hacking threat to worry about, ” CNN Business, February 20, 2018, https://money.cnn.com/2018/02/20/technology/north-korea-hack - ers-reaper-fireeye/index.html. INDIA 369  “Orbit al Launches of 2019, ” Gunter’s Space Page, February 11, 2020, https://space.skyrocket.de/doc_chr/lau2019.htm. 370 Che than Kumar, “India to launch first manned space mission by 2022: PM Modi, ” Times of India, August 15, 2018, https://timesofindia.india t- times.com/india/india-to-launch-first-manned-space-mission-by-2022-pm-modi/articleshow/65410373.cms. 
 371 Indian Sp ace Research Organization, “Annual Report 2019-2020, ” Department of Space, 2020, 94, https://www.isro.gov.in/sites/default/. SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 202072 files/flipping_book/annual_report_2019-20_english/files/assets/common/downloads/Annual%20Report%202019-20%20(English).pdf. 372 No te: Data limited to total launches from 1980 to 2019; Thomas G. 
Roberts, Spaceports of the World (Washington, DC: CSIS, March 2019),  https://www.csis.org/analysis/spaceports-world. 373 “India launches r ecord 104 satellites in single mission, ” BBC News, February 15, 2017, https://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-in  - dia-38977803. 374 “ Space Environment: Total Payloads Launched by Country, ” accessed February 12, 2020. 
375 S taff Writers, “ISRO’s Second Spaceport, for New SSLV Rocket, to Come up in Tamil Nadu, ” The Wire, December 1, 2019, https://thewire.in/ space/isro-kulasekarapattinam-thoothukudi-sdsc-sriharikota-sslv-pslv-gslv-antrix . 376 Sur endra Singh, “India to get its second spaceport, and acquisition work begins in Tamil Nadu, ” Times of India, December 2, 2019, https://time  - sofindia.indiatimes.com/india/india-to-get-its-second-spaceport-land-acquisition-work-begins-in-tamil-nadu/articleshow/72323869.cms . 377 Jeff F oust, “Spaceflight purchases first commercial flight of new Indian small launcher, ” SpaceNews , August 6, 2019, https://spacenews. 
com/spaceflight-purchases-first-commercial-flight-of-new-indian-small-launcher/. 378 Connor Simpson, “China Bec omes Third Country to Ever ‘Soft-Land’ on the Moon, ” The Atlantic, December 14, 2013, https://www.theatlan  - tic.com/international/archive/2013/12/china-becomes-third-country-ever-soft-land-moon/356151/. 379 Eliz abeth Howell, “Chandrayaan-2: India’s Orbiter-Lander-Rover Mission, ” Space.com, October 8, 2019, https://www.space. 
com/40136-chandrayaan-2.html. 380 Ibid. 381 Chelse a Gohd, “India Admits Its Moon Lander Crashed, Cites Problem with Breaking Thrusters, ” Space.com, November 25, 2019, https:// www.space.com/india-admits-moon-lander-crash.html. 
382 Jeff F oust, “India confirms plans for a second lunar lander mission, ” SpaceNews, January 1, 2020, https://spacenews.com/india-confirms- plans-for-second-lunar-lander-mission/. 383 S taff Writers, “Indian astronauts to begin training in Russia for country’s first manned space mission, ” SpaceDaily, January 23, 2020, http:// www.spacedaily.com/reports/Indian_astronauts_to_begin_training_in_Russia_for_countrys_first_manned_space_mission_999.html. 384 Ibid. 
385 Viv ek Raghuvanshi, “India to launch a defense-based space research agency, ” Defense News, June 12, 2019, https://www.defensenews. com/space/2019/06/12/india-to-launch-a-defense-based-space-research-agency/?utm_medium=social&utm_source=twitter.com&utm_ campaign=Socialflow+DFN. 386 R ajat Pandit, “India to hold first simulated space warfare exercise next month, ” Times of India, June 8, 2019, https://timesofindia.india m- times.com/india/india-to-hold-first-simulated-space-warfare-exercise-next-month/articleshow/69697289.cms. 
387 R aghuvanshi, “India to launch a defense-based space research agency. ” 388 P andit, “India to hold first simulated space warfare exercise next month. ” 389 Ajay Banerjee, “India plans polic y to tackle space threats, ” Tribune, July 29, 2019, https://www.tribuneindia.com/news/archive/india-plans- policy-to-tackle-space-threats-809330. 
390 Indian Sp ace Research Organization, “Annual Report 2019-2020, ” 94. 391 A shley J. Tellis, “India’s ASAT Test: An Incomplete Success, ” Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, April 15, 2019, https://carneg - ieendowment.org/2019/04/15/india-s-asat-test-incomplete-success-pub-78884. 
392 Ibid. 393 Jona than McDowell, Twitter Post, December 27, 2019, 8:54 PM, https://twitter.com/planet4589/status/1210786046943739904. 394 Sar ah Lewin, “India’s Anti-Satellite Test Created Dangerous Debris, NASA Chief Says, ” Space.com, April 1, 2019, https://www.space.com/ nasa-chief-condemns-india-anti-satellite-test.html. 
395 Chitr anjan Kumar, “India tests ASAT: China calls for peace, Pakistan urges international community to condemn, ” Business Today, March 27,  2019, https://www.businesstoday.in/current/economy-politics/india-tests-asat-china-calls-for-peace-pakistan-urges-international-com a- munity-to-condemn/story/331703.html. 396 Doris Elin Urrutia, “India ’s Anti-Satellite Missile Test Is a Big Deal. Here’s Why., ” Space.com, March 30, 2019, https://www.space.com/in d- dia-anti-satellite-test-significance.html. 
 397 T ellis, “India’s ASAT Test. ” 398 Shaan Shaikh, “India Conduc ts Successful ASAT Test, ” Missile Threat, CSIS, March 28, 2019, https://missilethreat.csis.org/india-con l- ducts-successful-asat-test/. 399 Nar endra Modi, Twitter Post, March 27, 2019, 12:08 AM, https://twitter.com/narendramodi/status/1110800868058660864. 
400 Ibid. 401 R ajat Pandit, “Satellite-killer not a one-off, India working on star wars armoury, ” Times of India, April 7, 2019, https://timesofindia.india m- times.com/india/satellite-killer-not-a-one-off-india-working-on-star-wars-armoury/articleshow/68758674.cms. 402 P earl MAria D’Souza, “French Agency CNES to aid ISRO’s space station project, ” New Indian Express, January 27, 2020, https://www.newind h- ianexpress.com/nation/2020/jan/27/french-agency-cnes-to-aid-isros-space-station-project-2094922.html. 
403 Snehesh Ale x Philip, “India gets new Special Ops Division that can cripple targets miles inside enemy territory, ” ThePrint,  May 15, 2019,  https://theprint.in/defence/india-gets-new-special-ops-division-that-can-cripple-targets-miles-inside-enemy-territory/235786/ . 404 Amrit a Nayak Dutta, “New tri services special ops division, meant for surgical strikes, finishes 1st exercise today, ” ThePrint,  September 28,  2019, https://theprint.in/defence/new-tri-services-special-ops-division-meant-for-surgical-strikes-finishes-1st-exercise-today/298445/.. 73 405 R ajat Pandit, “After Agni-V Launch, DRDO’s New Target Is Anti-satellite Weapons, ” Times of India, April 20, 2012, https://timesofindia.india- times.com/india/After-Agni-V-launch-DRDOs-new-target-is-anti-satellite-weapons/articleshow/12763074.cms. 
406 He adquarters Integrated Defence Staff, Technology Perspective and Capability Roadmap (TPCR) (New Delhi: India Ministry of Defence, April  2013), 6-7, 32-33, https://mod.gov.in/sites/default/files/TPCR13.pdf. 407 He adquarters Integrated Defence Staff, Technology Perspective and Capability Roadmap (TPCR) - 2018 (New Delhi: India Ministry of Defence,  2018), 21-22, https://mod.gov.in/sites/default/files/tpcr.pdf. 408 R ajat Pandit, “Satellite-killer not a one-off, India working on star wars armoury, ” Times of India, April 7, 2019, https://timesofindia.india i- times.com/india/satellite-killer-not-a-one-off-india-working-on-star-wars-armoury/articleshow/68758674.cms. 
409 Brian Weeden and Vic toria Samson, “India’s ASAT test is a wake-up call for norms of behavior in space, ” SpaceNews, April 8, 2019, https:// spacenews.com/op-ed-indias-asat-test-is-wake-up-call-for-norms-of-behavior-in-space/. 410 Daniel Oberhaus, “India ’s Anti-Satellite Test Wasn’t Really About Satellites, ” Wired, March 27, 2019,  https://www.wired.com/story/india-an o- ti-satellite-test-space-debris/. 411 He adquarters Integrated Defence Staff, Technology Perspective and Capability Roadmap (TPCR) - 2018, 63. 
412 Ibid., 64. 413 P TI, “Govt approves setting up of defence cyber agency, ” Times of India, November 27, 2019, https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/india/ govt-approves-setting-up-of-defence-cyber-agency/articleshow/72264836.cms. 414 Ibid. 
415 “Orbit al Launches of 2019, ” Gunter’s Space Page, February  11, 2020, https://space.skyrocket.de/doc_chr/lau2019.htm 416 John R aymond and Kathleen Hicks, “A Conversation with General Raymond” (public event, Center for Strategic and International Studies,  Washington, D.C.: November 2019) 18,  https://www.csis.org/analysis/conversation-general-raymond. 417 L ouis de Gouyon Matignon, “The Birth of the French Space Program, ” Space Legal Issues, February 2, 2019, https://www.spacelegalissues. com/space-law-the-birth-of-the-french-space-program/. 
418 “Insight , ” CNES, November 27, 2018, https://insight.cnes.fr/en/INSIGHT/index.htm.  419 “ World First French SEIS Instrument Detects ‘Marsquake’ , ” CNES, April 23, 2019, https://presse.cnes.fr/en/world-first-french-seis-instru ,- ment-detects-marsquake.  420 K yle Mizokami, “France Accuses Russia of Space Satellite Espionage, ” Popular Mechanics, September 10, 2018, https://www.popularme  - chanics.com/military/a23067892/france-charges-russia-with-space-satellite-espionage/. 
421 Sp ace Environment: Total Payloads Launched by Country, ” accessed February 12, 2020. 422 “Def ense Space Strategy Summary, ” French Ministry of Defense, DICoD Publishing Office, July 2019, https://www.defense.gouv.fr/content/ download/563617/9727377/synthe%CC%80se%20strate%CC%81gie%20spatiale%20de%20de%CC%81fense.pdf .  423 Ther esa Hitchens, “Space Lasers for Satellite Defense Top New French Space Strategy, ” Breaking Defense, July 26, 2019, https://breaking s- defense.com/2019/07/france-envisions-on-orbit-lasers-for-satellite-defense/. 
424 Flor ence Parly, “Presentation of the Defense Space Strategy, ” SatelliteObservation.net, July 25, 2019, English translation from: https://sat a- elliteobservation.net/2019/07/27/frances-new-space-defense-strategy/.  425 Hit chens, “Space Lasers for Satellite Defense Top New French Space Strategy. ” 426 Jen Judson, “U S, Israel’s Arrow-3 missile put to the test in Alaska, ” Defense News, July 28, 2019, https://www.defensenews.com/penta e- gon/2019/07/28/us-israels-arrow-3-missile-put-to-the-test-in-alaska/. 
427  Ibid. 428  “T esla Model 3 Spoofed off the highway - Regulus Navigation System Hack Causes Car to Turn On Its Own, ” Regulus,  n.d., https://www. regulus.com/blog/tesla-model-3-spoofed-off-the-highway-regulus-researches-hack-navigation-system-causing-car-to-steer-off-road/. 
429 Ibid. 430 Josh P etri, “How Hackers Can Take Over Your Car’s GPS, ” Hyperdrive,  June 19, 2019, https://www.bloomberg.com/news/arti g- cles/2019-06-19/threat-of-gps-spoofing-for-autonomous-cars-seen-as-overblown. 431 Ibid. 
432 “ Arrow 3 (Israel), ” Missile Threat, CSIS, August 11, 2016, last modified June 15, 2018, https://missilethreat.csis.org/defsys/arrow-3/. 433 “2020: The Y ear of Sustainability, ” AviationWeek & Space Technology, January 2020, 17, https://aviationweek.com/sites/default/ files/2020-01/AW_200113_0.pdf . OTHERS 434 Mari Y amaguchi, “Japan reveals plan for space defense unit, ” Defense News, January 21, 2020, https://www.defensenews.com/ space/2020/01/21/japan-reveals-plan-for-space-defense-unit/. 
435 Mari Y amaguchi, “Abe says new unit will defend Japan from space tech threats, ” MSN,  January 20, 2020, https://www.msn.com/en-us/ news/world/abe-says-new-unit-will-defend-japan-from-space-tech-threats/ar-BBZ8kfk#image=BBZ8kfk_1|2. 436 Y amaguchi, “Japan reveals plan for space defense unit. ” 437 Y omiuri Shimbum, “Satellite interceptor sought by mid-2020s, ” Japan News, August 19, 2019, https://the-japan-news.com/news/arti e- cle/0005948349. 
438 Ibid.. SPACE THREAT ASSESSMENT 202074 439 Ibid. 440 Euan McKir dy, “Hayabusa mission: Japanese space probe attempts to ‘bomb’ asteroid, ” CNN, April 5, 2019, https://www.cnn. 
com/2019/04/05/asia/hayabusa-crater-operation-sci-intl/index.html. 441 Allied Maritime Command, “Elec tronic Interference in Mediterranean, ” December 12, 2019, https://shipping.nato.int/nsc/operations/ news/2019/electronic-interference-in-mediterranean. 442 Ibid. 
443 Ale xandra Sticklings, “UK Ministry of Defence Announces Ambitious Plans for Space, ” Royal United Services Institute,  July 30, 2019, https:// rusi.org/commentary/uk-ministry-defence-announces-ambitious-plans-space. 444 Sandr a Erwin, “As satellites become targets, UK military seeks closer ties with space industry, ” SpaceNews, November 6, 2018, https://spa i- cenews.com/as-satellites-become-targets-u-k-military-seeks-closer-ties-with-space-industry/. 445 Andr ew Chuter, “UK shoots for new laser weapons against drones, missiles, ” Defense News, July 9, 2019, https://www.defensenews.com/ global/europe/2019/07/09/uk-shoots-for-new-laser-weapons-against-drones-missiles/. 
446 Mandy Z uo, “China flight systems jammed by pig farm’s African swine fever defences, ” South China Morning Post, December 20, 2019,  https://www.scmp.com/news/china/society/article/3042991/china-flight-systems-jammed-pig-farms-african-swine-fever . 447 E ditor, “GPS Signal Jamming Destroys China Drone Show - Again, ” Resilient Navigation and Timing Foundation,  November 1, 2018, https:// rntfnd.org/2018/11/01/gps-jamming-destroys-china-drone-show-again/. 448 Simone McCarthy , William Zheng, and Denise Tsang, “HK$1 million in damage caused by GPS jamming that caused 46 drones to plummet  during Hong Kong show, ” South China Morning Post, October 29, 2018, https://www.scmp.com/news/hong-kong/law-and-crime/arti l- cle/2170669/hk13-million-damage-caused-gps-jamming-caused-46-drones. 
449 Ka therine Dunn, “The long ocean voyage that helped find the flaws in GPS, ” Fortune, January 24, 2020, https://fortune.com/2020/01/24/ gps-disruption-test-voyage/. 450 Ibid. 451 Ibid.. 
1616 Rhode Island Avenue NW                                                                  Washington, DC 20036                                                                                 202 887 0200 | www.csis.org. 